[PAGE 1]
1 
 
Auto Care Association 
7101 Wisconsin Ave., Suite 1300 
Bethesda, MD 20814 
Submitted by:  Aaron Lowe, Senior Vice President, Regulatory and Government Affairs 
 
Before the  
United States Copyright Office, Library of Congress 
Washington, D.C. 
 
In the Matter of    ) 
Software-Enabled Consumer Products  ) Docket No. 2015-16 
Study: Notice of Inquiry and    ) 
Request for Public Comment    ) 
 
Comments of Auto Care Association 
Auto Care Association (“Auto Care”) is a national trade organization of 2,000 members 
representing more than 150,000 independent businesses that manufacture, distribute, and sell 
motor vehicle parts, accessories, tools, equipment, materials, and supplies, and perform vehicle 
service and repair.  The subject of this inquiry – assertions of copyright over software embedded 
in consumer products that controls the operation of those products – affects daily our members 
and the consumers they serve by making motor vehicle repair more expensive and legally risky.  
Physical parts can be customized, repaired, and replaced under clear patent law principles; there 
is no reason why a manufacturer’s choice to replace physical parts with copyrighted software 
should change that result.    
 
Current copyright law, properly interpreted, achieves this result.  Yet, the need for 
interpretation of copyright defenses and doctrines, and the absence of clear statutory direction, 
creates unnecessary risk for manufacturers, servicers, and consumers that their otherwise-lawful 
actions will lead to litigation.  The expense and disruption of litigation, and the risk of crippling 
statutory damages for copyright infringement, chills innovation and reduces competition for 
service and parts.  As a result, original equipment manufacturers and dealerships can exact 
supracompetitive prices for parts and service; whereas aftermarket competitors, fearing 
infringement allegations, must incur added risks, costs, and delays before bringing new and 
competing products and services to market. 
 
Auto Care therefore welcomes this study to clarify a set of consistent legal principles for 
embedded software that controls the function of physical equipment:   
 
First, copyright law should expressly permit lawful repair of products whose physical 
operation relies on software, regardless of whether the software must be altered or

[PAGE 2]
2 
 
reproduced for such repairs to occur.  Copyright should not diminish the right to repair 
granted under patent law. 
 
Second, copyright law should acknowledge and accommodate fair uses and 
noninfringing uses of such embedded software, including reproduction and decompilation 
for lawful purposes such as facilitating interoperability, accessing or altering 
noncopyrighted elements in the software, developing replacement software, and 
customizing product performance.  
 
Third, federal copyright law should treat parts that incorporate such embedded software 
as a unitary object for purposes of the first sale and maintenance provisions of Sections 
109 and 117 respectively.  Where a product is sold to the consumer, the copy of 
embedded software that operates the product’s parts also should be deemed to have been 
sold.   
 
Finally, the transfer of a single copy of software from one physical part to another should 
be treated as noninfringement under the first sale doctrine—just as patent law permits the 
re-use of parts (and the re-use of parts of parts in other parts) as lawful repair.  
 
The Automotive Parts and Repair Industry, and the Ubiquity of Embedded Software 
 
The independent aftermarket industry employs more than 4,300,000 people in the United 
States.  Nearly $341 billion dollars was spent on motor vehicle care in the United States in 2015, 
or more than 1.9 percent of the U.S. gross domestic product. Following expiration of a new car 
warranty, over 70 percent of car owners who patronize auto repair shops rely on independent 
repair shops over new car dealers. Approximately 20 percent of American consumers buy 
automotive parts and products to maintain, repair, and customize their own vehicles.  
 
The right to repair motor vehicles has attained greater importance over the last decade. A 
steady trend shows American consumers and businesses are keeping their cars and trucks in 
service longer. On average, new car buyers in 2015 keep their vehicles for 6.5 years, and used 
car buyers keep those cars on the road for 5.3 more years – a total of more than 11-1/2 years, and 
more than 4 years longer than the average in 2006.1 As cars advance in age, so does the need for 
consumers and businesses to repair and replacement vehicle parts. Studies confirm that 
                                                            
1  News Release, IHS, “Average Age of Light Ve hicles in the U.S. Rises Slightly in 2015 to 
11.5 years,”  July 29, 2015, http://press.ihs.com/press-release/automotive/average-age-light-
vehicles-us-rises-slightly-2015-115-years-ihs-reports; Phil LeBeau, “Americans holding onto 
their cars longer than ever,” CNBC (July 29, 2015) http://www.cnbc.com/2015/07/28/americans-
holding-onto-their-cars-longer-than-ever.html

[PAGE 3]
3 
 
consumers prefer to obtain parts and service from independent businesses rather than 
dealerships—benefitting from reduced costs,  greater convenience, and higher consumer 
satisfaction from local repair shops and neighborhood mechanics.2   
 
Vehicle repair by Auto Care members also contributes to a cleaner environment.  Repair 
and customization improves vehicle performance and efficiency, increases gas mileage and 
reduces energy consumption, and lowers emissions. Repair of motor vehicles using rebuilt 
automotive parts typically re-uses 88 percent of the raw material from the original parts, and 
rebuilding engines saves 50 percent of the energy required to produce a new engine. 
 
Consumers have the right to repair their motor vehicles. Cleaning, repairing, and 
refurbishing parts, or replacing worn or broken parts, historically has been considered 
permissible repair, not infringing reconstruction, under patent law. When repairing motor 
vehicles, a servicer may replace a broken part, or repair or rebuild the consumer’s existing part. 
Where replacement parts are needed, the servicer (and consumer) often may have a choice of 
new original equipment manufacturer (OEM) parts, new parts from an independent producer, or 
rebuilt parts from either the OEM or an independent.  In many cases, a used part removed from a 
vehicle may be refurbished or rebuilt and used to repair other vehicles.  For example, replacing 
one vehicle’s engine or transmission with parts taken from other vehicles has always been 
accepted as lawful as well as economically and ecologically beneficial. 
 
As parts increasingly incorporate computer software, functions that used to be performed 
by hardware components now are controlled by software embedded in those parts or centralized 
in an electronic control unit (“ECU”).  Today’s engines, transmissions, oxygen sensors, 
ignitions, brakes, emissions systems, electric windows, air blowers, air bags, and even 
windshield wipers are just a few of the systems in which manufacturers have replaced purely 
electro-mechanical parts with microprocessors and software controls. The function of these parts 
is the same regardless of whether implemented in hardware or software. Logically, the law 
applicable to software-controlled parts should be the same as for hardware—repairing, 
refurbishing, modifying, adjusting, or replacing software that functions as a part in a motor 
vehicle should be treated no differently than a brake caliper or a universal joint.  
 
Specifically, Auto Care submits that the Copyright Office should affirm that, under 
copyright law as under patent law: 
 
 Where a vehicle is sold to a consumer, the consumer owns the vehicle and its 
parts, including the copy of any embedded software.   
                                                            
2  “Independent vs. dealer shops for car repair,” Consumer Reports, Jan. 22, 2015, 
http://www.consumerreports.org/cro/magazine/2015/03/best-places-to-get-your-car-
repaired/index.htm

[PAGE 4]
4 
 
 
 Where the parts require adjustment to function at maximum efficacy and 
efficiency, the servicer or consumer has the right to change the software 
parameters or code, or to change out the software itself.   
 
 Where servicers or consumers need to understand the workings of a part for 
purposes of repair, customization, or interoperability, they have the right to copy 
or decompile the software in that part.   
 
 Where a part is disassembled, whether for purposes of repairing that part or 
rebuilding another part, the servicer or consumer has the right to transfer the copy 
of the software in that part to another medium and to re-install that software either 
in that same part or in another working part.    
 
Responses to Copyright Office Questions 
 Auto Care comments below on questions  posed by the Copyright Office Notice, 
according to the topics identified in the letter from Senators Grassley and Leahy.  The focus of 
these responses reflects primarily the role of repair services as users of copyrighted software.3  
However, Auto Care members include businesses that develop their own software for motor 
vehicles, for example as a replacement for or as enhancements to OEM software.     
 
1. The provisions of the copyright law that are implicated by the ubiquity of 
copyrighted software in everyday products;  
From the user perspective, the most relevant sections are: 
Section 102—which delineates the extent to which elements of software may not 
be protectable by copyright, by excluding from protection facts, ideas, procedures, 
processes, systems, methods of operation, concepts, principles, or discoveries.  As 
pertinent to software, these would include numerical parameters governing the 
performance of automobile parts; code expression that is constrained by externalities, 
such as the hardware and software language platforms that run the software; and security 
codes used to lock out competitors.  See, e.g., Lexmark Int’l Inc. v. Static Control 
Components, Inc., 387 F.3d 522, 534-536 (6th Cir. 2004); Gates Rubber Co. v. Bando 
Chem. Indus., Ltd., 9 F.3d 823, 838 (10th Cir. 1993); Computer Assocs. Int’l, Inc. v. 
Altai, Inc., 982 F.2d 693 (2d Cir. 1992). 
                                                            
3   Auto Care and its members remain concerned at the misuse of Section 1201 by 
automakers that apply technological measures as a means to prohibit competition for the sale of 
motor vehicle parts.  Auto Care will address those issues separately in response to the Copyright 
Office’s notice initiating its study of Section 1201.

[PAGE 5]
5 
 
Section 107—which ensures that certain uses of copyrighted software remain 
noninfringing fair uses. These may include, for example, reproduction and decompilation 
to access the underlying code for purposes of analyzing its operation, accessing and 
altering noncopyrightable elements, and developing interoperable products. See Sony 
Computer Entm’t, Inc. v. Connectix Corp., 203 F.3d 596, 603 (9th Cir. 2000); Sega 
Enters., Ltd. v. Accolade, Inc., 977 F.2d 1510 (9th Cir. 1992). 
Section 109—which extends th e doctrine of exhaustion or “first sale” to the type 
of computer programs ordinarily embedded in motor vehicles. 
Section 117—which permits the copying of so ftware as an essential step in using 
a machine, and the adaptation of software for purposes of maintenance or repair and 
archiving.  
Notwithstanding the legal and logical underpinnings of these principles, independent 
vehicle parts manufacturers and servicers have been sued and threatened with suit for copyright 
infringement merely for engaging in repairs of software-controlled parts that would have been 
permissible repair under patent law.  Copyright should not be misused as leverage to control or 
restrain competition in markets for non-copyrightable parts and services.4  The application of 
copyright statutes, doctrines, and limitations on rights should be clarified to specifically 
immunize activities inherent to otherwise lawful motor vehicle maintenance and repair where the 
embedded computer program controls the operation of a motor vehicle or its constituent parts. 
2. Whether, and to what extent, the design, distribution, and legitimate uses of 
products are being enabled and/or frustrated by the application of existing 
copyright law to software in everyday products;  
Legal certainty provides the incentives needed as the springboard for investment and 
innovation. Uncertainty over copyright law and its consequent legal risks unfairly advantages 
incumbents over competitors. In the case of software-controlled vehicle parts, gray areas of 
copyright law have been exploited by copyright owners to stymie competition in the market for 
non-copyrightable parts and service.  
Although consumers prefer to patronize local independent car services, and to acquire 
less expensive replacement parts for their vehicles, independents face steep challenges trying to 
compete against original equipment manufacturers and dealerships. Using embedded software 
code as the equivalent of a physical part gives additional inherent advantages to OEMs and 
dealers. Cars are more difficult to service without access to the software (or to a diagnostic tool 
                                                            
4  See Omega, S.A. v. Costco Wholesale Corp., CV 04-05443 TJH, 2011 WL 8492716 (E.D. 
Cal. Nov. 9, 2011) (application of copyrighted image to wristwatch solely to prevent importation 
was misuse), aff’d, Omega, SA v. Costco Wholesale Corp., 776 F.3d 692, 696-706 (9th Cir. 
2015) (Wardlaw, J. concurring).

[PAGE 6]
6 
 
provided by the OEM to dealers). Consequently, the need to acquire or to develop interoperable 
tools extends dealers’ time-to-market advantage and increases costs for independents and 
consumers.   
Saddling independents with the threat of copyright litigation or liability further 
exacerbates the risks to independents, and complicates the calculus of whether or when an 
independent should invest in competitive products and services.  If copyright infringement 
liability is found, actual or statutory damages could inflict fatal damage to the present and future 
prospects of a company’s product, or of the company itself.   
Independent competitors have long and deep experience with patent law, and the lines 
between permissible repair and infringing reconstruction are well drawn in precedent.  The same 
cannot be said for copyright as applied to software embedded in car parts. Consequently, even 
where companies consult copyright counsel and read pertinent case law, they still may be left 
without a sufficiently definitive answer. In the interim, our members read in the press OEMs’ 
extravagant claims that the first sale doctrine cannot apply because consumers merely “license” 
and do not own the copy of the software embedded in vehicle parts. And, they are aware that 
other independent companies that have dared to compete have been sued for attempting to repair 
cars without a license from the manufacturer, or for attempting to sell replacement parts. As a 
result, Auto Care is concerned that their efforts to compete in these consumer markets will be 
thwarted by such overbroad assertions of copyright.   
Finally, our members report that new software-based schemes are being deployed by 
original equipment manufacturers, in a cat and mouse game specifically intended to lock-out 
competition. For example, manufacturers tie the copy of the software installed in a car’s parts to 
the Vehicle Identification Number (VIN). As a result, a part removed from one vehicle for 
refurbishment cannot be used in another car of the same model. Similarly, some car 
manufacturers embed software in car parts whose primary or sole purpose is to authenticate with 
the car’s ECU module so as to “verify” that any replacement part has been installed by an 
“authorized” servicer and is a “genuine” part made by the manufacturer.  Because these tactics 
are deployed in copyrighted software, our members report serious concerns that any effort to 
alter the software will expose them to suits for infringement (as well as the potential threat of 
suits under Section 1201). 
3. Whether, and to what extent, innovative services are being enabled and/or 
frustrated by the application of existing copyright law to software in everyday 
products;  
The concerns expressed in response to Question 2 apply equally to vehicle maintenance, 
customization, and repair services. These services need to access, alter, or replace the software in 
motor vehicle parts in order to provide consumer services for vehicle hardware. Any uncertainty 
over the right under copyright law of services to engage in these activities—which constitute

[PAGE 7]
7 
 
lawful repair under patent law—should be el iminated and clarified by the Copyright Office 
study. 
4. Whether, and to what extent, legitimate interests or business models for 
copyright owners and users could be undermined or improved by changes to 
the copyright law in this area;  
 One suggestion to rectify the chilling effect s of excessive assertions of copyright would 
be to clarify the application of Sections 109 and 117 in circumstances where embedded software 
controls the operations of products. As the Copyright Office learned during the most recent 
Section 1201 triennial review, motor vehicle companies take the position that a vehicle owner 
does not own the copy of any software in the vehicle parts.5 Section 109(b)(2)(B)(i) goes 
partway by providing an exception to an exception to the first sale doctrine, thus allowing the 
assertion of the first sale exemption to the owner of a copy of embedded software. Similarly, 
Section 117 privileges the use software in the course of maintenance and repair, but only for the 
owner of the copy.  
 To be sure, the activities of independent services and parts manufacturers are exempt 
from liability under the principles of fair use. However, the determination of privileges under 
Sections 109 and 117 are black-and-white inquiries compared to the gray of fair use. The market 
therefore would benefit from clarifying that the owner of the motor vehicle is also the owner of 
the copy of any embodied software that controls the operation of the motor vehicle—thus 
specifically invoking the users’ rights and privileges under Sections 109 and 117 and 
immunizing independent businesses from manufacturer overreach.  
5.  Key issues in how the copyright law intersects with other areas of law in 
establishing how products that rely on software to function can be lawfully 
used.  
                                                            
5  See, e.g., Comments of John Deere in Proposed Exemption Class 21, at 5:  “A vehicle 
owner does not acquire copyrights for software in the vehicle, and cannot properly be considered 
an ‘owner’ of the vehicle software”; Comments of General Motors in Proposed Exemption Class 
21, at 10-12. While these comments ignore the distinction between the owner of the software and 
the owner of a copy of the software, the clear intention behind the comments is to deny the 
applicability of the first sale doctrine to any purchaser of a motor vehicle. The press immediately 
understood the impact of these arguments, and took these companies to task.  See “Brave New 
Tractor: John Deere And General Motors Pretty Sure They Own All Your Stuff,” 
http://wonkette.com/583917/brave-new-tractor-john-deere-and-general-motors-pretty-sure-you-
dont-own-your-stuff#fweCZLCTDyb7ICxz.99 (Apr. 27, 2015); Mike Masnick, “GM Says That 
While You May Own Your Car, It Owns The Software In It, Thanks To Copyright,” Techdirt 
(Apr. 23, 2015), https://www.techdirt.com/articles/20150421/23581430744/gm-says-that-while-
you-may-own-your-car-it-owns-software-it-thanks-to-copyright.shtml

[PAGE 8]
8 
 
The primary concern of independent motor vehicle parts manufacturers and servicers is 
the uncertainty of copyright law versus the dependability of legal analysis under patent law. The 
distinction between repair and reconstruction under patent law is well defined: Repair or 
replacement of worn-out, damaged, or destroyed parts merely extends the life of a product that 
the purchaser has the right to use; making the article anew constitutes infringement.6 The 
outcome of the copyright law analysis where physical parts are controlled by software should be 
equally discernible to these businesses. As Justice Black observed in his concurrence in Aro, 
small repair and service businesses such as those represented by Auto Care need bright line rules 
to avoid the “disastrous or even lethal consequences” of infringement suits:   
[B]usinessmen are certainly entitled to know when they are committing an 
infringement. … But to what avail these congressional precautions if this Court, 
by its opinions, would subject small businessmen to the devastating uncertainties 
of nebulous and permissive standards of infringement under which courts could 
impose treble damages upon them for making parts, distinct, separable, minor 
parts, or even major parts of a combination patent, upon which parts no patent has 
been or legally could have been issued.7 
 Auto Care therefore urges the Copyright O ffice in its Study to develop these principles 
into clear guidance. To further assist the Office, we address below the specific issues in the 
Notice: 
1. Whether copyright law should distinguish between software embedded in ‘‘everyday 
products’’ and other types of software, and, if so, how such a distinction might be drawn in an 
administrable manner.  
a. Whether ‘‘everyday products’’ can be distinguished from other products that 
contain software, such as general purpose computers—essentia lly how to define 
‘‘everyday products.’’ 
 b. If distinguishing between software embedded in ‘‘everyday products’’ and 
other types of software is impracticable, whether there are alternative ways the Office can 
distinguish between categories of software.  
Response:  The definition depends more on the function of the software than the nature of the 
product. A bright line distinction can be drawn for software that controls the physical operation 
                                                            
6  See Aro Mf’g Co., Inc. v. Convertible Top Replacement Co., Inc., 365 U.S. 336, 342-343 
(1961) replacement fabric convertible tops); Dana Corp. v. American Precision Co., 827 F.2d 
755 (Fed. Cir. 1987) (rebuilding automobile clutches using new parts and used parts from many 
disassembled worn clutches held permissible repair).   
 
7   Id., 365 U.S. at 358-359.

[PAGE 9]
9 
 
of a product.8 Typically, software in motor vehicles is found either in electronic control units (for 
larger systems such as the engine or transmission), or in discrete microprocessor units collocated 
with physical and electromechanical controls. Because such embedded software only controls the 
operation of a motor vehicle system or part, it is inseparable and indistinguishable from the 
systems and parts themselves.   
2. The rationale and proper scope of copyright protection for software embedded in 
everyday products, including the extent to which copyright infringement is a concern with 
respect to such software.  
Response: As an initial consideration, many elem ents of embedded software, and some 
embedded software routines in their entirety, may not be protectable by copyright. Because the 
software controls physical part operations and has to operate within a specific hardware and 
system environment, the expression in the software code will be highly constrained. For 
example, some routines are short implementations of mathematical equations and data upon 
which the operations are performed, and may not meet the bare requisites of originality and 
authorship. 
Where such embedded software does meet the test for copyrightability, the scope of 
protection should be limited. To preserve the right to repair, maintain, and customize the 
function and performance of the physical products, businesses must be free to access, analyze, 
and alter the software for that product. Copyright therefore should not preclude the ability to 
engage in those activities for a particular product, regardless if it is necessary to reproduce or 
create a derivative work for that particular product. Similarly, copyright law should not preclude 
creation of a replacement software program that does not literally copy copyright-protectable 
code.  
3. The need to enable interoperability with software-embedded devices, including 
specific examples of ways in which the law frustrates or enables such interoperability.  
Response:  Businesses have always had the right to sell motor vehicle parts that improve the 
performance of the original equipment. Historically, for example, consumers have 
“turbocharged” their vehicles, or updated vehicles with better engines, transmissions, safety 
features, and emission systems. Auto Care believes that such interoperability is lawful, and is not 
frustrated by copyright law when correctly applied. That said, investment in developing 
interoperable software and parts has been chilled by overreaching legal claims, in lawsuits as 
well as in the press, by original equipment vendors. And Auto Care expects, although companies 
will not make such information known either to the public or to Auto Care, that companies have 
withheld or canceled plans to introduce products and services to the public for fear of the 
                                                            
8     As an analogy, software that controls the rotation speed or the recording heads of a 
personal computer’s hard disk drive can readily be distinguished from the audio, audiovisual 
works, photographic, graphical, or software and other literary works recorded on the drive.

[PAGE 10]
10 
 
expense, disruption, and risk of copyright litigation that they believed to be unfounded.9  Clarity 
in the law, and greater availability of attorney fees to successful defendants in copyright cases, 
will therefore provide greater incentives for investment and innovation by independent 
manufacturers and services. 
4. Whether current limitations on and exceptions to copyright protection adequately 
address issues concerning software embedded in everyday products, or whether amendments or 
clarifications would be useful. Specific areas of interest include:  
a-c. The idea/expression dichotomy (codified in 17 U.S.C. §102(b)); merger 
doctrine; and scenes a faire doctrine  
Response:  Auto Care believes that these statutory and analytical doctrines have been properly 
applied in past cases to software used to control the operation of products. The cases cited by the 
Copyright Office Notice, particularly Lexmark v. Static Control Components, and Computer 
Assoc. v. Altai, have explained how these doctrines constrain the originality of software.10 Such 
software must conform to the computer language and system requirements of parts in the 
vehicle, must run on a specific hardware platform, and must meet size and programming 
requirements for storage and operation in the microprocessor. Typically, the code reflects little if 
any creativity. It merely uses mathematical equations designed to manipulate and operate 
physical equipment, in order to produce optimal performance specifications for the physical parts 
or systems. Thus, these doctrines remain highly pertinent to the evaluation of copyrightability of 
embedded software, and to the extent to which copying of elements (or all) of embedded 
software code is noninfringing.   
                                                            
9   Auto Care moreover notes that companies have little motivation to challenge overreaching 
claims of original equipment manufacturers, where the cost of litigating novel or difficult 
copyright principles could eclipse the successful defendant’s potential profits from offering the 
products or services.  See Assessment Technologies of WI, LLC v. Wiredata, 361 F.3d 434, 437 
(7th Cir. 2004) (“When the prevailing party is the defendant, who by definition receives not a 
small award but no award, the presumption in favor of awarding fees is very strong”). Auto Care 
submits that the Copyright Office should take these considerations into account in connection 
with the position of the United States in Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., No. 15-375, on 
certiorari to the Supreme Court.  
 
10    The Sixth Circuit in Lexmark also correctly determined that these doctrines should be 
applied to the analysis of embedded software as limits on copyrightability rather than as defenses 
to infringement. 387 F.3d at 535-536. Hardware and system constraints, and security and 
authentication measures applied by the OEM, compel code to be written in specific ways that 
permit the parts to function within the automotive system as a whole. While it may be 
appropriate to apply these doctrines to weigh noninfringement in cases based on substantial 
similarity, the doctrines are only pertinent to copyrightability of the original embedded software 
code where literal copying is necessary to enable operability and/or interoperability of parts.

[PAGE 11]
11 
 
d. Fair use (codified in 17 U.S.C. §107)  
Response:  Fair use remains a fundamental principle for independent businesses that make 
compatible replacement software or interoperable software enhancements, or that seek to repair 
motor vehicle parts using software. As in Sega and Connectix, competitors must have access to 
the software code to create compatible software for or to perform maintenance on replacement 
parts, and must make copies of the code and decompile it in order to offer competing products 
and services. Fair use also can assure that the scope of repair under patent law is not diminished 
by copyright law, and can fill gaps where the existing copyright statutory framework provides no 
explicit guidance. For example, just as a repair shop can take physical parts from one car to put 
them in another, fair use can protect transferring the copy of a program from one part to another; 
or can protect adjustment of software parameters or code to improve a part’s performance, in the 
same way that repair shops adjust and customize the performance of physical parts.   
e. The first-sale doctrine (codified in 17 U.S.C. §109)  
Response:  The first-sale doctrine as codified does not explicitly reflect the realities of the market 
for embedded software that controls the operation of motor vehicle parts. As suggested above, 
the Study should clarify that the owner of the physical object also owns the copy of any 
embedded software—such that a sale of a product or  part should also be deemed to encompass a 
sale of the copy of software used to control the part or product’s physical operation.  As so 
clarified, the Study would eliminate legal uncertainty and reduce threats of unjustified litigation 
by assuring uniform application of the first sale doctrine to embedded software.   
f. Statutory limitations on exclusive rights in computer programs (codified in 17 
U.S.C. §117)  
Response:  Auto Care believes that, properly interpreted, the current limitations on copyright in 
the software maintenance provisions of Section 117 should adequately protect most repair and 
maintenance activities engaged in by independent services. Any additional maintenance 
activities can be addressed as a matter of fair use, to assure that the scope of lawful repair for 
products with embedded software is the same under copyright law as under patent law. 
5. The state of contract law vis-a-vis software embedded in everyday products, 
and how contracts such as end user license agreements impact investment in 
and the dissemination and use of everyday products, including whether any 
legislative action in this area is needed.  
Response:  The Copyright Office Study should clarify that sale of a product or part whose 
operation is controlled by embedded software constitutes a sale of the copy of the embedded 
software. Comments submitted in the most recent Section 1201 triennial review by and on behalf 
of original motor vehicle equipment manufacturers suggest they compel consumers to accept 
“licenses” for embedded software in order to use the vehicle they already have purchased. Where

[PAGE 12]
12 
 
the software is integral to the physical operation of parts or systems of motor vehicles, 
manufacturers should be preempted from imposing copyright-based license restrictions on the 
right to use and repair products that the consumer owns. In many circumstances, these licenses 
could constitute copyright misuse, inasmuch as copyright protection is being used as leverage to 
stifle competition in markets for non-copyrightable goods and services. Thus, clarifying that the 
purchaser of the vehicle owns the copy of the embedded software will promote competition and 
consumer rights in a manner fully consistent with the promotion and purposes of copyright law. 
6. Any additional relevant issues not raised above. 
Response:  As noted above, Auto Care is deeply concerned about the application of technological 
protection measures in vehicle systems, to stymie competition for parts and service rather than to 
protect copyrighted works.  Auto Care separately will address these comments to the Copyright 
Office in the parallel Section 1201 study proceeding. 
 Auto Care wishes to bring to the atten tion of the Copyright Office another concern 
relating to the scope of exhaustion applicable to copyright.  On February 12, 2016, the U.S. 
Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit held en banc that a patent owner who made an 
authorized sale of a patented product could preclude patent exhaustion by means of a “single use 
only” legend.  Lexmark Int’l Inc. v. Impression Prods. Inc., No. 14-1617.  The United States as 
amicus in that case took the opposite view: the authorized sale of the product exhausted the 
patentee’s rights against the repair and maintenance of the product, and any such contract-based 
restriction on the post-sale uses of the product were enforceable, if at all, under contract law and 
not under patent law. Auto Care urges the Copyright Office to continue to apply the principles 
reflected in the United States amicus under copyright law. Any contract-based restrictions on the 
post-sale use of embedded software cannot and should not be enforceable under copyright law.  
 
 Auto Care thanks the Copyright Office fo r conducting this Study.  We look forward to 
continuing our participation in this proceeding.  Should the Office have any questions, please 
feel free to contact us at your convenience. 
Respectfully submitted,  
/s/ Aaron Lowe 
Senior Vice President, Regulatory and Government Affairs 
Auto Care Association 
7101 Wisconsin Ave., Suite 1300 
Bethesda, MD 20814 
301-654-6664, ext. 1021 
www.autocare.org
