[PAGE 1]
U.S. Copyright Ofﬁce 
Software-Enabled Consumer Products Study 
Docket No. 2015-6 
Comment of Intellectual Property Professors 
Introduction 
The increasing prevalence of consumer goods that incorporate embedded software highlights 
two longstanding problems in copyright law—the RAM copy doctrine and the characterization 
of sales as licenses.  Both of these trends arose in cases involving software, but they are now 1
poised to spread beyond that isolated and somewhat idiosyncratic corner of copyright law to 
the market for consumer goods generally, where they could inﬂict unforeseen harms on the 
intellectual property system, the economy, and the public. 
Today’s consumer products and devices—from smartphones and home appliances to vehicles 
and medical devices—integrate software code. That code doesn’t just offer new bells and 
whistles that improve on existing products; it is essential to the basic functionality of many 
devices. Without that software, these products are at best collections of spare parts and at 
worst expensive paper weights. If consumers are denied their statutory rights to use, transfer, 
and modify the software at the heart of this new generation of goods, they don’t really own the 
products they buy. Control over embedded software gives copyright holders unanticipated and 
unprecedented control over how those products are used, if and under what circumstances 
they can be resold, who if anyone can repair them, and what replacement parts and supplies 
are compatible with them. While copyright law was intended to give rights holders some 
measure of control over protected works—subject to principles of exhaustion and fair use, 
among others—copyright was never meant to provide such a powerful tool to control markets 
for devices. In this sense, software-embedded goods push copyright law uncomfortably close 
to regulating utilitarian devices properly within the scope of patent law. 
Allowing rights holders to dictate the terms of use, transfer, and repair for tractors, Barbie dolls, 
and coffee makers also serves to discredit the copyright system in the public mind. Reasonable 
consumers can be convinced to accept limitations on their ability to download movies without 
paying for them or photocopy expensive college textbooks. But so far, they appear far less 
accepting of software that tells them who can repair their tractor or their iPhone or code that 
restricts which brand of coffee or ink cartridge they can use with their device. On a nearly 
weekly basis, the popular press reports on a new collision between the well-established 
expectations of consumers to use the products they buy as they see ﬁt and the altogether new 
degree of control software code allows rights holders to wield. A copyright law that embraces 
those restrictions puts its legitimacy at risk. 
The challenge that software-embedded goods presents for the copyright system is a direct 
result of over two decades of software exceptionalism. For a variety of reasons, courts have 
reshaped copyright doctrine to accommodate the unique nature of software code and the 
 The anticircumvention provisions of the DMCA present a third, related set of concerns that are 1
the subject of a separate Copyright Ofﬁce study. See 80 FR 81369 . In the context of software-
enabled goods, a stark divide between these issues is artiﬁcial and obscures the important 
ways in which they are intertwined. Nonetheless, this comment will make an effort to set aside 
issues that relate primarily to DRM.
  of  1 13

[PAGE 2]
market preferences of the software industry. Unless we are willing to allow that brand of 
software exceptionalism to infect the digital economy as a whole, it is time to rethink the rules 
that developed during the infancy of software copyright. 
Courts have treated software as a special case for a number of reasons. For one, it has always 
been an awkward ﬁt within our copyright system. After the legislative acceptance of software 
copyright in 1980, courts and Congress have felt the need to make a number of 
accommodations to traditional copyright principles to make room for software. Consider 
§  102(b) and its exclusion of any “procedure, process, system, [or] method of operation” from 
the scope of copyright protection.  Courts have managed to reconcile protection for software 2
with that fundamental limitation, although their precise relationship remains a contested 
question.  From protectability to infringement, copyright doctrine has been molded and 3
stretched to address the unique problems software presents. Software is different from other 
works in another respect. Copies of software have little intrinsic value in isolation. Unlike books, 
paintings, or even musical compositions, the value of software is only realized within an 
operating environment, where running the code requires loading it into memory. Software also 
stands apart because the software industry has characterized transactions as licenses since the 
early days of mass markets for software.  Book publishers, record labels, and others attempted 4
to impose licensing restrictions on copies in the past. Consumers and courts saw those efforts 
as anomalous departures from existing transactional forms and established expectations. 
Accordingly, they rejected them. But in the software realm, attempts to characterize 
transactions as licenses have been around from the beginning. A key feature of those early 
licenses was the idea that the software developer does not sell copies of the program, but 
merely licenses them.  Early efforts to license software reﬂected the uncertainty surrounding 5
available copyright protection and concerns over conﬁdential trade secret information. But once 
that uncertainty was resolved, the license remained. It was and remains a powerful tool for 
undermining exhaustion rules, controlling secondary markets, and limiting competition. 
Even if software exceptionalism was justiﬁed in the past, it isn’t any longer. Digital copies of all 
sorts share many of the characteristics of software. They are useless outside of a computing 
environment, and they are subject to pervasive licensing efforts. The distinction between 
software and other kinds of copyrighted works, which was never particularly clear as a statutory 
or conceptual matter, is breaking down from a practical perspective.  And as computers take 6
the shape of phones, cars, and pacemakers, software is no longer some isolated corner of the 
marketplace conﬁned to virtual machines. It is a ubiquitous component of the physical world. 
Equally importantly, the intervening years have provided a clearer picture of the troubling 
consequences of software exceptionalism. 
 17 USC § 102(b).2
 Lotus v. Borland, 49 F .3d 807 (1st Cir. 1995); Oracle v. Google, 750 F .3d 1339 (Fed. Cir. 2014). 3
 Watts S. Humphrey, “Software Unbundling: A Personal Perspective, ” IEEE Annals of the 4
History of Computing 34, no. 1 (2002): 60.
 Id.5
 See A.M. Turing, On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem, 6
42 Proc. London Math. Soc. 230 (1936); Allen Newell, The Models Are Broken, The Models Are 
Broken!, 47 U. PITT . L. REV . 1023, 1033 (1986).
  of  2 13

[PAGE 3]
One such consequence is the RAM copy doctrine, which treats temporary instantiations of 
information in memory that persist for as little as a few seconds as ﬁxed copies for 
infringement purposes.  That misstep has cast the shadow of infringement liability over nearly 7
every use—personal and commercial, private and public—of a digital work. If merely reading a 
digital book or turning on a device with embedded code is potentially an act of infringement, the 
economy—from cars and tractors to toys and coffee makers—operates at the mercy of 
software copyright holders.  It means that powering on Mattel’s Hello Barbie requires a 8
copyright holder permission, not only for the original purchaser, but for all subsequent users and 
purchasers as well. And if Mattel decides to clamp down on the secondary market for used 
toys, it could quite simply refuse to grant permission to aftermarket purchasers to load the 
software that runs the device. For that matter, so could Ford or Volkswagen. 
But the clearest illustration of software exceptionalism is the Ninth Circuit’s inconsistent 
handling of the question of copy ownership in software and non-software cases. On June 7 , 
2010, the same Ninth Circuit panel heard oral arguments UMG v. Augusto  and Vernor v. 
Autodesk.  Both cases turned on the question of copy ownership; both involved the allegedly 9
infringing resale of lawfully-made copies; both cases featured license terms that imposed 
similar restrictions and purported to preclude copy ownership by the defendants. But despite 
those similarities, the panel reached very different conclusions relying on two inconsistent 
approaches. The best explanation for this disparity is that one case was about software, and the 
other was not.  
In Augusto, the court focused on the practical reality of the transaction. But in the software 
case, Vernor, it was concerned almost exclusively with the text announcing restrictions and 
reservations in the licensing agreement. Had the court applied the Vernor standard, Augusto 
would have been decided quite differently: UMG characterized the transaction as a license; it 
prohibited recipients from transferring the discs to others; and it conﬁned them to “personal” 
use of the discs. Each of the three Vernor factors were satisﬁed. Instead, the Ninth Circuit 
created two parallel frameworks for distinguishing licenses from sales. In software cases, it 
applies a test that turns on factors entirely within the control of the rights holder. In non-
software cases, it looks to the nature and consequences of the transaction.  
These two mistakes are linked. By ﬁnding infringing reproductions around every corner—every 
time a work is privately displayed, every time a device with embedded code is turned on, every 
time a copy in long term storage is loaded into short term memory—the RAM copy doctrine 
necessitates licenses for the most mundane and expected uses of a work. If every act is 
infringing, every act requires permission. That necessity reinforces the narrative that consumers 
aren’t really buying their software, they are merely paying for permission to use it. 
In order to address the pressing issue of software-enabled products, copyright law must 
undertake a substantial course correction. It must recognize the RAM copy doctrine and the 
 See MAI Systems v. Peak Computer, 991 F2d 511 (9th Cir 1993). Courts have started to push 7
back on the most obvious excesses of the RAM copy doctrine. Cartoon Network v. CSC 
Holdings, 536 F3d 121 (2d Cir 2008). But there is little certainty about its viability and scope. 
See Aaron Perzanowski, Fixing RAM Copies, 104 Northwestern L. Rev. 1067 (2010). 
 See Jessica Litman, The Exclusive Right to Read, 13 Cardozo Arts & Ent. L.J. 29, 31-32 (1994).8
 UMG Recordings, Inc. v. Augusto, 628 F .3d 1175 (9th Cir. 2011); Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc., 621 F .9
3d 1102 (9th Cir. 2010).
  of  3 13

[PAGE 4]
widespread acceptance of the consumer license as costly mistakes. And it must reafﬁrm the 
strong commitment to balancing the exclusive rights of copyright holders with the personal 
property interests of consumers reﬂected throughout the Copyright Act. If instead, copyright 
law continues down the existing path of software copyright, those mistakes will be ampliﬁed 
throughout the economy. 
1. The provisions of the copyright law that are implicated by the ubiquity of copyrighted 
software in everyday products 
At least six provisions of the Copyright Act are implicated by software-enabled devices. 
Section 101 provides that “[a] work is ‘ﬁxed’ in a tangible medium of expression when its 
embodiment in a copy or phonorecord, by or under the authority of the author, is sufﬁciently 
permanent or stable to permit it to be perceived, reproduced, or otherwise communicated for a 
period of more than transitory duration .”  (emphasis added). By treating the very act of loading 10
software into memory when a device or product is powered on or used, the RAM copy doctrine 
ignores this durational requirement and introduces unnecessary uncertainty about the legality 
of consumers using the devices they own.  
Section 102(b) excludes “any idea, procedure, process, system, method of operation, concept, 
principle, or discovery” from the scope of copyright protection.  Among the many goals of 11
§  102(b) is maintaining the boundary between the copyright and patent systems.  A device 12
maker should not, by virtue of their copyright interest in a software program, be permitted to 
control the use, transfer, and repair of a device. As the Court explained in Baker v. Selden, “That 
is the province of letters patent, not of copyright. ”  But without meaningful exhaustion and 13
corresponding consumer property rights, that is precisely the control copyright offers for 
makers of software-enabled devices.  
Section 106(3) deﬁnes the types of transactions available to copyright holders under the 
exclusive right of public distribution. It provides that copyright holders have the exclusive right 
“to distribute copies or phonorecords of the copyrighted work to the public by sale or other 
transfer of ownership, or by rental, lease, or lending. ”  This language recognizes two categories 14
of transactions: (1) sales and other transfers of ownership, like gifts; and (2) transfers of limited 
duration: rental, lease, or lending. Some transactions commonly referred to as licenses are easy 
to ﬁt into category (2). Borrowing a library book or subscribing to Netﬂix doesn’t transfer 
ownership. Other transactions, like the exchange of perpetual possession of a physical copy in 
exchange for a one-time payment, ﬁt more naturally into category (1), regardless of how they 
are characterized in license terms. In any case, the text of the Act makes clear that there is no 
free-standing transactional form called a “license” when it comes to the transfer of particular 
copies, such as those embedded in a phone, watch, or tractor. 
 17 USC § 101 .10
 17 USC § 102(b).11
 See Pamela Samuelson, Why Copyright Law Excludes Systems and Processes From the 12
Scope of Its Protection, 85 Tex. L. Rev. 1921 (2006).
 Baker v. Selden 101 U.S. 99 (1879).13
 17 USC § 106(3).14
  of  4 13

[PAGE 5]
Section 202 reinforces the distinction between “[o]wnership of a copyright, ” which the rights 
holder retains even after the sale of an embedded copy, and “ownership of any material object 
in which the work is embodied. ”  Nonetheless, license agreements and the courts that enforce 15
them often lose sight of this basic distinction. A rights holder can license certain uses of their 
copyrighted work at the very same time they transfer ownership through the sale of a particular 
copy stored in a device or product.  
Section 109(a) reﬂects the longstanding ﬁrst sale rule, limiting the power of copyright holders to 
interfere with downstream transfers of copies owned by consumers, and § 109(b) ensures that 
the owner of a copy is entitled to display it publicly. 
Section 117 secures additional rights for owners of copies of computer programs. It permits the 
creation of copies essential to the use of the program, archival copies, and adaptation copies  
necessary to translate between programming languages, move the program from one device to 
another, and to add new features.  The statute also permits the transfer of exact essential step 16
and archival copies as part of a transfer of the original copy, triggering a duty to delete any 
remaining archival copies.  17
Together, §§ 109 and 117 deﬁne the rights of owners of copies.  Applying the principle of 18
copyright exhaustion, these two provisions demonstrate the steps the Copyright Act takes to 
preserve the personal property interests of owners. Section 117 , like § 109, reﬂects 
congressional recognition of the fact that copyright has the potential to interfere with the 
legitimate personal property interests of owners of copies. That potential conﬂict is even 
greater when software leaves the familiar conﬁnes of our computers and makes its way into 
nearly every electronic device that surrounds us.  
To solve that problem, § 117 recognizes a set of rights that belong to copy owners. But that 
solution only works in a legal environment that acknowledges the purchasers of software 
products and software-embedded devices as owners. Too many courts have ignored this 
congressional purpose and fallen for the software industry’s myth of licensed copies. In doing 
so, those courts have created a legal framework that bestows on copyright holders set of rights 
the Copyright Act was simply never intended to grant. 
2. Whether, and to what extent, the design, distribution, and legitimate uses of products 
are being enabled and/or frustrated by the application of existing copyright law to 
software in everyday products 
A range of legitimate uses are frustrated by the application of the RAM copy doctrine and the 
acceptance of software transactions as licenses rather than sales. Combined, those doctrines 
give rights holders the power to control whether and how consumers use the devices they 
own; when and under what conditions they can lend, resell, or give them away; who can repair 
 17 USC § 202.15
 17 USC § 117(a); National Commission on New Technological Uses of Copyrighted Works, 16
Final Report 13 (1979).
 17 USC § 117 (a)-(b).17
 17 USC §§ 109 & 117 .18
  of  5 13

[PAGE 6]
them;  what interoperable products, replacement parts, and components can be used with 19
them; the degree to which those products can be researched and tested; the possibility of 
tinkering and user innovation; and the availability of interoperable products. 
Below are just a few examples of how control over the software embedded in consumer 
devices frustrates their legitimate use. Many of the harms these examples represent are 
compounded by the anticircumvention provisions of the DMCA.  But even putting § 1201 20
aside, the unauthorized use, transfer, and modiﬁcation of copies of software arguably violate 
§  106 if we accept the RAM copy doctrine and reject consumer ownership of embedded 
software copies. 
- Amazon used the software embedded in its Kindle devices to remotely delete 
purchased books—including George Orwell’s 1984—and to disable consumer accounts, 
effectively rendering the devices unusable.  21
- Nintendo used the software embedded in its Wii U gaming device to force owners to 
accept a revised end user license agreement. Device owners were given no option to 
refuse the update. The software prevented all attempts to access games or other data 
until device owners clicked “ Agree” to the new terms. 22
- Google’s terms of use for its Glass wearable computer prohibit owners from reselling, 
loaning, transferring, or giving away the device. And its embedded software allowed 
Google to remotely deactivate the device in the event of an unauthorized transfer.  23
- Cisco insists that owners of its hardware are not entitled to transfer copies of the 
software they contain, software that is essential to their function. Device owners, Cisco 
claims, “[do] not own the software on the product - and therefore [have] no rights to sell 
  Section 117 permits the owner or lessee of a machine to create a copy of software for the 19
purposes of repair. 17 § USC 117(c). However, the provision contains two crucial limitations that 
severely narrow its scope and has never been applied to common consumer goods.
 Some have been addressed by exemptions granted in the recent § 1201 rulemaking, but such 20
exemptions do not preclude infringement liability, nor do they permit modiﬁcation of the 
underlying code. Moreover, those exemptions are temporary, requiring renewal every three 
years, and the exemption related to motor vehicles does not go into effect until October 2016.
 Brad Stone, Amazon Erases Orwell Books from Kindle, New Y ork Times, July 17 , 2009, http://21
www.nytimes.com/2009/07/18/technology/companies/18amazon.html; Mark King, Amazon 
Wipes Customer’s Kindle and Deletes Account with No Explanation, Guardian (UK), October 22, 
2012, http://www.theguardian.com/money/2012/oct/22/amazon-wipes-customers-kindle-deletes-
account.
 Kit Walsh, Nintendo Updates Take Wii U Hostage Until Y ou "Agree" to New Legal Terms, 22
Deeplinks, Oct. 14, 2014, https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2014/10/nintendo-updates-take-wii-u-
hostage-until-you-agree-new-legal-terms.
 David Kravets & Roberto Baldwin, Google Is Forbidding Users from Reselling, Loaning Glass 23
Eyewear, Wired, April 17 , 2013, http://www.wired.com/2013/04/google-glass-resales; Long 
Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption Under 17 U.S.C. 1201 (Proposed Class # 21) at 6, 
Section 1201 Exemptions to Prohibition Against Circumvention of Technological Measures 
Protecting Copyrighted Works: Second Round of Comments, accessible at http://copyright.gov/
1201/2015/comments-032715/class%2021/John_Deere_Class21_1201_2014.pdf.
  of  6 13

[PAGE 7]
it to you. This means that if you purchased the product from that seller, your company ... 
would be in violation of Cisco’s intellectual property rights. ”  24
- John Deere tractors contain a variety of control units—hardware and software 
components that regulate functions ranging from running the engine to adjusting the 
armrest. John Deere leverages its control over that software to prevent home repairs 
and shut out independent repair shops. Instead, tractor owners are forced to pay for 
expensive service at authorized John Deere dealers. John Deere defends this policy on 
the grounds that its customers don’t actually own the software embedded in their 
tractors. In John Deere’s estimation, tractor owners merely have “an implied license for 
the life of the vehicle to operate the vehicle. ”  25
- Apple created software for the iPhone that detects “unauthorized” repairs of the 
devices. For iPhone owners who choose to opt for an independent repair shop, the 
consequences can be catastrophic. The device displays the cryptic “Error 53” and 
renders the device unusable and the data stored on it inaccessible. To date, Apple has 
announced no remedy to ﬁx Error 53. As a result unknown numbers of iPhone owners 
have seen their devices rendered worthless by Apple’s software.  26
- Companies like Keurig have relied on embedded software to control the market for 
consumable products like coffee pods. The DMCA reinforces these software 
restrictions, but § 1201 is not necessary to restrain consumer choice. A software license 
that prohibits modiﬁcation or removal of the lockout software could trigger traditional 
infringement liability under the RAM copy doctrine.  27
- Similarly, companies like Apple have relied on embedded software to prevent device 
owners from installing or using interoperable products. Only approved applications from 
Apple’s app store can be installed on the iPhone and iPad, for example. Modifying a 
device’s operating system to avoid these restrictions violates license restrictions and 
could constitute infringement.  Concerns about potential infringement liability can also 28
discourage research and testing of consumer devices. As recent safety recalls of Ford 
and Chrysler vehicles demonstrate—along with Volkswagen’s environmentally 
disastrous defeat device—the software that operates our nation’s vehicles requires 
outside scrutiny. But carmakers insist that car owners have no right to inspect or modify 
that software. GM, for example, recently told the Copyright Ofﬁce that car owners 
mistakenly “conﬂate ownership of a vehicle with ownership of the underlying computer 
software in a vehicle. ” In a world that embraces the RAM copy doctrine and refuses to 
 Cisco, Third Party Maintenance Services, http://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en_us/about/24
doing_business/legal/service_descriptions/docs/Third_Party_Maintenance_Services_FAQ.pdf
 Kyle Wiens, We Can’t Let John Deere Destroy the Idea of Ownership, Wired, April 21, 2015, 25
http://www.wired.com/2015/04/dmca-ownership-john-deere.
 Cory Doctorow, Error 53: Apple remotely bricks phones to punish customers for getting 26
independent repairs, BoingBoing, Feb. 5, 2016, http://boingboing.net/2016/02/05/gerror-53-apple-
remotely-bric.html.
 Hayley Peterson, Keurig's New Coffee Machine Got A Ton Of Hype, But Customers Seem To 27
Hate It, Business Insider, Nov. 25, 2014, http://www.businessinsider.com/keurig-20-scathing-
reviews-2014-11.
 Tom Krazit, Apple: iPhone Jailbreaking Violates Our Copyright, Cnet, Feb. 13, 2009, http://28
www.cnet.com/news/apple-iphone-jailbreaking-violates-our-copyright.
  of  7 13

[PAGE 8]
recognize consumer ownership of software copies, the specter of copyright liability 
stands in the way of this important work.  29
- Current software copyright law can also interfere with user innovation. Owners of 
medical devices like pacemakers and insulin pumps are understandably motivated to 
test and improve the devices that are implanted in their bodies and keeping them alive. 
But because they are not considered the owners of the embedded software copies that 
make these modern devices work, they are denied the opportunity to innovate even 
when their lives rest in the balance. In some instances, embedded software even 
denies patients access to data about their own health.  30
These examples make clear that copyright law frustrates a host of socially valuable, legitimate 
uses. Rejecting an approach that treats all RAM instantiations as copies and recognizing owners 
of devices as owners of the copies of software embedded in them would go a long way 
towards addressing these and similar scenarios. 
With regard to interoperable products, the Federal Circuit’s recent opinion in Oracle v. Google 
introduces a related but distinct set of concerns.  In ﬁnding the structure, sequence, and 31
organization of Oracle’s Java API copyrightable, that opinion signiﬁcantly increases the barriers 
facing developers of products that interoperate with existing devices and software platforms. 
First, it misinterpreted § 102(b) as nothing more than a restatement of the idea/expression 
distinction, giving no independent meaning to the statutory exclusion of procedures, processes, 
systems, and methods of operation. In doing so, the Federal Circuit misapplied Ninth Circuit 
precedent by limiting consideration of interoperability to the fair use inquiry. But in Sega v. 
Accolade, the court based its holding on the fundamental premise that software elements 
necessary to achieve interoperability are beyond the scope of copyright protection.  Second, 32
the Federal Circuit adopted an unreasonably narrow interpretation of the merger doctrine when 
it reasoned that merger was inapplicable so long as Oracle’s own engineers could exercise 
creative judgment in the creation of the API; the choices left available to developers of follow-on 
interoperable software or devices was, in the Federal Circuit’s estimation, irrelevant.  This 33
 Andy Greenberg, After Jeep Hack, Chrysler Recalls 1 .4M Vehicles for Bug Fix, Wired, July 24, 29
2015, http://www.wired.com/2015/07/jeep-hack-chrysler-recalls-1-4m-vehicles-bug-ﬁx; Alisa 
Priddle, Ford Recalls 433,000 Cars Because Engines Won’t Shut Off, USA Today, July 2, 2015, 
http://www.usatoday.com/story/money/cars/2015/07/02/ford-recall/29620683; Andrea Peterson 
and Brian FungThe Tech Behind How Volkswagen Tricked Emissions Tests, Washington Post, 
Sept. 22, 2015, https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-switch/wp/2015/09/22/the-tech-
behind-how-volkswagen-tricked-emissions-tests; Comments of General Motors LLC (Proposed 
Class #21) at 10, Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems 
for Access Control Technologies, No. 2014-07 (U.S. Copyright Ofﬁce March 27 , 2015), accessible 
a t h t t p : / / c o p y r i g h t . g o v / 1 2 0 1 / 2 0 1 5 / c o m m e n t s - 0 3 2 7 1 5 / c l a s s % 2 0 2 1 /
General_Motors_Class21_1201_2014.pdf.
 Emily Singer, Getting Health Data from Inside Y our Body, MIT Technology Review, November 30
22, 2011, http://www.technologyreview.com/news/426171/getting-health-data-from-inside-your-
body; Andrew Gregory and Graham Morrison, Karen Sandler: Full Interview, TuxRadar, 
September 26, 2013, http://www.tuxradar.com/content/karen-sandler-full-interview.
 Oracle v. Google, 750 F .3d 1339 (Fed. Cir. 2014)31
 See Sega Enters., Ltd. v. Accolade, Inc., 977 F .2d 1510, 1522 (9th Cir. 1992).32
 Oracle, 750 F .3d at 1361.33
  of  8 13

[PAGE 9]
result is inconsistent with the prevailing view in many circuits, including the Ninth.  The Federal 34
Circuit’s rewriting of software copyright law gives copyright holders far greater power to limit 
interoperability not only with software code, but with the consumer devices that depend on 
that code. 
3. Whether, and to what extent, innovative services are being enabled and/or frustrated 
by the application of existing copyright law to software in everyday products 
In recent years, device makers and service providers have developed no shortage of new and 
innovative offerings. From media streaming services like Netﬂix and Spotify to wearable 
technology like Fitbit and the Apple Watch, developers have found new ways to deliver goods 
and services to meet the demands of consumers.  
But none of these goods and services depend on copyright law continuing down the dangerous 
path outlined above. Although device makers are eager to limit competition, control consumer 
behavior, restrict secondary markets, and extract higher prices for services, consumables, and 
replacement parts, there is no reason copyright law should indulge those whims. First, it is far 
from clear that the development and introduction of these new products depends on this 
degree of downstream control. And to the extent such control is necessary, it is available 
through other means that do not conscript the Copyright Act into the effort to gain control over 
the market for devices and related services. That is not the job of copyright law, nor should it 
be. If device makers want to exert that control, they can turn to other bodies of law including 
patents and contracts. Even within the copyright framework, if it is essential to control post-sale 
use of a product, device makers and service providers have a clear and workable option—don’t 
sell your product to consumers. Products can be offered as rentals, leases, or subscriptions—
transactions that consumers understand do not confer the rights associates with ownership. 
But when a consumer buys a car, a phone, or a pacemaker, they expect to own it. And that 
expectation is not limited to the physical components; it reasonably includes the software that 
is equally, if not more, responsible for the device’s characteristics, features, and performance. 
4. Whether, and to what extent, legitimate interests or business models for copyright 
owners and users could be undermined or improved by changes to the copyright law in 
this area 
The current state of the law surrounding software-enabled devices poses a signiﬁcant risk to a 
number of legitimate interests and business models. It threatens secondary markets and 
intermediaries like eBay that facilitate resale. It threatens portions of the sharing economy, 
including sites like Neighborgoods, that enable the lending of tools and other equipment. It 
threatens independent service and repair shops across the electronics, telecommunications, 
automative, and other sectors. It threatens the makers of low cost add-on products and 
compatible consumables, including amateur user-innovators.  
Ironically, the uncertainty surrounding exactly what rights consumers acquire in the devices 
they buy could dissuade them making such purchases in the future. This assumes that a 
sufﬁcient number of consumers are aware of the limited set of rights they acquire when it 
 See Sega, 977 F .2d at 1522; Sony Computer Entertainment, Inc. v. Connectix, Corp., 203 F .3d 34
596, 602-03 (9th Cir. 2000); Lexmark Int’l, Inc. v. Static Control Components, Inc., 387 F .3d 522, 
535-36 (6th Cir. 2004); Computer Associates International, Inc. v. Altai, Inc., 982 F .2d 693, 
709-10 (2d Cir. 1992).
  of  9 13

[PAGE 10]
comes to “licensed” devices. And while there have been notable consumer backlashes to 
some instances of over-reaching rights holders, there is good reason to suspect that the public 
at large remains in the dark about the assertions rights holders make about their ongoing right 
to control devices after their sale. 
Given the troubling consequences of allowing copyright holders to assert control over software 
embedded in devices sold to consumers, in conﬂict with the text and purpose of § 117 , rights 
holders should be expected to demonstrate a concrete and signiﬁcant risk of meaningful 
infringement of their software code. But they can’t. No one buys a John Deere tractor to extract 
its software code. No one buys a pacemaker to share its operating system via BitTorrent. 
Assertions of copyright in this space are not driven by a desire to prevent or discourage 
infringement; they are motivated by a desire to control how consumers use utilitarian devices, 
to limit competition and increase prices by curtailing secondary markets, and to leverage the 
limited copyright monopoly into the service and repair markets. Not only is that far from a 
compelling justiﬁcation for copyright exclusivity, it is the deﬁnition of copyright misuse. 
5. Key issues in how the copyright law intersects with other areas of law in establishing 
how products that rely on software to function can be lawfully used 
In the context of software-enabled devices, copyright law intersects with at least four other 
bodies of law.  
First, to the extent copyright law interferes with the ability of device owners to use, transfer, 
and repair the products they buy, the balance between the statutory rights of copyright holders 
and the personal property rights of consumers are implicated. Copyright law’s exhaustion rules 
are intended to achieve a balance between those conﬂicting sets of interests.  But to the 35
extent copyright law fails to acknowledge consumers as the owners of not only the physical 
devices they buy, but also the software copies responsible for the functionality, the copyright 
system is responsible for a massive erosion of personal property rights.  
  
Second, since license terms that purport to prevent a transfer of ownership are often 
characterized by licensors—and interpreted by courts—as contracts, the intersection of 
copyright and contract law is a necessary consideration.  Contract law has undergone a 36
transformation in recent decades that replaced the traditional paradigm of negotiated terms, a 
meeting of the minds, and explicit acceptance with a contemporary view that permits contract 
formation by notice alone, and constructive notice at that. Under those conditions, contracts no 
longer create purely in personam rights. Instead, they effectively attach restrictions that run 
with a piece of personal property; they create servitudes on chattels, a property restriction that 
faced hostility at common law historically.  These so-called agreements seek to enlist copyright 37
law in achieving an outcome that courts have rejected for centuries. Putting aside issues of 
formation, this suggests that license agreements imposing restrictions on the use of a device 
 See Aaron Perzanowski & Jason Schultz, Reconciling Intellectual and Personal Property, 90 35
Notre Dame L. Rev. 1211 (2015). 
 There are good reasons, however, to resist the notion that licenses are at their core 36
contractual in nature. See Christopher M. Newman, A License Is Not A "Contract Not to Sue": 
Disentangling Property and Contract in the Law of Copyright Licenses, 98 Iowa L. Rev. 1101 
(2013).
 See Molly Shaffer Van Houweling, The New Servitudes, 96 Geo. L.J. 885 (2008).37
  of  10 13

[PAGE 11]
or its embedded software should be enforced not with copyright remedies, but with contractual 
ones—subject to internal contract law limitations and copyright preemption. 
Third, false advertising is a relevant area of law that is typically overlooked in this discussion. 
Recent research suggests that when consumers buy digital goods, they often expect to acquire 
the same sorts of rights to use and transfer those goods that they acquire when they purchase 
analog products.  By characterizing transactions as sales or purchases when, in fact, the ﬁne 38
print imposes signiﬁcant and unexpected limitations, device makers are misleading consumers 
about the fundamental nature of the transaction. At the very least, the law should ensure that 
consumers are able to make informed choices. 
Finally, software-enabled devices present an increased potential for conﬂict with patent law. 
Historically, copyright law has made great effort to avoid extending protection to utilitarian 
devices. This is evident not only in § 102(b), but also on the useful article limitation on protection  
for pictorial, graphic, and sculptural works.  But if rights holders can exercise the kinds of 39
control over devices described above by virtue of their copyright interests in the software that 
operates these devices, copyright has effectively embraced protection of utilitarian articles as 
such. This raises the possibility of overlapping copyright and patent protection for the functional 
features of the same device, not to mention the potential for copyright protection for devices 
that fail to meet the more stringent standards of possibility—protection that persists decades 
longer than the comparatively short patent duration.  
Recommendations 
Because the problems described above result primarily from misinterpretation of the terms of 
§§ 101, 109, and 117 , legislative intervention is not strictly necessary. But courts clearly require 
some guidance regarding the ﬁxation’s durational requirement in order to put to rest the legacy 
of MAI v. Peak. Similarly, the courts would beneﬁt from some clariﬁcation regarding the impact 
of license terms on the question of whether a “sale or other transfer of ownership” has 
occurred for purposes of determining who counts as an “owner” of a copy under §§ 109 and 
117 . The Copyright Ofﬁce is well positioned to offer that interpretive guidance. In doing so, it 
should follow the lead of the Second Circuit in Cartoon Network and emphasize the distinct 
statutory durational requirement ignored in MAI v. Peak . Likewise, It should encourage an 
approach to resolving the license/sale question that looks to the economic reality of a 
transaction rather than the self-serving language of license terms drafted by copyright holders, 
as the Ninth Circuit did in Augusto and Second Circuit did in Krause v. Titleserv.  These 40
recommendations apply with equal force to software and non-software disputes. 
 See Aaron Perzanowski & Jason Schultz, The End of Ownership (MIT Press, forthcoming 38
2016) (describing survey data that reveal a substantial percentage of consumers believe that 
they acquire the rights to resell, lend, and give away digital books, music, and movies after 
clicking the ubiquitous “Buy Now” button).
 17 USC § 101(deﬁning a “useful article” as one “having an intrinsic utilitarian function that is 39
not merely to portray the appearance of the article or to convey information” and providing that 
“the design of a useful article ... shall be considered a pictorial, graphic, or sculptural work only 
if, and only to the extent that, such design incorporates pictorial, graphic, or sculptural features 
that can be identiﬁed separately from, and are capable of existing independently of, the 
utilitarian aspects of the article”).
 402 F .3d 119 (2d Cir. 2005)40
  of  11 13

[PAGE 12]
If legislation is necessary, promising models have been proposed in Congress and enacted in 
other jurisdictions. The Y ou Own Devices Act (YODA)  addresses some of the most 41
troublesome implications of current copyright law as applied to software-enabled devices. It 
would entitle the owner of a device to transfer an authorized copy of a computer program that 
enables operation of that device when the owner sells, leases, or otherwise transfers the 
device. That right cannot be waived. YODA would greatly improve the current state of 
uncertainty regarding transfers of devices, but it could go further by giving owners the right to 
modify their software, as currently permitted under § 117 . 
A statutory deﬁnition of a “transfer of copy ownership” or an “owner” for exhaustion purposes 
could also offer much needed clariﬁcation. To the extent those terms are deﬁned, they should 
recognize that a transaction characterized by a one-time payment in exchange for perpetual 
possession of or access to a copy should be considered a sale regardless of the terms of a 
license. 
When it comes to the RAM copy doctrine, existing legislation in Canada and Israel provide 
useful starting points. In 2012, Canada added § 30.71 of the Copyright Act which provides that it 
is “not an infringement of copyright to make a reproduction of a work or other subject-matter if 
(a) the reproduction forms an essential part of a technological process; (b) the reproduction’s 
only purpose is to facilitate a use that is not an infringement of copyright; and (c) the 
reproduction exists only for the duration of the technological process. ” Similarly, Copyright Act,. 
§ 26 of the Israeli Copyright Act provides: “The transient copying, including incidental copying, 
of a work, is permitted if such is an integral part of a technological process whose only purpose 
is to  enable transmission of a work as between two parties, through a  communications 
network, by an intermediary entity, or to enable any other lawful use of the work, provided the 
said copy does not have signiﬁcant economic value in itself.” By incorporating a similar provision 
in the Copyright Act, much of the harm of the RAM copy doctrine could be avoided. 
The Request for Public Comment asks “whether copyright law should distinguish between 
software embedded in ‘everyday products’ and other types of software . ” Since the problems 
highlighted here have their origins in cases dealing with traditional computer software, it would 
be unwise to distinguish software embedded in everyday products from software installed on 
traditional computers. While the concerns are more obvious and startling when we talk about 
software-enabled devices, those same worries exist for software installed on desktops and 
laptops. In both cases, the takeaway is the same—when a product is sold to consumer, she 
should be entitled to treat that product as her property, as deﬁned by §§ 109 and 117 . If the 
rights of public are contingent on the kindness of licensors, in the near future copyright law will 
regulate nearly every device with which we interact. 
Respectfully, 
Aaron Perzanowski 
Professor of Law 
Case Western Reserve University School of Law 
Timothy K. Armstrong 
Professor of Law 
University of Cincinnati College of Law 
 H.R. 862, 114th Cong. (2015)41
  of  12 13

[PAGE 13]
Joshua Fairﬁeld 
Professor of Law 
Washington and Lee University School of Law 
Shubha Ghosh 
Crandall Melvin Professor Law 
Director, Technology Commercialization Law Program 
Syracuse University College of Law 
Ariel Katz 
Associate Professor 
Innovation Chair in Electronic Commerce 
University of Toronto Faculty of Law 
Stacey M. Lantagne 
Assistant Professor of Law 
The University of Mississippi School of Law 
Mark A. Lemley 
William H. Neukom Professor 
Stanford Law School 
Michael J. Madison  
Professor of Law 
University of Pittsburgh School of Law 
Betsy Rosenblatt 
Associate Professor 
Director of the Center for Intellectual Property Law  
Whittier Law School 
Michael L. Rustad  
Thomas F . Lambert Jr. Professor of Law  
Co-Director Intellectual Property Law Concentration 
Suffolk University Law School  
Pamela Samuelson  
Richard M. Sherman Distinguished Professor of Law  
Berkeley Law School 
Rebecca Tushnet 
Professor of Law 
Georgetown Law 
  of  13 13
