[PAGE 1]
Catherine R. Gellis for the R Street Institute, comment in Docket No. 2015-6 
 
Before the  
U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 
Washington, DC 
 
 
___________________________________ 
      ) 
In the Matter of    ) 
      ) 
Software-Enabled Consumer   ) 
Products Study    ) Docket No. 2015-6 
      )   
      )   
____________________________________) 
 
COMMENT OF THE R STREET INSTITUTE  
 
I. Preliminary Statement 
The R Street Institute is a non -profit, non -partisan, public policy research 
organization (“think tank”), whose mission is to engage in policy research and out reach 
to promote free markets and limited, effective government.  As part of that mission the 
Institute regularly advocates for the removal of arbitrary legal and regulatory barriers that 
threaten free and open technological innovation.   
In furtherance of  that mission we hereby submit this comment to both the 
“Software-Enabled Consumer Products Study” (“software study”) (Docket No. 2015 -6) 
and “Section 1201 Study” (“1201 study”) (Docket No. 2015 -8).  We submit in this way 
because of the degree the two stud ies interrelate, thereby requiring them to be addressed 
together.   When contemplating the role copyright law has in affecting innovation policy, 
overly segregating related issues creates artificial barriers that prevent the effective 
telling of what is one coherent story and which needs to be treated as such.1 
                                                 
1 We note that Question #11 of the 1201 study specifically invites commentary on any other “pertinent” 
issues, and the sixth item under “specific issues” in the software study similarly asks for commentary on 
other “relevant” issues, as does the letter from Senators Grassley and Leahy requesting the study.  In this 
case we note that the responses to the software study are pertinent to the 1201 study, and vice versa.

[PAGE 2]
 
 
 
 
Although certain aspects discussed below may be more specific to one study or 
another, the entirety of this comment should be considered part of the record for each.2  If 
the Copyright Office finds i t necessary to ascribe this comment to a specific question 
posed, they are most applicable to Question #2 of the software study  (“Whether, and to 
what extent, the design, distribution, and legitimate uses of products are being enabled 
and/or frustrated by the application of existing copyright law to software in everyday 
products”) and Question #11 of the 1201 study (“Please identify any pertinent issues not 
referenced above that the Copyright Office should consider in conducting its study.”).  
We also highl ight where portions of this comment may also be applicable to other 
questions asked, such as Question #2 of the 1201 study  (“How should section 1201 
accommodate interests that are outside of core copyright concerns, for example, in cases 
where circumvention of access controls protecting computer programs implicates issues 
of product interoperability or public safety?”), to wh ich we respond unequivocally, for 
the following reasons, that it should not.3   
II. The Overarching Issue Relevant to Both Studies 
The essential question raised by both studies is, “What is copyright law doing 
here?”  Copyright law can be traditionally understood to create limited monopolies of a 
limited set of exclusive rights for limited times for the authors of creative works.  And , to 
the extent that it is not precluded by doctrines such as merger, scènes à faire , or the 
idea/expression dichotomy, software may in some cases be deemed an independent, 
creative work.  But the questions contemplated by both studies are not limited to 
exploring the bounds of that potential copyrightability of software.   
                                                 
2 To comply with the instructions, however, this comment will be separately submitted for eac h study.   
3 Question #3 of the 1201 study asks whether Section 1201 should be adjusted to allow for a presumption 
of renewal of previous exemptions, to which we would say yes.  In fact, there should be a presumption of 
validity for all sought exemptions.  Relatedly, Question #4 of the 1201 study contemplates shifting 
burdens from proponents of a class to opponents, which we would also agree is a needed improvement.  
However, small changes like these are mere bandaids that do not adequately address the fund amental 
problem of copyright inserting itself in how technology is used and developed, which is what our comment 
challenges.

[PAGE 3]
 
 
 
 
What this comment addresses is where the issues transcend the question of the 
copyrightability for software and instead investigate the role copyright law plays in 
affecting how people m ay use and develop computing technology in general.  It is that 
question there that requires the most attention, and, indeed, alarm. 
The problem was illustrated in the most recent 1201 rulemaking.  There were 
essentially two types of classes for which exem ptions were sought: exemptions that 
would enable non-infringing consumption of copyrighted works, and exemptions seeking 
the ability to bypass a technical protective measure (“TPM”) preventing access to the 
computing logic of onboard hardware (which, for b revity, will generally be referred to as 
“hardware” or “computing logic” throughout).  While we would of course advocate for 
liberal granting of exemptions of the former, it is the latter type of classes on which this 
comment focuses. 
What we saw was essen tially a regulatory land -grab by copyright law to insert 
itself over the legal ability of people to use the computing devices legitimately available 
to them as they would choose.  The rationale for this insertion appeared to be as follows: 
because software  is ostensibly copyrightable, and because software sits between the 
hardware and the user’s ability to control the function of the hardware, the anti -
circumvention provisions of 1201 were implicated because modifying the software meant 
bypassing the TPM co ntrolling access to the underlying computing logic of the device 
that ran the copyrighted software.   
Everything about that presumption needs to be challenged.  The difficulty with 
doing it within these studies, however, is that they search for solutions w ithin copyright 
law, when these are problems created by copyright having extended its reach far beyond 
where it was intended and entitled to be in the first place.   The better answer is ultimately 
to get copyright out of the way. 
III. Comments applicable to each study

[PAGE 4]
 
 
 
 
(1) Copyright law should not interfere with how people may freely use, modify, 
or transfer electronic devices generally. 
Underpinning the software study is the presumption that copyright is necessary to 
incentivize the creation of software.  This presu mption must be questioned.  Given that 
software, particularly embedded software, is so often bound up in directing the technical 
operation of companion hardware, significant restraint should be exercised before 
allowing monopoly rights in the software affe ct what the legitimate possessor of the 
object it runs can do with it.     
This restraint is particularly warranted in the case of software -enabled consumer 
products.  As the most recent 1201 rulemaking itself demonstrated, there is no longer any 
meaningful difference between a computer as one was understood at the time the DMCA 
was passed and any other device capable of computing logic.  There are now TV -shaped 
computers, car -shaped computers, pacemaker -shaped computers, toaster -shaped 
computers,4 even sne aker-shaped computers, 5 and more. 6  Chips capable of processing 
electronic signals are cheap and something that can be added to essentially any object.  
Although as of now the computing logic that each resulting device runs may be tailored 
to the intended purpose of each such device (for instance, smart TVs are designed to do 
different things than smart medical devices) the distinctions are not meaningful ones, and 
they are definitely not meaningful for purposes of copyright law.  In all these examples 
software is controlling the operation of onboard computing logic, and nothing about that 
particular device’s operation, be it what the manufacturer intended or otherwise, should 
                                                 
4 See, e.g., the “Breville Die-Cast 2-Slice Smart toaster” marketed for its “intelligent” ability to know just 
how much to brown bread.  http://www.brevilleusa.com/die-cast-2-slice-smart-toastertm.html (last 
reviewed Feb. 12, 2016). 
5 See, e.g., the Sketchers 10900L “Game Kicks” sneaker, which feature a “[f]ully functional game feature!” 
where  “[f]our colorful flowers light up and make sounds in a classic 'match the pattern' game .”  The shoe 
also comes with “a [r]eset button and [a] sound on/off button.”  https://www.skechers.com/en-
us/style/10900/game-kicks/gumt (last reviewed Feb. 12, 2016). 
6 See various other examples of “more,” including computer-shaped air conditioners, clothes washers, and 
lightbulbs at http://www.crookedbrains.net/2014/03/smart-and-awesome-wi-fi-gadgets.html (last reviewed 
Feb. 12, 2016).

[PAGE 5]
 
 
 
 
affect the question of whether copyright is needed to regulate that operation.  In  all such 
cases the answer should be no. 
The increasing convergence between formerly non -computerized objects and 
“smart” versions illustrates why there should be this limitation on the role of copyright.  
Copyright is designed to be a solution to market f ailure, or the situation where no one 
will make the investment in creating an expressive work if the sole basis for potentially 
profiting from that effort can easily be usurped by another party.  The prototypical 
example is a book, where the intrinsic valu e of the book is the expression contained 
within, not the physical object containing it.  Such is not the case, however, regarding 
embedded software in objects capable of computing logic.  In these cases it is the object, 
or device itself, that is what’s valuable.   
The producers of these physical objects are selling physical objects that do things, 
be it toasting bread, shielding feet, or merely processing electrons as any computing 
device does.  The devices compete on the market based upon their objects’ ability to do 
what the consumer wants to put them to, at the cost the consumer is willing to pay, more 
optimally than those of their competitors.  Thus there is no need to artificially insulate the 
manufacturer from competitive market forces with a copyright monopoly, particularly not 
when such a monopoly will consequently hobble how a user can purchase, use, or adapt 
the product in the way that they might choose.  Even to the extent that embedded 
software may be somewhat copyrightable, that copyrightabilit y should not serve to limit 
the control people have over the physical goods they choose to have in their lives.   
In fact, it is anathema to copyright that it should even have begun to: even in the 
case of a book, under the first sale doctrine the owner of a physical book had traditionally 
retained the right to dispose of it has he chose, regardless of the copyright status of the 
expressive content within.  It should not require a statutory amendment to ensure that 
people can dispose of the other objects in  their lives freely as well, even electronic 
devices with embedded software, but to the extent that it may, the R Street Institute

[PAGE 6]
 
 
 
 
supports legislation such as the You Own Devices Act, which aims to restore that 
important freedom to users. 
(2) Section 1201 should not interfere with how people may freely use, modify, or 
transfer electronic devices generally. 
 Incongruously attached to the copyright statute is Section 1201.  Ostensibly it is 
intended to prohibit the interference with “digital rights management” ( “DRM”) 
mechanisms controlling the access to digital copies of copyrighted works.  In practice, 
however, it effectively chills behaviors that have nothing to do with copyright or the 
infringement thereof. 
The first problem stems from the overbroad definitio n of what constitutes a TPM.  
It is problematic enough when it is DRM that obstructs access to a work, particularly 
when that access is non -infringing or otherwise legitimate.  This problem is aggravated 
by the fact that Section 1201 does not actually puni sh an infringing use of a work – other 
sections of the copyright statute provide punitive consequences for that infringement – 
but rather the mere act of circumventing a TPM, regardless of why it was done.  Worse, it 
imposes not just a civil sanction but a  potentially criminal one, and it is a sanction that 
can attach even when the circumvention was done in furtherance of a non -infringing use 
or one with no connection to a use of a copyrighted work at all.   
As we see from these rulemakings, Section 1201 is  presumed to reach all sorts of 
circumventions done by people simply trying to fully use, modify, or otherwise explore 
the computing logic of the devices they legitimately possess.  Whether it is to be able to 
connect a mobile device to another network, discover the vulnerabilities of a medical 
device, repair a broken tractor, or simply ensure that one’s TV is not spying on them , 
Section 1201 deters all these non -copyright activities because of the overly expansive 
definition of a TPM.   A default assumptio n appears to have evolved that for all intents 
and purposes a TPM is anything that controls any access, including access to the 
computing logic of a device.  This definition appears to be predicated on the fact that a

[PAGE 7]
 
 
 
 
TPM may itself be a piece of software,  and software may be copyrighted, even though 
the circumvention has little to do with affecting the exclusive rights of whatever 
copyright that software  might have .7  In other words, presumptions are built upon 
presumptions, first by presuming that embedded software controlling computing device is 
itself eligible for copyright, and then by considering that copyright to be the copyright 
interest Section 1201 is intended to protect, when it is not.  The software is merely the 
TPM, not the thing that the TPM is designed to control access to.   
The Section 1201 study contemplates a number of improvements to the statute 
that might offer some relief: presumptive renewal of previously granted exemptions 
(Question #3 ), reducing the enormous burdens of petitioning fo r, and substantiating, 
needed exemptions (Question #4), and creating permanent exemptions ( Questions #8 & 
#9).  These changes would help alleviate some of the difficulty faced by the public to 
obtain the legal relief necessary to perform the circumventions of TPMs for non -
infringing activities, including activities simply involving the ability of legitimate 
possessors of computing devices to freely use them as they so choose, including in ways 
that don’t affect  a copyright interest.  But, as noted in footnote 4 supra, these proposed 
changes are not enough, particularly where these non -infringing activities in no way 
implicate copyright interests.  Every exemption sought, even if ultimately granted, 
represents a use that has already been chilled, and no amount of hardcoded exemptions 
baked into the statute will ever be able to cover all the uses that have yet to be imagined. 
The fact that it was necessary to petition for exemptions covering security 
research of medical devices and automobiles, even though “security research” is already 
a hardcoded exemption in Section 1201, shows why a much more definitive solution,  
making it absolutely clear that Section 1201 has no place regulating circumventions 
involving access to computing logic, is needed.   Hardcoding activities such as “security 
                                                 
7 See discussion Part II.1 supra of why the entitlement of software to copyright should be extremely 
limited.

[PAGE 8]
 
 
 
 
research” is simply not sufficient to keep up with a rapidly changing technology frontier.  
Computing faculties are becoming better, faster, and more ubiquitous all the time.  There 
is no way for the Copyright Office to keep up, nor should it have to. 
Question #2 asks how non-copyright interests should be accommodated during a 
1201 rulemaking proceeding, as if it in any way makes sense to empower the Librarian of 
Congress via the Copyright Office to act as a gatekeeper entitled to either bless, or 
effectively forbid, any of the purposes for which someone might want to bypass a TPM, 
particularly when those purposes are simply to get access to the computing logic of a 
device.  Neither the Librarian nor the Office is endowed with the authority or expertise to 
be an all -purpose evaluator of how people use their computing technology or judge its 
effects.  On the contrary, the more present non -copyright issues, the more important it is 
that copyright law not interfere with those uses, and especially not when that interference 
is motivated by the desire to protect society from unwanted consequenc es arising from 
technology use and development.  First, there are many other regulatory bodies, state and 
federal, capable, and indeed better able, to address whatever harm that may arise from 
innovation.  And secondly, the ubiquity of computing devices in  an increasing, even 
infinite number of items, illustrates the critical need for people to have complete 
dominion over them, to discover the full extent of their effects and vulnerabilities. 8  The 
Copyright Office is not in the position to police when bad actors have deployed software 
on their devices that spy on users 9 or cheat on emissions tests .10  But the public is, and it 
must be unambiguously legally able to. 
                                                 
8 Few would likely have ever argued that a parent should not be able to adjust their child’s footwear as 
needed.  The mere introduction of a microchip to that shoe should not make that parent suddenly legally 
unable to do so. 
9 See, e.g., Trevor Timm, “The Government Just Admitted It Will Use Smart Home Devices for Spying,” 
The Guardian, Feb. 9, 2016, available at http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/09/internet-
of-things-smart-devices-spying-surveillance-us-government. 
10 See, e.g., Karl Russell, Guilbert Gates, Josh Keller, and Derek Watkins, “How Volkswagen Got Away 
With Diesel Deception,” New York Times, Jan. 6, 2016, available at 
http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015/business/international/vw-diesel-emissions-scandal-
explained.html.

[PAGE 9]
 
 
 
 
IV. Conclusion 
Both studies skirt around the ultimate issue: the role and purpose of copyright 
(and consequently the agency charged with administering it).  Copyright law derives its 
constitutional authority from the progress clause, which charges it to advance the 
progress of science and the useful arts.  Anything that copyright law attempts to do mus t 
always be tested against that directive (and limitation).  When, as we see now, copyright 
is interfering with that progress, chilling people’s ability to use and develop technology 
as they would freely choose, it cannot pass that test.  The statute defin ing copyright’s 
reach must therefore be changed to remove it from the path of progress.  
 
   
 
Dated:  February 16, 2015 Respectfully submitted, 
 /s/ Catherine R. Gellis 
  
Catherine R. Gellis  
(CA Bar # 251927) 
P.O. Box 2477 
Sausalito, CA 94966 
Phone: 202-642-2849 
cathy@cgcounsel.com 
 
Counsel for the R Street Institute 
 
Michael W. Godwin  
(DC Bar # 432639) 
1050 17th St. NW 
Washington, DC 20036 
Phone: 202-230-4286 
mgodwin@rstreet.org 
 
General Counsel for the R Street 
Institute

[PAGE 10]
