[PAGE 1]
16	February,	2016		Hon.	Maria	Palante,	Register	of	Copyrights	United	States	Copyright	Office	Library	of	Congress	Washington,	DC		Re:	NOI:	"Software-Enabled	Consumer	Products	Study:	Notice	and	Request	for	Public	Comment,"	Comments	of	the	Music	Library	Association.		Comments	submitted	by:	Tammy	Ravas	Chair,	Legislation	Committee	Music	Library	Association		Dear	Ms.	Pallante,		The	Music	Library	Association	respectfully	submits	the	following	comments,	pursuant	to	the	Notice	of	Inquiry,	"Software-Enabled	Consumer	Products	Study"	(Doc.	2015-6;	80	FR	77668).		The	MLA	is	the	professional	association	for	music	libraries	and	librarianship	in	the	United	States.	Founded	in	1931,	it	has	an	international	membership	of	over	800	librarians,	musicians,	scholars,	educators,	and	members	of	the	book	and	music	trades.	Complementing	the	Association‘s	national	and	international	activities	are	ten	regional	chapters	that	carry	out	its	programs	on	the	local	level.	The	Music	Library	Association	provides	a	professional	forum	for	librarians,	archivists,	and	others	who	support	and	preserve	the	world‘s	musical	heritage.		Our	comments	primarily	address	question	5	of	the	NOI	("Key	issues	in	how	the	copyright	law	intersects	with	other	areas	of	law	in	establishing	how	products	that	rely	on	software	to	function	can	lawfully	be	used,"),	though,	as	we	will	explain,	we	take	a	broad	view	of	this	question.			Overview	MLA	believes	that	the	questions	raised	in	the	NOI	carry	implications	that	extend	well	beyond	the	limited	sphere	within	which	they	were	raised,	and	that	the	scope	of	the	inquiry	must	be	broadly	seen	in	the	interaction	of	end	user	licenses	and	copyright	law,	rather	than	narrowly	in	computer	programs	and	consumer	products.		For	this	reason,	our	comments	respond	to	the	question	of	end	user	licenses	in	general,	rather	than	specifically	to	the	software-enabled	consumer	products	contemplated	by	the	NOI.				We	are	aware	of	many	ways	in	which	the	uncomfortable	relationship	between	copyright	law	and	current	models	of	software	licensing,	including	that	which	is	embedded	in	software	for	consumer	products,	directly	affects	libraries	with	respect

[PAGE 2]
	 2	to	their	use	and	distribution	of	software	and	other	products.		Music	libraries	in	particular	may	wish	to	provide	access	to	devices	with	such	software	embedded	in	them,	such	as	tablets	and	other	e-readers,	satellite-ready	radios,	electronic	keyboards,	and	any	number	of	learning	devices,	many	of	which	may	carry	end	user	licenses	into	which	libraries	may	not	legally	be	able	to	enter.			We	recognize	inherent	problems	in	the	application	of	laws	to	those	and	other	consumer	products	considered	by	the	NOI,	such	as	cellphones,	automobiles,	and	others,	especially	those	which	access	the	Internet.				However,	we	ask	that	the	Office	consider	the	broader	implication	of	questions	raised	by	the	NOI,	because	common	licensing	models	for	software	are	in	no	way	limited	to	software	for	these	consumer	products,	or	even	to	software	on	its	own.		Similar	licensing	models,	including	non-negotiable	end	user	licensing	agreements	(EULAs)	are	very	commonly	used	for	electronic	books,	audiovisual	works,	digital	sheet	music,	and	digital	sound	recordings	to	name	a	few.			Furthermore,	the	definition	of	"computer	programs"	leaves	much	room	for	overlap	with	other	works.		As	the	nature	of	creation	expands,	incorporating	new	technology	as	it	becomes	available,	it	is	easy	to	imagine	nearly	every	enumerated	class	of	works	in	Sec.	102	to	include,	at	least	in	part,	a	"set	of	statements	or	instructions	to	be	used	directly	or	indirectly	in	a	computer	in	order	to	bring	about	a	certain	result."1			As	the	NOI	states,	the	Office	noted,	in	the	Section	104	Report,	that	"unilateral	contractual	provisions	could	be	used	to	limit	consumers'	ability	to	invoke	exceptions	and	limitations	in	copyright	law."		This	has	proven	prophetic,	and	MLA	members	have	found	themselves	limited	in	unique	ways	that	could	be	a	bellwether	for	the	future	of	all	libraries'	collection	efforts.		MLA	has	raised	these	concerns	many	times	with	the	Office,	and	in	other	fora,2	and	we	are	grateful	that	the	Office	has	opened	this	study,	since	it	presents	an	important	opportunity	for	policymakers	to	confront	existential	threats	to	American	libraries,	and	especially	music	libraries.				We	believe	that	the	central	question—the	one	underlying	all	the	questions	raised	in	the	NOI—is	the	extent	to	which	non-negotiable	contracts	should	control	in	situations	where	they	interfere	with	user	protections	and	rights	that	are	a	critical																																																									1	This	has	been	true	for	most	of	the	life	of	the	current	definition.		Consider,	for	example	the	works	of	Deena	Larson,	which	are	archived	at	the	Maryland	Institute	for	Technology	in	the	Humanities.		These	are	unquestionably	literary	works,	but	which	were	written	in	Hypercard,	an	early	piece	of	software	for	Apple	Macintosh	computers	and	precursor	to	Hypertext	Transfer	Protocol.		As	such,	they	are	also	computer	programs	for	purposes	of	the	Sec.	101	definition,	though	they	were	conceived	for	use	as	literary	works,	not	as	tools	or	games.	Maryland	Institute	for	Technology	in	the	Humanities,	“The	Deena	Larson	Collection,”	University	of	Maryland.	http://mith.umd.edu/larsen/	[accessed	27	January	2016];	17	U.S.C.	Sec.	101.	2	See	for	example,	Music	Library	Association,	“Music	Licensing	Study;	Comments	of	the	Music	Library	Association,”	Music	Library	Association.		http://copyright.gov/policy/musiclicensingstudy/comments/Docket2014_3/Music_Library_Association_MLS_2014.pdf	[accessed	27	January	2016];	Music	Library	Association,	“Statement	on	Online	License-Driven	Music	Sound	Recordings,”	Copyright	for	Music	Librarians.	http://copyright.musiclibraryassoc.org/Resources/OnlineLicensing		[accessed	27	January	27,	2016].

[PAGE 3]
	 3	part	of	the	balance	Congress	creates	in	the	law	of	copyright.		Are	the	Constitutional	objectives	of	copyright	(or	any	aspect	of	intellectual	property	law)	served	when	other	areas	of	law	are	able	to	create	parallel	systems	that	include	all	of	the	author	protections,	but	none	of	the	user	protections?3		We	think	they	are	not.				Congress	was	given	supreme	power	to	"promote	the	progress	of	science	and	the	useful	arts."		We	understand	that	the	sanctity	of	contracts	is	one	of	our	oldest	and	most	cherished	legal	doctrines,	but	the	principle	works	only	when	the	contracts	are	between	two	parties,	each	of	which	has	had	an	opportunity	to	negotiate	terms.		Unilateral	contracts,	such	as	those	in	modern	EULAs	present	an	all	too	tempting	opportunity	to	make	an	end	run	around	copyright,	one	that	is	an	abuse	of	the	system	and	which	trivializes	Congress'	authority.			Specific	Issue	The	NOI	requests	comment	on	the	following	relevant	issue:	"Key	issues	in	how	the	copyright	law	intersects	with	other	areas	of	law	in	establishing	how	products	that	rely	on	software	to	function	can	be	lawfully	used."		With	the	Office's	indulgence	to	interpret	that	question	in	the	broad	way	we	have	described,	the	issue	raised	is	directly	germane	to	our	legitimate	concerns	for	libraries'	traditional	ability	to	collect,	preserve,	and	make	available	copyrighted	works.		Though	we	have	many	concerns	about	the	overuse	of	contracts	as	a	means	to	bypass	the	limitations	and	exceptions	in	Title	17,	our	specific	concern	is	in	instances	where	this	practice	excludes	valuable	works	from	libraries	entirely.		The	increasingly	digital	nature	of	the	creative	and	scientific	landscape,	combined	with	the	EULA	model	introduced	by	the	software	industry,	has	resulted	in	an	increased	reliance	by	copyright	holders	on	providing	leased,	rather	than	purchased	content.		The	licenses	that	accompany	the	works	are	frequently	more	restrictive	than	current	copyright	law,	specifically	excluding	limitations	and	exceptions	on	which	libraries	rely	for	their	daily	business.		Though	in	all	cases	this	can	and	does	obstruct	traditional	library	uses	of	electronic	copies	of	the	works,	in	most	cases	those	works	are	available	in	alternate	forms	that	allow	libraries	to	collect	and	make	use	of	the	work.		However,	in	some	cases,	licenses	form	the	only	way	in	which	the	works	are	made	available.		Rather	than	a	sound	recording	being	available	on,	say,	both	Compact	Disc	and	through	an	online	distribution	service,	these	online-only	recordings	are	available	only	through	the	latter,	and	under	restrictive	license	terms.4																																																											3	Eric	Harbeson,	“Born	Digital:	Works	Here	Today,	Maybe	Gone	Tomorrow,”	District	Dispatch,	entry	posted	January	18,	2014,	http://www.districtdispatch.org/2014/01/born-digital-works-today-maybe-gone-tomorrow/		[accessed	27	January	2016].	4	Judy	Tsou	and	John	Vallier,	"Ether	Today,	Gone	Tomorrow:	21st	Century	Sound	Recording	Collection	in	Crisis."	Notes	v.	72	no.	3	(March	2016):	461.		The	authors	quote	the	license	from	Apple’s	music	service,	"iTunes”:	“You	shall	be	authorized	to	use	[the	service]	only	for	personal,	noncommercial	use,	except	as	otherwise	authorized	by	Apple....	You	agree	not	to	modify,	rent,	lease,	loan,...works	based	on	the	iTunes	Service	in	any	manner..."

[PAGE 4]
	 4		This	exclusion	of	important	works	from	libraries	generally	takes	the	form	of	two	common	provisions	in	EULAs.		The	first	is	that	the	license	agreements	are	strictly	between	copyright	holders	and	end	users.		MLA	members	and	their	counsel	have	consistently	understood	this	to	indicate	that,	since	libraries	are	not	end	users,	they	cannot	legally	enter	into	EULAs.5		The	second	is	in	the	specific	restrictions	contained	within	the	license,	normally	including	prohibitions	on	rental,	lease,	lending,	and	other	functions	that	form	the	traditional	core	activity	of	a	library.		Under	these	terms,	libraries	lose	their	ability	to	avail	themselves	of	rights	under	the	first	sale	and	fair	use	doctrines.6				Sometimes,	problematic	license	terms	come	from	download	services,	such	as	Apple's	iTunes.		In	these	cases,	the	license	governs	downloads	that	are	stored	on	a	machine	indefinitely.		Here,	at	least,	libraries	might	be	able	to	preserve	the	works,	were	they	able	to	enter	into	the	agreement.		Another,	more	troubling,	and	increasingly	popular	model	is	in	the	distribution	of	works	through	subscription	streaming	services.		Here,	availability	of	works	is	subject	to	ongoing	negotiations	between	the	services	and	the	rights	holders,	with	the	result	that	content	can	and	will	disappear	from	those	services	unpredictably.		Unlike	subscription	services,	the	content	of	music	library	collections	is	driven	by	user	need,	rather	than	commercial	considerations,	and	in	many	cases,	such	need	is	expressed	years	or	decades	after	publication	of	the	work.		Because	of	this,	libraries	and	archives	are	far	more	likely	to	preserve	historically	significant	works	that	may	not	have	obvious	commercial	value	than	are	commercial	entities.7			In	some	cases,	extraordinary	effort	may	result	in	a	library's	being	able	to	acquire	a	license;	however,	this	does	not	give	us	hope.		A	recent	experience	documented	in	an																																																									5	D.J.	Hoek,	“The	Download	Dilemma,”	American	Libraries,	July	27,	2009,	http://www.americanlibrariesmagazine.org/article/download-dilemma	[accessed	5	October	2014];	Kevin	Smith,	“Planning	for	Musical	Obsolescence,”	Scholarly	Communications	@	Duke,	July	28,	2014,	accessed	October	5,	2014,	http://blogs.library.duke.edu/scholcomm/2014/07/28/planning-for-musical-obsolescence/.	6.	17	U.S.C.	109(d).		See	also	Vernor	v.	Autodesk,	Inc.,	621	F.3d	1102,	2010	U.S.	App.	LEXIS	18957.	"[The	first	sale	doctrine]	allows	the	‘owner	of	a	particular	copy’	of	a	copyrighted	work	to	sell	or	dispose	of	his	copy	without	the	copyright	owner's	authorization.	The	first	sale	doctrine	does	not	apply	to	a	person	who	possesses	a	copy	of	the	copyrighted	work	without	owning	it,	such	as	a	licensee."	(internal	citations	omitted)	7.	“Today’s	digital	formats	are	not	inherently	safe	harbors	of	preservation.		Protecting	and	maintaining	digital	audio	recordings	poses	problems	that	go	beyond	those	associated	with	the	preservation	of	analog	recordings…	For	example,	successive	releases	of	software	programs	may	no	longer	be	compatible	with	earlier	files.”	Rob	Bamberger	and	Sam	Brylawski,	The	State	of	Recorded	Sound	Preservation	in	the	United	States:	A	National	Legacy	at	Risk	in	the	Digital	Age	(Washington	D.C.:	CLIR,	2010):	2;	here	is	an	example	of	lost	content	from	a	popular	television	show,	“More	than	100	installments	of	[Doctor	Who]	are	still	missing	because	the	BBC	did	not	start	routinely	archiving	its	shows	until	1978.”	John	Plunkett,	“’Lost	Doctor	Who	Episodes	from	1960s	Returned	to	BBC,”	Guardian,	December	12,	2011,	accessed	October	2014,	http://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/dec/12/lost-doctor-who-episodes-bbc.

[PAGE 5]
	 5	IMLS-funded	project,	undertaken	by	the	MLA	and	the	University	of	Washington	(UW),	shows	the	utter	lack	of	tenability	in	relying	on	license	negotiation	as	a	solution.		UW	librarians	attempted	to	obtain	a	Grammy-winning	recording	by	the	Los	Angeles	Philharmonic	and	their	superstar	conductor,	Gustavo	Dudamel,	for	their	library.	The	recording	was	unavailable	in	any	physical	form,	and	available	only	on	the	iTunes	service.	After	extensive	hunting,	they	finally	found	the	party	that	was	able	to	grant	the	license,	only	to	find	that	the	license	offered	was	more	than	$500,	was	for	a	very	limited	time,	and	did	not	include	even	half	of	the	work.8		Even	if	the	license	was	for	a	permanent,	complete	copy	of	the	recording,	this	price	tag	so	far	exceeded	what	any	music	collector	would	consider	a	fair	price	that	it	was	laughable,	and	that	does	not	even	include	the	cost	to	the	library	for	the	considerable	time	hunting	down	the	recording.				Whether	or	not	libraries	are	able	to	undertake	heroic	efforts	such	as	those	by	the	UW	librarians,	the	result	is	the	same:	works—in	some	cases	highly	significant	works—are	excluded	from	library	catalogues.		Music	librarians	are	unable	to	legally	acquire	the	works	that	their	patrons	may	require.				Though	we	don't	know	the	full	extent	of	the	problem,	it	appears	somewhat	limited	in	scope	for	the	present.		It	is	possible	that	this	is	due	to	market	forces	that	are	at	play,	as	the	Section	104	Report	conjectured.		However,	despite	this,	there	are	already	examples	of	very	important	works	and	performances—those	that	would	normally	be	collected	by	music	libraries—that	have	been	excluded	from	their	collections	due	to	the	terms	of	these	license	agreements.		These	include	Oscar-	and	Grammy-winning	recordings	by	important	artists,	such	as	Pixar	Studios	(soundtrack	to	the	movie,	"Up!"),	the	previously	discussed	Dudamel	recording,	and	others.9	The	MLA	is	concerned	that	the	music	industry	(as	well	as	other	content-producing	industries)	is	likely	to	move	increasingly	toward	licenses	as	the	dominant	distribution	model.	Taken	to	the	limit,	a	world	where	all	works	are	made	available	only	through	such	regimes	would	be	disastrous	for	the	research	and	creative	community.		Furthermore,	whether	or	not	the	practice	is	widespread	at	present	is	immaterial.		When	librarians	cannot	legally	make	their	selections	from	the	totality	of	the	available	works,	the	important	role	that	they	play	in	society	is	severely	hobbled.10																																																										8	Tsou	and	Vallier,	supra	note	4	at	465:	"UMG	...	agreed	to	license	the	material	...	under	the	following	conditions:	that	no	more	than	25	percent	of	the	album’s	content	could	be	licensed,	and	the	license	would	be	valid	for	no	more	than	two	years.	Furthermore,	a	$250	processing	fee	would	be	charged	in	addition	to	an	unspecified	licensing	fee	that	would	have	been	“more	than”	the	processing	fee.	Given	that	the	standard	cost	of	a	complete	iTunes	album	is	$9.99,	we	determined	UMG’s	offer	to	be	unreasonable.	Perhaps	more	importantly,	having	1.25	movements	of	this	five-part	piece	is	useless	to	a	library	or	user.	We	attempted	to	further	negotiate	with	UMG,	but	our	efforts	were	rejected."	9	“Statement	on	Online	License-Driven	Music	Sound	Recordings,”	supra	note	2.	10	Id.

[PAGE 6]
	 6	Keeping	works	out	of	the	hands	of	libraries	through	the	use	of	EULAs	presents	enormous	risks	to	our	cultural	heritage,	as	libraries	and	archives	are	the	means	through	which	that	heritage	is	preserved.			Proposed	solution	We	believe	legislation	is	appropriate	and	needed.		To	solve	the	problem,	such	legislation	must,	at	a	minimum,	allow	libraries	and	archives	to:			1.	Acquire	works	at	a	reasonable	price;	2.	Store	and	preserve	these	works	locally;	and	3.	Serve	these	works	to	their	patrons.11			There	are	multiple	ways	in	which	this	could	be	accomplished	with	legislation.		We	note	that	the	United	Kingdom	has	already	taken	the	step	to	make	certain	exceptions	to	their	copyright	law	not	subject	to	contractual	override.12		This	is	not	our	preferred	solution,	since	this	model	raises	Constitutional	risks,	as	well	as	questions	about	the	ability	of	libraries	and	archives	to	tailor	donor	agreements	with	protections	that	help	assure	potential	donors	in	the	use	of	their	materials	by	the	receiving	institution.		We	favor	a	more	narrowly	focused	solution	that	eliminates	the	risk	of	litigation	for	libraries,	in	limited	circumstances.					To	that	end,	we	propose	the	following	language,	to	be	added	as	a	new	section	of	Title	17,	Chapter	5:			(a)	No	action	may	be	brought	in	a	state	or	federal	court	for	a	violation	of	a	non-negotiable	license	committed	by	a	non-profit	library,	archives,	or	museum,	or	any	employee	thereof	acting	within	the	scope	of	his	or	her	employment,	when:	(1)	the	violation	occurs	directly	from	the	acquisition	of	content	for	the	institution’s	normal	collection-building,	educational,	preservation,	or	lending	purposes;	and	(2)	the	violation	results	directly	from	license	text	that	would	otherwise	prevent	the	institution	from	carrying	out	one	or	more	of	those	functions;	and	(3)	the	employee	has	determined,	after	a	reasonable	search,	that	the	content	is	not	available	in	physical	form	for	a	reasonable	price.	(b)	Nothing	in	this	section	shall	be	interpreted	to	immunize	the	library,	archives,	or	museum,	or	its	employees,	from	any	infringement	defined	under	other	sections	of	this	title,	or	to	in	any	way	affect	the	limitations	and	exceptions	provided	by	Sections	107-122.	 																																																								11	id.	12	See	for	example,	Copyright	Designs	and	Patents	Act,	1988,	S.I.	2014/1372	reg.	3(1)(e),	Sec.	29(4B):	"To	the	extent	that	a	term	of	any	contract	purports	to	prevent	or	restrict	the	doing	of	any	act	which,	by	virtue	of	this	section,	would	not	infringe	copyright,	that	term	is	unenforceable."

[PAGE 7]
	 7	We	believe	that	this	proposal	would	sidestep	the	significant	potential	Constitutional	conflicts	by	avoiding	direct	interference	with	private	contracts.		Instead,	our	proposal	would	remove	the	ability	of	courts	to	entertain	lawsuits	in	very	specific	circumstances,	without	invalidating	a	contract,	without	removing	any	of	the	potential	liability	that	the	library	or	archives	may	incur	for	copyright	infringement,	and	without	removing	any	rights	or	privileges	copyright	holders	enjoy	under	the	Act	and	under	international	law.
