[PAGE 1]
LIBRARY	OF	CONGRESS	U.S.	COPYRIGHT	OFFICE		Comments	of	JOHN	T.	MITCHELL		IN	RESPONSE	TO	NOTICE	OF	INQUIRY	Docket	No.	2015-6			A	Preliminary	Comment	Concerning	the	Unlocking	Technology	Act	of	2015		The	NOI	asks	that	concerns	about	the	operation	of	17	U.S.C.	§	1201	not	be	addressed	in	response	to	this	NOI,	but	the	NOI	itself	draws	attention	to	the	Unlocking	Technology	Act	of	2015,	H.R.	1587,	114th	Cong.	Sec.	3	(2015).	The	NOI	notes	that	this	legislation	would	amend	§	1201	to	limit	its	applicability	to	prohibiting	circumvention	or	trafficking	in	circumvention	devices	to	situations	neither	authorized	by	the	copyright	holder	or	by	law.	That	is,	circumvention	would	not	be	prohibited	for	non-infringing	access.		I	note	that	this	legislation	actually	would	perfect	the	intent	of	the	two	WIPO	treaties	that	§	1201	purported	to	implement.	These	treaties	themselves	require	prohibition	on	circumvention	of	access	controls	only	where	not	authorized	by	the	copyright	holder	or	by	law.	It	is	facially	clear	that	the	WIPO	treaties	did	not	intend	to	require	prohibitions	on	circumvention	for	non-infringing	uses.		One	might	have	reasonably	thought	that	§	1201(c)	intended	to	make	that	clear	as	well,	but	courts	and	litigants	have	tended	to	ignore	it	–	as	has	the	U.S.	Copyright	Office.1	Still,	some	courts	have	begun	recognizing	the	need	for	at	least	a	“copyright	nexus”	between	the	technological	measure	and	some	exclusive	right	under	§	106	that	is	being	protected	by	it.																																																									1	17	U.S.C.	§	1201(c)	states:	Other	Rights,	Etc.,	Not	Affected.—			 (1)	Nothing	in	this	section	shall	affect	rights,	remedies,	limitations,	or	defenses	to	copyright	infringement,	including	fair	use,	under	this	title.			 (2)	Nothing	in	this	section	shall	enlarge	or	diminish	vicarious	or	contributory	liability	for	copyright	infringement	in	connection	with	any	technology,	product,	service,	device,	component,	or	part	thereof.			 (3)	Nothing	in	this	section	shall	require	that	the	design	of,	or	design	and	selection	of	parts	and	components	for,	a	consumer	electronics,	telecommunications,	or	computing	product	provide	for	a	response	to	any	particular	technological	measure,	so	long	as	such	part	or	component,	or	the	product	in	which	such	part	or	component	is	integrated,	does	not	otherwise	fall	within	the	prohibitions	of	subsection	(a)(2)	or	(b)(1).			 (4)	Nothing	in	this	section	shall	enlarge	or	diminish	any	rights	of	free	speech	or	the	press	for	activities	using	consumer	electronics,	telecommunications,	or	computing	products.

[PAGE 2]
See,	e.g.,	Chamberlain	Group	v.	Skylink	Technologies,	Inc.,	381	F.3d	1178	(Fed.	Cir.	2004),	cert.	denied,	544	U.S.	923	(2005).	In	a	nutshell,	circumvention	for	non-infringing	purposes	must	not	be	unlawful.	That’s	the	teaching	of	the	WIPO	treaties	and	Skylink.	Plus,	it	is	a	requirement	of	the	Constitution:	Given	that	the	First	Amendment	protects	all	non-infringing	access	to	speech,	and	that	Congress	has	no	power	to	prohibit	non-infringing	access	outside	of	the	scope	of	the	exclusive	rights	established	under	article	I,	section	8	authority,	it	is	imperative	that	§	1201	not	be	interpreted	in	such	as	way	as	to	empower	anyone,	under	color	of	law,	to	use	computer	programs	to	suppress	non-infringing	uses	of	a	work	of	authorship.		A	Preliminary	Comment	Concerning	“Software”		The	NOI	correctly	notes	that	“computer	programs”	are	literary	works.	But	using	“software”	as	synonymous	with	“computer	programs”	can	be	problematic.	Just	as	§	202	underscores	the	distinction	between	“copies”	and	“copyrights,”	it	is	important	to	be	clear	whether	one	is	discussing	use	of	a	copy	or	use	of	a	copyright.	Use	of	a	copy	is	a	function	of	ownership	of	the	copy.	Use	of	the	copyright	is	a	function	of	whether	the	use	falls	within	§	106,	as	limited	by	§§	107-122.			The	Business	Software	Alliance	and	its	members	have,	for	many	years	now,	been	trotting	out	a	fiction	that	“software	is	licensed,	not	sold,”	and	have	succeeded	in	obtaining	some	atrocious	court	rulings	where	copyright	“licenses”	have	been	used	to	trump	ownership	rights.	With	all	other	literary	works,	we	have	always	understood	that	they	can	be	both	licensed	and	sold.	The	author	of	a	poem	may	license	its	reproduction	into	copies,	license	the	public	performance	of	the	poem	(independent	of	whether	the	public	performer	has	ever	possessed	a	copy),	and	sell,	lend	or	give	away	copies.	The	fact	that	it	transferred	a	copy	of	a	poem	along	with	a	license	to	perform	it	publicly,	or	to	reproduce	it,	has	no	bearing	whatsoever	on	the	question	of	whether	the	transfer	of	the	copy	was	by	transfer	of	ownership	or	mere	possession.			It	would	help	the	discussion	in	this	NOI	if	the	false	“licensed	or	sold”	dichotomy	is	avoided,	and	the	discussion	is	clear	as	to	whether	any	particular	analysis	refers	to	computer	programs	as	intangible	literary	works	or	their	tangible	copies.		1.	Ubiquity		Most	issues	concerning	computer	programs	embedded	in	everyday	products	can	be	resolved	by	literal	application	of	the	Copyright	Act.	“Everyday	products”	are	“material	objects”,	and	if	a	literary	work	is	fixed	in	them,	they	are	by	definition	“copies”.			Although	there	is	no	basis	for	a	copyright	holder	to	exercise	any	greater	control	over	the	disposition	of	an	everyday	product	such	as	a	car,	a	watch,	a	computer	or	an	oven,	just	because	the	item	meets	the	definition	of	“copy	or	phonorecord,”	there	is	every	reason	to	grant	less	control:	If	the	exercise	of	any	exclusive	right	over	the	work	fixed	in	a	copy	or	phonorecord	results	in	power	to	control	disposition	beyond	the	scope	of	that	particular	copyright,	the	copyright	must	yield.

[PAGE 3]
	To	illustrate,	Section	109	grants	the	owner	of	a	non-infringing	copy	the	absolute	right	to	rent	that	copy	without	the	consent	of	the	copyright	holder,	except	in	the	case	of	phonorecords	and	certain	specific	kinds	of	copies	of	computer	programs.	So,	while	the	copyright	owner	may	rightfully	prohibit	rental	of	a	phonorecord	CD	of	"1989"	by	Taylor	Swift,	or	rightfully	prohibit	the	rental	of	a	DVD	copy	of	Adobe	Acrobat,	neither	should	have	the	power	to	prohibit	the	rental	if	the	material	object	is	an	iPhone	or	laptop	computer	in	which	other	works	(by	other	authors)	are	fixed.	First,	the	Copyright	Act	did	not	intend	to	grant	Adobe	the	power	to	control	the	rental	of	laptops	by	merely	persuading	someone	to	reproduce	Acrobat	onto	it.	Second,	where	myriad	works	by	different	authors	are	fixed	in	a	single	material	object,	it	would	do	violence	to	the	exclusive	right	each	copyright	owner	individually	has	to	authorize	–	or	not	–	the	disposition	of	the	material	object.	Tom	may	not	be	prohibited	from	authorizing	Sally	to	rent	her	laptop	upon	which	Tom’s	works	were	lawfully	reproduced,	merely	because	the	laptop	is	also	a	lawfully	made	copy	of	the	works	of	Dick	and	Harry	as	well,	and	they	have	not	authorized	it.		2.	Frustrating	Copyright		When	copyright	owners	that	had	engaged	in	geographically-based	price	discrimination	on	the	basis	of	a	flawed	interpretation	of	§	109	were	rebuffed	by	the	Supreme	Court,	which	could	find	no	basis	in	the	Copyright	Act	for	such	a	right,2	they	turned	to	computer	programs	to	regain	control.	But	this	was	not	some	facile	direct	use	of	code	to	gain	greater	control	over	uses	beyond	the	scope	of	the	copyright	with	respect	to	that	specific	copy.	Pertinent	to	this	NOI,	different	works	of	authorship	(and	some	non-copyrightable	bits	and	pieces)	residing	in	different	places	work	together	to	gain	such	power.		Microsoft	Corporation	and	Adobe	Systems	both	employ	software-based	means	of	trying	to	limit	lawful	uses	of	their	works,	and	to	suppress	the	§	109-authorized	right	of	the	owner	to	redistribute	copies	by	sale.	The	computer	programs	are	laced	with	additional	lines	of	code	that	are	unrelated	to	the	primary	works	of	authorship	registered	with	the	Copyright	Office.	Copies	of	these	additional	literary	works	are	not	what	the	customer	intends	to	own	when	a	copy	is	purchased	or	created	under	download	license.	Rather,	the	appended	works	work	to	disable	private	performance	of	the	works	after	a	period	of	time	unless	the	owner	(or	user)	of	the	work	from	the	lawfully	made	copy	inserts	an	alphanumeric	“key”.3	These	keys,	which	may	be	distributed	on	the	copy,	with	the	copy,	or	entirely	separate	from	the	copy	(and	in	effect	can	become	the	value	token	paid	for	while	the	actual	reproduction	is	free)	are	then																																																									2	“A	publisher	may	find	it	more	difficult	to	charge	different	prices	for	the	same	book	in	different	geographic	markets.	But	we	do	not	see	how	these	facts	help	Wiley,	for	we	can	find	no	basic	principle	of	copyright	law	that	suggests	that	publishers	are	especially	entitled	to	such	rights.”	Kirtsaeng	v.	John	Wiley	&	Sons,	Inc.,	No.	11–697,	slip	op.	at	31,	568	U.S.	__	(March	19,	2013).	3	It	is	hard	to	pin	down	the	nature	of	the	key.	Microsoft	prefers	to	say	that	it	is	not	a	license,	but	a	“product	key	code,”	whereas	Adobe	insists	it	is	some	sort	of	“serial	license	key”	or	the	like.

[PAGE 4]
checked	against	databases	operated	by	Microsoft	and	Adobe,	respectively,	to	determine	whether	the	user	of	the	key	was	authorized	to	“use”	the	work	(despite	the	absence	of	any	§	106	exclusive	right	to	use	a	work).		The	upshot	is	that	such	schemes	can	serve	to	circumvent	the	very	specific	limitations	that	the	Copyright	Act	places	on	exclusive	rights,	thereby	enlarging	the	scope	of	the	lawful	monopoly.	Specifically,	the	owner	of	a	copy	lawfully	made	under	the	Copyright	Act	is	entitled	to	install	it	(reproduce	it)	onto	a	hard	drive	if	necessary	to	run	(privately	perform)	the	work,	but	these	alphanumeric	“keys”	work	in	conjunction	with	local	and	remote	software	to	frustrate	that	entitlement	if	the	copyright	owner	is	displeased	that	a	copy	sold	more	cheaply	in	China	made	its	way	back	into	the	United	States,	or	that	the	product	key	purchased	more	cheaply	in	China	is	used	in	conjunction	with	free	download	to	a	U.S.	consumer	whom	they	wished	had	paid	more	for	the	key.			4.	Legitimate	Businesses	Sued	Out	of	Business		The	product	keys	/	license	keys	are	not	copyrighted.	They	are	typically	used	to	frustrate	non-infringing	uses	of	lawfully	made	copies	–	it	is	not	enough	to	purchase	and	install	the	copy	as	permitted	by	law.	In	order	to	continue	privately	performing	the	work,	one	must	present	a	valid	key	number.	In	a	post-Kirtsaeng	world,	it	is	now	quite	common	for	copyright	owners	to	allow	free	downloads	directly	from	their	websites,	while	relying	on	the	sale	of	the	keys	to	be	the	point	where	revenue	is	generated.	When	copyright	owners	distribute	product	keys	cheaply	in	some	markets,	and	more	expensively	in	others,	they	stimulate	natural	arbitrage,	yet	there	is	no	“exclusive	right	to	perform	a	work	privately”	in	the	Copyright	Act.	Operating	Microsoft	Word	to	write	this	comment	is	never	infringing,	even	if	I	were	using	a	borrowed	computer	(not	my	copy),	a	stolen	computer	(not	my	copy)	or	even	using	a	computer	upon	which	was	fixed	an	infringing	reproduction.	(The	same	is	true	with	respect	to	reading	a	book	–	reading	an	infringing	copy	is	never	infringing.)		Yet,	retailers	are	being	sued	for	selling	the	“keys”	that	were	issued	by	the	copyright	owners	and	for	which	they	were	paid	whatever	consideration	they	asked.	When	these	keys	are	being	used	as	a	proxy	for	sales	of	copies,	but	for	the	sole	purpose	of	circumventing	the	§§	109	and	117	limitations,	it	is	important	that	the	copyright	principles	prevail.		These	are,	in	reality,	functional	uses	of	the	works.	The	prohibition	in	§	102(b)	is	more	than	just	an	acknowledgement	of	the	idea/expression	dichotomy.	It	goes	further,	prohibiting	copyright	protection	for	computer	programs	that	are	merely	functional.	(“In	no	case	does	copyright	protection	for	an	original	work	of	authorship	extend	to	any	idea,	procedure,	process,	system,	method	of	operation,	concept,	principle,	or	discovery.”		5.	Intersection	With	Antitrust	Law		Where	the	copyright	monopoly	is	narrow	and	limited,	any	use	of	one	copyrighted	work	(computer	program)	to	technologically	avoid	those	limitations,	whether	on	other	computer	programs	or	other	works	of	authorship	(or	the	owners	of	lawfully	made	copies	or	phonorecords	thereof),	the	antitrust	laws	automatically	come	into	play.	The	Sherman	Act

[PAGE 5]
prevents	the	enlargement	of	the	lawful	monopoly	as	well	as	the	end-user	license	agreements	in	restraint	of	trade.	The	Copyright	Office	desperately	needs	to	consult	with	the	Department	of	Justice	Antitrust	Division,	and	carefully	reintegrate	copyright	and	antitrust	law.		Conclusion		Computer	“software”	should	be	treated	as	what	it	is:	Computer	programs,	which	is	so	say,	literary	works	of	authorship	that	may,	in	the	exercise	of	§	106,	be	both	licensed	(in	the	sense	of	authorizing	another	party	to	“do”	any	of	the	exclusive	rights)	or	sold	(in	the	sense	of	owners	of	lawfully	made	copies	of	the	works	exercising	their	§	109	rights,	or	being	authorized	by	law	to	exercise	§	117	rights).	Any	general	license	to	“use”	the	software	that	does	not	track	to	the	§	106	rights	must	be	suspect,	and	any	use	of	computer	programs	themselves	to	escape	the	§§	107-122	limitations,	or	to	expand	upon	the	so-limited	§	106	rights,	must	be	challenged	and	changed.		 _________________________
