[PAGE 1]
	
	
February	16,	2016	
	
Maria	A.	Pallante	
Register	of	Copyrights	
U.S.	Copyright	Office	
Library	of	Congress	
101	Independence	Ave.,	SE	
Washington,	DC		20559‐6000	
	
RE:	 Software‐Enabled	Consumer	Products	Study:		Notice	and	Request	for	Public	
Comment;	U.S.	Copyright	Office	Notice	of	Inquiry	[Docket	No.	2015–6]	
Dear	Ms.	Pallante:	
The	Motor	&	Equipment	Manufacturers	Association	(MEMA)	represents	vehicle	suppliers	
that	manufacture	and	remanufacture	components	and	systems	for	use	in	passenger	cars	and	
heavy	trucks	providing	original	equipment	(OE)	to	new	vehicles	as	well	as	aftermarket	parts	to	
service,	maintain	and	repair	over	256	million	vehicles	on	the	road	today.	Suppliers	are	the	
largest	employers	of	manufacturing	jobs	in	the	U.S.	directly	employing	over	734,000	Americans	
with	a	total	employment	impact	of	3.6	million	jobs.	Our	members	lead	the	way	in	developing	
advanced,	transformative	technologies	that	enable	safer,	smarter	and	more	efficient	vehicles,	
all	within	a	rapidly	growing	global	marketplace	with	increased	regulatory	and	customer	
demands.	MEMA	represents	vehicle	suppliers	through	the	following	four	divisions:	Automotive	
Aftermarket	Suppliers	Association	(AASA),	Heavy	Duty	Manufacturers	Association	(HDMA),	
Motor	&	Equipment	Remanufacturers	Association	(MERA)	and	Original	Equipment	Suppliers	
Association	(OESA).		
MEMA	is	encouraged	by	the	Notice	and	Request	for	Public	Comment	on	the	operation	of	
Section	1201	of	Title	17.	Motor	vehicle	suppliers	work	closely	with	vehicle	manufacturers	to	
provide	the	cutting	edge,	innovative	systems	and	components	to	consumers.	In	order	to	meet	
regulatory	requirements	and	consumer	demand	for	safer,	cleaner,	and	more	connected	
vehicles,	motor	vehicle	parts	manufacturers	and	remanufacturers	have	increasingly	taken	on	a	
significant	role	in	the	research,	development,	engineering,	and	manufacturing	of	the	advanced	
technologies	necessary	to	meet	these	ever‐increasing	goals.	In	fact,	suppliers	are	responsible	
for	two‐thirds	of	the	value	of	today’s	automobiles,	and	many	vehicle	technologies	produced	for	
new	cars	are	manufactured	by	the	same	suppliers	that	make	parts	for	the	aftermarket.	As	
vehicles	continue	to	become	more	sophisticated,	the	number	of	sensors	and	software	enabled	
devices	will	grow.	As	it	stands,	there	are	60	to	100	sensors	in	the	average	vehicle	today.		
The	U.S.	automotive	light	vehicle	aftermarket	is	a	$246.7	billion	industry	that	includes	
manufacturing,	remanufacturing,	distribution,	retailing,	and	installation	of	all	vehicle	parts,	
chemicals,	tools,	equipment,	and	accessories.	Most	automotive	aftermarket	maintenance	and	
repair	work	takes	place	in	independent	repair	shops	or	at	vehicle	manufacturers’	dealerships,

[PAGE 2]
MEMA Comments to U.S. Copyright Office 
RE: Software‐Enabled Consumer Products Study, Docket No. 2015–6 
2/16/16   Page 2 of 4 
with	the	latter	often	referred	to	as	OE	Service.	There	is	also	a	significant	“do‐it‐yourself”	
market,	which	comprises	individuals	who	perform	their	own	vehicle	repair	and	maintenance.	
Since	1982,	vehicles	have	been	equipped	with	computers	and	electronics	to	control	drivability	
and	fuel	efficiency,	and	aftermarket	manufacturers,	remanufacturers	and	independent	service	
repair	outlets	have	demonstrated	their	ability	to	service	and	maintain	these	technologies.	More	
and	more,	many	vehicle	components	are	connected	and	enabled	by	the	software	and	
programming	that	make	them	functional.	
Remanufacturing	is	a	growing	segment	of	the	aftermarket	that	ut ilizes	standardized	
industrial	processes	by	which	previously	worn	or	non‐functional 	products	are	returned	to	
the	same‐as‐new,	or	better,	condi tion	and	performance	as	the	original	components.	
Remanufacturing	processes	incorporate	technical	specifications	 (including	engineering,	
quality	and	testing	standards)	to	yield	fully	warranted	product s.	Examples	of	remanufactured	
components	in	the	motor	vehicle	parts	industry	include:	electro nic	control	units	(black	box	
and	other	electronic	modules),	brakes,	steering	and	suspension	 components,	engines,	
transmissions,	alternators,	starters,	and	turbochargers.	Remanu facturing	preserves	the	value	
of	the	original	manufacturing	−	including	energy	costs	and	inve stments	in	capital	and	labor	
inputs	−	which	recycling	alone	c annot	do.	As	such,	remanufactured	parts	are	about	thirty	
percent	less	expensive	than	comparable	new	parts.		
In	the	U.S.,	the	average	age	of	light	vehicles	(passenger	cars	and	pick‐up	trucks)	is	11.5	
years,	and	the	owners	of	these	vehicles	often	demand	cost‐effective	solutions	for	their	
maintenance	and	repair	needs.1	As	such,	the	independent	aftermarket	(e.g.	independent	repair	
shops	and	local	repair	technicians)	has	about	70	percent	of	the	service	bay	capacity	to	maintain	
and	repair	passenger	vehicles.	In	contrast,	new	vehicle	dealers	only	represent	about	28	percent	
of	the	service	bays.2	Therefore,	consumers	have	come	to	rely	on	the	independent	aftermarket	
to	provide	both	quality	repair	parts	and	related	services.	
However,	U.S.	copyright	laws,	and	specifically,	the	anti‐circumvention	and	anti‐trafficking	
provisions	of	Section	1201,	currently	severely	limits	the	ability	of	consumers	to	have	their	
vehicles	serviced	and	repaired	with	the	software‐enabled	component	of	their	choice	–	whether		
new	aftermarket	or	remanufactured	–	in	the	independent	aftermarket.	The	access	to	vehicle	
software	is	necessary	in	the	course	of	diagnosis	and	repair	of	a	vehicle.	For	example,	repairs	
that	replace	hardware	components	may	require	use	of	the	software.	
The	Librarian	of	Congress’s	2015	DMCA	Section	1201	Rules	did	grant	exemptions	for	those	
vehicle	owners	who	wish	to	repair	or	modify	their	own	vehicles.	However,	vehicle	owners	must	
also	retain	the	freedom	of	choice	regarding	the	servicing	and	repair	of	their	vehicles	by	third	
parties.	This	freedom	has	existed	for	more	than	100	years,	well	before	the	employment	of	
technological	protection	measures	(“TPMs”)	in	vehicles.	In	order	to	do	this,	the	independent	
aftermarket	must	also	have	the	freedom	to	repair	and	maintain	vehicles,	which	will	more	often	
than	not	include	access	to	vehicle	software.		
																																																								
1 Source:  IHS, July 29, 2015. 
2 New vehicle dealers represent about 14 percent of the total automotive service outlets in the U.S.

[PAGE 3]
MEMA Comments to U.S. Copyright Office 
RE: Software‐Enabled Consumer Products Study, Docket No. 2015–6 
2/16/16   Page 3 of 4 
However,	the	Librarian’s	most	re cent	DMCA	exemptions	specifical ly	excluded	TPM	
circumvention	“on	behalf	of”	vehicle	owners	by	third	parties,	o ut	of	concern	that	such	an	
exception	would	be	“in	tension	wi th	the	anti‐trafficking	provis ions	of	Section	1201(a)(2)	
and	(b).”	It	is	the	position	of	 MEMA	that	such	service	and	repa ir	technicians	act	as	the	agent	
of	the	vehicle	owner,	who	are	permitted	to	engage	in	such	servi ce	repair	as	a	matter	of	fair	
use	or	under	Section	117.		
To	the	extent	that	the	U.S.	Copyright	Office	nonetheless	finds	 that	creating	an	exemption	
for	third	party	repairs	would	st ill	be	in	tension	with	the	anti‐trafficking	provisions	of	Section	
1201,	then	MEMA	respectfully	sugg ests	amending	Section	1201	to	allow	for	the	adoption	of	
exemptions	to	the	prohibition	on 	circumvention	that	can	also	extend	to	the	exemptions	to	the	
anti‐trafficking	prohibitions.	Thus,	the	Register	should	recommend,	and	the	Librarian	should	
be	permitted	to	adopt,	exemptions	that	permit	third‐party	assis tance	when	justified	by	the	
record.	In	this	instance,	creating	an	exemption	for	vehicle	own ers	to	engage	in	self‐diagnosis,	
maintenance,	or	repair,	but	not	for	third	party	service	and	rep air	technicians	to	do	so	on	their	
behalf,	creates	the	counterintuitive	result	that	those	vehicle	 owners	who	lack	the	knowledge	
or	ability	to	engage	in	self‐diagnosis	or	repair	is	left	with	n o	choice	but	to	return	to	the	
vehicle	manufacturer,	often	at	a	much	higher	cost	than	going	to 	an	independent	service	
provider.	When	vehicle	repairs	a re	more	expensive	and	less	convenient,	owners	may	in	turn	
choose	to	forego	frequent	mainten ance,	which	means	vehicles	may	fall	into	disrepair,	
endangering	other	drivers	on	the	road,	pedestrians,	and	propert y	–	as	well	as	the	driver	of	
the	vehicle.	Ensuring	the	public	safety	of	citizens	should	be	t aken	into	account	in	evaluating	
the	operation	of	Section	1201.	
Aftermarket	parts	manufacturers	have	faced	legal	action	from	vehicle	manufacturers	
alleging	Section	1201	violations	infringement	of	copyright	laws	for	the	sale	of	remanufactured	
software‐enabled	modules.	These	actions	are	often	associated	with	much	higher	costs	for	
consumers	because	they	force	vehicle	owners	or	independent	service	providers	to	go	to	the	
vehicle	manufacturers	as	the	only	option	for	repair	parts,	resulting	in	higher	prices,	longer	
trips,	and	fewer	options.	The	choice	of	purchasing	a	remanufactured	or	new	aftermarket	
component	–	in	either	the	independent	aftermarket	or	OE	Service	channel	–	should	remain	the	
decision	of	the	consumer.	This	choice	is	often	driven	by	many	factors,	including	the	consumer’s	
preference,	his	or	her	budget,	and	the	age	of	the	vehicle.	Frequently,	in	the	independent	
aftermarket,	a	standard	repair	part	may	be	available	but	a	more	sophisticated	part	is	not	(see	
Exhibit	#1).	In	addition,	the	independent	aftermarket	has	seen	a	growing	number	of	
replacement	parts	redesigned	with	sensors	or	micro‐computers	with	alleged	TPM	protection.	
For	example:	
 Blower	motors	redesigned	after	Model	Year	2005;	
 Clock	spring	components	for	air	bag	assemblies	redesigned	after	Model	Year	2010;	and,	
 Window	switches	redesigned	after	Model	Year	2006.	
These	are	not	necessarily	high	technology	components,	but	they	are	components	that	
consumers	may	need	to	replace	over	the	life	of	their	vehicles.	Section	1201	should	not	act	as	a	
limit	to	consumers’	options	of	repair	parts	and	service	–	a	freedom	of	consumer	choice	that	has

[PAGE 4]
MEMA Comments to U.S. Copyright Office 
RE: Software‐Enabled Consumer Products Study, Docket No. 2015–6 
2/16/16   Page 4 of 4 
absolutely	nothing	to	do	with	copyright	laws.	Moreover,	copyright	laws	should	not	act	as	an	
anti‐competitive	measure	that	works	to	drive	up	pricing	while	limiting	choice.	The	U.S.	
Copyright	Office	should	encourage	policies	that	protect	consumer	choice	of	both	components	
and	service	location	and	allow	for	a	level	playing	field	for	all	participants.	This	ensures	
convenience,	affordability	and	a	competitive	market.	
By	limiting	the	choices	of	consumers,	vehicle	manufacturers	are	forcing	consumers	into	a	
more	restrictive	(and	often	more	expensive)	service	and	repair	decision.	Unlike	other	products,	
consumers	can	plan	to	retain	their	vehicles	for	many	years,	making	the	best	of	initial	
investments	and	opportunities	at	the	time	of	resale.	Section	1201	should	not	be	used	to	force	
consumers	into	potentially	more	expensive	repair	and	service	models,	thereby	diminishing	the	
overall	value	of	their	vehicles.		
As	consumer,	regulatory	and	legislative	demands	continue	to	add	more	technology	to	
vehicles,	including	the	advent	of	self‐driving	cars,	the	challenges	with	servicing	and	repairing	
them	will	only	become	more	acute.	It	is	also	MEMA’s	belief	that	the	current	triennial	Section	
1201	rulemaking	process	can	be	much	streamlined	if	it	is	adjusted	to	provide	for	the	
presumptive	renewal	of	previously‐granted	exemptions.	MEMA	urges	the	U.S.	Copyright	Office	
to	use	this	Software‐Enabled	Consumer	Products	Study	as	an	opportunity	to	develop	a	future	
direction	for	copyright	law	that	does	not	create	roadblocks	or	rescind	the	freedom	of	choice	for	
consumers	to	have	their	vehicles	serviced	and	repaired	as	they	deem	appropriate.	
MEMA	appreciates	the	U.S.	Copyright	Office’s	consideration	of	our	comments.	For	more	
information	or	questions,	please	contact	MEMA	Senior	Vice	President	of	Government	Affairs	
Ann	Wilson	at	(202)	312‐9246	or	awilson@mema.org.		
Sincerely,	
	 			 	
S t e v e 	 H a n d s c h u h 	 				A n n 	 W i l s o n 	
P r e s i d e n t 	 a n d 	 C E O 	 				S e n i o r 	 V i c e 	 P r e s i d e n t , 	 G o v e r n m e n t 	 A f f a i r s

[PAGE 5]
Window Lift Motor (WLM) Technology
2‐pin “simple” 
motor
4‐pin motor with 
sensors
•Express‐down function
•2 pins for power and 2 
pins for a pulser
•Auto‐function needs 
to be tested
5‐pin motor with 
sensors
•2 pins for power, 
pulser for speed, limit 
switch for position, 
and ground for 
sensors
•Sometimes 6‐pin 
connector but only 5 
used
•Auto‐function needs 
to be tested
6‐pin motor 
without PCBA 
(Printed Circuit 
Board Assembly)
•2 pins for power, 4 
pins for the 2 Hall 
effect sensors for 
position
•Window functions 
processed in window 
switch
•Software development 
not required
•Position determined 
by Hall effect sensor 
producing a pulse or 
internal position 
sensors
•Auto‐function needs 
to be tested
6‐pin “smart” 
motor with PCBA 
(Printed Circuit 
Board Assembly)
•Window functions 
processed in 
removable PCBA and 
communicated 
through serial data 
pins to the door 
module or BCM
•1 pin connected to 
+12V battery, 1 pin for 
ground, 2 pins for high 
and low speed serial 
data, 2 pins to control 
motor
•Auto‐function needs 
to be tested
7‐10‐pin “smart” 
motor with PCBA
•Additional 
communication to the 
BCM (Body Control 
Module) and/or door 
module
10+ pin “smart” 
motor
•Very complex motor 
that combines the 
door module with the 
WLM
Low Complexity High  Complexity
Existing Industry Technology In Scope for Smart Motor 
Development Out of Scope
Exhibit #1
