[PAGE 1]
 
 
Juelsgaard Intellectual Property  
and Innovation Clinic 
Mills Legal Clinic 
Stanford Law School 
Crown Quadrangle 
559 Nathan Abbott Way 
Stanford, CA 94305-8610 
jipic@law.stanford.edu 
650.724.1900 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Before the 
 
U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 
 
In the Matter of Software-Enabled Consumer Products Study 
 
 
Docket No. 2015-6  
 
 
 
 
 
Reply Comments of Engine Advocacy 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sydney B. Lakin 
Wangshu Tai 
 Certified Law Students 
Phil Malone 
Jef Pearlman  
 Counsel for Commenter

[PAGE 2]
 
   ii 
Table of Contents 
I. Introduction ......................................................................................................................... 1 
II. Copyright Law Has a Particular Impact on Embedded Software. ...................................... 2 
III. The Existence of Strong Innovation Under the Current Copyright Regime Does 
Not Mean that an Improved Copyright System Would Fail to Spur More 
Innovation. .......................................................................................................................... 3 
IV. The Risks to Innovation of Applying Current Copyright Law in the Fast-Moving, 
Emerging World of Software-Enabled Consumer Devices Warrant Moving 
Quickly and Deliberately to Make Appropriate Changes to the Law. ................................ 5 
V. Conclusion .......................................................................................................................... 9

[PAGE 3]
 
   1
Engine Advocacy (“Engine”) submits these reply comments in response to the Copyright 
Office’s Notice of Inquiry and Request for Public Comment for its Software-Enabled Consumer 
Products Study. 
Engine supports the growth of technology entrepreneurship through economic research, 
policy analysis, and advocacy on local and national issues. Engine works with the White House, 
Congress, federal agencies, state and local governments, and also international advocacy 
organizations to educate and inform them of the changing face of American high-tech 
entrepreneurship and issues vital to fostering technological innovation. 
Engine may be contacted through the above-identified counsel. 
I. Introduction 
 The landscape of software-enabled cons umer products holds vast opportunities for 
innovation, interoperability, increased consumer choice and utility, and enhanced social value. 
These opportunities can best be realized to their full potential by interpretations of and 
modifications to copyright law that facilitate innovation and avoid tensions between the law and 
this rapidly developing field.  
Engine’s initial comments emphasized in part how allowing copyright to lock down 
technology necessary for interoperability—specifically, soft ware such as application 
programming interfaces (“APIs”)—would frustrate innovation and competition. The inability of 
users to modify the software in devices they own hampers innovation, prevents interoperability, 
reduces security, and undermines settled expectations of ownership. Ultimately, Engine 
encouraged the Copyright Office to recommend changes that secure the open use of functional 
software to facilitate interoperability and ensure that users are treated as owners of the software 
in their devices and can tinker with, improve, or repair those devices by analyzing, copying, and 
modifying the software.  
In this reply, Engine strives to address three recurrent arguments, raised by some parties 
in their initial comments, that are important to the relationship between copyright law and 
software-enabled consumer products. First, software-enabled consumer products possess unique 
characteristics that could allow copyright restrictions to over-burden legitimate user interests. 
Second, the fact that software is an innovative industry should not mean that improvements to 
copyright law won’t have the potential to lead to additional innovation. Third, the prudent 
approach at this stage is for the Copyright Office to move proactively and decisively to ensure 
that copyright law best facilitates innovation in embedded software, rather than waiting until 
innovation has been chilled.

[PAGE 4]
 
   2
II. Copyright Law Has a Particular Impact on Embedded Software. 
Some commenters have asserted that it is “virtually impossible to draw any principled 
distinction between embedded and non-embedded software.”1 While it is true that embedded and 
standalone software possess a dynamic and entwined relationship with one another, embedded 
software has important distinct qualities from standalone software. While infringement is less of 
a threat for embedded software than it is for standalone, copyright restrictions in embedded 
software are particularly burdensome it can limit essential interoperability is essential and disrupt 
consumers’ settled expectations regarding their ownership rights in physical products.2  
As Public Knowledge and New America Foundation’s Open Technology Institute noted 
in their comments, “embedded software does not raise the same concerns about infringement that 
have driven software copyright policy in other areas.”3 Congress itself has acknowledged this 
distinction and has applied it to existing copyright law, demonstrating not only the relevance of 
the distinction but also that it is possible to legally recognize it.4 Copying embedded software for 
resale generally provides little value, and so there is incentive to do so. Unlike standalone 
software, which can be vulnerable to piracy because it can run on any compatible computer 
platform and consumers often already own the platform, embedded software typically operates 
only with the accompanying hardware in which it is embedded and has no separate use or 
purpose. Moreover, concerns that competitors might copy the software in software-enabled 
products for their own devices, essentially free-riding on others’ development work, are 
misplaced. Copying or pirating software for such replacement purposes should remain an 
unlawful infringement of copyright even if repair and interoperability are properly recognized as 
non-infringing activities.5 As an owner of a book “is entitled, without the authority of the 
copyright owner, to sell or otherwise dispose of the possession of that copy” after purchasing, so 
should an owner of a software-enabled consumer product be entitled. Similarly, as an owner of a 
book cannot generally lawfully copy the text of that book to republish or distribute it, neither 
should an owner of a software-enabled consumer product lawfully copy the embedded software 
and duplicate it within another, competing product.6  
Because embedded software raises minimal infringement concerns, over-restrictive 
copyright protections serve primarily to limit users’ legitimate interests rather than protect 
against illegal activity. One of the most important legitimate interests is promoting 
interoperability. As the “Internet of Things” proliferates, software-enabled consumer products 
will increasingly need to interoperate with platforms, networks, and devices made by diverse 
companies. Machine-to-machine communication is fundamental to the value of these products; 
                                                 
1 BSAThe Software Alliance, Comments of BSAThe Software Alliance, 2. Other commenters that advocated 
similarly include: Microsoft Corporation, Owner’s Rights Initiative, Software and Information Industry Association, 
ACTThe App Association, Global IP Center, Entertainment Software Association, Center for Democracy and 
Technology, and the Computers and Communications Industry Association. 
2 Infringement is less of a threat both in the reduced likelihood that individuals will infringe and in that any 
infringement is less damaging to the market. 
3 Public Knowledge and Open Technology Institute, Comments of Public Knowledge and Open Technology 
Institute 2. 
4 17 U.S.C. § 109 declares that software rental limitations do not apply to a “computer program embodied in a 
machine or product and which cannot be copied during the ordinary use of the machine or product.” 
5 17 U.S.C. § 102. 
6 17 U.S.C. § 109.

[PAGE 5]
 
   3
the inability to interoperate freely would greatly reduce consumer choice and innovation. 
Permitting exclusive rights on the ability to interoperate will permit software rights-holders to 
become gatekeepers to products, industries, and innovation in ways we would never countenance 
for other property, while providing few if any benefits in protecting against unlikely 
infringement. Interoperability also can be important for standalone software, but the lack of 
interoperability is particularly devastating to software-enabled products.  
Embedded software is distinguishable from standalone software by its very form: it is 
embedded into a physical consumer product and not sold separately. This distinction lends itself 
to a unique relationship with consumers. Decades of traditional ownership rights have instilled 
strong expectations about the relationship between owners and their products, which the law 
should continue to respect. The traditional rights that have always accompanied physical objects, 
including the right to tinker, repair, lend, and transfer, should extend as well to the embedded 
software within these objects. As detailed in Engine’s initial comments, without these parallel 
rights, innovation, safety, privacy, consumer choice, and more will be frustrated.  
Additionally, inappropriate application of software law to embedded software makes 
such software particularly vulnerable to new and unwarranted restraints on the alienability of 
property. Unless users preserve their traditional expectations and rights of use, manufacturers 
will sell their software-enabled consumer products accompanied by a copyright license in the 
embedded software and claim that the user therefore does not own the entire product. This would 
imperil the ability of a consumer to resell their used car or repair their refrigerator—behaviors 
consumers reasonably expect to be lawful—without  violating copyright law. Even the current 
uncertainty that consumers face surrounding their ownership rights is damaging, as basic 
property rights are publicly called into question or explicitly repudiated by manufacturers.  
Ultimately, copyright restrictions have a disproportionate impact on embedded software. 
Balancing the costs and benefits of different approaches to applying copyright to embedded 
software suggests that over-enforcement will lead to significant barriers to innovation, 
interoperability, competition, and safety with little benefit to consumers or the incentive to 
innovate in the first place. The Copyright Office and Congress should be vigilant to prevent the 
growth of such barriers and examine carefully issues of copyrightability, fair use and the first 
sale doctrine as applied to embedded software.7  
III. The Existence of Strong Innovation Under the Current Copyright Regime Does Not 
Mean that an Improved Copyright System Would Fail to Spur More Innovation.  
The fact that the technology industry has boomed under the existing legal framework 
does not mean that framework is optimal for innovation or business in embedded software. The 
status quo of the software industry does not tell us everything we need to know about the 
                                                 
7 While ownership rights and interoperability are of unique importance to embedded software, Engine does not 
intend to suggest that non-embedded, standalone software does not need and deserve the same freedom from 
copyright-based restrictions on interoperability, alienability, or other socially beneficial, fair uses. The question of 
how these issues should be treated for non-embedded software is outside the scope of the Notice of Inquiry and is 
therefore not addressed here.

[PAGE 6]
 
   4
counterfactual—namely, the innovations that might  otherwise have occurred under a different set 
of rules. While the current copyright regime has undoubtedly contributed to some extent to the 
current level of innovation, adapting appropriately to the market going forward can continue to 
improve the amount and pace of future innovation.8 
Various commenters have argued that, for example, “strong copyright protection for 
software (embedded and otherwise) has been a tremendous policy success that has enabled 
decades of innovation and creativity,” and therefore embedded software, governed by the current 
system, will continue to be successful, obviating the need for any systemic changes.9 While this 
argument is facially plausible, a deeper look reveals that it is grounded on logical fallacies and 
rests on the incorrect notion that some innovation under current copyright law rules out the 
possibility of increased innovation under an improved system.  
First, there is the deductive error of “affirming the consequent,” where one assumes that 
an effect follows one potential cause because it happened after that cause. For example, it is 
common sense that if it rains, the street will be wet. To affirm the consequent is to conclude that 
because the street is wet, it must have rained. This is, of course, incorrect. It is likewise incorrect 
to conclude that current copyright law caused innovation solely because that innovation 
happened. Good copyright law may make the software industry more successful. But the success 
of software industry does not mean that copyright law is wholly good; many factors have 
contributed to the massive innovation we have seen in the field of software. In fact, copyright 
law could have had an adverse impact on innovation that was offset by other positive factors, and 
still resulted in the innovation we have seen.  
Second, the argument relies on weak inductive reasoning. Unlike deductive reasoning, 
inductive reasoning produces conclusions that are inherently uncertain but can be strong or weak 
based on the evidence given. For example, strong inductive reasoning suggests that because, 
every day to date the law of gravity has held, it will probably hold tomorrow. In this proceeding, 
some commenters have argued that since software, governed by copyright law, has been 
successful, it will continue to be successful under existing interpretations and application of 
copyright law. This is far from strong inductive reasoning. The relevant copyright provisions 
have governed software for only forty years—e ssentially the entire relevant existence of 
“software”—and the nature of the software industry changes more year-to-year than virtually any 
other market segment. Because of the unique characteristics of embedded software, described 
above, the history and nature of innovation in software in general does not necessarily mean that 
the same conditions will govern the coming future of ubiquitous, interoperable embedded 
software in consumer devices. In any event, even if software as an overall industry might 
continue to flourish—which is far from certain —innovation in the specific  context of embedded 
software might be restrained. 
While it is difficult to be sure how the world would have developed under a different 
legal regime, the back-and-forth in the online music industry demonstrates the likely presence 
                                                 
8 Commenters that attribute the success of the software industry to copyright law include: Microsoft, Entertainment 
Software Association, BSA, Global IP center, Copyright Alliance, Software and Information Industry Association. 
9 The Entertainment Software Association, Comments of the Entertainment Software Association, 2.

[PAGE 7]
 
   5
and scale of missed opportunities in this constantly changing industry: a decade-long delay in a 
billion-dollar market. In 2012, Michael Carrier conducted anonymous interviews of 31 “CEOs, 
company founders, and vice presidents from technology companies, the recording industry, and 
venture capital firms” regarding their “reactions to the district court’s injunction in the case 
involving peer-to-peer (p2p) service Napster.”10 After lawsuits by A&M Records and 17 other 
record companies, both the district court and the Ninth Circuit held that Napster was liable for 
direct and contributory infringement. Whatever the merits of that liability finding, on a policy 
level, the Napster decision had major repercussions on the development of online music for 
years afterward. 
In retrospect, Carrier argues, even the winners did not benefit from the copyright 
decisions in the long run. One executive of a major record label lamented on the “missed 
opportunity” and observed that “it made ‘no sense’ that ‘fifteen years into digital 
exploration…when I buy a song, I still only get that song’” while the labels could offer 
“additional extras, like exclusive interviews and backstage access.”11 Another compared the 
industry with the booming market of e-books, where publishers and retailers had seized on and 
included in the bundle innovative services such as “relationship with the author” and “social 
reading environment.”12 Because the recording industry had adopted a strategy that relied 
primarily on the application of copyright law, it failed to fully recognize or engage with an 
inevitable trend—online music.  
One respondent of the Carrier survey speculated that “if the court had come out the other 
way, ‘every television broadcast, every piece of music ever created, [and] every image ever 
taken’ could be ‘available unfettered to all of the devices we have.’”13 She concluded that “if 
Napster had won, I guarantee you, it would be a $50 billion market right now.”14 Just one week 
after her interview with Carrier, Spotify launched in the United States.15 Sean Parker, co-founder 
of Napster, invested in Spotify in 2010 and had been a board member since then. In June 2015, 
the company valued at $8.5 billion.16 Although Parker described Spotify as “actually very similar 
to what I dreamt of 10 years ago,” the question remains what might have happened to innovation, 
to the industry and to the benefit of consumers if Parker had not had to start over again.  
IV. The Risks to Innovation of Applying Current Copyright Law in the Fast-Moving, 
Emerging World of Software-Enabled Consumer Devices Warrant Moving Quickly 
and Deliberately to Make Appropriate Changes to the Law.  
Some commenters in the initial round suggested that it is “premature to recommend 
legislative changes” at this time and urged the Copyright Office to “proceed with caution.” This 
                                                 
10 Michael Carrier, Copyright and Innovation: the Untold Story, WIS. L. REV. 891, 891 (2012). 
11 Id. at 952.  
12 Id. 
13 Id. at 909. 
14 Id. 
15 The interview happened on Nov. 23, 2011. See supra, at 908, n. 106. Spotify launched in the United States on 
Nov. 30, 2011. 
16 Kasper Viita & Matthew Campbell, Spotify Value Tops $8 Billion as Investors Bet on Streaming, http://
www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-06-10/spotify-valued-at-8-2-billion-as-teliasonera-buys-stake.

[PAGE 8]
 
   6
approach is backwards.17 As some of these same commenters acknowledged, “we are in the 
midst of a transformational new generation of software innovation” accompanied by a “rapid 
pace of innovation.”18 But the lessons they suggest taking away from this rapid transformation 
are wrong. This rapidly developing innovation is best facilitated and protected not by waiting to 
see what issues develop and how much the barriers that copyright law impose interfere, but 
rather by engaging the limitations and weaknesses of copyright law as soon as they are 
recognized and making changes needed to allow this innovation to flourish without undue 
interference or restriction.  
The negative consequences of undue hesitation and delay are especially great in a field 
where dynamic change is ever-present and accelerating. Take instant messaging software, for 
instance. When MSN Messenger was first launched in 1999, it included only basic functions 
such as plain text messaging and a contact list. Today, WeChat, one of the most popular instant 
messenger programs, incorporates texting, emoticons, voice messaging, video conferencing, file 
sharing, and even money transfers. While “tomorrow” may be more or less similar to “today” in 
many fields, software is assuredly not one of them, and it would be a mistake to regulate as if it 
were. 
A powerful example of the value ensuring that the law is calibrated proactively to ensure 
opportunities for innovation is provided by § 230 of the Communications Decency Act.19 Section 
230 is perhaps Congress’s greatest success in getting out in front of a rapidly developing 
technology—rather than sitting back and waiting fo r problems to arise—in a way that paved the 
way for tremendous subsequent innovation. In 1996, recognizing the critical importance of 
promoting “the continued development of the Internet . . . and other interactive media,” and 
preserving the vibrant and competitive free market that presently exists for the Internet and other 
interactive computer services,”20 Congress enacted § 230. Section 230 ensures that “[n]o 
provider or user of an interactive computer service shall be treated as the publisher or speaker of 
any information provided by another information provider.”21 Courts have construed the statute 
“broadly to extend protection from liability to many companies.”22  
Prior to § 230, in the early days of the Internet, a company could be held liable for any 
defamatory or other tortious content that appeared on its website, regardless of who wrote it. 
Section 230 established the distinction between a publisher/speaker and a provider/user, thus 
significantly reducing the risk of liability that Internet services face for the user-generated 
content they host. As a result, for instance, Facebook cannot be held liable for the defamatory 
content posted by any of its 1.6 billion users (though, of course, users themselves may still be 
                                                 
17 BSAThe Software Alliance, Comments of BSAThe Software Alliance, 5. Microsoft Corporation, Comments of 
Microsoft Corporation, 8.. 
18 Microsoft Corporation, Comments of Microsoft Corporation, 2.BSA The Software Alliance, Comments of BSA 
The Software Alliance, 1.  
19 47 U.S.C. § 230(c)(1). 
20 47 U.S.C. § 230(b)(2). 
21 Id. 
22 Cyrus Sarosh Jan Manekshaw, Liability of ISPs: Immunity from Liability under the Digital Millennium Copyright 
Act and the Communications Decency Act, 10 COMP. L. REV. & TECH J. 101, 112 (2005).

[PAGE 9]
 
   7
held liable).23 Without § 230, the number of users and the volume of content they generate would 
create the potential for massive liability and no company, particularly no startup, could withstand 
the risk and potential expense of litigating and settling large numbers of lawsuits. Litigation can 
easily drag on for years and impose legal fees that would quickly bankrupt a start-up, even if it 
ultimately prevails on the merits.24 It takes just one suit, no matter the result, to bring many 
typical start-ups to a halt. An all too common analogy in recent years has been the conflicts 
between patent assertion entities (“patent trolls”) and start-ups. Knowing that start-ups typically 
cannot afford the legal fees necessary to get spurious claims dismissed, patent trolls survive by 
filing questionable lawsuits on weak patents and insisting on extortionate settlements. 
Section 230 and its safe harbor are widely recognized as critical elements in the 
remarkable flourishing of innovation that has occurred since 1996 in all aspects of Internet 
technology involving user-generated content. Without the safe harbor § 230 created, the chilling 
effect of potential litigation on innovation and start-ups would have been enormous and 
enormously damaging. When § 230 was passed, companies that depend on user-generated 
content such as eBay (1995) and Craigslist (1995) were start-ups. Policy-makers could not have 
foreseen the social media revolution that would later be brought by the likes of YouTube (2005), 
Facebook (2004), and Reddit (2005). These companies and the profound innovations they 
embody were either nascent or nonexistent at the time, and many of them would either not exist 
or exist in very different form without the § 230 safe harbor.25 Professor Eric Goldman attributes 
“a non-trivial role” to § 230 “in the ascension of Internet as a dominant media.”26 Anupam 
Chander describes the “shield” provided by § 230 as “invaluable.”27 Derek Kanna explains that it 
“cleared the way for the modern Internet” and was “the law that gave us websites like Reddit, 
Craigslist, Digg, and perhaps all of social media.”28 Section 230 has been “economically 
powerful, perhaps in ways Congress couldn’t have foreseen. . . . As a result, it has functioned as 
a permission slip for the whole Internet that says: ‘Go innovate.’”29 Without § 230, the Internet 
would look very different—and far less innovati ve—today. In 1996, the Web had a total number 
of 257,601 sites—a negligible number compared w ith 1 billion today, yet the lawmakers made 
the correct choice then to act promptly.30  
Ironically, supporters of the status quo before § 230 might well have made similar 
arguments that any change in the law should await the development of significant problems, and 
the innovations that would rebut their case would never have appeared since they would never 
                                                 
23 Number of Monthly Active Facebook Users Worldwide as of 4th Quarter 2015, http://www.statista.com/statistics/
264810/number-of-monthly-active-facebook-users-worldwide/. 
24 Carrier, 972.  
25 See The State of Broadband 2014: Broadband for All, Broadband Comm’n for Digital Dev. [UN agency for 
information and communications technology] (Sept. 2014), available at http://www.broadbandcommission.org/
documents/reports/bb-annualreport2014.pdf.  
26 Eric Goldman, Speech Shutdown at the Virtual Corral, SANTA CLARA COMPUTER & HIGH TECH. L.J. 101, 109 
(2005). 
27 Anupam Chander, How Law Made Silicon Valley, 63 EMORY L.J. 639, 653 (2004). 
28 Derek Khanna, The Law that Gave Us the Modern Internet—and the Campaign to Kill It , The Atlantic (Sept. 12, 
2013), available at http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2013/09/the-law-that-gave-us-the-modern-internet-
and-the-campaign-to-kill-it/279588/. 
29 Id. 
30 Total Number of Websites, http://www.internetlivestats.com/total-number-of-websites/.

[PAGE 10]
 
   8
have been founded or funded in the face of potentially crippling liability. Fortunately, rather than 
sitting back and waiting until the failures of the status quo became self-evident, Congress 
actively paved the way for innovation and progress in the “rapidly developing array of Internet 
and other interactive computer services available to individual Americans.”31 The Copyright 
Office should adopt this same principle as it seeks to facilitate and preserve this next wave of 
economically valuable, rapidly developing innovation.  
Commenters’ also attempt to rely on language in the Department of Commerce’s Internet 
Policy Task Force’s (“IPTF”) White Paper on Remixes, First Sale, and Statutory Damages, but 
that reliance is misplaced.32 The White Paper notes that “the alienability of everyday functional 
products is an important issue for consumers” and “further attention would be warranted” if the 
market develops so that this is an issue.33 Settled expectations about ownership and alienability 
are indeed important issues for consumers, but developments in the market show the time 
already is ripe for appropriate copyright reform. For example, in 2015, John Deere and General 
Motors advanced a view of embedded software that challenges the very idea of owning a tractor 
or a car: the purchaser of a vehicle does not fully own all of it—r ather, she “receives an implied 
license for the life of the vehicle to operate the vehicle.”34 This indicates that embedded software 
is already creating challenges for expectations of alienability, justifying action from the 
Copyright Office and Congress now, not down the road when the problems have become worse 
or innovation has been chilled. Otherwise, the uncertainty surrounding the law will stifle 
invention and creativity and startups and markets will be restrained.  
Ultimately, waiting to modernize copyright law or approaching changes with a paralyzing 
level of caution or hesitation is unwise and unwarranted. We are past the dawn of software-
enabled consumer products—consumer software is found in many of our everyday products—
and soon it will become truly ubiquitous. Examples abound. Just last week, the New York Times 
described how app makers and “makers of digital home devices like Nest are also rushing to 
make their products compatible with” Amazon’s Echo.35 Earlier this month, Wired featured an 
article titled How to Link Your Car’s Brain to Your Smart Home, detailing a $100 dollar device 
that enables your car to unlock the front door to your home, turn on your house lights, and open 
your garage automatically by turning off the car in your driveway.36 The integration of the 
Internet of Things into everyday life is a reality, not a hypothetical,37 and the law should not be 
allowed to lag behind. In any event, beginning to take steps toward needed reforms today will 
not result in immediate changes since any recommendations from the Copyright Office will take 
                                                 
31 47 U.S.C. § 230(a)(1). 
32 Commenters include Microsoft, the Software and Information Industry Association Commenters, BSAThe 
Software Alliance, and ACTThe App Association.  
33 Dep’t of Commerce, Internet Policy Task Force, White Paper on Remixes, First Sale, and Statutory Damages, 64 
(2016), at http://www.uspto.gov/sites/default/files/documents/copyrightwhitepaper.pdf. 
34 16 John Deere Reply Comment, 2015 DMCA proceeding, http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/comments-032715/
class%2021/John_Deere_Class21_1201_2014.pdf at 6. 
35 Farhad Manjoo, The Echo From Amazon Brims With Groundbreaking Promise, The New York Times (Mar. 8, 
2016), available at http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/10/technology/the-echo-from-amazon-brims-with-
groundbreaking-promise.html?action=click&contentCollection=Sports&module=MostPopularFB& 
version=Full&region=Marginalia&src=me&pgtype=article. 
36 Michael McCole, How to Link Your Car’s Brain to Your Smart Home, Wired (Mar. 3, 2016), available at http://
www.wired.com/2016/03/iot-cookbook-automatic/. 
37 See The Entertainment Software Association, Comments of the Entertainment Software Association, 7.

[PAGE 11]
 
   9
time to be enacted. Accordingly, the Copyright Office should engage in needed reexamination 
and reform of the law affecting these innovative technologies without delay and without waiting 
for examples of harm to innovation.  
V. Conclusion 
 Engine reiterates its appreci ation for the Copyright Office’s current study of software-
enabled products. Based on the comments submitted in the first round of this NOI, Engine urges 
the Office to recommend and strongly support changes to and interpretations of copyright law 
and policy that maximize the tremendous opportunities for innovators, entrepreneurs, startups, 
and users that have been and will be created by the spread of software-enabled products and the 
Internet of Things. The Office should not accede to invitations to do nothing now and wait to act 
until problems have become obvious and critical. The better course is to act now to pursue near-
term changes and clarifications that will help ensure, before it is too late, that copyright law does 
not restrict the next generations of innovative new products and services. Protecting innovation 
and its benefits is too significant to leave for another day; the Office should support necessary 
legislative changes that proactively provide the best possible conditions to ensure the 
opportunities for innovation continue to grow.
