[PAGE 1]
Reprtsmti11g the literary, thentrim/ a11d m11siml works of L. Ro11 Hubb ard 
February 16, 2016 
U.S. Copyright Office 
Jame. Madison Memorial Building 
101 Independence Avenue , S.E. 
Washington, DC 20559-6000 
R e: U.S. Co p yright Office Notice of Inquiry (NOI) 
Software-E nabled Co nsum er P rodu cts Study 
Doc ket No. 2015-6 
D ear Sirs: 
The following is the information we would like to provide in response to the above 
referenced Notice of Inquiry. 
4. Whether. and to what extent. legitimate intere t or busine model for copyright 
owner and users could be undermined or improved by changes to copyright law in this area. 
We represent the owner of the copyrights and patents in a device and the. oftware that 
runs the device that we license a publi her to manufacture and sell this device under this licen ·e. 
The device can only be purcha ed and used by omeone who is qualified and they mu st be 
'-pecifically trained on the use of the device. Before the person purcha ing the device can take it 
phy ically. they mu t agree to and sign a purcha e agreement for the device and a eparate license 
agreement for the software contained in the device. These agreement are not "shrink-wrap" or 
unilateral agreements. The agreement
s are read, agreed to as a condition to purcha e/u e and 
signed hard copy, not electronically. The agreements contain a number of restrictions concerning 
the use of the device with its software, including not being able to rever e engineer the 
device/ oftware, not being able to copy the oftware and not being able to transfer the device to 
another unles · certain condition· are met including the person the device i. being tran ferred to 
signs both agreements before taking physical custody of the device. 
Changes in the copyright law· uch a what is being propo ed in HR 682 You Own 
De vices Act introduced in the Hou se, if pa ed in it pre ent form or any uch imilar change·, 
would adver ely affect our busine s model a covered above. Any changes to the copyright laws 
for ·oftware-enabled device should contain an exception or not apply to circumstances where the 
device is limited and/or restricted as to who may purchase it and where the person purcha ing 
7051 Hollywood Boulel'llrd, Hollyll'ood. California 90028-6007 
(Telephone) 323-..f.66-3310 (Fax) 323-466-6474

[PAGE 2]
agree by signed agreement(s) to the restriction in the agreement( ). The copyright law hould 
not invalidate uch an arrangement or business model. 
2. The rationale and proper scope of copyright protection for oft ware embedded in 
everyday products, including the extent to which copyright infringement is a concern with respect 
to such software. 
We would not consider that the above de cribed device i an "everyday product", but feel 
we ~hould add a comment under thi category. The oft ware that run the above device has a 
copyright registration approved by the US Copyright Office and, as well, the device is al o 
patented (both de ign and utility) with patent registrations approved by the US Patent Office. The 
whole rea on we have the business model described above i protect the e copyright and patent , 
thi is important to us and copyright infringement of the software is of concern. 
If there i any further information that I can provide, please let me know. I can be 
contacted at the above address and phone number or emailed at ryland@authorservicesinc.com. 
Very truly your , 
Ryland Hawkin
