[PAGE 1]
 
 
 
February 16, 2016 
 
The Honorable Maria A. Pallante 
Register of Copyrights 
U.S. Copyright Office 
101 Independence Avenue, SE 
Washington, DC 20559-6000   
 
RE:  Comments of ACT | The App Association in Response to the U.S. Copyright Office’s Notice of 
Inquiry, Software-Enabled Consumer Products Study: Notice and Request for Public Comment, 80 
FR 77668 (Dec. 15, 2015) 
 
Dear Ms. Pallante: 
ACT | The App Association, representing over 5,000 app companies and software firms creating and 
licensing digital content, writes to submit input to the United States Copyright Office (“USCO”) in 
response to its Notice of Inquiry.1 ACT is widely recognized as the foremost authority on the $120 billion 
mobile app economy and its intersection with governmental interests. As the only organization focused 
on the needs of small business app developer entrepreneurs around the world, ACT advocates for an 
environment that inspires and rewards innovation while providing resources to help its members 
leverage their intellectual assets to raise capital, create jobs, and continue innovating. 
I. General Views 
Copyright protections are foundational to rewarding the creativity and innovation that sustains and 
grows much of the U.S. economy. With the rise of the digital economy and the increasing Internet-
enabled connectivity of consumer products, these copyright protections have only become more 
important for those who utilize this global marketplace. ACT applauds the USCO for seeking public 
comment to inform to its review of the role of copyright law with respect to software-enabled consumer 
products. 
As detailed in ACT’s latest State of the Mobile App Economy report,2 the app industry has existed for less 
than a decade and has experienced exponential growth alongside the rise of smartphones. It now 
represents a $120 billion ecosystem which is led by U.S. companies, the vast majority of which are 
                                                           
1 Software-Enabled Consumer Products Study: Notice and Request for Public Comment, 80 FR 77668 (Dec. 15, 2015) 
(“RFI”). 
2 ACT’s annually-released State of the Mobile App Economy provides further information on this growing industry 
that continues to grow, creating jobs and revolutionizing how consumers work, play, and manage their health. See 
http://actonline.org/2016/01/04/act-the-app-association-releases-latest-app-industry-report/.

[PAGE 2]
2 
 
startups or small businesses. The explosion of business-to-consumer and business-to-business mobile 
apps being deployed by non-traditional software companies is dramatically changing the independent 
software vendor economy, specifically with regard to exposure to digital risks and vulnerabilities. These 
deployments include a variety of content delivery options, security and monitoring services, tech 
support services, payment processing services, patents, licensing agreements, and diverse revenue 
models. Copyright protections should contemplate dynamic industries like the mobile app economy, and 
are a crucial underpinning to ACT’s thousands of software development member companies’ business 
models, such as: 
 Health devices with embedded software that are relied upon for related decisions, ranging from 
lifestyle changes to medical treatments. 
 Automotive products with embedded software that drivers rely on to protect their safety on 
American roadways. 
 Software-enabled financial tools used by countless Americans to handle financial transactions. 
 Consumer and home-oriented products enabled by embedded software apps that are relied 
upon for alertness and safety, as well as convenience and entertainment. 
Piracy presents a major threat to the success of ACT members and the billions of consumers who rely on 
digital products and services. Piracy, whether originating within the U.S. or abroad, threatens not only 
the creators of digital content by undermining their ability to innovate, invest, and hire; but also the 
end-users’ confidence in software-enabled products and services as there is potential for consumers to 
be victimized by illegal sellers who pose as legitimate content owners and sellers. Counterfeiting 
software apps can lead to customer data loss, interruption of service, and revenue loss and reputational 
damage. Further, with the rise of enterprise mobile app development, apps are being used as a means 
to attack mobile users of an entire enterprise. While the criminal penalties for these activities (e.g., 
attacking a bank’s clients through a counterfeit version of their app) are likely more of a deterrent than 
the copyright laws being violated when the counterfeit app is created, these criminal acts all begin with 
first misappropriating application logic and application media content (brands, etc.). These threats have 
caused significant damage, and continue to pose substantial hazards, to app development companies 
that service every sector of the economy for countless end-users.  
For example, ACT member BusyBee Studios’ children’s app Zoo Train3 was featured in the GooglePlay 
app store for sale at $0.99. This app uses colorful animal shapes and animations in providing educational 
puzzles and spelling lessons for young children. During a search for the product, the developers found 
another app in the GooglePlay store using the same name and artwork, but from a different publisher. 
This pirated app was free in the GooglePlay store and was displayed as a result of a search query for 
“Zoo Train,” and – unlike the true Zoo Train app – displayed advertisements to earn bogus revenue as 
well as gained permission to control a user’s device in order to access phone dialer information, the 
address book, and the network stack to install itself to run in the phone’s operating system background 
to collect this information (in other words, a malware “stub” that sits inactive but can be activated with 
                                                           
3 https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/zoo-train/id407870968?mt=8.

[PAGE 3]
3 
 
a command). It took nearly 12 months to have the counterfeit Zoo Train app removed from the 
GooglePlay store. 
Zoo Train is not alone in facing such risks. Further innovative mobile app innovators that rely on 
technological protection measures (“TPMs”) such as authentication and encryption to mitigate serious 
piracy threats include: 
 Mimir Health,4 which makes cloud-based analytic software for healthcare executives and 
clinicians. The company’s products combine disparate healthcare data into one place, 
eliminating time wasted on data consolidation and preparing reports by hand. 
 DrinkMate,5 producer of the smallest breathalyzer in the world that plugs into a smartphone. 
Once plugged into a smartphone and activated via its software app, a user can blow into the 
device and get an immediate reading of blood alcohol content. DrinkMate’s goal is to promote 
safe and responsible drinking habits and personal/public safety. 
 PreEmptive Solutions,6 which provides application protection solutions, and works directly with 
many thousands of software development organizations to help them manage these specific 
risks. Leveraging PreEmptive’s application analytics and protection solutions, development 
organizations materially improve application quality, user satisfaction, and development ROI 
across today’s distributed and increasingly heterogeneous computing architectures. 
 
The app industry effectively did not exist when the Digital Millennium Copyright Act7 (“DMCA”) became 
law in 1998 after a comprehensive negotiation between policymakers, copyright interests, tech firms, 
network operators, and nonprofits. The DMCA is not without flaws, but it has proven effective and 
flexible enough to provide for and deal with continued innovation in the tech sector as well consumer 
protection; further, courts have reined in attempts to abuse the law on many key issues. To educate 
policymakers, the developer community, and consumers about the DMCA, ACT published a white paper 
on the 15th anniversary of the DMCA titled “Quick Guide to the DMCA: The Digital Millennium Copyright 
Act Basics,”8 a resource with easy-to-understand facts about what the law actually does and how it 
impacts innovation. 
                                                           
4 http://www.mimirhealth.com/.  
5 http://www.getdrinkmate.com/.  
6 https://www.preemptive.com/.  
7 Pub. L. No. 105-304, 112 Stat. 2860 (Oct. 28, 1998). 
8 ACT | The App Association, Quick Guide to the DMCA (2014), available at http://actonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/10/DMCA_fullpage9-17-14.pdf.

[PAGE 4]
4 
 
ACT’s views on the role of copyright with respect to software-enabled consumer products are informed 
by several principles that we strongly urge the USCO to incorporate into its related report to Congress. 
These include: 
 Copyright Laws Should Encourage Innovation while Protecting Consumer Interests: the United 
States’ copyright laws were created to stimulate innovation for the general public good. As laws 
like the DMCA are nearly 20 years old and debate around copyright reform continues to 
intensify, it is important that the Congressional intent underlying copyright law remain a 
priority, such as ensuring that the copyright owner’s exclusive rights remain meaningful and 
effective and through the properly-scoped application limitations on those rights, such as of the 
fair use and first sale doctrines. 
 Copyright Laws Should Permit for the Securing of Digital Content: software application 
developers continue to face significant monetary and reputational risks due to piracy. The tools 
to address these threats provided by the DMCA--incentives to intra-industry consensus 
approaches and the use of TPMs (such as the use of digital rights management [“DRM”] 
technologies)--should be enabled and not discouraged. While no technology is impervious to 
attack, the DMCA has been a driving force in establishing the use of TPMs which have allowed 
for rights holders to reasonably protect their creative works. 
 Copyright Laws Should Provide Legal Certainty: software application developers must deal with 
complex laws and regulations, including copyright, in the context of the United States (and very 
often) globally. Copyright owners need clear legal mechanisms, including in the criminal context, 
to ensure that they can leverage the Internet to export their software or services to consumers 
in the United States and other countries, and a predictable process to protect their rights. 
 Changes to Copyright Laws Should be Responsive to Proven Harms: calls for sweeping changes 
to U.S. copyright law based on theoretical legal theories and undemonstrated impacts should be 
carefully scrutinized. ACT urges the USCO to ensure its report to Congress is based on data-
driven proven – not theoretical – harms. 
 Changes to U.S. Copyright Law and Global Impacts: policymakers examining changes to U.S. 
copyright law should always consider the impact changes made to copyright law in the context 
of a digital economy may have in creating precedent outside of the United States. 
 Sector-Specific Issues should be Addressed by Relevant Federal Actors, Not Through Altering 
the Copyright Laws: policymakers should carefully approach proposals for changes to the 
Copyright Act to address sector-specific issues, and ensure that changes to the Copyright Act do 
not supplant the mechanisms and processes in place to address the public interest for regulated 
segments of the economy, whether through specific Federal agency jurisdiction, competition, or 
other relevant areas of law.

[PAGE 5]
5 
 
II. Responses to Questions in the NOI 
 
1. Whether copyright law should distinguish between software embedded in ‘‘everyday 
products’’ and other types of software, and, if so, how such a distinction might be drawn in an 
administrable manner.  
a. Whether ‘‘everyday products’’ can be distinguished from other products that contain 
software, such as general purpose computers—essentially how to define ‘‘everyday 
products.’’  
b. If distinguishing between software embedded in ‘‘everyday products’’ and other types 
of software is impracticable, whether there are alternative ways the Office can 
distinguish between categories of software.  
 
To date, the Copyright Act, coupled with the DMCA’s protections, have enabled innovation, helped 
combat piracy, and facilitated appropriate public access and fair use. As noted above, the exponential 
growth of the mobile app economy (and the “Internet of Things” [IoT]) gives rise to a wider application 
of copyright law to many “everyday” products. These “everyday” products are and will be enabled by 
the same digital technologies that Congress contemplated when adopting the DMCA’s changes to the 
1976 Copyright Act. 
Functionally, whether a product is an “everyday” product is a relative determination that will change at 
an increasing rate as technological innovation escalates across segments of the economy. Moreover, 
technological innovation consistently outpaces legislative and regulatory processes, virtually assuring 
that any statutory articulation of a distinction will quickly become outdated, leading to more confusion 
and frustration in the marketplace. Attempting to determine a stagnant definition of “everyday 
products” from “others” in the context of copyright law is not feasible, and would therefore generate 
increased uncertainty by creating new and complicated differentiations in the law, discouraging 
investment and innovation (e.g., the “bring your own device” model). Alternatively, uniform and 
predictable application of the copyright laws will provide clarity in legal responsibilities and expectations 
for all stakeholders. 
Based on the above, ACT strongly discourages Congress and the USCO from attempting to distinguish 
between software embedded in ‘‘everyday products’’ and other types of software (as well as 
“alternative ways [to] distinguish between categories of software”) in the copyright context because 
such an exercise is impractical and would multiply confusion around the application of copyright law. 
While there are certainly opportunities to continue to refine copyright law that will embrace the next 
generation of technological advances, Congress should be wary of dismantling the compromises 
underlying existing law that have served innovation and creativity well, and should only proceed after 
extensive and careful consultation with stakeholders. 
ACT also encourages the USCO’s report to Congress to include discussion of the impact the United 
States’ copyright laws have globally. Should the USCO recommend to Congress that it consider taking a 
radical step such as attempting to differentiate between software in “everyday products” and “others,” 
it could push other nations to undertake a similar approach, multiplying legal uncertainty around the 
globe.

[PAGE 6]
6 
 
 
 
2. The rationale and proper scope of copyright protection for software embedded in everyday 
products, including the extent to which copyright infringement is a concern with respect to 
such software.  
Since the 1976 Act's enactment, the scope of copyright protections for computer programs has been 
refined by Congress, as well as judicially, creating precedents that underlie the software industry and 
the potential benefits that will result from the increasing digitization and connectivity of “everyday” 
products. Consistent with our views above, ACT strongly urges for the most clear and consistent 
approach to software copyright as is possible, regardless of whether it is embedded in so-called 
“everyday” products or in “other” products. 
The DMCA, and the Copyright Act itself, was never expected to end unlawful uses of content. No laws, 
for that matter, prevent unlawful behavior entirely. While the DMCA has not eliminated digital piracy, it 
has provided important tools for copyright owners to protect their copyrights online. Similarly, for 
software embedded in “everyday” products, copyright owners will face an ongoing battle to mitigate 
infringement. If Congress undertakes a legislative initiative in this area, ACT encourages Congress to 
consult extensively with stakeholders before proposing statutory change. 
 
3. The need to enable interoperability with software-embedded devices, including specific 
examples of ways in which the law frustrates or enables such interoperability.  
Interoperability – at its highest level, the ability to communicate with other interfaces – can sometimes 
be a necessity for app developers, but the practice of reverse engineering must be balanced with the 
need to adequately maintain the integrity of software using TPMs (such as authentication and 
encryption). The use of TPMs is crucial to maintaining the integrity of software and in protecting end-
user data collected by consumer products with embedded software, not only from nefarious actors but 
also in furtherance of the obligation to protect end-users’ privacy rights. 
While the USCO has requested that input related to the effectiveness of Section 1201 be shared in a 
separate Request for Information,9 ACT notes that Congress’ safeguarding provision requiring an 
examination of Section 1201’s efficacy in the DMCA10 is a valuable means to evaluate fair use and its 
relation to interoperability. Section 1201 allows a lawful user of a computer program to circumvent a 
technological measure “for the sole purpose of identifying and analyzing those elements of the program 
that are necessary to achieve interoperability of an independently created computer program with 
other programs, and that have not previously been readily available to the person engaging in the 
circumvention, to the extent that any such acts of identification and analysis do not constitute 
infringement…”.11 Since the DMCA came into effect, the courts have provided further clarity around this 
                                                           
9 See RFI at 77671. 
10 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 
11 17 U.S.C. § 1201(f)(1).

[PAGE 7]
7 
 
exemption that has provided increased certainty for copyright holders and the public.12 ACT continues to 
monitor these developments, and discourages sweeping changes to copyright law based on theoretical 
legal arguments and speculative harms. 
Furthermore, interoperability raises a number of issues that fall beyond the USCO’s purview (e.g., 
antitrust issues handled by the Department of Justice and/or Federal Trade Commission) or are sector-
specific (e.g., the Federal Communications Commission’s efforts to ensure interoperability in public 
safety communications13). ACT urges the USCO to ensure that its decisions around the application of 
copyright law to software embedded in devices are made in full consideration and coordination with the 
regulatory agencies best positioned to understand the issues unique to each sector. 
 
4. Whether current limitations on and exceptions to copyright protection adequately address 
issues concerning software embedded in everyday products, or whether amendments or 
clarifications would be useful. Specific areas of interest include:  
 
*** 
d. Fair use (codified in 17 U.S.C. 107)  
The fair use doctrine is an important component of the U.S. copyright system, which provides for the 
ability to copy, distribute, or otherwise use a copyrighted work under certain circumstances. ACT 
believes that the DMCA has advanced the Congressional intent of “fair use” while reasonably protecting 
copyright owners. The Copyright Act contains a list of the various purposes for which that may be 
allowed and the factors a court must consider in determining whether a use was fair, to be determined 
on a case-by-case basis.14 ACT continues to monitor developments in the courts, but at this time does 
not hold specific recommendations for changes to 17 U.S.C. 107.  
 
e. The first-sale doctrine (codified in 17 U.S.C. 109)  
Software apps are often licensed for use by consumers, and this digital content is therefore not owned 
by licensees for the purposes of Section 109 of the Copyright Act. This contrasts with a marketplace for 
sale of physical goods, which suffer from generational losses and therefore deteriorate over time. The 
“physical” manifestation of software only applies in limited cases when it had been previously installed 
on a computer that is resold. Licensing allows app developers to offer low-cost, consumer-friendly 
products in a thriving marketplace, making it possible for consumers to get amazing, innovative products 
for as little as $0.99. To be clear, the software industry at large, and in particular the mobile app 
economy, has flourished using this licensing business model, which has directly resulted in baseline 
                                                           
12 See, e.g., Davidson & Associates v. Jung, 422 F.3d 630 (8th Cir. 2005). 
13 E.g., Interoperability, FCC Public Safety & Homeland Security Bureau, Interoperability, 
https://transition.fcc.gov/pshs/emergency-information/interoperability.html (last accessed Feb. 16, 2016). 
14 These factors are: (1) the purpose and character of your use; (2) the nature of the copyrighted work; (3) the 
amount and substantiality of the portion taken; and (4) the effect of the use upon the potential market. See 17 
U.S.C. 107.

[PAGE 8]
8 
 
consumer expectations related to the licensing of software (e.g., warranties on the product and related 
consumer support). 
Proposals to expand the first sale doctrine to software and the app market would significantly threaten 
the industry’s viability, putting the quality of consumer software in peril, as treating software as if it had 
the same attributes as a physical product would require app makers to radically change their pricing 
structure. Aside from the technical challenges associated with such an assurance that the seller deletes 
the original copy before resale in a secondary market, it is reasonable to infer that app sales in the 
primary market will decline substantially. Since most app companies are small businesses, this threat to 
revenues would force them to dramatically increase prices and forego consumer-friendly business 
models to ensure a financial return on investment. In some cases, such a change would very likely lead 
to some app developers exiting the market, decreasing competition among the remaining developers, 
and reducing the overall diversity of the marketplace. 
Expanding the first sale doctrine to digitally licensed content would also discourage investment in one of 
the fastest growing sectors of our economy. When forced to raise prices, app makers would have far 
fewer customers, leading to marketplace uncertainty. Investment in mobile services would fall sharply 
and the pace of new innovations that make our lives easier would slow to a crawl. App companies not 
only create and license content but also obtain software licenses in the development of their products. 
Without the incentive for innovators to license their inventions, many software companies would no 
longer have access to the component parts of code, created by others, that are necessary to make new 
apps. Without access to these tools, the vast majority of companies in the app marketplace would lack 
the resources to continue production.  
In rejecting the notion that the first sale doctrine should extend to digital transmissions of copyrighted 
works, the Department of Commerce’s Internet Policy Task Force (“IPTF”) recognized the flexibility that 
the licensing model has brought to the software marketplace. Specifically, it noted that an “overly broad 
application of the first sale doctrine could also impede the continued development of the growing range 
of flexible new licensing models and variable pricing[, and that c]onsiderable evidence [demonstrates] 
that such models are becoming more and more prevalent and that they provide real value to consumers 
above and beyond traditional ownership models.”15 
 
*** 
 
                                                           
15 INTERNET POLICY TASK FORCE, DEP’T OF COMMERCE, WHITE PAPER ON REMIXES, FIRST SALE, AND 
STATUTORY DAMAGES (2015) at 65-68, https://www.ntia.doc.gov/report/2016/white-paper-remixes-first-sale-
and-statutory-damages.

[PAGE 9]
9 
 
5. The state of contract law vis-a-vis software embedded in everyday products, and how 
contracts such as end user license agreements impact investment in and the dissemination 
and use of everyday products, including whether any legislative action in this area is needed.  
Many copyrighted products, including apps, are distributed subject to license agreements that use 
“click-through” agreements facilitated by the app store platform (e.g., iOS). These license agreements 
are a business necessity and create the terms of service for the use of the software, and may 
appropriately include copyright limitations based on a balance of interests and the specific product, its 
end user(s), etc. Adherence to licensing terms, for example, is crucial to ensuring data integrity and 
resiliency, as well as end user privacy. ACT believes that the freedom to contract serves as a major 
reason underlying the innovation seen in the mobile app economy. 
The USCO should carefully consider, based on actual proven harms, its recommendations to Congress 
related to state of contract law vis-a-vis software embedded in everyday products in order to ensure 
that its recommendations are aligned with the existing body of contract laws, regulations, and 
precedents; and the wide reliance of the business community, including those participating in the digital 
economy, on them. ACT supports ensuring that app developers maintain the ability to dictate the terms 
by which the product they sell is used through end user license agreements. Undercutting the balance in 
place today that would alter the fundamentals underlying the digital economy at large, and would 
impede the proliferation of innovative software-enabled consumer products. 
 
***

[PAGE 10]
10 
 
ACT | The App Association appreciates the opportunity to submit comments to the USCO to help inform 
the record and its study on copyright issues for software-enabled consumer products, and looks forward 
to the opportunity to meet with you and your team to discuss these issues in more depth. Thank you for 
your consideration.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Morgan Reed 
Executive Director 
ACT | The App Association
