[PAGE 1]
 
Microsoft Corporation 
One Microsoft Way  
Redmond WA 98052 www.microsoft.com 
 
Page 1 of 9 
 
February 16, 2016 
 
 
Hon. Maria Pallante 
Register of Copyrights 
United States Copyright Office 
101 Independence Ave., S.E. 
Washington, D.C. 20559  
 
Re: Software-Enabled Consumer Products Study; Notice and Request for Public 
Comment  
 Docket No. 2015-6 
 
Dear Ms. Pallante: 
 
Microsoft welcomes this opportunity to respond to the Copyright Office’s Notice of 
Inquiry for its Software-Enabled Consumer Products Study (“Notice”).1 As Senators 
Grassley and Leahy noted in their letter to the Copyright Office of October 22, 2015, the 
ubiquity of innovative software in everyday consumer products such as cars, refrigerators, 
and other devices provides tremendous benefits to consumers, but also raises important 
policy issues.2 Consistent with their letter, and with the terms of the Notice, this 
submission focuses on the role of copyright protection for software embedded in 
consumer products; it does not address other policy issues raised by such products (e.g., 
privacy or security), or the well-settled copyright eligibility of all other types of software.  
 
These comments are informed by more than three decades of Microsoft leadership in 
nearly all facets of software innovation. In addition to developing some of the world’s 
most popular software products, Microsoft also offers several leading platforms, services, 
tools, and devices that allow customers to run and adapt third-party software, or even 
develop software themselves. The broad diversity of our offerings gives us a unique—and, 
we believe, uniquely balanced—perspective on the issues raised in the Notice.  
                                                           
1 80 Fed. Reg. 77668 (Dec. 15, 2015). 
2 Letter from Sens. Charles E. Grassley and Patrick Leahy to Hon. Maria A. Pallante (Oct. 22, 2015), 
at http://www.grassley.senate.gov/news/news-releases/grassley-leahy-call-copyright-study (last 
accessed Feb. 12, 2016).

[PAGE 2]
 
Microsoft Corporation 
One Microsoft Way  
Redmond WA 98052 www.microsoft.com 
 
Page 2 of 9 
 
Forty years of software innovation have generated massive benefits for software creators, 
consumers and the economy. At the same time, the U.S. copyright regime has proved 
remarkably adept at balancing the interests of creators, consumers, and the public—
including with regard to software embedded in consumer products. The coming decades 
will see a further burst of innovation, as the software and device industries reinvent 
themselves in an age of cloud computing. It is therefore critical that the Copyright Office 
tread with care so as not to alter the incentives or disturb the carefully developed legal 
precedent for software embedded in consumer products. 
I. Software innovation is thriving 
The pace and breadth of software innovation since Congress passed the 1976 Copyright 
Act have been astounding—and arguably unrivaled in the history of technology. At that 
time, most computers were large mainframes that primarily ran customized software. 
Given their massive size, cost, and complexity, they were used almost exclusively by large 
enterprises.3 But several key innovations in software and hardware quickly transformed 
the industry and made computing far more affordable, accessible, and powerful, such that 
today, software is nearly ubiquitous. 
The first major stage in software’s post-1976 evolution was the advent of personal 
computers in the 1980s, enabled both by small, powerful microprocessors and flexible, 
easy-to-use operating systems and applications. Next, innovations in client-server 
software brought the power of networked computing to millions of small and medium-
sized enterprises, spurring tremendous productivity gains and enabling them to compete 
more effectively with their larger rivals. Soon thereafter, the World Wide Web and the 
spread of broadband networks launched a new era of online computing as consumers and 
businesses leveraged the power of the Internet to deepen collaboration, speed 
innovation, and launch entirely new businesses and business models.  
Today, we are in the midst of a transformational new generation of software innovation. 
Smartphones, tablets, and other mobile devices not only provide computing “on the go,” 
they also are bringing billions of new users online. Cloud computing is perhaps even more 
transformational: even as it powers the hundreds of thousands of apps that make mobile 
devices useful, it also makes truly hyperscale computing available to all. The numbers bear 
this out. Annual business spending on cloud services is estimated to exceed $100 billion by 
                                                           
3 See, e.g., Bradford L. Smith, The Third Industrial Revolution: Policymaking for the Internet, 3 
COLUM. SCI. & TECH. L. Rev. 1, 19 (2001).

[PAGE 3]
 
Microsoft Corporation 
One Microsoft Way  
Redmond WA 98052 www.microsoft.com 
 
Page 3 of 9 
 
2017.4 By the end of 2016, consumers are likely to store more than 36 percent of their 
content in the cloud, including data, video, and backups from smartphones, tablet 
computers, and other mobile devices.5 The speed with which consumers have adopted 
cloud-capable devices like smartphones has been dramatic, with 64 percent of American 
adults owning smartphones in 2015, up from 35 percent in 2011.6 At the same time, 
advances in sensors and data analytics are ushering in an entire new generation of always-
connected, “Internet of Things” (“IoT”) devices. Indeed, the number of these devices is 
expected to exceed 6 billion this year, a 30 percent increase over 2015.7  
Microsoft is proud to have been at the forefront of each of these stages of software 
innovation. When Bill Gates and Paul Allen founded Microsoft in 1975, they were 
motivated by a bold vision: “a computer on every desk and in every home.”8 They sought 
to realize this vision by providing an open platform that enabled others to build 
compatible hardware and software, thus driving down costs and fueling innovation by 
thousands of software developers, device manufacturers, and service providers. As 
computing moved to new devices, Microsoft products like Visual Basic and services like 
Microsoft’ Store made available the creation and delivery of large-scale, easily created and 
distributed software and apps, democratizing computing for both developers and 
consumers. Microsoft was also one of the first major packaged software developers to 
make its software widely available for download, and to offer innovative software 
                                                           
4 See Brandon Butler, IDC: Cloud will be $107B industry by 2017, TECHWORLD (Mar. 20, 2014), at 
http://www.techworld.com/news/cloud/idc-cloud-will-be-107b-industry-by-2017-3507600/ (last 
accessed Feb. 12, 2016). 
5 Gartner, Gartners Says That Consumers Will Store More Than a Third of Their Digital Content in 
the Cloud by 2016 (June 25, 2012), at http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2060215 (last 
accessed Feb. 12, 2016). 
6 Pew Research Center, U.S. Smartphone Use in 2015 (Apr. 1, 2015), at 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/04/01/us-smartphone-use-in-2015/ (last accessed Feb. 12, 
2016). 
7 See Gartner, Gartner Says 6.4 Billion Connected “Things” Will Be in Use in 2016, Up 30 Percent 
From 2015 (Nov. 10, 2015), at http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/3165317 (last accessed Feb. 
12, 2016). 
8 Microsoft, Creating a Vibrant Information Technology Sector: Growth, Opportunity and 
Partnership (Apr. 2002), at 
http://download.microsoft.com/documents/australia/corporateaffairs/opportunitieswhite_paper.
pdf (last accessed Feb. 12, 2016).

[PAGE 4]
 
Microsoft Corporation 
One Microsoft Way  
Redmond WA 98052 www.microsoft.com 
 
Page 4 of 9 
 
functionality online as a service. Indeed, Microsoft began offering online services already 
in 1994—well before the term “cloud computing” had become common parlance.  
Today, Microsoft continues to drive the next era of software innovation, with the goal of 
providing products and services that empower every person and organization on the 
planet to be more productive. More than 1.2 billion people around the world, 
representing 140 countries and 107 languages, create and share ideas with Microsoft’s 
Office software.9 Customers using our Azure cloud services can choose from a wide range 
of operating systems, including over 1000 that are open-source, to reduce costs, improve 
efficiency, and innovate.10 Through our CityNext and other initiatives, we are helping 
governments and enterprises around the world harness connected devices, cloud 
computing, and data analytics to improve their own operations and the services they 
provide to their customers and constituents.11 And by making many of our most popular 
products and services available on multiple platforms (including Android and Apple’s iOS), 
we are expanding consumer choice and giving users greater flexibility and more options.12  
As these examples illustrate, software rarely exists in isolation. Rather, it typically forms an 
integral part of a much larger ecosystem. For software embedded in consumer products, 
this ecosystem includes general-purpose software, apps, cloud-based software, and online 
services (including the enterprise software that runs such services), all of which would be 
affected by any change to the copyright regime for embedded software. For instance, over 
the next five year, 33 percent of consumers plan to adopt wearable fitness devices, and 25 
percent are likely to adopt smart watches.13 Nearly all of these devices will rely on cloud 
                                                           
9 Microsoft, By the Numbers, at http://news.microsoft.com/bythenumbers/planet-office (last 
accessed Feb. 12, 2016). 
10 Microsoft, Linux in the Cloud, at https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/Openness/Linux (last 
accessed Feb. 12, 2016). 
11 Microsoft, Microsoft CityNext: Coming to a City Near You (July 10, 2013), at 
https://news.microsoft.com/2013/07/10/microsoft-citynext-coming-to-a-city-near-you/ (last 
accessed Feb. 12, 2016).  
12 Microsoft, Microsoft Empowers Windows, iOS, Android, Mac, and Linux Developers to Reach 
Billions of New Customers (Apr. 29, 2015), at https://news.microsoft.com/2015/04/29/microsoft-
empowers-windows-ios-android-mac-and-linux-developers-to-reach-billions-of-new-
customers/%20 (last accessed Feb. 12, 2016). 
13 Accenture, The Internet of Things: The Future of Consumer Adoption  (2014), at 
https://www.accenture.com/us-en/insight-internet-things-future-consumer-adoption.aspx (last 
accessed Feb. 12, 2016).

[PAGE 5]
 
Microsoft Corporation 
One Microsoft Way  
Redmond WA 98052 www.microsoft.com 
 
Page 5 of 9 
 
services powered by enterprise software and will be deeply integrated with software on 
smartphones, tablets, and many other devices. Thus, seeking to draw artificial lines 
around software embedded in consumer products could have substantial unintended 
consequences: it will be difficult to apply in practice and could adversely affect incentives, 
investment, and innovation across many different sectors of the economy. 
II. The U.S. copyright regime is remarkably effective in maintaining balance 
Throughout these eras of software innovation, the U.S. copyright regime has proven 
remarkably effective in balancing incentives for creativity with the interests of users and 
the public. When debating the 1976 Act, Congress—recognizing the potential benefits of 
widespread computing—engaged in a thorough study of emerging uses of computers. 
Based on that study, it determined that it could best balance all relevant interests by 
codifying copyright protection for software while also making this protection subject to 
important exceptions.14  
That decision proved prescient, as software developers have relied on copyright 
protection for over four decades to justify massive investments in software innovation. 
Microsoft was one of the first: in a 1976 “Open Letter to Hobbyists,” Bill Gates urged users 
to respect copyright in software and explained why such protection was critical to the 
software industry’s future development.15 As computer use became more widespread and 
software distribution methods evolved, developers continued to rely on copyright, first 
with shrink-wrap licenses (for packaged software products sold at retail) and later, click-
wrap licenses (for software delivered online). Modern online services like streaming, 
online apps, and cloud computing rely on many of these same contractual and copyright 
concepts, enforced through end-user licenses and embodied in terms of service.16  
                                                           
14 H.R. Rep. 94-1476, at 1116 (1976).  
15 Bill Gates, An Open Letter to Hobbyists (first published Feb. 3, 1976, in COMPUTER NOTES), at 
http://www.microsoft.com/about/companyinformation/timeline/timeline/docs/di_hobbyists.doc  
(last accessed Feb. 12, 2016). 
16 See, e.g., Robert W. Gomulkiewicz, The Federal Circuit’s Licensing Law Jurisprudence: Its Nature 
and Influence, 84 WASH. L. REV. 199, 208 (2009) (“End-user licensing also allows software developers 
to offer packages of software and services; flexible client-server computing-usage models; and the 
same code to business users at one price, home users for a lower price, academic users for yet a 
lower price, and charitable organizations for free. In sum, end-user licensing is a key component of 
business-model innovation in the information economy.”).

[PAGE 6]
 
Microsoft Corporation 
One Microsoft Way  
Redmond WA 98052 www.microsoft.com 
 
Page 6 of 9 
 
The U.S. software industry, on the foundation of copyright protection, has grown into one 
of the most vibrant sectors of the economy. Between 1997 and 2012, annual U.S. software 
industry revenues grew from $149 billion to $425 billion.17 Without the protection of 
copyright law, investments in software during this period might well have stagnated, 
leaving consumers with fewer choices and less innovation. 
In every step of this evolution, the U.S. copyright law has adroitly balanced the interests of 
software creators with those of users and the public. The Copyright Act itself has 
numerous “safety valves” that help to preserve this balance. One such safety valve is 
Section 107, codifying the fair use exception. Courts routinely apply fair use to protect the 
legitimate interests of software creators while also ensuring that users have the flexibility 
they need to use copyrighted software for new, transformative uses without being liable 
for copyright infringement.18 Another is in Section 109, which permits the resale of 
software embodied in devices and which cannot be copied during the ordinary operation 
or use of the device. Section 117 ensures that the basic operation of a computer—
including a computer that runs the software in an everyday consumer product—does not 
put consumers at risk of copyright infringement. Perhaps most importantly, Section 1201 
provides for rulemaking to mitigate the potential negative effects of the ban on the 
circumvention of technical protection measures for copyrighted software. For nearly two 
decades, Section 1201 rulemaking has functioned as a way to incrementally address and 
accommodate developing technologies affected by copyright based upon input from 
consumers, industry, and the general public. 
In addition to these “safety valve” mechanisms in the Copyright Act itself, courts have 
applied the Act to new technologies and business models in ways that broadly help 
preserve the balance between the interests of creators, users, and the public. For 
example, in Sony Corporation of America v. Universal City Studios, the Supreme Court 
ruled that Sony’s manufacturing and sale of video cassette recorders that allowed 
consumers to watch television broadcasts on their own schedules—at the time a novel 
concept—was not copyright infringement.19 And in Krause v. Titleserv, Inc., the Second 
                                                           
17 Software & Info. Industry Assoc., The U.S. Software Industry: An Engine for Economic Growth and 
Employment (2014), at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2541673%20 (last 
accessed Feb. 12, 2016). 
18 E.g., Sega Enters. Ltd. v. Accolade, Inc., 977 F.2d 1510, 1527-28 (9th Cir. 1992) (ruling that 
reverse-engineering copyrighted code in a video game console in order access the code’s 
unprotectable functionality was fair use). 
19 464 U.S. 417 (1984).

[PAGE 7]
 
Microsoft Corporation 
One Microsoft Way  
Redmond WA 98052 www.microsoft.com 
 
Page 7 of 9 
 
Circuit affirmed that Section 117 allows consumers to modify their copies of software 
programs in order to correct bugs or add routine functionality needed to ensure that 
those programs continue to operate and provide value.20 
U.S. leadership on robust yet balanced copyright laws has made copyright protection for 
software the global norm, providing substantial benefits to U.S. industry and the 
economy. These efforts have been critical to harmonizing international law and practice, 
including through agreements such as the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of 
Intellectual Property Rights, the WIPO Copyright Treaties, and numerous U.S. free trade 
agreements.21 Our Nation’s commitment to this vital balance is reflected most recently in 
the proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement (“TPP”), which requires TPP Parties to 
provide strong copyright protection while “endeavor[ing] to achieve an appropriate 
balance in its copyright and related rights system.”22 Remaining steadfast in its 
commitment to these principles in trade agreements is critical to maintaining U.S. 
leadership in technology and software innovation. 
The U.S. copyright regime has helped software innovation and choice flourish—and 
consumers are the winners. Software developers rely on copyright for a wide array of 
licensing and distribution models. This includes not only proprietary software, but also a 
range of open-source software development and licensing models. For example, the 
differences among various PC, mobile device, and mobile app ecosystems run the gamut 
from open-source-based development and licensing approaches23 to more proprietary or 
curated approaches, each of which strikes a different balance between variation and 
fragmentation. The success of all of these approaches, as evidenced in Google’s Android, 
Apple’s iOS, and Microsoft’s Store, and myriad devices in the marketplace using these 
platforms, demonstrates that different consumers want different things—and that 
software developers, operating on a foundation of copyright even as they pursue different 
                                                           
20 402 F.3d 119 (2d Cir. 2005). 
21 WTO Agreement on Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Apr. 15, 1994), at 
https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/t_agm0_e.htm (last accessed Feb. 12, 2016); WIPO 
Copyright Treaty (Dec. 20, 1996.), at http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/text.jsp?file_id=295166 (last 
accessed Feb. 12, 2016). 
22 Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement, art. 18.66, at https://medium.com/the-trans-pacific-
partnership/intellectual-property-3479efdc7adf (last accessed Feb. 12, 2016). 
23 Indeed, copyright law underpins the open-source licensing, development, and distribution model 
and is critical to enforcing such licenses. See, e.g., Jacobsen v. Katzer, 535 F.3d 1373, 1382 (Fed. Cir. 
2008).

[PAGE 8]
 
Microsoft Corporation 
One Microsoft Way  
Redmond WA 98052 www.microsoft.com 
 
Page 8 of 9 
 
aims, are serving those various needs exceedingly well. The genius of the existing U.S. 
copyright regime is that it has proven sufficiently flexible and balanced to provide the legal 
basis for all of these different approaches.  
This flexibility is reflected in Microsoft’s own offerings as well. Users of our Azure cloud 
services can run a wide range of operating systems and platforms, and a significant 
percentage of Azure customers use applications that run on open-source operating 
systems. Indeed, more than 20 percent of the workloads running on Azure today run a 
version of Linux. The choice remains entirely with the user. Far from restricting such 
choice, copyright protection for software has helped enable this choice by giving both 
Microsoft and its customers the freedom and flexibility choose whatever products, 
services, and business models best fit their needs. 
In sum, copyright protection for software has generated enormous innovation while 
successfully balancing the interests of creators with those of users and the public. It 
underpins a wide array of software products, businesses, and business models, giving 
consumers a tremendous amount of choice while spurring competition.  This is no less 
true with regard to software embedded in consumer products, an area in which software 
innovation and choice are clearly flourishing. 
III. The current system’s success recommends a cautious approach to legislation and 
policymaking 
Against this backdrop, the Copyright Office should proceed with caution before 
recommending changes that would alter copyright protection for software embedded in 
consumer products. As discussed, the evidence is overwhelming that software 
innovation—including in embedded software—is flourishing and that consumers and the 
public are benefitting enormously. By contrast, there is remarkably little evidence that 
copyright protection for software embedded in consumer products is causing any systemic 
problems. Indeed, when the Department of Commerce’s Internet Policy Task Force 
recently completed its 2016 study on novel copyright issues in the digital economy, it 
found the U.S. copyright regime to be sufficiently flexible to adapt to the evolution of 
software in consumer products, and therefore did not recommend any change to existing 
copyright protections for such software.24 In this context, there is no reason to believe 
                                                           
24 Dep’t of Commerce, Internet Policy Task Force, White Paper on Remixes, First Sale, and Statutory 
Damages, 64 (2016), at 
http://www.uspto.gov/sites/default/files/documents/copyrightwhitepaper.pdf (last accessed Feb. 
12, 2016).

[PAGE 9]
 
Microsoft Corporation 
One Microsoft Way  
Redmond WA 98052 www.microsoft.com 
 
Page 9 of 9 
 
that a different regime would be more effective in spurring innovation or at balancing the 
interests of creators, users, and the public. 
This is not to say that tensions in the system never arise. But when they do, existing 
provisions in the Copyright Act, combined with agency rulemaking, judicial interpretations, 
and voluntary private-sector efforts, have proven up to the task of maintaining the right 
balance. For example, in 2015, after considering the input of industry, public interest 
groups, and private citizens, the Library of Congress, acting pursuant to Section 1201, 
adopted exemptions for circumventing copyright protection on computer systems in 
vehicles for the purpose of diagnosis, repair, or lawful modification.25  
Accordingly, we urge the Copyright Office not to recommend changes to copyright 
protection for software embedded in consumer products at this time. Businesses in 
numerous sectors of our economy today rely on the certainty that the existing copyright 
system provides for embedded software. Even the potential for changes to that system 
could deter investment and innovation, as inventors and companies seek to avoid even 
the risk that they may be unable to recoup their investments in software development.   
Sincerely, 
 
Dave Green 
Assistant General Counsel – IP Policy & Strategy 
Intellectual Property Group – Corporate, External & Legal Affairs 
Microsoft Corporation 
 
                                                           
25 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, 80 Fed. Reg. 65944, 95654-55 (Library of Congress, Oct. 28, 2015).
