[PAGE 1]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Docket No. 2015-6 
 
 
 
Study on Software-Enabled Consumer Products  
 
 
 
Initial Comments of the Software and Information 
Industry Association 
 
 
February 16, 2016

[PAGE 2]
 
 
 
 
The Software & Information Industry Association 
(“SIIA”) respectfully submits these comments to the United 
States Copyright Office in response to the Notice of Inquiry 
entitled “Software-Enabled Consumer Products Study,“ 80 
Fed. Reg. 77668 (December 15, 2015).  
 
About SIIA 
SIIA is the principal trade association of the software 
and information industries and represents over 800 
companies that develop and market software and digital 
content for business, educati on, consumers, the Internet, 
and entertainment.   SIIA’s members range from start- up 
firms to some of the largest and most recogniz able 
corporations in the world, and one of SIIA’s primary 
missions is to protect their intellectual property and 
advocate a legal and regulatory environment that benefits 
the software and digital content industries .  SIIA member 
companies are market leaders in many areas , including but 
by no means limited to : 
 
• software publishing, graphics,  and photo 
editing tools 
• corporate database and data processing 
software 
• financial trading and investing services, 
news, and commodities exchanges  
• online legal information and legal research 
tools 
• protection against software viruses and other 
malware and 
• education software , online education services  
and open source software.

[PAGE 3]
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
As Moore’s Law has made comput ers smaller and 
smaller, our members have seen increasingly vibrant and 
powerful versions of their publications and software 
delivered on a variety of consumer devices.  Cell phones, for 
example, contain feature-rich versions of photo editing, 
database, and similar software that only existed on  
desktops just a few years ago. Devices that look like 
speakers are capable of accessing the internet , responding 
to spoken queries, and returning information. 
 
The devolution of computing power into smaller and 
smaller devices and the promotional buzz surrounding the 
so-called “Internet of Things” (IoT)  have raised curiosity 
among policy makers about whether to change existing law 
with respect to what some have unfortunately termed 
“embedded software,” and which the O ffice has termed 
“copyrighted software in everyday products.”  The 
Department of Commerce’s In ternet Policy Task Force 
recently stated that “the case has not been made in the 
record to change the law to address the sale of [software 
contained in] products or devices,”
1  a similar conclusion to 
that of the Copyright Office fifteen years ago. 2   
 
SIIA shares that conclusion.  SIIA believes that no 
change to existing law is necessary to address embedded 
software, software contained in consumer goods, the 
“Internet of Things,” or whatever moniker is ultimately  
used to describe it.  That is because we respectfully believe 
that this particular study is proceeding from a false 
dichotomy: there is no such distinction between 
“embedded” and other kinds of software.  There is merely 
                                                
1  Department of Commerce Internet Policy Task Force, 
White Paper on Remixes, First Sale and Statutory Damages  at 
65 (Jan. 2016) (“IPTF White Paper”).   
2  E.g., U.S. Copyright Office, DMCA Section 104 Report 
(2001).

[PAGE 4]
 
 
 
 
software—some of which is licensed, and some of which is 
sold.   
 
Most SIIA members license their products. 3  The law 
permits (and should continue to permit) technology 
providers to choose the models that best fit their markets.  
The innovative landscape of electronic commerce and high -
tech products derives from the wide availability of software 
and content, and flexibility of legal doctrines that allows 
providers to tailor the ir offerings to customer demand.  
Licensing permits a software publisher to offer a fully 
functional “academic” version of its product to students at a 
deeply reduced price, but the rights granted do not permit 
use for commercial purposes.
4  Similarly, “OEM licenses” 
bundle software with, or install software directly on  
scanners or desktop computers, and require the software to 
be used and distributed only with that hardware.  Often, 
the hardware manufacturer was granted a deep discount as 
part of the OEM license terms.  Another example is “site 
licenses,” which are defined by some geographic restriction 
on use, such as a specific company, area, or even 
department or floors of a building.
5  
 
Licenses have enabled  SIIA members to tailor products 
for specific customer needs, adjusting features, benefits, 
                                                
3  Licensing is the dominant method of software 
distribution.  See Software & Information Industry Association, 
Software and Information: Driving the Knowledge Economy  
(January 24, 2008) at 7- 8, http://www.siia.net/estore/globecon -
08.pdf. 
4  See, e.g., ProCD, Inc., v. Zeidenberg , 86 F.3d 1447 (7th Cir. 
1996) (“Instead of tinkering with the product . . . [software 
companies] turned to the institution of contract.”); id. at 1455 
(“Terms and conditions offered by contract reflect private 
ordering, essential to the efficient functioning of markets.”).    
5  See, e.g., Software & Information Industry Association & 
LicenseLogic LLC, Certified Software Manager Student Manual  
(SIIA Publications 2004) at 4:1– 4:52.

[PAGE 5]
 
 
 
 
rights, and price according to the needs of each customer 
base rather than a “one size fits all” model – a model which 
logically could require a higher price. 6   Consequently, 
licensing provides benefits to consumers that section 109 
cannot provide.     
 
Those advantages are not limited to software.  For 
example, the licensing of online and digital versions of 
textbooks provides numerous benefits to students and 
teachers.  They often come with special features  such as 
embedded quizzes, electronic flash cards, the ability to 
share notes online with fellow students and/or embedded 
links to videos an d articles from a professor’s lectures.  
These digital texts may also allow the teacher to monitor a 
student’s progress, the amount of time the student spends 
reviewing the material, and the student’s performance on 
the embedded quizzes .  The teacher can then use this 
information to determine what material the student finds 
difficult and tailor study plans to keep the student on the 
right track.  The nature of digital textbooks renders 
updating and editing them a much faster and easier task 
than their analog counterparts, and revisions can be  
distributed to users almost immediately —all without the 
additional expense of printing, handling, and processing 
returns.   
 
In addition, institutions increasingly 
want course 
materials delivered “inside” their digital classrooms so they 
can ensure that all students have access to the same 
materials and they can see how each student is performing.  
                                                
6  Cf.  Robert Maier, Penguin Random House Now Licensed 
for Perpetual Access  (Jan 2016)  ( “Though we were in shock when 
HarperCollins instituted its 26- loan limit in 2011, that rental 
model is now recognized as an attractive alternative to high -
priced perpetual access. At this point, the ideal arrangement 
would be the ability to license any title for perpetual access and 
to license the same title for a set number of circulations or a set 
time period, combining the library’s need to build its collection 
and to meet current popular demand.” ).

[PAGE 6]
 
 
 
 
These innovative products and business models would  not 
be possible if textbook publishers were no longer able to 
rely on licensing. 7  
 
SIIA’s comments in this study are greatly informed by 
our members’ marketplace experience. Software and 
information providers have also begun to provide access to 
technology and information services in which the consumer 
can acquire access to far more content and functionality 
than she could have in tangible goods.  And that access 
comes as cloud computing has already changed consumer 
relationships with both software and information from a 
good to a service.   These services increasingly seek to 
provide a seamless user experience across on PCs, tablets, 
smartphones, televisions, automobiles, household 
appliances, and other devices. Instead of purchasing a copy 
of photo-editing software that is downloaded onto a 
personal computer, a consumer sends copies of photographs 
to the cloud to be edited  and stored, and then returned fo r 
saving, printing, or display. Similarly, a variety of software 
is finding its way into seemingly “ordinary” devices, such 
as pens that can capture notes as written, and then send 
those notes to the cloud for storage, character recognition, 
and export into SIIA member software.
8  In these (and 
                                                
7   The result of all these evolving business models has been a 
dramatic drop in student textbook spending from $192 in the fall 
of 2008 to $138 in the spring of 2013.   See Stephanie Simon and 
Madeline Will, Textbook publishers revamp ebooks to fight used 
market, 4-traders.com  (July 23, 2013) at http://www.4-
traders.com/PEA RSON-PLC-4000637/news/Textbook -publishers-
revamp-ebooks-to-fight-used-market-17119420/.  (This is despite 
claims that the cost of new textbooks rises about 6 percent a 
year.  See GAO Report 13 -368, College Textbooks: Students Have 
Greater Access to Textboo k Information  at 6 (June 2013)  at 
http://www.gao.gov/assets/660/655066.pdf .  
 
8  E.g., http://digital -pen-review.toptenreviews.com/  [find 
others]. [See also http://www.livescribe.com/en -
us/legal/#TermsSales ].

[PAGE 7]
 
 
 
 
many other) situations, the relationship between consumer 
and software is not the relationship between a consumer 
and an inert copy; it is the relationship between a 
consumer and a live system.  
 
SIIA opposes any change to existing law to deal with so-
called “embedded software.”  The flexibility of existing law 
both enables our members to make their software and 
information products more widely available  and permits 
them to maintain th e integrity of their produ cts and 
services.  This principle of product integrity protects not 
only the public interest in copyright’s economic incentive 
and healthy marketplace competition, but also broader 
health and safety interests.  Maintenance of prod uct 
integrity is essential to  the full development of the IoT’s 
economic and social potential as it ensures that devices will 
operate as the consumer expects, and device manufacturers 
intend. In many cases, ensuring product integrity will 
require users to abide by the terms of software licen ses and 
other contractual obligations.   
 
  Our more detailed responses to the NOI ’s questions 
follow below, but can be summarized in the following basic 
themes: 
• The Copyright Act has successfully created a 
baseline of property rights, and the state law of 
contract fills in the gaps.   Against that backdrop, 
software development has flourished, and the 
industry is rapidly evolving in response to 
technological change.  The resulting market 
ecosystem has spawned freneticall y paced 
innovation and development while maintaining 
the incentives to create that the copyright law 
provides. 
• The category of software described in the  NOI is 
one that does not exist  and cannot be 
constructively defined.  Capital is flowing into 
the creation of “smart goods,” products and 
devices made more effective or “intelligent” 
through the incorporation of software and often

[PAGE 8]
 
 
 
 
an Internet connection.   There is no evidence 
that innovation is being harmed by this activity  
or the licensing terms that acc ompany this 
software.  Proposals to create legislative 
definitions of “embedded software,” “software 
contained in consumer goods” is doomed to 
failure, and will have negative, if unintended, 
consequences. 
• To the extent that concerns have arisen over the 
development of secondary markets, such 
concerns are beyond the scope of this 
rulemaking.  Issues relating to so -called “rights 
to tinker,” the “right to repair” and other related 
issues are beyond the scope of this rulemaking 
as they assume ownership of a copy.  Such 
concerns (to the extent they legitimately exist) 
are best addressed within the context of the 
Office’s examination of section 1201.    
 
RESPONSES TO THE NOI  
I. Existing Law Facilitates the Proliferation of 
Numerous Business Models  (Question 1, 2) 
 
 Under existing law, software is a “computer program;” 
namely, “a set of statements or instructions to be used 
directly or indirectly in a computer in order to bring about 
a certain result,” and is treated as a subset of literary 
works.
9   It provides the owners of copyright in computer 
programs with the same rights as any other copyright 
owner, but subject to a few specific limitations.  First, 
section 117 permits the owner of a copy to adapt a 
particular work and to make additional copies as an 
“essential step” in the operation of a machine, or for 
archival purposes.
10  It also permits the owner or lessee of 
a machine to copy software without infringing the 
                                                
9  17 U.S.C. § 101.  
10  Id. § 117 (a) (1), (2).

[PAGE 9]
 
 
 
 
copyright for purposes of maintenance or repair. 11  In 
addition, Congress crafted an exemption from software’s 
general rental right in section 109(b)(1)(B)(i) that allows 
rental, lease, or lending of devices that cannot be copied 
during the ordinary operation of a machine .12   
 
Each of these provisions contemplates the licensing of 
copyrighted works.  Section 117 (a) extends certain archival 
and modification rights, but only to the owner of a copy.   
Section 117(c) limits the reproduction right, but does not 
invalidate license terms.  
 
 Similarly, section 109 makes plain that its limitation 
on the distribution  right does not apply to a copy of the 
work through “rental, lease or lending.”
13  And, although 
section 109 allows the owner of a machine to lease the 
machine without violating the distribution right, that 
limitation has no relevance when the reproduction
 right is 
expressly licensed.  The text and structure of the act create 
a baseline of freely alienable property rights that can be 
rented, licensed, or transferred in gross in a variety of 
ways.   
                                                
11  Id. § (c), (d); see also H.R. Rep. No.  105 -551, at 26-27 
(1998) (stating a “ narrow and specific intent of relieving 
independent service providers, persons unaffiliated with either 
the owner or lessee of the machine, from liability under the 
Copyright Act when, solely by virtue of activating the machine in 
which a computer program resides, they inadvertently cause an 
unauthorized co py of that program to be made. ”). 
12  See also  TRIPS, art. 11 (exempting signatories from 
providing rental right for computer software when the software 
is not the essential purpose of the rental).   Like any copyrighted 
work, software is subject t o the idea/expression dichotomy, an 
area that SIIA believes the courts have well in hand.   
13  17 U.S.C. § 109(d); id. § 117 (a)(1), (2).  See also id. § 202 
(transfer of physical object does not convey intellectual property 
rights, and vice versa); H.R. Rep. No.  94-1476, at 80, 124- 25 
(1976) (describing limits of sections 109 and 202).

[PAGE 10]
 
 
 
 
A. The Market for Software in Smart Goods is 
Healthy and Growin g 
Against this backdrop, the market for software and 
information generates billions in revenues  and continues to 
grow.14  The framework under which that growth has 
occurred operates from a fairly simple assumption: 
copyright provides property rights, which the owner may 
license (or not), or sell (or not), in response to market 
demand.  A transaction for software could involve  Article 2 
of the Uniform Commercial Code, the common law of 
service contracts, as well as intellectual property doctrines 
including copyright and patent law.   
 
 That model has extended quite well to so-called “smart 
goods.”  Between 2010 and 2014, funding for IoT startups 
has more than doubled, and attracted about $7.5 billion in 
investment,
15  and the number of connected devices is 
estimated to grow by thirty percent in 2016. 16  That growth 
comes as many of SIIA’s member software companies’ 
relationship has changed from change from an installed 
user base in which customers license software CDs and 
install that software on computers to one in which the 
software is hosted and run remotely, and sold as a service.   
The shift reflects customer demand for both sof tware and 
information that is automatically updated and accessible in 
a convenient form.   
 
                                                
14 See Software & Information Industry Association, The U.S. 
Software Industry: An Engine for Economic Growth and 
Employment (2014) 
http://www.siia.net/Admin/FileManagement.aspx/LinkClick.aspx
?fileticket=yLPW0SrBfk4%3d&portalid=0 .  See also generally 
Siwek, The Copyright Industries and the U.S. Economy  (2014).  
15  CB Insights, Funding to IoT Startups Has More Than 
Doubled in Six Years (November 10, 2016).   
16  Gartner, Press Release , Gartner Says 6.4 Billion 
Connected “Things” Will Be in Use in 2016, Up 30 Percent From 
2015 (Nov. 10, 2015).

[PAGE 11]
 
 
 
 
That same kind of demand for convenience has entered 
into consumer goods, and has begun to  change the way that 
individuals interact with devices .  Such devices collect 
information about their users and tailor functionality to a 
user’s experience.  Cars, networked thermostats, activity 
monitors, and even refrigerators have begun incorporating 
“smart” features—some of which will be enormously 
successful, and some of which will not.   
 
II. Flexible Licensing Terms Ensure Health, Safety, 
and Product Integrity  (Questions 1,2,3,5)  
 
The licensing of software contributes to product 
integrity: the operation of the product in the manner in 
which the consumer expects, a nd the manufacturer 
intends.  License terms may restrict the conditions under 
which the user may modify the software and the manner in 
which it interacts with a network.  The manufacturer and 
the software provider should be permitted to decide 
whether or not the software in a consumer good has been 
licensed, sold, or is the subject of a service contract.  
Depending on the facts of the transaction  (and the vagaries 
of state law), software can be a sale, a license, or a contract 
for services, or a combination of all three.
17  The distinction 
                                                
17  See, e.g., Simulados Software, Ltd. v. Photon Infotech 
Private, Ltd ., 40 F. Supp. 3d 1191, 1199-200 (N.D. Cal. 2014);  
(noting that courts look to the essence of the agreement to 
determine whether the UCC applies);  Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc., 
621 F.3d 1102, 1111 (9th Cir. 2010) (establishing three -part test 
to determine whether a t ransaction for software is a sale or a 
license); DSC Commc'ns Corp. v. Pulse Commc'ns, Inc ., 170 F.3d 
1354, 1362 (Fed. Cir. 1999) (applying a multi- factor test to 
determine whether a licensee is in fact the “owner” of a copy) ; 
MDY Indus., LLC v. Blizzard Entm't, Inc ., 629 F.3d 928, 939 (9th 
Cir. 2010), as amended on denial of reh'g  (Feb. 17, 2011), opinion 
amended and superseded on denial of reh'g , No. 09-15932, 2011 
WL 538748 (9th Cir. Feb. 17, 2011) (noting difference between 
covenants and conditions).

[PAGE 12]
 
 
 
 
that the NOI purports to draw between “everyday 
consumer products” and “non -everyday” products would 
destroy both software providers and manufacturers’ 
abilities to protect product integrity and is one that the 
copyright law does not, cannot, and should not draw.   
A. Disruption of Licensing Law Will Create 
Negative Business, Health, and Safety 
Consequences. 
For example, companies are creating ingestible medical 
sensors that connect with a patch worn on the skin.  The 
sensor communicates with the patch to send  blood 
pressure, medication, and other information to the cloud, 
and can help medical professionals determine how well a 
particular medication regime is working. 18   The collected 
data is contained by software on the ingesti ble “pill,” more 
software on the patch, a software application for the 
patient, and in a portal for health care professionals .    We 
respectfully suggest that a copyright  rule mandating that a 
particular product is automatically “sold”  is unwise public 
policy.   
 
SIIA members also use and engage in the use of open -
source software.  Although these licenses permit free 
transfer and reproduction of the software, licensees must 
disclose improvements and modifications that they make.
19  
These obligations do not r un to the “owner” of a copy —only 
to licensees. Not only is open source software frequently 
included in consumer goods, but its use is a large part of 
IoT development. 20   Uncertainty over the enforceability of 
such licenses due to the transfer of the goods that happen 
to contain licensed software would be highly disruptive to 
                                                
18  See, e.g., http://www.proteus.com/how -it-works/ (visited 3 
February 2016).   
19  E.g., https://opensource.org/licenses/GPL -3.0 §§ 5, 6, 7.   
20  Giles Gravier, Open Source as a Driver of Internet of 
Things, InfoQ (Jan. 9, 2016); Steven Max Peterson , Google 
Readies Developers to Build the IoT, Starting with its Open 
Version of Bluetooth Low Energy Beacons,  Network World, Jan 
12, 2016).

[PAGE 13]
 
 
 
 
those entities that have elected to pursue an open source 
model of software development.   
 
No matter which licensing model is chosen—open, 
closed, a combination of both , or none—existing law has 
created a wealth of legitimate business models and 
technologies.   To the extent that 
owners of copies of 
computer software are prevented from repairing particular 
devices by technological protection measures within the 
scope of section 1 201, that discussion is beyond the scope of 
this NOI.   SIIA remains puzzled regarding the specific 
problem that legislation addressing embedded software 
would allegedly solve.   
 
B. Existing Law Has Created Healthy 
Secondary Markets 
That absence of evidence,  however, has not prevented 
claims that the spread of embedded software will result in 
the deterioration of secondary markets.  Such claims 
proliferated when the ProCD decision was decided nearly 
twenty years ago.  Due to the presence of software and 
other digital information in hard goods, the argument 
went, all kinds of secondary transactions in hard goods 
would be prohibited.  Experience suggests treating those 
claims with considerable skepticism.   
 
The “Craigslist apocalypse” simply has not happened, 
for several reasons.  First, prophecies of doom 
notwithstanding, a simple look around eBay and many 
other platforms reveals that robust secondary markets 
exist for all kinds of goods, and are likely to remain so.  
Consumers have certain expectations regardin g both 
transferability and interoperability, and the marketplace 
has generally provided sufficient incentives to meet those 
expectations.
 21  An expensive purchase such as a car, or 
even smart watch, is worth far less if it cannot be resold.   
                                                
21  Cf., e.g., 
http://www.developers.meethue.com/content/friends -hue-
program-update (noting how Philips changed firmware with its

[PAGE 14]
 
 
 
 
 
Second, although the law permits software to be 
licensed and not sold, it hardly requires it.  T he courts 
require licensors to take certain steps to make clear to 
subsequent purchasers that software is licensed , and there 
must be sufficient indic ia of licensing to support that 
conclusion.
22  In the event that “ everyday consumer 
products” were subject to license terms that restricted their 
transfer in secondary markets, courts would likely 
scrutinize those transactions using the indicia of sale and 
licensing developed in the common law and interpretive 
decisions of the copyright act, as appropriate.  It is far more 
likely that the situation will continue as it is now: goods 
will be sold containing some software that is owned, and 
some that is licensed. 23  The scope of those licenses (and 
sales) will vary by industry.   
 
However, it is possible that the rapid pace of change 
may outrun existing consumer expectations.  Although we 
have antitrust concerns about how its suggestions might be 
implemented in practice, we do believe that the IPTF’s 
recommendation of a multi -stakeholder process to discuss a 
consumer education campaign and possible best practices 
could provide a useful way forward.
24 
                                                                                                     
hubs to ensure interoperability after consumer ou tcry); 
Treehouse Foods, Inc. Reports Second Quarter Results, 
http://phx.corporate -ir.net/phoenix.zhtml?c=191105&p=irol-
newsArticle&ID=1956509  (Aug 7. 2014) (Gr een Mountain coffee 
competitor announcing successful reverse engineering around 
Keurig blocking technology).   
22  E.g., UMG Recordings, Inc. v. Augusto , 628 F.3d 1175, 
1180 (9th Cir. 2011) (finding that sticker on CD insufficient to 
create a license); Adobe Sys. Inc. v. Christenson , 809 F.3d 1071, 
1080 (9th Cir. 2015) ( first sale defense upheld because copyright 
owner did not bring forth sufficient proof of licensing ). 
23  See, e.g., http://www.belkin.com/us/end -user-license-
agreement/ (permitting transfer of software in smart goods 
provided originals deleted).  
24  IPTF White Paper, supra note 1, at 69.

[PAGE 15]
 
 
 
 
III. Conclusion 
In short, while we believe this kind of review is entirely 
wise and appropriate and we applaud the Office’s diligence,  
the law needs no changes to address issues in software 
copyright.    
 
 
Respectfully submitted,  
 
 
/s/ 
 
Christopher A. Mohr 
Vice President for Intellectual 
Property and General  Counsel 
 
Software and Information 
Industry Association 
 
16 February 2016
