[PAGE 1]
Submission of Comments from the Global Intellectual Property Center 
(GIPC), U.S. Chamber of Commerce 
Frank Cullen, Executive Director U.S. IP Policy 
 
 
Attn: Mr. Sarang V. Damle 
Deputy General Counsel 
U.S. Copyright Office 
 
Docket No. 2015-6: Software-Enabled Consumer Products Study 
 
 
 
GIPC Software Comments 
 
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce appreciates the opportunity to provide our 
comments on these important issues.  We also appreciate the leadership of the 
U.S. Copyright Office in its thoughtful consideration of copyright policy issues 
and we support its efforts and desires for modernization so as to better serve 
businesses that produce valuable copyrighted works, businesses that help 
deliver those works to the public, and consumers who benefit from both. 
 
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce is the world’s largest business organization 
representing the interests of more than 3 million businesses of all sizes, sectors, 
and regions. Our members range from mom-and-pop shops and local 
chambers to leading industry associations and large corporations. 
 
The Global Intellectual Property Center (GIPC) was established in 2007 as an 
affiliate of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. Today, the GIPC is leading a 
worldwide effort to champion intellectual property rights and safeguard U.S. 
leadership in cutting-edge technologies as vital to creating jobs, saving lives,

[PAGE 2]
 2 
advancing global economic growth, and generating breakthrough solutions to 
global challenges. 
 
I. Introduction 
 
It is often said that copyright law affects Americans’ everyday lives.  If that is 
truer today than in the past, it is a consequence of the convenient availability 
and use of copyrighted works in more aspects of daily life than ever before.  
And a significant portion of the copyrighted works that help make people’s 
lives better is software. 
 
Without software a computer is inert  -- it is the software that instructs the 
computer how to create an environment suitable to a human user, how to 
acquire and process data to return a desired result, and how to transmit and/or 
preserve data.  At the origins of the industry, software operated general 
purpose computing devices almost exclusively.  Over time, computers have 
been incorporated into the design and function of everything from airplanes 
and automobiles to kitchen appliances and toys to power plants and traffic 
lights. 
 
Software improves all of those products.  It makes them more efficient, safer, 
more effective and reliable, and helps all of us to be more productive.  In short, 
software makes our lives better. 
 
The software industry is also an innovative, valuable and growing part of the 
economy.  In the first dozen years of the 21st Century, the commercial software 
industry doubled from $180 billion to $360 billion, and it now employs over 10

[PAGE 3]
 3 
million people.1  In the United States, software accounts for 3.2% of the entire 
GDP and exports of software and related services have grown by 9-10% every 
year since 2006.2  Further, software accounted for over 15% of all U.S. labor 
productivity gains from 2004 to 2012.3 
 
II. Responses to the Notice of Inquiry 
 
 A. Elements of Copyright Law Implicated by the Use of Software 
 
The use of software may implicate the reproduction, distribution, and 
derivative rights of copyright.4  In each case, Congress has addressed the scope 
of lawful activity in the absence of a license through specific provisions of the 
Copyright Act: 
 
 Reproduction as an essential step in the utilization of the computer 
program is authorized by §117(a)(1); 
 Reproduction for archival purposes is authorized by §117(a)(2); 
 Reproduction under appropriate circumstances in the course of 
maintenance or repair of a machine is authorized by §117(c); 
                                                        
1 “Powering the Digital Economy,” BSA | The Software Alliance (p. 3)(accessed at: 
http://www.bsa.org/~/media/Files/Policy/Trade/DTA_study_en.pdf ). 
2  “The U.S. Software Industry: An Engine for Economic Growth and Employment,” SIIA White Paper 
by Robert J. Shapiro (2014)(accessed at: 
http://www.siia.net/Admin/FileManagement.aspx/LinkClick.aspx?fileticket=ffCbUo5PyEM%3d&por
talid=0). 
3  Id. 
4  For purposes of this submission, we consider only the copyright aspects of the comput er code.  Of 
course, many computer programs have elements of the display associated with those programs that 
may be copyrightable, and many computer programs include audiovisual elements that may be 
copyrightable as such.  However, we consider that the nature of the questions in the Notice of Inquiry 
point to the copyright in the code and we limit our comments accordingly.  We also use the terms 
“software” and computer program” interchangeably.

[PAGE 4]
 4 
 Distribution of lawfully made copies is generally authorized by §109(a); 
 Distribution for purposes of rental, lease, or lending are extensively, but 
not entirely, excluded from the foregoing by §109(b); and 
 Reproduction and adaptation for purposes of creating interoperable 
computer programs were addressed by courts under the Fair Use 
doctrine codified in §107, and given tacit approval by Congress by the 
codification of judicial precedent in §1201(f). 
 
In each case Congress has carefully calibrated the copyright law to 
accommodate the lawful use of software while also allowing the flexibility to 
develop innovative new products in an evolving marketplace.  The results have 
been a resounding success. 
 
This vibrant market of innovative products, and the many consumer benefits 
that flow from it, have developed in the context of our copyright system.  This 
is an incredible success story.  The goal of this study should be identifying the 
best way to preserve the conditions that have fostered this growth. 
 
 B. Software Licensing Models 
 
Software is offered through a variety of models, designed to suit the needs of 
the customer.  And, judging by the growth in the software marketplace, ever-
expanding use and innovation in software, and the growth in the industry, these 
offerings are meeting the needs and desires of both consumers and developers. 
 
Notwithstanding this empirical evidence of success, we are aware that some 
commentators have complained that software may be offered in the

[PAGE 5]
 5 
marketplace through a license rather than an outright sale.  This licensing 
model, these commentators further complain, prevents the application of the 
First Sale doctrine, because the customer is not the “owner” of the particular 
copy of the software.  From that they extrapolate that customers are unable to 
resell devices in which there is embedded licensed software.  So, these 
commentators conclude, Congress should amend the Copyright Act to pre-
empt otherwise legal and enforceable licensing terms and require all software to 
be sold outright.  Their interpretation of the law is correct; their presumption 
of harm is not.  And their proposed ‘remedy’ would be drastic and harmful.  
 
There is scant (if any) real evidence that the distribution right in software is 
being invoked to inhibit the secondary market for consumer products.  These 
claims are not consistent with the reality that such products are freely resold 
without complication from copyright law or licenses.  If there is any problem, it 
remains hypothetical.  Proposals to “solve” this non-existent problem would 
undermine certain business models and represent unprecedented and 
unwarranted interference in a marketplace vibrant with innovation and 
consumer choice.   
 
Software developers and publishers are certainly copyright owners, but that in 
and of itself does not earn income.  Software must serve a needed purpose, 
function well, and be offered on acceptable terms in order to become a 
successful product in the market.  Companies that offer less than that will be 
quickly surpassed in a marketplace defined by robust innovation and 
competition.  Thus, there are strong market incentives to ensure that software 
is offered to customers on terms they will accept.  As the Notice of Inquiry

[PAGE 6]
 6 
recalls, the Copyright Office recognized this reality in its DMCA Section 104 
Report.5 
 
The Copyright Office should also not overlook the reality that, particularly in 
the business-to-business context, software licenses are commonly the subject of 
detailed and extensive negotiation between sophisticated parties, including 
circumstances in which the final product is destined for sale to the public.  
Contract pre-emption would introduce unnecessary and unproductive 
uncertainty into the marketplace. 
 
It is equally important to resist any temptation to treat software in devices as 
deserving only second-class copyright protection.  The software embedded in 
devices constitutes a copyrightable work and therefore deserves the full respect 
of the law.  Moreover, there are many software-driven “devices” whose 
function involves the utilization of still other copyrightable works, from phone 
apps to entertainment systems found in cars or on board commercial aircraft, 
to karaoke machines.  A weakening of the copyright law with regard to 
software in devices would also lead to significant adverse consequences for a 
wide range of copyrighted works, as there is no principled difference among 
them. 
 
III. Conclusion 
 
The software industry is a tremendous American success story.  Our copyright 
system has played a critical role in the development of that industry and 
policymakers should strive to maintain the conditions that have generated so 
                                                        
5  U.S. Copyright Office, DMCA Section 104 Report , pp. 162-64 (2001).

[PAGE 7]
 7 
much benefit to our economy and our society.  Complaints about the effects of 
licensing terms remain theoretical at best, and certainly do not justify upending 
a system that has worked so successfully. 
 
GIPC thanks the Copyright Office for its work and for this opportunity to 
provide our views, and looks forward to continuing to work with the Copyright 
Office on this and other important issues progresses.
