[PAGE 1]
February 16, 2016 
 
Ms. Maria Pallante 
Register of Copyrights 
United States Copyright Office 
101 Independence Ave., S.E. 
Washington, D.C. 20559  
 
Re: Software-Enabled Consumer Products Study; Notice and Request for Public  
             Comments - Docket No. 2015-6 
 
Dear Ms. Pallante: 
 
BSA | The Software Alliance (“BSA”) appreciates this opportunity to respond to the Copyright 
Office’s Request for Public Comments on the “role of copyright law with respect to software-
enabled consumer products.”1 As the leading advocate for the global software industry in the 
United States and around the world, BSA is uniquely positioned to provide insights from the very 
companies that are driving the current wave of software-enabled innovation.  BSA members are 
among the world’s most entrepreneurial companies, creating software solutions that spark the 
economy and improve modern life.
2 In short, BSA’s member companies breathe life into the 
“everyday products” that are the focus of this study by providing the software that makes these 
devices desirable.   
 
This study’s focus on how “the application of copyright law to software in everyday products 
enables or frustrates innovation” comes at an interesting time.
3 Of course, the existence of 
software in consumer devices is hardly a new phenomenon; a huge number of “everyday 
products,” including microwave ovens and handheld calculators, have since the early-1970s 
featured embedded software. However, U.S. software companies are on the leading edge of 
developing new network-connected technologies that are giving rise to what economists from the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology have deemed the “Second Machine Age,” a period in 
which software-enabled innovations will be “as important and transformational to society and the 
economy as the steam engine.”4  
 
Given the rapid pace of innovation that is occurring in network-connected intelligent devices, it is 
unclear what “problems” this study may seek to address through changes to the copyright law. 
The Office cautions the study “is not intended to examine or address more general questions 
about software and copyright protection.” However, we are concerned that the Office’s questions 
may suggest a bias in favor of changing the law to create a sui generis (and perhaps diminished)
                                                            
1 U.S. Copyright Office, Library of Congress, Software-Enabled Consumer Products Study; Notice and 
Request for Comments, 80 Fed. Reg. 77668-71 (Dec. 15, 2015) [hereinafter Software-Enabled Study RFC].  
2 BSA’s members include: Adobe, ANSYS, Apple, Autodesk, Bentley Systems, CA Technologies, 
CNC/Mastercam, DataStax, Dell, IBM, Intuit, Microsoft, Minitab, Oracle, Salesforce, SAS Institute, Siemens 
PLM Software, Symantec, Tekla, The MathWorks, Trend Micro and Workday. 
3 Software-Enabled Study at 77668. 
4 Erik Brynjolfsson & Andrew McAffe, The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress and Prosperity in a Time of 
Brilliant Technologies 9 (W. W. Norton & Co. 2014). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 F Street NW, Suite 800 P 202 -872 -5500 
Washington, DC 20011 W bsa.org

[PAGE 2]
Ms. Maria Pallante 
February 16, 2016 
Page 2 
form of copyright protection for software embedded in “everyday products.” Absent a strong 
evidentiary record that copyright law is – in fact rather than in theory -- having unintended, 
negative effects on the development of software-enabled products, such a proposal seems very 
much like “solution” in search of a problem.   
Furthermore, the entire software industry is highly dynamic and interconnected, which makes it 
virtually impossible to draw any principled distinction between embedded and non-embedded 
software. Indeed, the software on phones, tablets, and other personal devices interact directly 
with, and borrow substantial functionality from, enterprise-grade software running in centralized 
servers.  As one example, voice recognition technology in many handsets depends heavily on the 
shared processing of the audio signal between the handset and a central voice processing 
server.  It is extremely likely that modifications to the law of copyright as it relates to everyday 
products would have material, and potentially unpredictable, unintended impacts on other areas 
of the software industry.  In the absence of any evidence of consumer injury, there is no 
justification for making changes to copyright law as it relates to embedded software. 
Whether Copyright Protection for Embedded Software is Spurring or Frustrating 
Innovation 
As the Copy
right Office’s Request for Comments observes, Congress extended copyright 
protection to software in order to promote innovation and creativity.5 Although today’s software 
industry looks far different from the nascent industry that existed when Congress expressly listed 
“computer programs” as copyrightable subject matter in 1980, the potential for software to 
become integral to the daily lives of ordinary people was apparent even then. Indeed, in its 
recommendation that software receive the full scope of copyright protection afforded to other 
forms of creative works, the National Commission on New Technological Uses of Copyrighted 
Works (“CONTU”) recognized that:  
“The possibilities provided by the technology are virtually lim itless. They are 
dependent only on the ingenuity employed in developing the programs that enable 
humans to communicate their ideas to one another through the in termediation of 
the machine and on the willingness of creators of such works to disseminate them 
at reasonable prices. In considering the quality of life in this country, failing to weigh 
the positive contributions of computers and the programs with which they are used 
would indeed be a mistake.”6    
By any measure, CONTU’s vision, as ratified by Congress in 1980, has been realized. The 
existing U.S. copyright framework for software has given rise to the most innovative and diverse 
software industry in the world. With nine of the top ten software companies by revenue residing in 
the United States,7 the U.S. software industry is responsible for many of the technological 
advances that have reshaped virtually every facet of our lives over the past two decades. To 
name just a few examples, U.S. software companies are helping to: change the face of education 
by shrinking textbooks to tablets and connecting classrooms across continents; deliver cutting-
edge health and fitness innovation; make our infrastructure safer, smarter and more collaborative; 
and improve the efficiency of our transit systems.8  
5 See Software-Enabled Study RFC at 77669 (“Though the 1976 Act did not expressly list computer 
programs as copyrightable subject matter, the Act’s legislative history makes it evident that Congress 
intended for them to be protected by copyright law . . .”) (emphasis added).   
6 National Commission on New Technological Uses of Copyrighted Works, Final Report of the National 
Commission on New Technological Uses of Copyrighted Works 26 (1978) (“CONTU Report”).  
7 Shobhit Set, World’s Top 10 Software Companies, Investopedia.com (Jan. 8, 2015), at 
http://www.investopedia.com/articles/personal-finance/121714/worlds-top-10-software-companies.asp  
8 See, BSA | The Software Alliance, You Can Do Amazing Things With Software, at http://withsoftware.org/. 
20 F Street NW, Suite 800 P 202 -872 -5500 
Washington, DC 20011 W bsa.org

[PAGE 3]
Ms. Maria Pallante 
February 16, 2016 
Page 3 
There is no indication that this trend is slowing or will slow anytime soon. In fact, we are on the 
cusp of an era of even greater software-driven innovation, due in large measure to strong and 
comprehensive copyright protection for software, that is being enabled by the convergence of 
Internet-connected devices, cloud computing capabilities, and data analytics. The “Internet of 
Things” (“IoT”) describes the growing network of “smart” devices that are software-enabled and 
Internet-connected.  These software-powered devices can collect and exchange data and add 
intelligence to improve efficiency, bolster performance, and add functionality. Unlike Internet-
connected devices that have been around for decades, software now enables “devices of all 
kinds – including smartphones, wearables, appliances, medical equipment, and vehicles – to 
connect with the Internet and each other to create, share and analyze information, all without 
human intervention.”9    
Embedded software is at the very core of IoT innovations that are transforming industries and the 
manner in which consumers interact with their devices. Consumers now have access to a range 
of IoT products capable of improving “conservation, efficiency, productivity, public safety, health, 
education and more.”10  For instance, new automobiles are equipped with more than 10 million 
lines of software code to control sensors that generate up to 25 gigabytes of data per hour that 
can be processed to enable safety and crash avoidance systems, reduce congestion and route 
traffic more efficiently.11 Both Apple and Microsoft have launched wearable devices with sensors 
that measure biometric data and provide unprecedented insights to help consumers optimize their 
workouts and live healthier lives.12 And by 2020, analysts predict that there will be more than 50 
billion IoT devices relied upon by consumers, governments and businesses.13    
The Request for Public Comments asks whether “copyright law should distinguish between 
software embedded in ‘everyday products’ and other types of software.”14 In view of the ongoing 
transformations occurring in consumer technology and the rapid pace at which advances are 
occurring,  the answer must be “no.” In the past 10 years, embedded software has turned our 
mobile phones into fully functional computers and connected our home thermostats and other 
electronic devices to the Internet to improve energy efficiency. And the pace of change is only 
accelerating.  Over the next 10 years, embedded software may usher an era in which driverless 
cars are the norm and implantable technologies help to manage chronic diseases. Over time, 
these developments may raise public policy questions across a range of issues, such as privacy, 
security and public safety.  But it strains credulity given the success in the market to date that the 
“application of copyright law to software in everyday products… [is frustrating] innovation.” 
Whether Copyright Protection for Embedded Software Frustrates Interoperability 
Con
sumers increasingly (and justifiably) demand flexibility in the ways they access, use, and 
enjoy network-connected devices – including in ways that were unimaginable only a few years 
ago. A well-functioning copyright system should therefore encourage rights holders to make use 
of emerging technologies to develop new products and services to satisfy consumer demand. 
When rights holders have the flexibility to experiment with and implement different business 
9 Deloitte, The Internet of Things Ecosystem: Unlocking the Business Value of Connected Devices 5 (2014), 
at http://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/global/Documents/Technology-Media-
Telecommunications/gx-tmt-Iotecosystem.pdf  
10 Consumer Electronics Association, Comment to the Federal Trade Commission on Internet of Things, 
Project No. P135405 (June 10, 2013) 7.  
11 BSA | The Software Alliance, What’s the Big Deal With Data? 15 (2015), at http://data.bsa.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/12/bsadatastudy_en.pdf  
12 See https://www.microsoft.com/Microsoft-Band/en-us; http://www.apple.com/watch/  
13 See Valerio, Pablo, Internet of Things: 50 Billion Is Only the Beginning, EE Times, Feb. 28, 2014, 
http://www.eetimes.com/document.asp?doc_id=1321229  
14 Software-Enabled Study at 77671. 
20 F Street NW, Suite 800 P 202 -872 -5500 
Washington, DC 20011 W bsa.org

[PAGE 4]
Ms. Maria Pallante 
February 16, 2016 
Page 4 
models, market competition will work to the public’s benefit. One metric for evaluating the health 
of a copyright system is the extent to which it supports myriad business models. 
In examining whether copyright is enabling or frustrating interoperability with software-embedded 
devices, it’s important to bear in mind that interoperability is largely a function of business 
strategy. Title 17 provides rights holders with the flexibility to develop software-embedded devices 
and platforms along a continuum of development and business models. Because consumers 
benefit from being able to select a model that best fits their needs, there is a strong public policy 
interest in preserving this type of vibrant market competition.   
Marketplace needs and consumer demands for products that work together (interoperate) within 
larger information processing systems are in most instances addressed by developing industry 
standards. In those circumstances, interoperability is effectively promoted through standards 
setting efforts entered into voluntarily by industry. Such efforts have been underway for decades 
in many fields where key technologies included in the standard are protected by copyright or 
patents. IP laws have not been an obstacle; to the contrary, they have enabled creators and 
inventors to contribute their technologies to the standard knowing their rights are protected and 
their incentives to further innovate are promoted. IEEE 802.11 is an example of such a standard 
facilitating multi-vendor interoperability by providing a specification that enables “everyday 
products” to connect to wireless networks using a common protocol.  
Like standards, innovative uses of application programming interfaces (“APIs”) are also driving an 
era of increased interoperability. At their most basic, APIs provide an interface through which 
software applications are able to communicate and make requests of one another. Software 
developers are increasingly using APIs to ensure that their products are interoperable with a wide 
range of hardware and platform configurations. For instance, Autodesk recently launched Spark, 
an open 3D printing software platform with APIs that enable third party companies to build 3D 
printing capabilities directly into their products. By opening the Spark platform to 3D printing 
software developers and manufacturers, Autodesk is creating an ecosystem of interoperable 3D 
printing software and hardware solutions. 
In the absence of clear evidence that copyright law is inhibiting consumers from accessing a wide 
variety of product offerings, we would caution against entertaining potential legislative changes to 
Title 17.  Any such change could destabilize a legal environment that has supported innovation, 
fostered consumer choice, and encouraged interoperability over more than three decades. 
Weakening copyright protection for embedded software in an effort to encourage specific 
business outcomes -- whether in terms of licensing practices or design choices -- could distort or 
diminish the existing positive market developments and unnecessarily disrupt stable international 
norms for the protection of software under copyright. 
Whether Copyright Protection for Embedded Software Frustrates Secondary Markets 
The first sale 
doctrine has since the 1908 Supreme Court decision in Bobbs-Merrill Co. v. 
Straus15 played an important role in ensuring that copyright protection does not act as an 
inadvertent restraint on the alienation of physical property. By upholding “the distinction between 
ownership of the copyright and ownership of the material object” on which a copy of a work 
resides,16 the first sale doctrine allows the owner of a physical copy of a work to resell or 
15 210 U.S. § 339 (1908). 
16 U.S. Copyright Office, A Report of the Register of Copyrights Pursuant to § 104 of the Digital Millennium 
Copyright Act, 87 (2001), available at http://www.copyright.gov/reports/studies/dmca/sec-104-report-vol-
1.pdf (“Section 104 Report).
20 F Street NW, Suite 800 P 202 -872 -5500 
Washington, DC 20011 W bsa.org

[PAGE 5]
Ms. Maria Pallante 
February 16, 2016 
Page 5 
otherwise dispose of that copy without the copyright owner’s consent.17 Because Section 109 
applies without limitation to software that is “embodied in a machine or product and which cannot 
be copied during the ordinary operation of the machine or product,”18 the first sale doctrine 
appropriately supports secondary markets for products that contain embedded software.   
Although the first sale doctrine does not apply to software obtained by license,19 there is 
remarkably little evidence that companies are structuring their licensing agreements to prevent 
the emergence of legitimate secondary markets for products with embedded software. In fact, the 
Department of Commerce’s Internet Policy Task Force recently concluded that the risk of 
manufacturers using license restrictions on embedded software to prevent the development of 
secondary markets is largely theoretical.20 Theoretical concerns and decades-old anecdotes are 
flimsy justification for changing the law.  Absent clear, current evidence of specific problems that 
are not being addressed by the market, we believe it is premature to recommend legislative 
changes that could create unintended distortions in a quickly evolving market.   
Thank you again for the opportunity to share our views on these important issues. 
Sincerely, 
Christian Troncoso 
Director, Policy 
17 See 17 U.S.C. § 109. 
18 17 U.S.C. § 109(b)(1)(B)(i). 
19 17 U.S.C. § 109(d). 
20 Department of Commerce, Internet Policy Task Force, White Paper on Remixes, First Sale, and Statutory 
Damages, 64 (2016) (“The Task Force did not hear evidence that licenses purporting to restrict a 
consumer’s ability to resell have been used with respect to embedded software that operates a functional 
product, other than a computer or related equipment. Thus, the record before us does not establish that the 
kinds of consumer products identified above are currently sold subject to such licenses.”) 
20 F Street NW, Suite 800 P 202 -872 -5500 
Washington, DC 20011 W bsa.org
