[PAGE 1]
 
Docket No. 2015-6  
 
Reply Comments of the Software and Information Industry 
Association 
 
March 18, 2016 
 
SIIA thanks the Copyright Office for the opportunity to submit 
these reply comments, in which we wish to make two brief points.  
First, despite the rather different perspectives of copyright owners 
and users, the comments generally agreed that no changes t o 
existing law were necessary to accommodate problems dealing 
with embedded software.  Second, to the extent that problems 
with existing law were identified, many of those critiques rest on 
flawed foundations, identifying judicial confusion when in fact 
none exists. 
 
The record reflects a consensus that embedded software does 
not require its own set of rules .  Even those commenters with 
whom we disagree acknowledge that the primary  question asked 
in the NOI—whether changes to the Copyright Act are necessary 
to accommodate software in everyday consumer devices —should 
be answered in the negative. 1  Indeed, the initial round of 
comments revealed consistent and persuasive  evidence that 
existing law spurs substantial investment and innovation not only 
in smart goods, but software generally. 2  Assertions of adverse 
effects routinely come hedged by conditional language:  
                                                
1  See, e.g., Computer & Communications Industry Association 
Comments, at 5 (“neither policymakers nor stakeholders can confidently 
define an administrable class of “everyday products ””); Comments of 
Aaron Perzanowski et al. , at 11 (“Because the problems described above 
result primarily from misinterpretation of the  terms of §§ 101, 109, and 
117, legislative intervention is not strictly necessary.”)  [hereinafter “Law 
Professor Comments”] ; Comments of Public Knowledge, at 2  (“Many of 
the policy difficulties that could arise in the embedded software context 
can be eliminated by simply following the text of the Copyright Act.”).  
The omission of a particular comment does not signal SIIA’s 
endorsement or rejection of its contents.  
2  See, e.g., Microsoft Comments, at 2 -3 (describing level of 
investment in cloud and other  services); Chamber of Commerce, at 2 -3

[PAGE 2]
 
2 
 
• “These comments identify contexts in which copyright 
may be improperly applied” 3 
 
• “Many of the policy difficulties that could arise in the 
embedded software context can be eliminated by simply 
following the text of the Copyright Act” 4 
 
• “[extension of existing licensing models to embedded 
software] raises 
the possibility of overlapping copyright 
and patent protection for the func tional features of the 
same device, not to mention the potential for copyright 
protection for devices that fail to meet the more 
stringent standards of possibility [ sic].”5 
 
And so on.  Instead, as some commenters candidly admit, their 
comments have little or nothing to do with problems having to do 
with embedded software.  Their discontents flow from the fact 
that modern software licensing exists.
6   Those broader questions, 
however, have been asked and answered during the Department of 
Commerce’s preparation of its recent white paper on first sale— a 
process in which many (if not most) of the same stakeholders 
participated.  At the end of three years of examination, the 
Department of Commerce found no evidence to warrant 
                                                                                                                
(noting that the commercial software industry has doubled since the 
beginning of the century, and now accounts for 3.2% of GDP); Law 
Professor Comments, at 9 (conceding that “In recent years, device 
makers and servic e providers have developed no shortage of new and 
innovative offerings.”).  
3  CCIA, at 2 (emphasis added).  
4  Public Knowledge, at 1 (emphasis supplied).  
5  Law Professor Comments, at 1 1. 
6  E.g., Law Professor Comments, at 1 (decrying licensing as 
“software exceptionalism”); Music Library Comments, at 1 (“our 
comments respond to the question of end user licenses in general, rather 
than specifically to the software -enabled consumer products 
contemplated by the NOI.”); Owners’ Rights Initiative  Comments, at 2 ( 
stating that “we will not distinguish between business products  
and consumer products… . The impact of copyright and contract law on 
all these products is the same.”).

[PAGE 3]
 
3 
 
amendment to existing law.  Tellingly, neither that white paper 
,nor the record on which its conclusions rest  were mentioned once 
by those critical of the existing licensing regime.  That silence, in 
our view, speaks volumes.    
 
Second, some of the comments have described the law of 
licensing in fairly misleading or incomplete ways, taking 
particular issue with the decision in Vernor v. Autodesk, 621 F.3d 
1102 (9th Cir. 2010).  In particular, some commenters have 
suggested a split between the Second and Ninth Circuits on 
practices that give rise to a license vs. a sale. 7  A cursory 
examination of each of these cases disproves that contention . 
 
The defendant in 
Vernor sold unlicensed software on ebay, 
having acquired software from a company that had paid $495 for 
upgrade versions of Autodesk software  that normally sold for 
$3750.  As a condition of that lower price, the company promised 
to destroy the older versions of the softwar e.8  The license 
agreement with Autodesk not only reserved title in all versions of 
the software, it required destruction of prior versions within sixty 
days, and reserved the right to demand proof of that destruction. 9   
Autodesk enforced its license agre ements through not only 
tracking registered licensees, but requiring the use of activation 
codes.
10  The Ninth Circuit found that if the copyright owner 
specifies that the user is granted a license, significantly restricts 
the user’s ability to transfer the  software, and imposes notable use 
restrictions, then it has licensed the software —not sold it.11   
 
In contrast, in Krause v. Titleserv, Inc., 402 F.3d 119, 120 (2d 
Cir. 2005) the plaintiff had written thirty five computer programs 
for the defendant over the course of a decade, without evidence of 
                                                
7  Owner’s Rights Initiative, at 6.  
8  See Vernor, 621 F.3d at 1105.  Autodesk also  brought suit against 
the company, who stipulated to an injunction banning it from further 
infringement.  Id.  n. 2. 
9  Id. at 1104. 
10  See id. at 1104-05. 
11  Krause, 402 F.3d at 120-21 (noting that the plaintiff had 
prevented executable files from being decompiled into source code).

[PAGE 4]
 
4 
 
a written license agreement. 12  The defendant could not, among 
other things, add new clients to its customer database or update 
the addresses of existing clients without modifying the source 
code.13  When he found out that he would have to report to a chief 
information officer, the plaintiff quit and prevented the existing 
programs from easily being upgraded. 14 The software was 
designed for the defendant’s sole benefit, and was customized for 
its operations. 15  The copies were stored on a server owned by the 
defendant, and could be possessed and used indefinitely. 16    
 
The contextual differences between these two cases are readily 
obvious.  Indeed, given the Ninth Circuit and Second Circuit’s 
emphasis on usage restricti ons,
17 it seems more than plausible 
that Krause would affirm the same results as Vernor.   SIIA 
respectfully suggests that these two cases do not represent a 
“split” on the law of licensing, as the contexts are dramatically 
different.  That same difference in context also explains the result 
in 
Augusto.18  All these cases represent is courts reaching 
different results on different sets of facts --a state of affairs that 
does not warrant legislative intervention on any front.  
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
/s/ 
Christopher A. Mohr 
Vice President for Intellectual 
Property and General Counsel  
Software and Information Industry 
Association   
                                                
12   Id. at 124 & n.3.  
13  Id. at 121. 
14  Krause, 402 F.2d at 121.  
15  Id. at 124. 
16  See id. 
17  See Krause, 402 F.2d at 124; Vernor, 621 F.3d at 1105. 
18  UMG Recordings,  Inc. v. Augusto, 628 F.3d 1175 (9th Cir. 2011).
