[PAGE 1]
Before the 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 
UNITED STATES COPYRIGHT OFFICE 
 
In the Matter of the Copyright Office’s Software-Enabled Consumer Products Study 
 
Docket No. COLC-2015-0011 
 
Comment of the Specialty Equipment Market Association (SEMA) 
___________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Submitted By 
Specialty Equipment Market Association (SEMA) 
Ashley E. Ailsworth, Corporate Counsel 
1317 F Street, NW 
Washington, DC 20004 
202-783-6007 ext. 19 
 
Dear Sir/Madam: 
 
The Specialty Equipment Market Association (SEMA) was founded in 1963 and represents the 
$36 billion specialty equipment automotive aftermarket industry of 6,633 member-companies.  
SEMA’s members offer custom auto accessories that enhance a vehicle’s appearance, safety, 
performance, comfort and convenience.  These aftermarket products include such accessories as 
custom wheels and tires, turbochargers, lighting equipment, performance exhausts, suspensions, 
grille guards, and sunroofs, and enable hobbyists to customize their vehicles according to their 
own tastes and preferences.  The specialty automotive aftermarket supports these hobbyists and 
represents a longstanding history of innovation and entrepreneurship, developing cutting-edge 
products that increasingly become mainstream in the auto industry.  
 
SEMA respectfully submits comments for the Software-Enabled Consumer Products Study being 
undertaken by the U.S. Copyright Office in response to a request made by Senators Charles E. 
Grassley and Patrick Leahy of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary.  The Senators requested 
information on five different topics, including “the provisions of the copyright law that are 
implicated by the ubiquity of copyrighted software in everyday products” and “whether, and to 
what extent, legitimate interests or business models for copyright owners and users could be 
undermined or improved by changes to the copyright law in this area.”  In considering changes 
to the copyright laws, SEMA supports any changes that would have the effect of improving the 
ability to access and utilize elements of vehicle software.  To maintain a competitive marketplace 
for aftermarket parts, the ability to access and utilize these elements should be extended to the 
owner of the vehicle, shops undertaking modifications on behalf of the owner and companies 
developing interoperative software and vehicle components that must interact with the software. 
SEMA’s position is clear.  In any changes to the copyright laws, it is important that aftermarket 
companies continue to have access and the ability to reverse engineer the software of modern 
vehicles to achieve different functionality and interoperability with aftermarket components.

[PAGE 2]
2 
 
Provisions of copyright law implicated by ubiquity of copyrighted software in everyday 
products 
 
Fair Use – Section 107 of the Copyright Act  
 
Congress sought to limit the exclusive rights granted to the copyright owner by providing an 
exception for fair use.  The concept of fair use in the Copyright Act is central to the use of 
copyright-protected software that runs modern vehicles.1  In analyzing whether a particular use is 
a “fair use,” a court is directed to consider the use in light of four statutory factors: (1) the 
purpose and character of the use, (2) the nature of the copyrighted work, (3) the amount of the 
work used in relation to the work as a whole, and (4) the effect the use has on the market for or 
value of the work.    
 
The first fair use factor asks whether the use of a copyrighted work “merely supersedes the 
objects of the original creation, or instead adds something new.”2  Following these principles, 
specifically in the context of computer software, it is clear that a modifier’s use of software to 
allow for the installation and interoperability of specialty parts and accessories is a “legitimate 
purpose” that weighs in favor of fair use.  
 
The nature of the copyrighted work weighs heavily in favor of fair use when the user is only 
interested in the functionality of the code, not its expression.  In the recent case of Oracle Am., 
Inc. v. Google Inc., the Federal Circuit reiterated that software, even where it contains functional 
elements, is entitled to copyright protection.  However, the court went on to explain that “where 
the nature of the work is such that purely functional elements exist in the work and it is necessary 
to copy the expressive elements in order to perform those functions, consideration of this second 
factor arguably supports a finding that the use is fair.”3 
 
The third factor only weighs against fair use if the amount used is unreasonable in light of the 
purpose for which the copyrighted work is used.4  Thus, even where the entire copyrighted work 
has been copied, such a finding will not defeat fair use if the copying was necessary to 
accomplish a legitimate purpose.5  The use of vehicle software to achieve aftermarket 
personalization, modification or other improvements supports a finding of fair use under the third 
factor, where the modifiers use no more than is necessary to research and ultimately implement 
the desired modification.  Ninth Circuit authority in both Sega v. Accolade and Sony v. Connectix 
establishes that the copying of an entire software program may be fair use if the copying was 
necessary to understand the functional elements of the software.6  In the case of reverse 
engineering vehicle software, analyzing the entire software program may be critical to 
understand the functionality of the vehicle and, in addition, to determine how much storage is 
                                                           
1 17 U.S.C. § 107 (2016). 
2 Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 579 (1994). 
3 Oracle Am., Inc. v. Google Inc., 750 F.3d 1339, 1375 (Fed. Cir. 2014). 
4 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 586-87. 
5 See Authors Guild, Inc. v. HathiTrust, 755 F.3d 87, 98 (2d Cir. 2014) (finding that “[f]or some purposes, it may be 
necessary to copy the entire copyrighted work, in which case Factor Three does not weigh against a finding of fair 
use”). 
6 Sega Enterprises Ltd. v. Accolade, Inc., 977 F.2d 1510, 1526-27 (9th Cir. 1992); Sony Computer Entertainment, 
Inc. v. Connectix Corp., 203 F.3d 596, 606 (9th Cir. 2000).

[PAGE 3]
3 
 
available to support additional functionality.  Importantly, access to the entire work is necessary 
to ensure that modifications in one part of the code will not negatively impact other functionality.    
 
The last factor also weighs in favor of a finding of fair use where the copyrighted material at 
issue is software controlling a motor vehicle.  The market for the software does not exist 
independent of the new vehicle.  Any aftermarket component designed to interoperate with the 
software will not supplant the market for the new vehicle and its original software, and 
purchasing the new vehicle is a prerequisite for the enthusiast interested in utilizing the 
aftermarket components.  In fact, the ability of the secondary market to provide and enable post-
sale modifications that increase a vehicle’s interoperability with improved components only 
increases the attractiveness of that vehicle to buyers, thereby benefiting the market for the 
vehicle and any copyrighted works contained therein.   
 
DMCA Exemption for Reverse Engineering 
 
A second statutory provision that indicates Congress understood the functional nature of 
software and the need for other programs to interact with it can be found within the Digital 
Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA).  The DMCA expanded copyright law to prevent 
circumvention of access controls put in place by a copyright owner.  The intent was to address 
the problem of pirating traditional copyrighted works, such as photos, music and movies, using 
digital media.  The language prohibits circumventing access controls on copyrighted works, but 
numerous exemptions were included to ensure the prohibition did not inhibit legitimate 
activities.  One of the permanent exemptions written into the DMCA allows circumvention of 
access-control mechanisms if done for the purpose of reverse engineering to achieve 
interoperability with a computer program.  The goal is to achieve interoperability, defined by the 
DMCA as “the ability of computer programs to exchange information, and of such programs 
mutually to use the information which has been exchanged.”7   
 
Use of computer code now transcends the realm of the personal computer.  Through the 
evolution of the “internet of things,” software now encompasses code that takes data from 
connected sensors and interprets and reacts to that information.  Examples from the internet of 
things abound, from medical devices to vehicle-to-vehicle communications.  In addressing the 
internet of things, regulators have expressed support for technological advancements along with 
concerns over the security and safety of these devices and communication pathways.8  Copyright 
issues are often not the focus of concern, but overbroad copyright protection could result in a 
chilling effect on innovation in the secondary market for software and products that interact with 
connected devices.  Changes to the law that would increase the ability to rely on the fair use 
doctrine in situations where the copyrighted materials at issue are functional features of software 
controlling consumer products could help limit the chilling effect on innovation.  Possible 
legislative solutions could include heightened pleading requirements for copyright infringement 
                                                           
7 17 U.S.C. § 1201(f)(4) (2016). 
8 See The Internet of Things: FDA Releases Guidance on Securing Wireless Medical Devices – What Medical 
Device Manufacturers Should Know, INFOLAWGROUP LLP (Oct. 2, 2013), www.infolawgroup.com/2013/10/ 
articles/information-security/the-internet-of-things-fda-releases-guidance-on-securing-wireless-medical-devices-
what-medical-device-manufacturers-should-know/; see also Transportation Sec. Foxx Announces Steps to 
Accelerate Road Safety Innovation, NHTSA, DOT 49-15 (May 13, 2015), http://www.nhtsa.gov/About+NHTSA/ 
Press+Releases/2015/nhtsa-will-accelerate-v2v-efforts.

[PAGE 4]
4 
 
claims involving software-enabled consumer products.  Another option would be to require a 
copyright owner to perform a subjective good faith analysis to determine whether the conduct at 
issue is for a purpose that constitutes fair use before using enforcing the DMCA’s anti-
circumvention provision.  The Ninth Circuit recently imposed such a requirement on copyright 
owners using the DMCA’s notice and takedown provision.9                
 
Legitimate interests or business models for copyright owners and users that could be 
undermined or improved by changes to the copyright law in this area 
 
Achieving interoperability of aftermarket components with vehicle software is a legitimate 
activity that could be impacted by the use of copyright law to limit access and use of the 
software, particularly the functional elements of vehicle software.  Although in decades past 
hobbyists could install these new features mechanically, the advent of government-mandated 
electronic-based vehicle systems—including onboard diagnostics, tire pressure monitoring 
systems, and electronic stability control—has given rise to a need to more fully understand 
vehicle software to ensure new innovations will be compatible with existing systems.   
 
Modern vehicles rely heavily on a network of electronic systems to collect and use data from 
various sensors.  Sensor data is collected and processed by the vehicle’s different control 
modules (Electronic Control Units – “ECUs” – made with microcontroller chips).  Modern 
vehicles can have up to 70-80 ECUs, ranging from the Engine Control Module (ECM) to the 
Telematic Control Unit (TCU).  Microcontroller chips in each module, including the ECM, store 
software code in the form of flash memory or Programmable Read Only Memory (PROM) that 
respond to the sensor data.  Aftermarket companies typically replace or recalibrate 
microcontroller chips in the ECM for improved performance.   
 
The California Air Resources Board (CARB) regulates changes to the ECM.  Hundreds of 
Executive Order numbers have been issued to aftermarket companies for various changes to 
ECMs to improve engine performance or allow other components to be installed on a vehicle.10  
For example, aftermarket turbochargers can be installed on a vehicle to increase engine 
efficiency, but the vehicle’s ECM will need to be replaced or recalibrated to account for the 
change in fuel/air entering the engine.   
 
In undertaking the Software-Enabled Consumer Products Study, please feel free to reach out to 
SEMA for further information on the use of vehicle software in the automotive aftermarket.  
 
                                                           
9 Lenz v. Universal Music Corp., No. 13-606 (9th Cir. 2015) (copyright owner must perform a subjective good faith 
fair use analysis before issuing a DMCA takedown notice). 
10 Aftermarket Parts Database of Executive Orders, CALIFORNIA AIR RESOURCES BOARD, 
http://www.arb.ca.gov/msprog/aftermkt/devices/amquery.php (last visited Feb. 16, 2016).
