[PAGE 1]
This is a Word document that allows users to type into the spaces below. The comment may be single -spaced, but 
should be in at least 12-point type. The italicized instructions on this template may be deleted.  
1 
 
 
Please submit a separate comment for each proposed class. 
NOTE: This form must be used in all three rounds of comments by all commenters not 
submitting short-form comments directly through regulations.gov, whether the commenter is 
supporting, opposing, or merely providing pertinent information about a proposed exemption. 
When commenting on a proposed expansion to an existing exemption, you should focus your 
comments only on those issues relevant to the proposed expansion.  
[   ] Check here if multimedia evidence is being provided in connection with this comment 
Commenters can provide relevant multimedia evidence to support their arguments. Please note 
that such evidence must be separately submitted in conformity with the Office’s instructions for 
submitting multimedia evidence, available on the Copyright Office website at 
https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2021. 
ITEM A.  COMMENTER INFORMATION  
Identify the commenter and provide a means to contact the commenter and/or the commenter’s 
representatives, if any. 
This petition is submitted by Peter Decherney, Professor of Cinema and Media Studies and 
English at the University of Pennsylvania, and Professor Katherine Sender, Department of 
Communication, Cornell University on behalf of themselves and John L. Jackson, Jr., Professor 
and Dean, Annenberg School of Communication, University of Pennsylvania; Rebecca Stein, 
PhD, Executive Director, Online Learning Initiative, University of Pennsylvania; the International 
Communication Association (ICA); the Society for Cinema and Media Studies (SCMS); Console-
ing Passions; the Library Copyright Alliance (LCA), Shiv Gaglani, CEO and Co-Founder, 
Osmosis.org; Stefan Wisbauer, Managing Director, Lecturio; Andrew Berg, MD, Co-Founder, 
SketchyMedical, Saud Siddiqui, MD, Co-founder, SketchyMedical; Ken Robertson, COO, 
Picmonic Inc.; and Ruthe Farmer, Chief Evangelist, CSforAll.  
ITEM B.  PROPOSED CLASS ADDRESSED 
Identify the proposed exemption that the comment addresses by the number and name of the 
class set forth in the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (e.g., “Proposed Class 1: Audiovisual 
Works—Criticism and Comment”). 
Proposed Class 1: Audiovisual Works—Criticism and Comment 
  
[PAGE 2]
 
 
2 
 
ITEM C.  OVERVIEW 
Provide a brief summary of the circumvention activity sought to be exempted or opposed and 
why. 
Over the last two decades, the meteoric rise of the Internet has changed almost every facet of 
our lives. It has revolutionized how people work, communicate, create, teach, and learn. 
Therefore, to accommodate more of the online education ecosystem, we propose to add a new 
educational exemption under 17 U.S.C. § 1201. The Digital Millennium Copyright Act’s (DMCA) 
prohibition on the circumvention of technological measures continues to be a barrier to what 
would otherwise be the lawful fair use of audiovisual works for educational purposes. As such, 
we propose an exemption that would allow educators and preparers of online learning 
materials to use short portions of motion pictures (including TV shows and videos), as defined 
in 17 U.S.C. 101, for the purpose of criticism, comment, illustration and explanation in offerings 
for registered learners of online learning platforms when the use of film and media excerpts will 
contribute significantly to learning. 
Though the Copyright Office’s endorsements of existing educational circumvention exemptions 
– kindergarten through 12th grade (K-12), college and universities, and Massive Open Online 
Courses (MOOCs) – were visionary steps towards the advancement of education and online 
learning, those exemptions only apply to a limited number of learning settings. Since the 
adoption of these exemptions in previous Triennial Rulemaking Proceedings, online learning 
platforms have assumed a more prominent role in education. In fact, the U.S. is one of the 
world’s leaders in the online education market.1  Even prior to the coronavirus pandemic, the 
U.S. online learning market was projected to reach $6.22 billion between 2017 and 2022.2 
Online learning has modernized the education field, and in doing so created a global learning 
society. If you have an Internet connection and a computer, you can easily enroll in an online 
education program – often times at a significantly cheaper cost than traditional face-to-face 
offerings. Advancements in education and the Internet help bridge inequality gaps in access to 
high-quality education. As such, many believe that online learning is the future and may 
someday replace aspects of in-person learning.3  
Furthermore, online learning has shown significant growth over the last decade, providing 
people with maximum opportunities to retrain, gain new skills, and supplement their 
                                                      
1 Online Education Market & Global Forecast, by End User, Learning Mode, Technology, Country, Company,  
https://www.researchandmarkets.com/reports/4876815/online-education-market-and-global-forecast-
by?utm_source=dynamic&utm_medium=BW&utm_code=nvzl68&utm_campaign=1334853+ -
+%24350+Billion+Online+Education+Market%3a+Global+Forecast+to+2025+by+End+User%2c+Learning+Mode
+(Self-Paced%2c+Instructor+Led)%2c+Technology%2c+Country%2c+Company&utm_exec=chdo54bwd (Dec. 
2019) [hereinafter Online Education Market]. 
2 Technavio, E-Learning Market in US by Product and End-user-Forecast and Analysis 2020-2024, 
https://www.technavio.com/report/e-learning-market-in-us-industry-analysis (Jul. 2020). 
3 Ilker Koksal, The Rise of Online Learning, https://www.forbes.com/sites/ilkerkoksal/2020/05/02/the-rise-of-
online-learning/?sh=689d7fed72f3 (May 2020).  

[PAGE 3]
 
 
3 
 
education.4 Today’s digital education opportunities consist of thousands of online learning 
platforms, such as Osmosis.org, Picmonic Inc., CSforALL, Lecturio, and SketchyMedical, who 
have joined us in this comment. Additionally, online learning platforms offer high-quality 
courses and content covering an array of subject matter, including medicine, music instruction, 
professional development, STEM, and business certifications.  
Congressional legislative history asserts that the DMCA was “designed to facilitate the robust 
development and world-wide expansion of electronic commerce, communications, research, 
development, and education in the digital age.”5 Yet, approximately 20 years since the DMCA 
went into effect, educators and preparers of educational materials for online learning platforms 
are being encumbered by the very act that was created to keep copyright law on pace with 
emerging technologies.6 In this 8th Triennial Rulemaking Proceeding, we ask that the Copyright 
Office seize this opportunity to provide clarity to the educational practice of online instructional 
learning. 
 
We ask the Copyright Office to allow educators and preparers of educational materials for 
online learning platforms, irrespective of their educational accreditation or for-profit status, to 
incorporate short portions of motion pictures into their courses. Failure to allow this will 
significantly diminish the advantages of their instructional content. Adopting an exemption for 
educators and preparers of educational materials for online learning platforms will inevitably 
help break down existing barriers to education posed by social and economic inequality. Online 
learning levels the educational playing field for public and private school pupils, home-schooled 
students, and part-time learners of all kinds by providing equal access to education.  
 
The incorporation of short portions of motion pictures into online educational material would 
also enable the continued advancement of innovative educational methods. Integrating 
audiovisual content helps learners understand complex concepts and procedures. Without it, 
educators and preparers of educational materials for online learning platforms lose the ability 
to meet learners where they are by using clear and inspiring visual examples. 
 
Moreover, as we struggle to respond to the challenging times presented by the coronavirus, it 
is essential that online learners can access the same quality of education as they would in 
person – especially during a time where students cannot access traditional in-person 
instruction. Due to the abrupt and mandatory transition from in-person to online learning, the 
demand for online learning materials have increased. However, educators and preparers of 
online learning materials are prevented from meeting that demand with the same quality 
learning experiences as in-person instruction due to the DMCA’s anti-circumvention provisions.  
                                                      
4 Online Education Market, supra note 1.  
5 Committee on the Judiciary’s Report for The Digital Millennium Copyright Act, S. Rep. No. 105-190, at 1-2 
(1998).  
6 Id. at 2 (“Copyright laws have struggled through the years to keep pace with emerging technology from the 
struggle over music played on a player piano roll in the 1900's to the introduction of the VCR in the 1980's. With 
this constant evolution in technology, the law must adapt in order to make digital networks safe places to 
disseminate and exploit copyrighted materials.”). 
[PAGE 4]
 
 
4 
 
Further, the shift online has not only impacted education but it has also displaced millions of 
people in the workforce. Given the volatility of the economy, professionals have turned to 
online learning platforms to sharpen and gain skills that will be required in a post-pandemic 
world. Overall, whether you’re a student whose education has been shifted online or a blue-
collar worker trying to find your next job, it is clear that whenever the pandemic recedes, the 
value of online learning will remain. 
Additionally, our exemption embraces the spirit of Congress’ goals for the Internet and 
education as expressed in the TEACH Act while also limiting risk to copyright owners when 
working in an online medium. As discussed in Item E, the TEACH Act envisioned a need to 
extend education’s reach to include more than just children and young adults, but also lifelong 
learners. By allowing learners to integrate educational activities into their daily work lives, 
online learning platforms fulfil the vision of the TEACH Act. The exemption we request in this 
Triennial proceeding will support educational quality that foster 21st century skills. 
   
Lastly, we note that the creation of this exception is fully consistent with § 107 of the Copyright 
Act. The proposed uses of audiovisual materials in this comment are the same as those already 
accepted as qualifying fair use in previous rulemaking proceedings. The proposed exemption is 
not attempting to change the types of educational uses that are being exempted. Instead we 
only seek an expansion of the users whose identical educational uses would likewise qualify as 
fair use. We would also like to note that our new exemption calls for online learning platforms 
with instructional materials using short clips of motion pictures to use technological protection 
measures analogous to those used by Massive Open Online Course (MOOC) providers, for 
which the Copyright Office has already granted an exemption. 
 
For the aforementioned reasons, we respectfully request the Librarian to allow online learners 
and educators to have the same access to effective educational methods as their K-12, college 
and university, and MOOC counterparts.  
 
ITEM D.  TECHNOLOGICAL PROTECTION MEASURE(S) AND METHOD(S) OF CIRCUMVENTION 
Access to motion pictures and other audiovisual works is controlled by numerous technological 
protection measures. For instance, digital video disks (DVDs) are protected by entirely different 
technical protection measures (TPMs) than those that protect Blu-Ray Discs, and audiovisual 
works streamed online are protected by almost as many TPMs as there are online distribution 
platforms, from Amazon to iTunes to Netflix. 
 
Many commercial DVDs employ the Content Scramble System (CSS), for which the Librarian of 
Congress ultimately granted exemptions, on the recommendation of the Copyright Office, in 
the previous iterations of this proceeding. The encryption scheme in CSS employs an algorithm 
configured by a set of security “locks” to encrypt a DVD’s contents. The video content is 
rendered unusable and unplayable unless the content is decrypted with CSS “keys.” 
Manufacturers of DVD players are authorized to utilize CSS technology under the CSS License 
[PAGE 5]
 
 
5 
 
Agreement. Millions of DVD players and computers worldwide implement CSS technology, and 
it is used to protect the content on hundreds of millions of DVDs. 
 
Although less common, another form of copy protection that protects access to some 
commercial DVDs is disc corruption. This method makes the disc content “unreadable” by 
corrupting sections of the DVD so that some of the content is skipped when trying to copy it. 
Many companies that implement this form of encryption do so under different names. For 
example, Disney utilizes this form of technology under the name Disney X.7  
 
The Advanced Access Content System (AACS) is the successor to CSS and is the standard TPM 
on Blu-Ray Discs. AACS encrypts discs using title locks. These title locks can only be decrypted 
using a media key in combination with the Volume ID of the media itself. Decryption keys are 
distributed over a broadcast channel, which enables licensors to “revoke” access to individual 
Blu-Ray players. AACS also incorporates “traitor tracing” techniques, which allow short sections 
of movies to be encrypted with different keys so that if a key is compromised, it can be 
identified and revoked without disrupting access completely. 
 
A variety of entirely different TPMs protect audiovisual works distributed online through 
distribution services or streaming media. For example, Protected Streaming is a TPM developed 
by Adobe and employed by various online distribution services. Protected Streaming utilizes 
both encryption and Small Web Format (SWF) Verification to protect audiovisual works. Other 
examples include Microsoft PlayReady and Apple’s FairPlay. 
 
Circumvention, in turn, is accomplished in a variety of ways. The most common method of 
circumvention for educational use is through software programs that disable the various TPMs 
referenced above. These programs are able to rewrite the desired portion of a protected work 
with the exact same frame rate, preserving content and maintaining the same resolution. The 
techniques used may differ widely based on the experience and sophistication of the platform, 
the instructor, or the learner attempting to use the copyrighted work for any of the fair uses 
described below.  
 
In addition, we note that our petition calls for online learning platforms to protect their content 
that contains copyrighted clips by implementing reasonable technological protection measures 
to prevent circumvention consistent with the previously granted MOOC exemption. We discuss 
further in Item E. 
  
                                                      
7 Learning Center, Miraizon, http://www.miraizon.com/support/info_copyprotection.html (last visited Dec. 9, 2020).  

[PAGE 6]
 
 
6 
 
ITEM E.  ASSERTED ADVERSE EFFECTS ON NONINFRINGING USES  
 
Educators and preparers of online learning materials need to be able to use short portions of 
motion pictures (including TV shows and videos), as defined in 17 U.S.C. 101, for the purpose of 
criticism, comment, illustration and explanation in offerings for registered learners on online 
learning platforms when use of the film and media excerpts will contribute significantly to 
learning. Educators teaching in-person classes, educators teaching for-credit online classes, and 
educators teaching Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) already may take advantage of 
these types of powerful instructional illustrations to make their lessons as effective as possible. 
In granting the exemptions that allow educators teaching for-credit online classes and 
educators teaching MOOCS, the Copyright Office recognized the undeniable value the use of 
these clips adds to the quality of online education.  
 
The demand for online education has skyrocketed in the last three years. Online education 
became the new standard when Americans adapted to a changing world amidst the coronavirus 
pandemic. Millions of Americans registered on online learning platforms seeking educational 
opportunities online.8 This demand will continue in a post-pandemic society. Americans are 
now accustomed to online education, and will rely on it to supplement their skills in a 
transforming economy. It is in our collective interest to make that learning as effective as 
possible. 
 
Opportunities to Advance Educational Equity are Hindered by the Anti-Circumvention 
Provisions  
The national protests in 2020 over racial inequalities in society sparked increased focus in 
addressing all social inequalities within American culture, including those within the 
educational system. Fortunately, as Internet access increases and technology improves, gaps in 
access to high-quality education will decrease as people can utilize online sources for education 
that were previously unobtainable because of cost or under-funded schools. It is vitally 
important that the online learning experience matches the in-person learning experience so 
those that use online learning sources to supplement their less-than equal in-person education 
opportunities can actually obtain on par education.  
Education for many exists outside of the four corners of a K-12 or university classroom. 
Students must supplement their education with additional resources online when their own 
school-systems fail to adequately support their needs. For example, in recognition of deficient 
access to computer science education in most school districts, CSforALL formed as a central hub 
of computer science education for U.S. youth in and out of school.9 An online coding course 
under this umbrella aimed at girls who aspire to STEM and computing careers cannot share the 
inspiring stories of role models like Katherine Johnson and Mary Jackson through short clips 
                                                      
8 Dan Brodnitz, The 20 Most Popular LinkedIn Learning Courses of the Year, LinkedIn (Sept. 28, 2020) 
https://www.linkedin.com/business/learning/blog/top-skills-and-courses/fy20-most-popular-courses-of-the-year-
hero. 
9 About CSforALL, CSforALL, https://www.csforall.org/about (last visited Dec. 10, 2020). 
 

[PAGE 7]
 
 
7 
 
from the Academy Award-nominated movie "Hidden Figures” under the current anti-
circumvention provisions. Of course, well-funded schools with STEM programs can freely share 
this clip in the classroom.  
Screen capture, a technology that allows for the use of encrypted works without requiring the 
legal right to decrypt them through an exemption, would perpetuate educational inequalities if 
it were to be the only tool that supplemental educational platforms could use to incorporate 
short clips from motion pictures in their educational materials. The image resolution, audio 
synchronization, and frame coherence of screen capture can degrade picture quality, create 
distortions in image and audio, and drop frames at critical moments. Reserving access to the 
highest quality materials furthers disparities in educational privileges which must be remedied 
to close the social inequalities that society has deemed unacceptable. 
Ruthe Farmer, former senior policy advisor for tech inclusion at the White House Office of 
Science and Technology Policy and current Chief Evangelist for CSforALL, believes that the use 
of motion picture clips in educational materials is necessary for today’s youth. Ms. Farmer 
describes current K-12 students as the “YouTube generation,” meaning that kids today learn 
through the use of videos. Preventing organizations like CSforALL and its member organizations 
from providing young students content that speaks to their mode of learning lessens the value 
of educational content made for kids. Restrictions on online classes also “disparately impact 
less-affluent children” who rely on extracurricular education sources outside of school and 
often online because their schools are underfunded, which is especially common in STEM 
education.10  
Expanding the Current Exemption Would Enable Innovative Educational Methods  
The use of short portions of motion pictures in offerings by educators and preparers of 
educational materials for online learning platforms allows for innovative teaching methods that 
enhance education. Osmosis.org, a health education platform, has found that the use of clips 
can expand how health professionals, medical students, and patients understand medical 
conditions. For example, enhanced understanding of achondroplasia is gained when Osmosis 
can incorporate in its online instructional materials a powerful scene in which Peter Dinklage, in 
character as "Game of Thrones’" Tyrion Lannister, shared the isolation and pain sometimes 
experienced by those with dwarfism. The presentation of the emotional scene for an 
educational rather than entertaining purpose provides unique insight for health professionals 
and students into the mental impacts of the condition that would not be gained if the online 
learning platform could not use short motion picture clips in its materials.11 Further, the 
emotional resonance of the scene is enhanced by the careful stitching of sound and image 
frame by frame. A distorted version, as could arise from screen capture, would potentially be 
humorous rather than moving, undercutting the purpose of using this clip as an educational 
example. 
                                                      
10 Interview with Ruthe Farmer, Chief Evangelist of CSforALL, (Nov. 24, 2020) by Student Attorneys of the 
Glushko-Samuelson Intellectual Property Law Clinic at American University Washington College of Law.  
11 Interview with Max Harris, Chief of Staff of Osmosis, (Dec 1, 2020) by Student Attorneys of the Glushko-
Samuelson Intellectual Property Law Clinic at American University Washington College of Law. 
[PAGE 8]
 
 
8 
 
Teachers, as well as college and university professors, also use online learning platforms to 
supplement their accredited courses. For example, some medical school professors use 
Osmosis to curate a list of pre-recorded videos tailored to match specific topics covered in their 
course syllabi. Students then watch the videos alongside their course materials. Unaccredited 
courses on online learning platforms like Osmosis have become unofficial extensions of 
accredited courses that instructors and students use to improve their learning materials.12 
 
Osmosis also believes that incorporating short portions of motion pictures in its online 
materials will enhance how patients understand medical diagnoses. For example, both the 
character Dustin on the Netflix TV series “Stranger Things” and his real-life counterpart, actor 
Gaten Matarazzo, have a rare genetic condition called cleidocranial dysplasia. Medical patients, 
especially children and their parents, may have difficulty grasping common symptoms including 
the underdevelopment of facial bones and teeth that this rare condition causes. Osmosis seeks 
to use a clip from the show displaying the details of the actor’s face so that the patients have a 
familiar reference to comprehend the otherwise unrelatable technical medical language. Not 
only does the clip help the family learn about the medical condition, but a young patient who 
may be struggling with self-image issues because of the condition now has a popular character 
with which he or she can relate and identify.13  
 
If online platforms like Osmosis cannot incorporate these kinds of clips in its materials because 
of the anti-circumvention measures, instructors and healthcare professionals would merely be 
able to describe the character to the patient. Instead, short clips can visually display 
information – as in-person instructions are able to – in order to demonstrate the details of a 
disease.  Using this clip from popular culture also introduces a young patient to an on-screen 
hero like actor Gaten Matarazzo who may inspire the child to watch the full “Stranger Things” 
series from which the clip was taken.  
 
Were the educators and preparers of educational materials for Osmosis and other similar 
online learning platforms like SketchyMedical, Lecturio, and Picmonic, to have the clear right to 
use short clips, these are types of uses they would employ to enhance the quality of their 
educational materials.14 However, because they do not currently fall within an existing 
exemption, the richness of their instructional materials is diminished. Professionals, students, 
and patients on these platforms should be able to enjoy the benefits that the use of these clips 
would create. 
 
The Anti-Circumvention Provisions Lessen the Quality of Learning Experiences that are Only 
Available Online During the Coronavirus Pandemic  
The coronavirus pandemic has forced traditional in-person learning experiences to shift online. 
Online learning is the exclusive way in which people can teach and learn when public safety 
measures like lockdowns and stay-at-home orders are in place. Forbidding the use of short 
                                                      
12 Id. 
13 Id. 
14 Id. 
[PAGE 9]
 
 
9 
 
motion picture clips restrains the educational experience unfairly when students would be able 
to enjoy critiquing the clips under normal circumstances. 
Private music study is an example of a form of education that was forced to shift online during 
the coronavirus pandemic. Lessons are traditionally taught at music stores or studios that have 
had to close under stay-at-home orders. In-home lessons have also been halted because of the 
accompanied safety concerns. Students are now using online learning platforms for their 
musical studies. Jared Falk, President and CEO of Musora Media, Inc., which includes the 
popular online music instructional platforms Drumeo, Guitareo, and Pianote under its umbrella, 
recognizes that the anticircumvention provisions “lower the quality of education and the value 
of the learning experience” for music students that are now studying online.15 
Students want to learn how to play like their favorite musicians, and instructors help students 
reach this goal by teaching specific techniques after studying clips of performances from DVDs 
together in the lesson. Musora Media’s instructional videos, which often likewise will focus 
entirely on how to play a specific musical part, are blocked from incorporating the necessary 
short clips from DVDs in its instructional materials by the anti-circumvention measures.  
Merely describing or mimicking the performance to a student fails as an adequate 
demonstration because an instructor cannot possibly convey the same bravado as the 
performer who inspired the student to want to learn in the first place. Instructors can 
recommend that students watch the chosen clips on a third-party source, but this breaks the 
flow of a lesson. There is also no guarantee that the clip will be available elsewhere. Students 
are thus robbed of this critical component of music learning.  
Screen capture is not a suitable alternative. Screen capturing jumbles audio synchronization, 
skips frames, and reduces resolution. The benefit of studying a musical performance is lost if 
the audio cannot be heard perfectly because of either desynchronization or a broken linearity 
from skipping frames. Likewise, using a clip of a musical performance to study what are often 
fine and nuanced techniques requires best-quality images so that these details can be easily 
scrutinized. 
Mr. Falk believes that “the goal should be to equalize the online and classroom experience with 
the student.”16 The outlet that music provides is perhaps more valuable than ever during the 
challenging times of a pandemic. It is therefore essential that students can access the same 
quality of music education online as in-person at a time where students cannot access 
traditional in-person music instruction. 
Workforce Displacement Has Forced a Reliance on Online Learning for Skills Training 
Millions of displaced workers from the pandemic are in urgent need of skills retraining as 
shifting market needs have rapidly accelerated. Online education is at the forefront of helping 
                                                      
15 Interview with Jared Falk, President and CEO of Musora Media, Inc., (Nov. 13, 2020)  by Student Attorneys of the 
Glushko-Samuelson Intellectual Property Law Clinic at American University Washington College of Law.  
16 Id. 
[PAGE 10]
 
 
10 
 
revitalize America’s workforce. For example, LinkedIn Learning reports a tripling of time spent 
on its platform over the last year, and over 3 million users watched its top twenty courses.17  
 
The economy is changing, and professionals are turning to online learning platforms like 
LinkedIn Learning to learn the skills that the post-pandemic market will require. America needs 
these professionals to adapt to the demands of a new economy. The Copyright Office should 
enable these millions of learners to enjoy the same benefits as learners enrolled in settings 
already covered by existing exemptions to the anti-circumvention provisions.  
Samara Iodice, Supervisor, Assets with LinkedIn Learning, notes the importance of using short 
motion picture clips in LinkedIn Learning’s education materials. For example, instructors 
teaching ethics in coding can find it challenging to demonstrate the lines between ethical and 
unethical coding effectively without replicating or creating unethical code themselves. Without 
short clips, instructors can merely describe the behaviors they consider unethical. With short 
clips, instructors can illustrate illegal hacking using fictional scenarios. For example, clips from 
the USA Network TV show “Mr. Robot” can show the illegal acts of a fictional cyber-vigilante 
who leads a global criminal hacking scheme.18  This is clearly a transformative use. Further, as in 
the previous example, a screen capture will potentially distort the impact of the example, 
inserting humor where the instructor wants to emphasize the seriousness of the situation.  
Now and within the next three years, enabling instructors of all types to benefit from tools to 
enhance how they teach millions of displaced workers new skills will be a service to America if 
the Librarian chooses to allow it.  
 
 
Congress Had a Broad and Encompassing Vision of Education, Learners, and  
The Role of Online Learning in Developing “Our Nation’s Human Resources” 
When It Crafted the TEACH Act   
  
Our new exemption for educators and preparers of educational materials for online learning 
platforms seeks to update DMCA exemptions to reflect the Internet of today for the broad 
range of education, learners, and national opportunities that Senate Judiciary Chair Orrin Hatch 
hoped to reach. He, the Senate, and Congress, saw modern technological advances as an 
opportunity for the country to offer breadth and equity in education, including for those far 
from classrooms or otherwise unable to participate in traditional educational systems.  
 
The legislative history of the TEACH Act is visionary in its anticipation of the reach of technology 
and the Internet to help us address broad national challenges, if we allow it. It envisions the 
Internet as a place for learners without normal schedules and for flexibly addressing national 
                                                      
17 Dan Brodnitz, The 20 Most Popular LinkedIn Learning Courses of the Year, LinkedIn (Sept. 28, 2020) 
https://www.linkedin.com/business/learning/blog/top-skills-and-courses/fy20-most-popular-courses-of-the-year-
hero. 
18 Interview with Samara Iodice, Supervisor, Assets for LinkedIn Learning, (Dec. 4, 2020) by Student Attorneys of 
the Glushko-Samuelson Intellectual Property Law Clinic at American University Washington College of Law.  
  

[PAGE 11]
 
 
11 
 
needs (and crises) for increasing access and opportunities. The TEACH Act holds the vision of 
the type of learning our signatories provide and for the type of exemption we request in this 
Triennial proceeding.  
 
Specifically, in his report to the Committee on the Judiciary on the Teach Act, Senator Hatch 
and the Senate Judiciary Committee laid out a broad vision for online education:  
 
“For our nation to maintain its competitive edge, it will need to extend education 
beyond children and young adults to lifelong learning for working adults, and to reach 
all students of all income levels, in cities and rural settings, in schools and on campuses, 
in the workplace, at home, and at times selected by students to meet their needs.”19 
 
This vision emphasizes the importance of providing education not only to those traditional 
learners in the K-12 and college and university systems, but also nontraditional learners who 
are not a part of that system. It is only by extending educational opportunities to the often-
looked-over class of nontraditional learners that the vision of Congress can be adequately 
fulfilled. Our signatories strive to achieve just that.  
 
Our exemption stays true to the original ideals Senator Hatch sought the Teach Act to have and 
falls in line with Congress’ intent to reach all learners and ensure that online educational 
institutions are permitted to deliver invaluable education to traditional and nontraditional 
students, both in the era of today’s crisis and beyond. 
 
Our Exemption Embraces Congress’ Broad Goals for the Internet and Education in the United 
States by Extending Education Outside the Classroom to Both Traditional and Nontraditional 
Learners   
 
With the TEACH Act, Congress envisioned  the development of this nation’s workforce; as 
Senator Hatch said eloquently in his report to the Senate Judiciary Committee, “Education is the 
means by which we develop our nation’s human resources.”20 Our exemption aligns with this 
vision and provides what Congress sought as demonstrated through our signatories.  
 
Our signatories provide flexible, around-the-clock supplemental educational programs to 
support students training either to enter the workforce for the first time or reenter the 
workforce. Some examples are those training to be doctors, nurses, physician’s assistants, and 
surgical aides through the use of Osmosis.org. Specifically, in the medical field, many of these 
programs are affiliated with, but not offered through, medical schools throughout the United 
States. They help students of all backgrounds better understand their courses, master the 
material and prepare for exams. These courses help to expedite the pipeline for our frontline 
responders and heroic medical staff who are saving lives during this pandemic and will be 
                                                      
19 (Committee on the Judiciary Report on Technology, Education and Copyright Harmonization Act of 2001) S. 
Rep. No. 107-31, at 4 (2001). 
20 Id. at 3.  
[PAGE 12]
 
 
12 
 
spending the coming years helping those who survive the virus recover from accompanying 
problems. 
 
Additionally, our signatories provide vibrant and engaging after-school, evening, weekend and 
summer programs. These programs include courses that help students learn to code, program 
robots, play math games and conduct science experiments as seen through CSforAll. Clips of 
films and TV shows would help make this online content accessible, showing, for example, 
science experiments that cannot now be done because the laboratories are not open. These 
clips would also be especially engaging and meaningful when women, African Americans and 
Latinos are shown as engineers, programmers, scientists and mathematicians because it would 
inspire younger generations to believe that their goals are achievable.  
 
The aforementioned examples are specific to a particular field, but educators and preparers of 
educational materials for online learning platforms provide supplemental education to much 
broader areas of practice. They are also pivotal in teaching new and emerging skills to millions 
of unemployed and displaced workers to find new skills and help them revitalize our economy 
as we recover, not only from the pandemic but from the displacement of workers by 
technology. This includes automation and the substitution of online delivery for brick-and-
mortar stores. The need for these online instructional opportunities has become crucial in the 
last six months and will be necessary for years to come.  
 
Our Exemption Limits the Risk for Copyright Owners by Calling on Educators and Preparers of 
Educational Materials for Online Learning Platforms to Take the Same Measures as MOOCs 
Using this Exemption Today 
 
The Register of Copyrights said the TEACH Act was meant to be “useful and important 
guidance” for this exemption.21 We have followed that approach and incorporated the 
Register’s recommendation in the filing of this petition. 
 
Specifically, educators and preparers of educational materials using short clips of films and TV 
shows with online learning platforms will adhere to the same types of commitments made by 
MOOCs covered by the exemption today. Our petition states:  
 
 “The online provider will limit these online learning materials, to the extent 
technologically feasible, to registered learners of the online learning platform, institute 
copyright policies, and provide copyright information to educators and preparers of 
online learning materials, learners, and relevant staff members.” 
 “Further, the online provider, to the extent technologically feasible, will work to 
reasonably prevent unauthorized further dissemination of online learning materials in 
accessible form to others, including after the registration period ends.” 
                                                      
21 Register of Copyrights, Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions  
to the Prohibition on Circumvention, Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights (Oct. 8, 2015)  
(“2015 Recommendation”) at 74. 
[PAGE 13]
 
 
13 
 
Like other exemption holders, educators and preparers of educational materials for online 
learning platforms will limit access to their courses, create policies and provide them to those 
who prepare the online materials, and build protections into their platforms and practices to 
prevent “unauthorized further dissemination” of the course materials. We note that because 
online learning platforms specialize in the use of Internet technology, the protections they offer 
may exceed the commitments offered in our petition.  
 
We trust that, in following the recommendation of the Register of Copyrights, the Copyright 
Office should construe the DMCA exemptions for online learning in a way that continues the 
same vision for learners and protections for copyright owners that the TEACH Act did in 2002, 
but not limit, stifle, or freeze online learning to a 1999 or 2002 world. 
 
The Use of Non-Profit, Accredited Restrictions from the TEACH Act are Outdated Due to the 
Advancement of the Internet 
 
When the TEACH Act was passed, the accreditation and non-profit categorization may have 
been seen as a rational sorting criterion for conventional schools and universities. However, the 
TEACH Act did not anticipate the exponential growth of other models for the delivery of what it 
considered a “digital educational” experience to our nationwide learners. As it has become 
apparent, with the almost complete shift from in-person to online learning in 2020, the 
requirement for an institution to be either accredited or nonprofit to be able to deliver a quality 
education equal to that of in-person learning is outdated. While including the limitation of non-
profit and accreditation may have been reasonable several years ago, removing these 
limitations now is essential to allow our educators and preparers of educational materials for 
online learning platforms to provide equitable learning conditions to our future doctors, nurses, 
computer scientists, chemists, biologists, and musicians. The consequences of not removing 
these limitations would be extremely detrimental to our recovery as a nation from this 
pandemic. 
 
Our Exemption Falls Squarely Within Fair Use Under the Copyright Act 
 
As noted earlier, the proposed uses of audiovisual materials are the same as those already 
accepted as qualifying fair use in the previous rulemaking. Through this exemption proposal we 
are not attempting to change the types of educational uses that are being exempted. Instead, 
we only seek an expansion of the users whose identical educational uses would likewise qualify 
as fair use.  
 
Our signatories make use of noncommercial speech in their course offerings. As cited in “Our 
Proposed Uses are Noninfringing Under Title 17”, noncommercial speech is inherent in learning 
and education, and our signatories exercise it when they teach medicine and coding and more. 
Noncommercial speech is not exclusive to nonprofit or accredited institutions.   
 
The limitations imposed regarding an institution’s status as being nonprofit or accredited stem 
from a concern that, absent any requirements, there would be potential harm to copyright 
[PAGE 14]
 
 
14 
 
holders. This concern can be found in the 1999 Report on Copyright and Digital Distance 
Education. The report stated:  
 
“At the same time, it is important to retain meaningful limitations on the eligible 
recipients; the performances or displays should not be made available to the general 
public. We recommend permitting transmissions to be made to students officially 
enrolled in the course, regardless of their physical location. Since today's digital and 
scrambling technologies allow transmissions to be targeted more precisely, the 
requirement should be added that the transmission must be made solely, to the extent 
technologically feasible, for reception by the defined class of eligible recipients.”22 
 
Our exemption stays true to the sentiment expressed by the Copyright Office. Our signatories 
do not make their library of content available to the “general public”, but rather limit access to 
users who have the required account and password. This holds true for our online learning 
platform signatories Lecturio, Osmosis, Picmonic, and SketchyMedical which offer no access or 
extremely limited access to non-account holders.  
  
Our Exemption is in Line With the Broad Vision of the Copyright Office in 1999, Including a 
Focus on the Learner, Not the Educator  
 
In its 1999 Report on Copyright and Digital Distance Education, the Copyright Office emphasized 
the importance of the learner and the growing needs of citizens around the country with the 
advancement of technology and need for distance education. Specifically, the Report 
acknowledges: 
 
“Distance education is reaching wider audiences, covering all segments of the 
population. The college audience is increasing particularly rapidly, in part due to 
responsiveness to the needs of an older, non-traditional student population, as well as 
students in other countries. Students also include professionals engaging in professional 
development or training, and retirees. The expansion of the field has led to changes 
among providers, with courses offered by both nonprofit and for-profit entities, on both 
a nonprofit and for-profit basis, and through varieties of partnerships among 
educational institutions and corporations.”23 
 
Here, the Copyright Office emphasizes the evolution of online learning extending beyond the 
traditional student with the ideal of how online education policy can truly be improved to serve 
nontraditional students in the way it has already been serving traditional students.  
 
This Report was visionary, in its day, for the embrace of new technologies for education. 
Specifically, the Report advocated: 
                                                      
22 U.S. Copyright Office, Report on Copyright and Digital Distance Education (1999), available at 
http://www.copyright.gov/reports/de_rprt.pdf at xviii. 
23 Id. at ii.  
[PAGE 15]
 
 
15 
 
“The desire to let markets evolve does not mean that the law must remain frozen. 
Where a statutory provision intended to implement a particular policy is written in such 
a way that it becomes obsolete due to changes in technology, the provision may require 
updating if that policy is to continue. Doing so may be seen not as preempting a new 
market, but as accommodating existing markets that are being tapped by new methods. 
In the view of the Copyright Office, section 110(2) represents an example of this 
phenomenon.”24 
 
Given that our exemption is consistent with the 1999 Report’s vision of the Internet as a 
medium for instruction and learning, we now implore the Copyright Office to also remain 
consistent with their vision in this Report. There have been not only great changes in 
technology but also extreme changes in the livelihoods of all Americans which has put online 
education at the forefront of saving lives and careers. To move forward as a country, especially 
now, online education and this exemption are pivotal.  
 
 
Our Proposed Uses are Noninfringing Under Title 17 
“Fair use is a key part of the social bargain at the heart of copyright law, in which as a society 
we concede certain limited individual property rights to ensure the benefits of creativity to a 
living culture. We have chosen to encourage creators by rewarding their efforts with copyright. 
To promote new cultural production, however, it also is important to give other creators 
opportunities to use copyrighted material when they are making something new that 
incorporates or depends on such material.”25  
 
As a society, we have chosen to make education and innovation priorities. To do so, we need 
the tools to provide learners of all kinds with equal access to education. Even those offering 
their lessons for a fee, including some educators and music instruction courses with online 
learning platforms, clearly fall under fair use protections and this special right provided by 
copyright law. 
 
Under § 107 of the Copyright Act, courts evaluate four factors on a case-by-case basis to 
determine whether a use constitutes fair use: (1) the purpose and character of the use, 
including whether such use is of a commercial nature or is for non-profit educational purposes; 
(2) the nature of the copyrighted work; (3) the amount and substantiality of the portion used in 
relation to the copyrighted work as a whole; and (4) the effect of the use upon the potential 
market for or value of the copyrighted work.26 
The first factor heavily weighs in favor of a fair use finding. The proposed class of uses is strictly 
for educational purposes, which is one of the acceptable fair use examples explicitly listed in 
                                                      
24 Id. at 144.  
25 Association of Independent Video and Filmmakers, et al., Documentary Filmmakers’ Statement of Best Practices 
in Fair Use, http://archive.cmsimpact.org/sites/default/files/fair_use_final.pdf (Nov. 2005). 
26 17 U.S.C. § 107 (2018). 

[PAGE 16]
 
 
16 
 
the preamble to § 107.27 Specifically, the purpose of any use under this exemption would be to 
educate online learners rather than merely replace the entertainment purpose of the original 
audiovisual work. Through the tailored discussion of short specific scenes in movies and TV 
shows, educators and preparers of online learning materials repurpose the short clips into an 
educational tool for learners in a way that is highly transformative.28  
Additionally, commercial use does not serve as a bar to fair use. We know that fair use is 
“healthy and vigorous in broadcast news and other commercial media, where references to 
popular films, classic TV programs, archival images, and popular songs are frequently 
unlicensed. Trade and academic publishers regularly rely on fair use to justify the incorporation 
of third-party material into books they produce.”29 Those educators and preparers of 
educational materials for online learning platforms, both non-profit and for-profit, are likewise 
engaged in a fair use of multimedia materials, and further, use them to further their mission of 
teaching and robust learning. 
The second factor, the nature of the copyrighted work, weighs heavily in favor of finding fair 
use. Movies and TV shows are created for mass audiences, in the U.S. and globally. In contrast, 
most online learning is created for specific and much smaller audiences, including students in a 
medical school class who need supplemental materials to master a concept or understand the 
feelings of a prospective patient.  A short clip can help them see through a news source how a 
celebrity responds to a particular disease, through a movie how a virus is transmitted across 
continents, and through a fictional prince’s eyes how his short stature changes every 
interaction of his life. Courts have found that the second factor “may be of limited usefulness 
where the creative work of art is being used for a transformative purpose.”30  Our use is highly 
transformative. 
 
Moreover, the third factor weighs in favor of fair use based on the prerecorded structure of 
online learning materials. The circumvention of audiovisual works is necessary to allow 
preparers of online materials to seamlessly incorporate portions of such works directly into pre-
planned and prerecorded content. Under our exemption, short excerpts of motion pictures and 
including television shows would only be incorporated by educators and preparers of 
educational materials for online learning platforms for the purpose of criticism, comment, 
illustration and explanation for registered learners of online learning platforms. Therefore, any 
                                                      
27 Id.  
28 See Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 580 (1994) (stating that the central purpose of the first 
factor in a fair use enquiry is to see whether the new work merely “supersede[s] the objects” of the original creation, 
or instead adds something new, with a further purpose of different character); see Authors Guild v. Google, Inc., 804 
F.3d 202, 214 (2d Cir. 2015) (“[A] transformative use is one that communicates something new and different from 
the original or expands its utility, thus serving copyright's overall objective of contr ibuting to public knowledge.”).  
29American University School of Communication Center for Social Media, et al., Code of Best Practices in Fair Use 
for Academic and Research Libraries,  https://cmsimpact.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/01/code_of_best_practices_in_fair_use_for_arl_final.pdf (Jan. 2012).  
30 Bill Graham Archives v. Dorling Kindersley Ltd., 448 F.3d 605, 612 (2d Cir. 2006). 

[PAGE 17]
 
 
17 
 
use of excerpts from audiovisual works would be concise and limited only to the extent 
necessary for such purposes.31  
  
Lastly, the fourth factor heavily weighs in favor of finding fair use. The proposed use under this 
exemption is identical to the uses found in the K-12, university, and MOOC educational 
exemptions. Therefore, the Copyright Office has already acknowledged that the effect of the 
use of educational clips upon the potential market of such clips is minimal at best. More 
importantly, legal precedent shows that transformative uses do not substitute the work in the 
marketplace.32 The educational use of clips is inherently “non-substitutional” by nature. The 
two markets – entertainment and online education – are so different that using clips in the 
manner proposed in this exemption does not substitute the market for TV shows and movies. 
Since our proposed exemption would limit use to short portions of audiovisual works for 
educational purposes and the use is highly transformative, it is very unlikely that employing a 
short clip in an online course would be a sufficient substitute to watching a full-length movie for 
entertainment.  
 
In fact, the proposed use of short portions of motion pictures arguably increases the market or 
value of the copyrighted work that was excerpted. For instance, Ruthe Farmer, Chief Evangelist 
for CSforALL, and other STEM leaders have increasingly urged Hollywood producers to cast 
more diverse representation for the roles of scientists, technologists, and surgeons.33  
 
In response to the passionate advocacy for diversity, TV shows and movies have begun to 
routinely cast women and minority actors in an effort to provide the audience with role models 
they could aspire to emulate. For young Latina STEM scholars, it is very likely that seeing a short 
clip of Mariana Foster, a main character in Freeform’s “Good Trouble”, navigate her way as a 
Latina female software engineer in a male dominated profession may inspire them to continue 
to study computer science, as their online STEM instructors seek. It is also very likely that these 
same students will rush to their televisions and streaming services to see the entire series, thus 
increasing the market for the show. We note that there is a phenomenon of youth 
programming featuring aspirational role models for underrepresented students, including 
Disney’s “Doc McStuffins”, “Girl Meets World”, Freeforms’ “The Fosters”, and ABC’s “Blackish”, 
which online learners may well discover from educational short clips. 
 
Given that all factors lean towards a finding of fair use, the use of audiovisual clips in online 
learning materials would qualify as a non-infringing use. 
 
 
                                                      
31 See Tresona Multimedia v. Burbank High Sch. Vocal, 953 F.3d 638 (9th Cir. 2020) (citing Kelly v. Arriba Soft 
Corp., 336 F.3d 811, 820-21 (9th Cir. 2003) (“If the secondary user only copies as much as is necessary for his or 
her intended use, then this factor will not weigh against’ fair use.”).  
32 See Campbell, 510 U.S. at 591 (‘‘cognizable market harm’’ is limited to ‘‘market substitution’’); Author’s Guild, 
Inc. v. HathiTrust, 755 F.3d 87, 99 (2d Cir. 2014) (“[A]ny economic ‘harm’ caused by transformative use s does not 
count because such uses, by definition, do not serve as substitutes for the original work”).  
33 Interview with Ruthe Farmer, Chief Evangelist of CSforALL (Nov. 24, 2020). 
[PAGE 18]
 
 
18 
 
Our TPMs are Strong 
 
We would like to note that our new exemption calls for educators and preparers of educational 
materials and their online learning platforms to use technological protection measures 
analogous to those used by MOOCs, for which the Copyright Office has already granted an 
exemption. As stated in our petition, they will, to the extent technologically feasible, work to 
reasonably prevent unauthorized further dissemination of online educational materials using 
short clips of movies and TV shows. These protections are meant to acknowledge the 
importance of protecting the copyright owners’ works.  
 
As we presented in our 9/8/2020 petition, “To provide clarity to the educational practice of 
online instructional learning, in this 8th Triennial Rulemaking of the U.S. Copyright Office, we 
seek to add a new educational exemption under 17 U.S.C. § 1201: 
 
To allow educators and preparers of online learning materials to use short portions of 
motion pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in 17 U.S.C. 101, for 
the purpose of criticism, comment, illustration and explanation in offerings for 
registered learners on online learning platforms when use of the film and media 
excerpts will contribute significantly to learning. 
 
The online provider will limit these online learning materials, to the extent 
technologically feasible, to registered learners of the online learning platform, institute 
copyright policies, and provide copyright information to educators and preparers of 
online learning materials, learners, and relevant staff members. 
 
Further, the online provider, to the extent technologically feasible, will work to 
reasonably prevent unauthorized further dissemination of online learning materials in 
accessible form to others, including after the registration period ends.” 
 
 
Statutory Factors Favor Allowing Short Clips As Set Out Above 
 
We know without doubt that education is moving online, and that the movement has been 
greatly accelerated due to the pandemic.34 We submit with the certainty of research and 
investigations of the last three months that our nation’s learners, young and old, virtually all 
online now, will be adversely affected by the prohibition under subparagraph (A) if educators 
and preparers of educational materials for online learning platforms, as defined within this 
proposed exemption, are not allowed to make noninfringing uses of copyrighted works as 
discussed here. The upcoming three years, which will encompass our nation’s recovery period 
and transition to a new economy and way of life, similarly depend on these resources. 
Accordingly, and as requested, we evaluate the five statutory factors enumerated in 
§1201(a)(1)(C) and submit that our proposed exemption exceeds the statutory requirements. 
                                                      
34 Laura Meckler & Hannah Natanson, Remote learning widens equity gap, Washington Post, Dec. 7, 2020, at A1. 
[PAGE 19]
 
 
19 
 
(i) the availability for use of the copyrighted works:  
 
This comment and request for exemption is not premised upon a general lack of availability of 
works, but rather on the unavailability of works stored on certain TPM-protected formats for 
specific educational uses that could benefit learners using online learning platforms. There are 
a number of sources that educators and preparers of educational materials for online learning 
platforms may excerpt clips from, including DVDs, Blu-Ray discs, and online streaming sources. 
Despite the availability of works, the DCMA’s ban on circumventing technological measures on 
copyrighted works prevents many online learning platforms from accessing these sources to 
incorporate short clips into their courses. 
 
(ii) the availability for use of works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational 
purposes:  
 
As discussed above, the courses of online learning platforms supplement and augment 
traditional education. That is why the Joint Educators, so often before this forum in these 
Triennial Proceedings, come again to seek this new exemption. Professor Peter Decherney 
wants his children, and all children, to have access to engaging online instruction material in 
piano, percussion and guitar. Seeing a riff by Eddie Van Halen may inspire them to continue 
practicing the guitar and showing a few moments of how the great drummer Jeff Porcaro bends 
his wrists to achieve the “shuffle” sound in his famous “Rosanna” shuffle is a fair use that 
should be available to all aspiring musicians. Further, even before the coronavirus, many 
schools were cutting their music and arts programs for lack of funding. The instructional 
materials of online learning platforms, non-profit and for-profit, “fill the gap” to supplement 
and augment non-profit educational offerings.  
 
Osmosis.org aligns with medical schools across the U.S. and medical school professors choose 
their students’ Osmosis courses alongside the medical course curricula. The Osmosis materials 
provide educational supplements, drills for the intense memorization requirement, and 
examples to help drive concepts home. Their online learning materials help a range of other 
learnings, including nursing and physician’s assistant students, to see difficult materials in new 
and illustrative ways. CSforAll has 104 members organizations dedicated to offering K-12 STEM 
education at places like the Boys and Girls Clubs, Girl Scouts, 4-H and other community 
locations just outside of school doors when the communities cannot support the technology or 
teachers themselves. 
 
Whether for-profit or non-profit, accredited or unaccredited, the online education system has 
stepped forward to work together with traditional educational institutions and educators to 
seek the use of short clips for educational purposes that are clearly protected under fair use.  
We note that currently educators and preparers of educational materials for unaccredited and 
for-profit online learning platforms may not embed noninfringing audiovisual works into their 
courses without a license from the copyright owner, but we are not aware of any market 
offerings that provide educators and preparers of educational materials for online learning 
platforms with the clips they need. As a result, educators and preparers of educational 
[PAGE 20]
 
 
20 
 
materials for online learning platforms have shared with us that many opportunities are lost: 
rich content and examples are left unshared. It is a matter of grave concern and fundamental 
equity to Professor Decherney, Professor Sender, Dr. Stein, and the other Joint Educators that 
online learning platforms, as defined and limited in this petition, are unable to use the same 
audiovisual materials that in-person educators and MOOC providers can use and thus, cannot 
provide the same quality educational experience. 
 
(iii) the impact that the prohibition on the circumvention of technological measures applied 
to copyrighted works has on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or 
research  
 
As illustrated extensively above, the inability of educators and preparers of educational 
materials for online learning platforms to legally circumvent TPMs significantly undermines 
their ability to provide a well-rounded and enhanced educational experience. Including short 
clips of movies and television shows in online courses has the ability to capture students’ 
attention and get them to engage more actively with the material. Short clips serve many 
potential functions, including providing visual examples of a concept being taught, encouraging 
commentary and critique of the work, inspiring students to think bigger, and allowing them to 
engage with the shared experiences of the characters depicted onscreen. 
 
With a significant part of the population now turning to the Internet for educational 
opportunities, there is an expectation that they will have high-quality options to choose from. 
Our national learners, of all ages and for all professions and purposes, are at a serious 
disadvantage if educators and preparers of educational materials for online learning platforms 
cannot provide the same quality educational experience as more traditional teaching 
environments. Prohibiting these educators and preparers from using these clips at the same 
audiovisual quality will only serve to heighten the unequal access issues that already pervade 
the educational system.  
 
(iv) the effect of circumvention of technological measures on the market for or value of 
copyrighted works  
 
The circumvention of technological measures by educators and preparers of educational 
materials for online learning platforms would be strictly limited to minimize the potential effect 
on the market or value of copyrighted works. The exemption requires online learning providers 
to limit access to the materials to registered learners, implement copyright policies, provide 
copyright information, and work to reasonably prevent unauthorized sharing of the online 
learning materials. The clips being excerpted are meant for the limited purpose of educating 
students by emphasizing or illustrating a concept as part of the learning experience, so it is 
unlikely that those accessing the clips would reuse them. However, should this occur, reuse of 
short clips would be unlikely to affect the value of the copyrighted work from which it was 
sampled, as the clips are short in duration and not meant to replace the experience of viewing 
the work in its entirety. In fact, if the incorporated clips serve their intended purpose of 
engaging students more fully, students may choose to seek out the full version of the work, 
thereby increasing the market or value of the copyrighted work that was excerpted.  
[PAGE 21]
 
 
21 
 
(v) such other factors as the Librarian considers appropriate 
 
On December 7, 2020, the front page of the Washington Post shared the upsetting news, 
“Remote learning widens equity gap.” The inability for students to attend school because of the 
coronavirus pandemic has had dire consequences for their education.35 A new study shows that 
students have lost months’ worth of math skills during the pandemic, with students of color 
being affected most significantly.36 The shift to online learning has posed many difficulties for 
students and is resulting in many students being left behind.37 This learning deficit 
demonstrates that there is a stronger need than ever for quality online learning content that 
can replicate the in-person learning environment as closely as possible. To allow educators and 
preparers of educational materials for online learning platforms to use short clips in their 
materials will help bridge this gap by engaging students more fully and illustrating concepts in 
more relatable ways.  
  
 
Conclusion 
 
Desire for knowledge and belief in education as a tool for self-improvement run deep in the 
culture of the United States. This is reflected in the familiar language of Article I, Section 8, 
Clause 8 of our Constitution, which exemplifies our shared belief in the “Progress of Science 
and useful Arts.”  
 
We ask only for clarification that educators and preparers of educational materials for online 
learning platforms may use short quotations of motion pictures including TV shows to bring the 
most vivid, exciting, and inspiring examples to their lessons. 
 
                                                      
35 Id.  
36 Id. 
37 Id.  
