[PAGE 1]
This is a Word document that allows users to type into the spaces below. The comment may be single-spaced, but 
should be in at least 12-point type. The italicized instructions on this template may be deleted.  
 
 
[   ] Check here if multimedia evidence is being provided in connection with this comment 
ITEM A.  COMMENTER INFORMATION  
The Petition submitter is Software Freedom Conservancy (Conservancy), a not-for-profit 
organization that helps to promote, improve, develop, and defend Free and Open Source 
Software (FOSS)—software developed by volunteer communities and licensed for the benefit of 
everyone. Conservancy is the nonprofit home for dozens of FOSS projects representing well over 
a thousand volunteer contributors. Our communities maintain some of the most fundamental 
utilities in computing today, and introduce innovations that will shape how software will be 
created in the future. 
 Conservancy fights for software freedom, which gives people control over the 
functionality of the software they use, including the freedom to add or remove features. One of 
the most important aspects of this control is allowing individuals to determine when and how 
private information is sent to other people or companies. Because of this, Conservancy naturally 
cares deeply about privacy for all software users. While our ultimate organizational goal is to 
preserve all software freedom for everyone, the ability to protect one’s own privacy is one of the 
most essential rights in the entire group of rights that software freedom activists seek. 
Conservancy is at the forefront of non-profit organizations in making practical progress toward a 
future where people can correct and improve the software in devices they own, in large part to 
improve their privacy while using these devices.  
Conservancy may be contacted as follows: 
Karen Sandler, Executive Director 
Software Freedom Conservancy, Inc. 
137 Montague St., Ste. 
380 Brooklyn, NY 11201-3548 
dmca-exemption@sfconservancy.org 
+1-212-461-3245 
 
  
[PAGE 2]
 
 
2 
 
ITEM B.  PROPOSED CLASS ADDRESSED 
Proposed Class 13: Computer Programs—Security Research  
To expand “good-faith security research” to include good-faith testing, investigation, 
and/or correction of privacy issues (including flaws or functionality that may expose personal 
information) and permits the owner of the device to remove software or disable functionality that 
may expose personal information.  
ITEM C.  BRIEF OVERVIEW OF PROPOSED EXEMPTION 
In its Notice of Proposed Rulemaking for 2021 the Office says that it intends to 
recommend renewal the exemption permitting circumvention of technological protection 
measures (“TPMs”) that control access to copyrighted works for purposes of “good-faith security 
research,” codified at 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(11). Conservancy supports the renewal of this 
exemption and seeks its expansion to encompass good-faith testing, investigation, and/or 
correction of privacy issues. 
There is a significant degree of overlap between security and privacy research. Privacy 
researchers use many of the same techniques to access and assess the functionality of the 
programs they study. And often, privacy issues result from security flaws, such as when private 
information may be accessed due to the vulnerabilities in software. But privacy research extends 
beyond such issues, for example to investigating whether a company’s data collection practices 
are consistent with their stated policies. The security research exemption, which applies only to 
research “testing, investigation, and/or correction of a security flaw or vulnerability,” therefore 
does not protect the full gamut of socially valuable privacy research.1  
Likewise, the permanent statutory exemption at 17 USC § 1201(i) permits end users to 
take measures to disable privacy-invasive functionality, but does not extend to publicly-minded 
research. Circumvention is permitted only if “carried out solely for the purpose of preventing the 
collection or dissemination of personally identifying information about a natural person who 
seeks to gain access to the work protected.”2 Privacy research is typically focused on 
documenting and explaining a product’s functionality, and largely for the benefit of people other 
than the privacy researchers themselves.  
Because the existing exemptions do not adequately protect privacy researchers, the 
security research exemption should be clarified to explicitly protect privacy research. As to 
Conservancy’s request for an expansion of the good-faith security research exemption to permit 
consumers to “remove software or disable functionality that may expose personal information,” 
we recognize that 17 USC § 1201(i) addresses such end-user mitigations and is the more 
appropriate focus of any proposed expansion to those protections. Conservancy discusses the 
limitations of § 1201(i) below and suggests that the Office recommend legislation to expand § 
                                                      
1 See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(11). 
2 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(i)(1)(D) (exemption only applicable where the “act of circumvention is 
carried out solely for the purpose of preventing the collection or dissemination of personally 
identifying information”) (emphasis added); See also id. § (A) and (D) (“personally identifying 
information” must relate to the “person who seeks to gain access to the work protected”).  
[PAGE 3]
 
 
3 
 
1201(i) to address these concerns rather than expanding the good-faith security research 
exemption to do so.  
ITEM D.  TECHNOLOGICAL PROTECTION MEASURE(S) AND METHOD(S) OF CIRCUMVENTION 
A. Privacy-Focused Research Requires Circumvention of TPMs  
The techniques used by privacy researchers to study how software collects and uses 
private information are largely the same as those used by security researchers. These include 
installing legitimately obtained software on devices for the purpose of evaluating the device’s 
functionality,3 de-obfuscating and decompiling code in order to study it,4 and accessing protected 
memory spaces to evaluate the software within.5 
Often, these techniques reveal privacy concerns that do not relate to security 
vulnerabilities, for example:  
 Researchers at Cardiff University published a paper in 2018 analyzing the 
security and privacy practices of various internet-connected home devices, to 
determine whether they were consistent with manufacturers’ privacy policies.6 To 
analyze whether a “smart plug” transmitted information other than that disclosed 
in its privacy policies, the researchers extracted and decompiled the device’s 
firmware to reverse-engineer its data-encryption scheme and read its encrypted 
outbound traffic.7  
 Researchers at Princeton University decompiled the mobile app associated with 
an internet-connected “hydration tracker” water bottle marketed to children and 
discovered by examining the code that the application “imported libraries for 
communication with third-party analytics and performance monitoring services…, 
[including] Yahoo’s Flurry Analytics, Google Analytics, Crashlytics, and a 
Chinese analytics platform.”8 
                                                      
3 See Dr. Matthew D. Green, Comment on Sixth Triennial 1201 Rulemaking Proceeding at 5 
(Feb. 6, 2015), available at https://cdn.loc.gov/copyright/1201/2015/comments-
020615/InitialComments_shortform_MGreen_Class22.pdf (hereinafter “Green 2015 
Comment”). 
4 See id at 7. 
5 See id at 8. 
6 Alanoud Subahi and George Theodorakopoulos, Ensuring compliance of IoT devices with their 
Privacy Policy Agreement, available at 
http://orca.cf.ac.uk/123089/1/Ensuring%20compliance%20of%20IoT%20devices%20with%20th
eir%20Privacy%20Policy%20Agreement.pdf.  
7 Id. 
8 Gordon Chu, Noah Apthorpe, and Nick Feamster, Security and Privacy Analyses of Internet of 
Things Children’s Toys, available at https://arxiv.org/pdf/1805.02751.pdf. 
[PAGE 4]
 
 
4 
 
 An independent researcher used a “debug port” on an internet-connected 
presence, temperature, and humidity monitor to extract the device’s firmware and 
analyze its functionality.9 
As the Office recognized in its 2015 recommendation to adopt the security research 
exemption, these techniques require researchers to first bypass various forms of TPM where 
they’re used, “including challenge-response mechanisms, dongles, code obfuscation, runtime 
checks, encryption, and disabled access ports on the circuitry [of computing devices].”10  
A recent example will illustrate where TPMs have prevented research into privacy issues 
unrelated to vulnerabilities. Developers of Android any iOS applications commonly use code 
obfuscation or encryption measures to prevent reverse engineering.11 Earlier this year, a privacy 
researcher discovered, after decompiling the popular social media smartphone application 
TikTok, that the application was collecting information far in excess of what it disclosed to the 
public in its privacy policy.12 To discover these data collection practices, the researcher was 
required to circumvent an “unusual added layer of encryption” that hindered reverse engineering 
of the application.13 The application did not necessarily use private information insecurely, only 
contrary to the company’s disclosures. 
B. End Users Must Circumbent TPMs to Adopt Privacy Safeguards  
Consumers who learn about privacy issues in the devices or software they own may wish 
to adopt safeguards to protect their privacy. Modifying hardware or software to alter or disable 
functionality, however, often requires circumventing TPMs.  
                                                      
9 DZone, Reverse Engineering of a Not-So-Secure IoT Device, Erich Styger, available at 
https://dzone.com/articles/reverse-engineering-of-a-not-so-secure-iot-device.  
10 See United States Copyright Office, Section 1201 rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding to 
Determine Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention, October 2015, available at 
https://cdn.loc.gov/copyright/1201/2015/registers-recommendation.pdf (hereinafter “Register’s 
2015 Recommendation”) at Pg. 254.   
11 Simform, How to avoid reverse engineering of your android app?, available at 
https://www.simform.com/how-to-avoid-reverse-engineering-of-your-android-app/; App 
Sealing, Securing Mobile Apps Against Reverse Engineering, Govindraj Basatwar, available at, 
https://www.appsealing.com/securing-mobile-apps-against-reverse-engineering/; IBM Mobile 
Foundation, Obfuscating Android code using Proguard in MobileFirst Foundation 8.0, available 
at https://mobilefirstplatform.ibmcloud.com/blog/2016/09/19/mfp-80-obfuscating-android-code-
with-proguard/. See also Register’s 2015 Recommendation at Pg. 254 (recognizing code 
obfuscation and encryption as technological protection measures). 
12 Digital Information World, This researcher claimed to reverse-engineered TikTok app, and 
unveiled alarming privacy aspect, Arooj Ahmed, available at 
https://www.digitalinformationworld.com/2020/06/tiktok-app-alarming-privacy-aspect.html.  
13 The Wall Street Journal, TikTok Tracked User Data Using Tactic Banned by Google, Kevin 
Poulsen and Robert McMillan, available at https://www.wsj.com/articles/tiktok-tracked-user-
data-using-tactic-banned-by-google-11597176738;  

[PAGE 5]
 
 
5 
 
For example, modifying the code running on an electronic device requires the consumer 
to replace the device’s firmware. Firmware is often cryptographically signed or encrypted to 
prevent the device from running code not explicitly authorized by the manufacturer.14 Firmware 
encryption is used on wireless cameras15 and smart TVs.16 Amazon’s Echo smart speaker 
likewise uses cryptographic signatures to prevent the installation of unauthorized firmware 
updates.17 A consumer wishing to modify the device’s functionality would need to circumvent 
these measures to do so.18  
ITEM E.  ASSERTED ADVERSE EFFECTS ON NONINFRINGING USES  
A. The prohibition on circumvention chills privacy research and harms consumers 
Privacy researchers are adversely affected by § 1201’s prohibition on circumvention 
because it is often necessary to circumvent TPMs on copyrighted computer programs for the 
purpose of testing, investigating, and correcting privacy issues. By putting essential research 
techniques in legal jeopardy, the prohibition chills beneficial privacy research. 
This also harms consumers, because consumer privacy in the United States is largely 
driven by the “notice and choice” approach, making it incumbent on individuals to decide, on the 
basis of available information, which products align with their privacy interests.19 Without the 
work of independent privacy researchers, consumers seeking to assess the privacy practices of 
companies they entrust with their personal information must rely solely on the companies’ own 
privacy disclosures. Adequate protections for privacy research are necessary to support informed 
consumer choice. 
1. The class of works affected  
The proposed exemption would permit privacy researchers to circumvent the TPMs on 
computer programs, including desktop and mobile applications, as well as software embedded in 
computing devices—the same class of works encompassed by the security research exemption.20 
All of these are computer programs protected by copyright. 
                                                      
14 Sternum, Is Encryption Enough for Security? - Part 1, available at 
https://www.sternumiot.com/blog/2019/4/8/is-encryption-enough-for-security-part-1.  
15 See IPVM, Cyber Security - Firmware Encryption, https://ipvm.com/forums/video-
surveillance/topics/cyber-security-firmware-encryption. 
16 See Marco Ramilli, Firmware Hacking: The Samsung smart TV turn, available at 
https://marcoramilli.com/2013/05/13/firmware-hacking-the-samsung-smart-tv-turn/. 
17 See  XDA, Sideloading an Echo Show?, https://forum.xda-developers.com/t/sideloading-an-
echo-show.3871093/. 
18 See Register’s 2015 Recommendation at 254 (discussing the role of firmware encryption as a 
TPM). 
19 Berkeley Law, Alan Westin’s Privacy Homo Economicus, Chris Jay Hoofnagle and Jennifer 
M. Urban, available at https://www.law.berkeley.edu/research/bclt/research/privacy-at-
bclt/berkeley-consumer-privacy-survey/.  
20 See Register’s 2015 Recommendation at 254 (discussing the class of works affected by 
security research). 

[PAGE 6]
 
 
6 
 
2. The proposed uses are non-infringing 
Privacy researchers examine computer programs to determine whether their functionality 
is consistent with the manufacturers’ disclosures, with the law, and with best practices. These 
uses are non-infringing because they make use only of the non-protected elements of the works, 
and because they are fair use. 
a. Privacy researchers make use of non-protected elements of computer programs 
When privacy researchers access a protected work, such as a mobile application or the 
firmware of an internet-connected camera, they are not concerned with the work’s expressive 
elements, but with their functional elements—what the work is doing and how. The works 
produced by these researchers, typically in the form of research reports and academic papers, 
typically do not incorporate any expressive portion of the works studied. Because copyright does 
not protect functional elements of a work,21 or any “process, system, [or] method of operation,” 
17 U.S.C. § 102, the work of privacy researchers is fundamentally non-infringing.22  
b. The proposed uses are fair use 
Privacy research, like security research, sometimes requires reproduction, and adaptation 
of a protected work in service of the research.23 For example, when a researcher decompiles a 
binary application, the resulting decompiled source code may be an adaptation of the work. But 
as the Office has recognized in the context of approving the security exemption, such 
intermediate or ancillary uses in service of good-faith research are fair uses.24 
All four fair use factors support this conclusion. First, the “purpose and character” of the 
access and reproduction of the protected work would be for “academic inquiry” or would “result 
in criticism or comment about the work and the devices in which [the protected work] is 
incorporated.”25 Second, the “nature of the copyrighted work”—computer programs—is “likely 
to fall on the functional rather than creative end of the spectrum,” affording them thinner 
copyright protection and favoring privacy researchers’ claim to fair use of the work.26 Third, 
privacy researchers will only copy the portion of the software necessary to evaluate the 
“functional elements” of the computer program, which are not protected by Copyright law, and 
any copying of the non-functional aspects of the inspected code will be incidental, with such 
                                                      
21 See Sony Computer Entm’t, Inc. v. Connectix Corp., 203 F.3d 596, 602 (9th Cir. 2000) (citing 
17 U.S.C. § 102(b)).   
22 See Register’s 2015 Recommendation at 301 (computer programs “are likely to fall on the 
functional rather than creative end of the spectrum”). 
23 Dr. Matthew D. Green, Comment on Sixth Triennial 1201 Rulemaking Proceeding at 15 (Feb. 
6, 2015), available at https://cdn.loc.gov/copyright/1201/2015/comments-
020615/InitialComments_shortform_MGreen_Class22.pdf. 
24 See Register’s 2015 Recommendation at Pg. 300 (discussing the application of the Fair Use 
factors to good-faith security research); citing 17 U.S.C. § 107 (listing Fair Use factors). 
25 See Register’s 2015 Recommendation Pg. 300-01 citing § 107 (1). 
26 See id. at 301 (citing § 107 (2). 
[PAGE 7]
 
 
7 
 
incidental copying traditionally being considered fair use.27 Lastly, any market harm resulting 
from privacy research “would be due to potential criticism... which is not considered a 
cognizable harm under” the fair use factors.28  
In sum, privacy research will concern the same class of protected works covered by the 
existing good-faith security research exemption, and, for the same reasons the Office found 
good-faith security research to be non-infringing fair use, privacy research will similarly “be 
socially productive and fair” under § 107.  
3. Existing exemptions are insufficient to protect privacy researchers.  
While privacy research and security research often overlap, valuable privacy research 
may not always meet the criteria for the exemption at 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(11), because 
investigating how a product or service collects and disseminates consumer information may not 
relate to any “security flaw or vulnerability.” Rather, privacy researchers often aim to investigate 
and raise awareness about the intended (although obscured or undocumented) functioning of a 
particular product or service. 
The investigation of the TikTok mobile app described above illustrates this distinction.29 
Although TikTok’s data collection practices were a violation of its users’ privacy, the violation 
was not the result of any security flaw. Rather, TikTok was reportedly intentionally collecting 
the data for advertising targeting purposes.30 Similarly the research cited above concerning 
whether various internet connected devices are in compliance with privacy regulations and 
privacy disclosures was concerned with exposing deceptive marketing or ethically questionable 
practices, rather than vulnerabilities or other security issues.31  
The permanent statutory exemption permitting circumvention for purposes of protecting 
“personally identifying information,” codified at 17 USC 1201(i), also fails to adequately protect 
privacy focused research. The exemption is only applicable where the “act of circumvention is 
carried out solely for the purpose of preventing the collection or dissemination of personally 
identifying information.”32 Privacy research focused on documenting and explaining a product’s 
information practices—rather than seeking to prevent or disable any particular data collection 
practice—would therefore fall outside this exemption.   
Moreover, the exemption is available only to the person whose “personally identifying 
information” is collected or disseminated by the product.33 But privacy researchers primarily 
investigate products not to prevent collection and dissemination of their own personally 
                                                      
27 See id. at 301 (citing § 107 (3)). 
28 See id. at 302 (citing § 107 (4)). 
29 See supra, § Item D (A). 
30 Tech Crunch, TikTok found to have tracked Android users’ MAC addresses until late last year, 
Natasha Lomas, available at https://techcrunch.com/2020/08/12/tiktok-found-to-have-tracked-
android-users-mac-addresses-until-late-last-year/.  
31 See supra, § Item D(A). 
32 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(i)(1)(D) (emphasis added). 
33 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(i)(1)(A). 

[PAGE 8]
 
 
8 
 
identifying information, but “to promote the security or safety of the class of devices or machines 
on which the computer program operates, or those who use such devices or machines.”34  
In sum, the relevant exemptions fail to protect privacy research (a) focused on 
documenting and explaining a product’s information practices, rather than seeking to prevent any 
particular data collection practice, and (b) research focused on products that collect information 
from individuals other than the researcher. Accordingly, the universe of privacy research 
protected by the relevant exemptions is unduly narrow, excluding a wide variety of good faith, 
and socially beneficial, privacy investigations. 
4. The prohibition adversely affects non-infringing uses 
The lack of a clear exemption for privacy-focused research has similar adverse effects as 
those underlying the security research exemption.35 Specifically, the current prohibition limits 
privacy researcher’s ability to investigate TPM-protected software, which as this Office noted, 
represents “a significant number” of consumer products.36 As a result, privacy researchers are 
discouraged from producing good-faith privacy research—including criticism, comment, news 
reporting, scholarship, and research related to privacy issues—with respect to a wide swath of 
consumer products.37  
Although some privacy research can be conducted with the consent of copyright holders, 
for all the same reasons discussed by the Office with respect to information security research, 
many copyright holders may withhold their consent in the event that privacy researchers plan to 
release critical or negative analysis of a copyright holder’s product.38 This outcome will similarly 
deprive the public of important information about products that handle increasingly sensitive 
personal information. 
5. The statutory factors favor the exemption 
a. Availability for use of copyrighted works  
 Expanding the security research exemption to include good-faith privacy research will 
increase the availability of copyrighted works. First, consumers are more likely to purchase 
products—and trust them with their personal data—if the products have been vetted by 
independent privacy researchers. Second, privacy research may spur the development of more 
privacy-protecting products than is presently offered in the market. Third, the exemption will 
promote the publication of privacy research in the form of “scholarly articles and presentations, 
as well as new computer programs aimed at rectifying” the various privacy issues discovered by 
researchers.39  
                                                      
34 See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(11)(ii). 
35 See Register’s 2015 Recommendation at 305. 
36 Id. 
37 Id. 
38 Id. at 306. 
39 Id. at 310. 
[PAGE 9]
 
 
9 
 
b. The impact that the prohibition on circumvention of technological measures applied 
to copyrighted works has on scholarship and research  
Expanding the good-faith security research exemption to include good-faith privacy 
research will “enhance criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship and 
research.”40 Should the exemption be expanded, research focused on privacy issues that don’t 
necessarily relate to security flaws or vulnerabilities will encourage the production of scholarship 
and research related to such issues. Additionally, increased privacy research may “enhance 
media attention to, and reporting on, [privacy] issues.”41  
c. The proposed exemption’s effect on the market for or value of copyrighted works will 
be positive 
Expanding the good-faith security research exemption to include good-faith privacy 
research will not have any adverse effect on the value of the copyrighted work at issue. As noted 
by the Office with respect to the information security exemption, harm to the copyright holder 
due to the exposure of security issues is not relevant to the Office’s inquiry, and the same is true 
for privacy issues. Moreover, as the Office acknowledged with respect to security research, 
“knowledge of and ability to correct [software] flaws will in fact enhance the value of the 
software and products at issue.”42 Accordingly, privacy research will not adversely affect the 
market for or value of copyrighted works for the same reasons noted by the Office with respect 
to security research.43  
B. The prohibition on circumvention prevents end users from protecting their privacy 
In addition to expanded protections for privacy researchers, Conservancy suggests an 
expansion of the permanent exemption at 17 USC § 1201(i). The current exemption permits end 
users to circumvent TPMs to “identify[] and disable[]” the collection and dissemination of 
“personally identifying information reflecting [their own] online activities.”44 The exemption is 
available only where the work collects or disseminates such information “without providing 
conspicuous notice of such collection or dissemination to such person, and without providing 
such person with the capability to prevent or restrict such collection or dissemination.”45 This 
exemption’s limitations have not kept pace with the expanding scope of privacy issues raised by 
new technology. 
First, § 1201(i) only permits the consumer to modify a device that “contains the 
capability of collecting or disseminating personally identifying information reflecting the online 
activities of a natural person.”46 Many internet connected devices, however, such as smart 
cameras, voice-enabled smart TVs and smart speakers, and health and fitness trackers, passively 
                                                      
40 Id. 
41 Id. at 311 (finding this statutory factor to “weighs strongly in favor of the exemption” with 
respect to security research). 
42 Id. 
43 Id. 
44 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(i). 
45 See id (emphasis added). 
46 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(i)(1)(A) (emphasis added). 
[PAGE 10]
 
 
10 
 
collect information about their owners’ offline activities as well.47 Accordingly, the current 
permanent exemption fails to encompass consumer modifications to a wide range of devices that 
collect sensitive offline information about consumers, including highly intimate details about 
one’s health and travel habits.48 
Second, a consumer may wish to modify a device in a manner that protects the 
“personally identifying information” of those other than the person making the modification to 
the device.49 For example, a consumer may want to make modifications to a smart camera that 
captures the activities of those outside of one’s home, or make modifications to networking 
equipment to monitor and protect the internet activities of one’s children. Accordingly, the 
current permanent exemption fails to encompass consumer modifications directed at protecting 
the privacy of those other than the consumer.  
Finally, consumers commonly become aware of privacy issues with their devices after 
purchasing them, despite “conspicuous notice” from the manufacturer of its privacy practices.50 
Many consumers are not necessarily aware of the implications of such notices until being 
exposed to more detailed reporting on them in the media. In some cases, it’s increasingly 
difficult to find products that don’t transmit data to third parties.51 A consumer should have the 
legal right to correct privacy issues on their own devices regardless of their privacy savvy at the 
point of sale, and even where the market offers no privacy-respecting alternatives. 
To address these limitations, 17 USC § 1201(i) could be expanded to additionally permit 
users to circumvent TPMs where: 
                                                      
47 See James K. Wilcox, How to Turn Off Smart TV Snooping Features, Consumer Reports, Jan. 
27, 2020, available at https://www.consumerreports.org/privacy/how-to-turn-off-smart-tv-
snooping-features/; Dorian Lynskey, ‘Alexa, are you invading my privacy?’ – the dark side of 
our voice assistants, The Guardian, Oct. 9, 2019, available at 
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2019/oct/09/alexa-are-you-invading-my-privacy-the-
dark-side-of-our-voice-assistants; Natasha Lomas, Google gobbling Fitbit is a major privacy 
risk, warns EU data protection advisor, Feb. 20, 2020, available at 
https://techcrunch.com/2020/02/20/google-gobbling-fitbit-is-a-major-privacy-risk-warns-eu-
data-protection-advisor/. 
48 Notably, the Supreme Court of The United States has acknowledged that the digital 
aggregation of even public offline activity can be highly revealing and can contain the “privacies 
of life” including one’s “familial, political, professional, religious, and sexual associations.” See 
Carpenter v. United States, 138 S. Ct. 2206, 2217 (2018). 
49 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(i)(1)(A) and (D) (limiting protection to “natural person who seeks to 
gain access to the work protected”). 
50 See, e.g., Karl Paul, ‘Tossed my Fitbit in the trash’: users fear for privacy after Google buys 
company, The Guardian, Nov. 6, 2019, available at 
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2019/nov/05/fitbit-google-acquisition-health-data. 
51 See Whitson Gordon, Can I Save Money by Buying a ‘Dumb’ TV?, Wired, Nov. 26, 2020, 
https://www.wired.com/story/save-money-buying-dumb-smart-tv/ (noting that, “‘Dumb’ TVs 
aren't completely extinct, but they're pretty close—the few that exist tend to come in small sizes 
with low resolutions.”). 
[PAGE 11]
 
 
11 
 
 the work protected is capable of collecting or disseminating identifying 
information reflecting the offline activities of a person or persons; 
 the work protected is capable of collecting or disseminating identifying 
information about any person, so long as the person performing the circumvention 
lawfully obtained the work; and 
 the work does not provide the capability to prevent or restrict collection or 
dissemination of personally identifying information, regardless of whether it 
provided conspicuous notice of those capabilities. 
DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE 
N/A 
