[PAGE 1]
EXHIBIT 19 
[PAGE 2]
CMS .gov Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 
Home > Medicare > Hospital Quality Initiative 
'Hosp 吻lOutpatient Qua 町Reporting Program 
Hospital Outpatient Quality Reporting 
Program 
Overview 
The Hospital O叶patient Qual心 Repo 面ng Program (Hospital OQR ) is a 
pay for quality da加 reporting program implemented by the Centers for 
Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS ) for outpatient hospital services. The 
Hospi加l OQR Program was mandated by the Tax Relief and Health Care 
Act of 2006, which requires subse面on (d) hospitals to submit data on 
measures on the quality of care furnished by hospitals in outpatient 
settings. Measures of quality may be of various types, including those of 
process, structure, outcome , and efficiency. 
Under the Hospital OQR Program , hospitals must meet administrative, 
da加 collection and submission, validation, and publication requiremen加, or 
receive a 2 percenねge point reduction in payment forねiling to meet these 
requiremen始, by appサing a repo面ng factor of 0.980 to the Outpatient 
Prospective Payment System (OP PS ) paymen 加 and copaymen 加 for all 
applicable services. 
In addition to providing hospi加ls with a financial incentive to report their 
quality of care measure da加, the Hospital OQR Program provides CMS 
with data to help Medicare beneficiaries make more informed dec画ons 
about their healthcare. Hospital quality of care information gathered 
through the Hospital OQR Program is available on the Hospital Compare 
Web site. 
Outpatient Department Measures 
Outpatient care can refer to numerous types of health services, such as 
emergency department services, observation services, outpatient su面cal 
services, lab tests, and X-rays, provided to those who visit a hospital or 
other healthcare facility. Outpatient often refers to a patient who leaves the 
ねcility after treatment on the same day but may include a patient who 
spends the night at the hospital for whom a doctor has not written an o司er 
for inpatient admission. 
Hospitaにompare provides resu島on eme 円ency department and 
outpatient quali句 measures , which evaluate the quality of care provided to 
patien瓦 A quality measure converts medical information from patient 
reco川s into a rate or time that allows facilities to assess their performance 
and consumers to compare how well patients are being cared for at their 
local hospitals. 
The outpatient measures evaluate the regularity with which a healthcare 
provider administers the outpatient treatment known to provide the be討 

[PAGE 3]
results for most patients with a particular condition. An example includes 
patients receiving appropriate fibrinolytic therapy within 30 minutes of 
arrival to the emergency department. 
The Hospital OQR measures include data collected from various methods 
to measure patient care outcomes, process of care, imaging efficiency 
patterns, care transitions, ED-throughput efficiency, Health Information 
Technology use (HIT), care coordination, and patient safety. Data may be 
collected through chart abstraction, claims volumes, or reporting on a 
hospital process. Specialty areas were identified by CMS as having 
common and frequent procedures in the hospital outpatient setting. These 
procedures were identified as colonoscopies and outpatient imaging 
procedures. Other areas of future focus are outpatient surgeツ and 
chemotherapy. 
Measures for the CY 2021 Payment Determination 
・OP -2: Fibrinolytic Therapy Received Within 30 Minutes of ED 
Arrival 
・OP -3: Median Time to Transfer to Another Facility for Acute 
Coronary Intervention 
・OP -8: MRI Lumbar Spine for Low Back Pain 
OP -lO: Abdomen CT -Use of Contrast Material 
・OP -I 3: Cardiac Imaging for Preoperative Risk Assessment for Non -
Ca司iac, Low -R島k Surgery 
・OP -I8: Median Time from ED Arrival to ED Departure for 
D陰cha円ed ED Patients 
・OP -22: Left Without Being Seen 
OP -23: Head CT or MRI Scan Results for Acute lschemic Stroke or 
Hemorrhagic Stroke who Received Head CT or MRI Scan 
Interpretation Within 45 minutes of ED Arrival 
・OP -29: Appropriate Follow-Up Interval for Normal Colonoscopy in 
Average Risk Patients 
・OP -31: Cataracts: Improvement in Patient's Visual Function within 
90 Days Following Cataract Surgery* 
・OP -32: Facility 7-Day Risk-Standardized Hospital Visit Rate after 
Outpatient Colonoscopy 
・OP -33: External Beam Radiotherapy for Bone Metastases 
・OP -35: Admissions and Emergency Department (ED ) Visits for 
Patients Receiving Outpatient Chemotherapy 
・OP -36: Hospital Visits after Hospital Outpatient Surgery 
* Measure voluntarily collected as set forth in section Xlll.D.3.b. of 
the CY 2015 0PPS /ASC final rule with comment period (79 FR 66946 
through 66947 ). 
Read more about the Hospital OQR Program in the most recent 
final rule found here. 
[PAGE 4]
More information regarding the Hospital OQR measures can be 
found on the QualityNet website F . 
Public Reporting 
Data collected through the Hospital OQR program is publicレ reported so 
people with Medicare and other consumers can find and compare the 
quality of care provided at ambulatory su面cal centers. Publishing these 
data can improve facility performance by providing benchma 永s for 
selected clinical areas and public view of facility data. 
The CMS /jg.§pita! Compare  website publishes information on the quality of 
care provided to patients; this information is made available to inform 
consume 円 and to encourage healthcare伯cilities to make continued 
improvemen 加 in care quality. Hospital Compare is generally refreshed bi-
annually for the Hospital CQR program. Information on Public Reporting 
can be found in Section 1833(t)(17)(E) of the Social Securi句 Act and 
requires that the Secre加ry establish procedures to make data collected 
under the Hospital OQR program available to the public. 
Contact Us 
Submit questions and search for answers on the Hospital OQR Program 
through the Q  Question and Answer Tool or call the Hospital OQR 
Support at (866) 800-8756 weekdays from 7 a.m. to 6 p.m. Eas肥rn Time. 
Page Last Modified: 07/28/2020 11:42AM 
H旦いwith File Forma 始 and Plug土］旦
CMS .gov 
A federal government website managed and paid for by the U.S. Centers 
for Medicare & Medicaid Services. 7500 Security Bouleva司, Baltimore, 
MD 21244 
Receive Email Updates 
子 

[PAGE 5]
(,pe 
your email here 
Submit 
Connect with CMS 
 ) 

[PAGE 6]
EXHIBIT 20 
[PAGE 7]
Influential factors on medical
equipment maintenance
management
In search of a framework
Rona Bahreini
Tabriz Health Services Management Research Center,
Iranian Center of Excellence in Health Management, Student Research Committee,
School of Management and Medical Informatics,
Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran
Leila Doshmangir
Tabriz Health Services Management Research Center,
Iranian Center of Excellence in Health Management,
School of Management and Medical Informatics,
Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran, and
Ali Imani
Health Economics Department, Tabriz Health Services Management Research Center,
School of Management and Medical Informatics,
Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran
Abstract
Purpose – Effective maintenance management of medical equipment is one of the major issues for quality of
care and cost-effectiveness especially in modern hospitals. An effective medical equipment maintenance
management (MEMM) consists of adequate planning, management and implementation. This is essential for
providing good health services and saving scarce resources. Considering the importance of the subject, the
purpose of this paper is to extract the influential factors on MEMM using a qualitative approach.
Design/methodology/approach – Documents review and interviews were main methods for data
collection. Semi structured interviews were conducted with a purposive sample of 14 clinical engineers with
different degree of education and job levels. Interviews were voice recorded and transcribed verbatim.
Qualitative data were analyzed using a content analysis approach (inductive and deductive) to identify the
underlying themes and sub-themes.
Findings – Factors influencing an effective and efficient MEMM system categorized in seven themes and
19 sub-themes emerged. The themes included: “resources,”“ quality control,”“ information bank,”“ education,”
“service,”“ inspection and preventive maintenance ” and “design and implementation. ”
Originality/value – The proposed framework provides a basis for a comprehensive and accurate
assessment of medical equipment maintenance. The findings of this study could be used to improve the
profitability of healthcare facilities and the reliability of medical equipment.
Keywords Maintenance management, Hospital, Medical equipment, Medical devices
Paper type Research paper
Introduction
Medical equipment is extensively utilized for patients ’ diagnosis and treatment. Nowadays,
providing health services through the use of diagnostic and treatment devices is a
fundamental part of health services, especially in hospitals (Wang et al., 2008, 2012). Medical
devices are assets that directly improve the quality of life for many people (Painter and
Baretich, 2011). Medical devices requiring calibration, maintenance, repair, user training and
decommissioning activities are usually managed by clinical engineers. Medical equipment
Journal of Quality in Maintenance
Engineering
Vol. 25 No. 1, 2019
pp. 128-143
© Emerald Publishing Limited
1355-2511
DOI 10.1108/JQME-11-2017-0082
Received 23 November 2017
Revised 17 May 2018
Accepted 12 June 2018
The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at:
www.emeraldinsight.com/1355-2511.htm
128
JQME
25,1
[PAGE 8]
requires scheduled and unscheduled maintenance during its useful life (WHO, 2011).
Hospitals should ensure that medical equipment is kept in working condition, and is safe,
accurate, and reliable and operates at the required level of performance effectively
(Augustýnek et al. , 2018). Lack of proper maintenance of medical equipment leads to
equipment downtime, reduces the level of device performance, and wastes costs and
resources. In this concern, it is essential that hospitals focus on effective and quick
maintenance of more critical devices (Bracale and Pepino, 1994; Dyro, 2004; Stiefel, 2009).
Medical equipment maintenance has diff erent types: inspection and preventive
maintenance (IPM) and corrective maint enance (WHO, 2011). Effective management
of maintenance and repairs (Kinley, 2012 ) shall be planned and implemented using
appropriate maintenance strategies to keep the devices safe and functional according to
basic functional specifications (Wang, 2012) . In addition to high initial investment, the
medical equipment requires continual and costly maintenance during its useful
life (Cheng and Dyro, 2004). The maintenanc e problem is the key discussion point in
the management of medical devices (Braca le and Pepino, 1994). Other studies have
indicated that the most common cause of medical equipment downtime is poor
maintenance, planning, and management (Wang and Levenson, 2000; Wang and Rice,
2003). To solve this problem, it is necessary to establish and regulate a system of proper
maintenance and the correct use of medical equi pment (Stiefel, 2009). Perfect maintenance
is the equation of performance, risk, resource inputs and costs to reach this goal (Campbell
and Jardine, 2001).
The ultimate goal of maintenance is reliability and safety. It should always be safe for both
patients and users (Wang, 2012). Maintenance management has had an extraordinary impact
on the ability of organizations to achieve their objectives (Duffuaa et al. , 2002). Hospital
management has gradually been perfect, but as far as medical equipment maintenance
management (MEMM) is concerned, there still exist some problems and hospital MEMM
system is too loose. For example, there is no corresponding maintenance personnel
composition, degree requirements and even no maintenance access qualification. Maintenance
personnel placement is done most often casually, personnel division of labor is not clear, and
the maintenance caters to some surface problems and fails to do finishing repair (Wang, 2014).
Today, medical devices and equipment have become increasingly more complex
( Jamshidi et al. , 2014), and deals with patient care in a hospital may range from simple
thermometers to complex systems such as MRIs (Palesh et al. , 2010).
In Iran, in accordance with the law on the organization and functions of the Ministry of
Health and Medical Education (MoHME), the medical equipment office was established to
monitor the production, supply, consumption and use of medical equipment. Medical
equipment in hospitals is purchased through two different channels: The MoHME and
Board board of trustees in each hospital. Engineer/technician is responsible for the
management and maintenance of medical equipment in the hospital and has different
responsibilities such as training, improving patient and personnel safety, installation and
repairing cycle management and maintenance management.
Why this study: aims
Mahady et al. (2002) in his study states, despite the importance of medical equipment
maintenance, unfortunately, enough attention has not been paid to this issue, especially in
developing countries (Mahady et al. , 2002). A number of studies have been conducted on
medical equipment until now (Ameriyoon et al., 2006, 2007, 2014). To our best knowledge, no
studies have provided a comprehensive framework for MEMM in Iran. This study aimed to
explore the views of experts on factors affecting MEMM. This paper presents a framework
for MEMM with the purpose of enhancing and improving our understanding of the effective
factors in this realm.
129
Influential
factors on
MEMM
[PAGE 9]
Methods
Design
This is a qualitative study based on content analysis approach. Qualitative data were collected
through documents review and semi-structured interviews. Qualitative research approaches
have an explorative nature and are used to understand people experiences in all its complexity
and in all its natural setting (Pope et al., 2000). Health or education policies can be developed
using this type of research (Tong et al., 2007). The collected data consisted of the perspectives
of medical and biomedical engineers concerning factors influencing MEMM.
Sampling
Purposive sampling was used to conduct this study and was continued until data
saturation. Participants were selected from different cities of Iran as the most
knowledgeable persons about this subject. The research participants included 14 clinical
engineers whose education varied from bachelor to PhD degree. The inclusion criteria for
interviewees were having at least bachelor ’s degree with at least two years of work
experience in clinical engineering department of hospitals during the study period, being
accessible and being willing to participate in the study. As experts in the medical
equipment, an equal number of male and female participants (n ¼ 14) took part in this study.
Data collection
Semi-structured interviews and documents review were used for data collection. Related
documents were regulations of MEMM, MEMM guidelines and other related regulations or
reports developed by MoHME. The time period for data collection was from April to July
2016. The interview questions were asked in an open ended manner. They were based on an
interview guide (Boyd, 1989). Interviews lasted approximately 30 –90 min and were
interviewed in the working place of the participants. The researchers and the participants
agreed on an appropriate time before referral. The face-to-face interviews were recorded
through voice-recorder and transcribed verbatim. All the research team participated in
developing the interview guides (Appendix). Interview guide was lists of demographic
questions and questions that covered aims of the study. The interview began with general
and simple questions. During the interview, the interviewer added extra questions about
unexpected but relevant area that emerged. Data collection continued until saturation was
achieved and no new information was discovered in data analysis.
Data analysis
Morse and Field ’s qualitative content analysis approach (Morse and Field, 1995a) was
adopted for data analysis. Content analysis is a widely used qualitative research technique
in health studies in recent years and is used to interpret meaning from the content of text
data and, hence, adhere to the naturalistic paradigm (Downe-Wamboldt, 1992; Krippendorff,
2004; Sandelowski, 1995) (Hsieh and Shannon, 2005). Content analysis can also be a useful
tool for discovering and describing the focus of individual, group, institutional or social
attention allowing researchers to test theoretical issues to enhance data understanding.
In this study, content analysis approach (inductive and deductive) was used to analyze the
data. Data analysis started with the transcription of interviews and repeated reviews until
meaningful themes emerged. Then, data were read word by word to derive codes. Next, the
first impressions, thoughts, and initial analyses were noted. Afterwards, codes were
generated from participants ’ words. For example, the code “training on general equipment ”
was generated by the researcher from a participant ’s comment that “every nurse who
graduated from the university should be trained about the general equipment. ” MAXQDA
12 (qualitative) software was used to analyze the data. Two researchers (LD and RB)
130
JQME
25,1
[PAGE 10]
analyzed the data to help minimize bias. All data were transcribed, coded and analyzed by
both researchers. The extracted codes, then were sorted into both items and subthemes
based on comparisons between similarities and differences. Once the themes had been
agreed by the authors, the two researchers read the remaining transcripts. Finally, themes
were created as the expression of the hidden content of the text after being identified,
reviewed and defined. The member-checking method was used to meet study validity.
To address credibility, transcriptions were given to the participants to ensure the accuracy
of the transcriptions. Also, the initial codes, subthemes, and major themes were audited by
two of the researchers (LD and RB) and the results were confirmed.
Ethical considerations
All of the participants agreed on recording their voice with the exception of one participant
who just allowed the researcher to take notes while she was talking. Moreover, all
participants were informed about the objectives of the study and their informed consent was
taken. Participation in the study was voluntary and the participants were assured on the
confidentiality and anonymity of the provided data.
Results
Through data analysis, the factors affecting MEMM were categorized in seven main themes
and 22 subthemes (Table I). As follows, the definitions of each theme and subtheme are
reported using the participants ’ direct quotations.
Theme 1: resources
This theme had three categories including “Physical Resources, ”“ Human Resources ” and
“Financial Resources.” In general, the provision of resources is one of the main and effective
items in MEMM in this regard. All interviewees underscored the importance of all of the
above-cited resources.
Themes Sub themes
Resources Physical resources
Human resources
Financial resources
Quality control Safety tests
Performance tests
Adjustment and calibration
Documentation Providing medical devices ID (Identification)
Use of local and global evidence
Providing user manual
Recording executive processes
Education Technical and practical training
Service Corrective maintenance (repair)
Decommissioning
Outsourcing
Reform and improvement system
Reporting adverse events and recall system
Inspection and preventive maintenance (IPM) Periodic, internal, case and practical inspection
Management processes to increase the life of the device
Designing and implementation Knowledge and attitude
Process management
Purchasing management
Table I.
Themes and
sub-themes of factors
affecting medical
equipment maintenance
management
131
Influential
factors on
MEMM
[PAGE 11]
Physical resources
Maintenance management relies on physical resources. These include workspace, tools and
test equipment, supplies, replacement parts, and operation and service manuals needed to
perform maintenance mechanisms. Workspace is one of the main factors in MEMM.
The participants harbored these notions that lack of workspace for repair and maintenance
of medical equipment is a great issue. Moreover, they stated that providing a safe and
healthy work environment for staff and patients is required. One engineer gave the
following explanation:
“I would say that before the user we prepare our environment for the user. ” (P9) One of the other
participants said: “Now when you go to hospitals, you can see that 90% of hospitals do not have
a place for device repair ” (P6).
Various tools and test equipment are required to perform maintenance activities, depending
on the type of equipment in service. Some participants expressed that the existence of some
facilities such as computers, printers and types of software are essential for the unit of
biomedical engineering.
Some experts commented on this issue: “Today some companies that work on the
preventive maintenance have powerful software, but this software is related to the unit of
medical equipment [ …] Also, the University of Medical Sciences is required to equip them
with the software ” (P1):
Medical engineering unit should have direct telephone line, fax and computer, but, none of them is
available (P4).
Human resources
Many of the engineers pointed out that developing human resources is necessary to operate
an effective maintenance program, so the first step is to identify the number and type of
required staff. All participants reported that the provision of trained and skilled human
resources was a main factor behind job satisfaction as illustrated by the following quotes:
Supply of the fixed manpower is one of the factors affecting performance of biomedical
engineering unit (P2).
If the human resources are not expert, companies can abuse regulations (P8).
Financial resources
Financial resources for maintenance primarily focus on two tasks: monitoring costs and
managing the budget. Furthermore, maintenance program is required for financial planning
where the costs and benefits of the current situation and the new proposal can be compared.
Therefore, it is better for each medical device in the hospital to have a history of all time and
expenses associated with maintaining that device. According to the participants ’ opinions
the budget for the implementation of medical (devices) equipment maintenance program
should be estimated and funded. The interviewees commented on this issue:
Maintenance management has preventive role in costs, while the cost of repair is high (P9).
The allocation of funds for maintenance should be from hospital policies. For example, funds have
been allocated for providing parts, calibration, maintenance and service (P6).
Theme 2: quality control
This theme emerged from three subthemes: “safety tests, ”“ performance tests ” and
“adjustment and calibration. ” Generally, the quality control tests include tests of safety,
performance and calibration.
132
JQME
25,1
[PAGE 12]
Safety tests
Most of the participants reported that safety is the first and most important step in the design,
manufacture, installation, utilization and maintenance of medical equipment. There are various
safety aspects to consider when implementing a successful and effective maintenance program,
such as the safety of technical personnel. These tests are essential for patient and personnel.
This ensures that when working on medical equipment it is essential for technical personnel to
work safely in hazardous conditions. According to the interviewees:
While quality control is easy in practice, if a simple device is impaired, it compromises patient
safety (P14).
Another engineer stated:
If the electrical safety is not guaranteed, the patient may be injured from it and also users can ’t use
the device with confidence (P11).
Performance tests
Performance tests of medical equipment require special training and equipment that include
technical, functional, laboratory and clinical tests. Technical testing should be performed by
authorized companies and agents, and other tests should be carried out by users. During the
interview with the participants, none of them referred to performance tests. The study of
documentation including guideline MEMM at health centers showed that performance tests
are one of the quality control tests.
Adjustment and calibration
Calibration measures the outputs of device under test by the tester with accuracy at defined
conditions and specified ranges. It includes adjusting medical equipment in order to achieve the
desired precision and ensuring its operation based on international metrics. All participants
believed that calibration is a principal factor in MEMM. One interviewee commented:
I think calibration meaning an understanding of proper working of the device is a key element in
maintenance management (P5).
Another interviewee pointed out that:
Calibration is not only to say that a device is calibrated or not [ …] calibration is something that
says us what is wrong, and it soon returns to standard status (P8).
Theme 3: documentation
Documentation was the most dominant concept in this study. One of the fundamental
responsibilities of a clinical engineering manager is the documentation of the maintenance
processes and activities. Without proper documentation, maintenance and management
of equipment will simply lead to inconsistent implementation and unpredictable outcomes.
These data provide the inventory database of every maintenance task performed on
the device.
This theme consists of four subthemes: “providing ID for medical devices, ”“ the use of
local and global evidence, ”“ provision of user manual ” and “recording executive processes.”
Providing medical devices ID
Medical equipment ID was expressed by the participants as another important factor in
MEMM. Preparing and updating medical equipment ID is required for their proper
management. Having the available information about medical equipment specifications is
useful for its proper management. ID includes information such as a device specifications,
133
Influential
factors on
MEMM
[PAGE 13]
warranty status, service installations, acceptance tests, preventive maintenance, calibration,
etc. An expert commented that:
We have designed an intelligent system for medical devices for the first time in the country that
indicates when the device is repaired, when calibrated, when serviced. This is called ID of a device (P7).
One of the factors for improving maintenance management is documentation in the form of
computer. In this regard, a computerized ID is designed but has not been implemented yet (P4).
The use of local and global evidence
Constant communication with scientific standard references is required in order to be
informed on international standards and be up to date in the field of medical equipment.
According to the ever increasing progress of medical equipment, utilization and mapping
with the available scientific evidence can help to improve MEMM. One of the interviewees
explained this in these terms:
We are not connected with standard references scientifically in the world.
Adequate studies have not been conducted about medical equipment maintenance management in
our country (P1).
Providing user manual
Ideally, the maintenance program will have an operation (user) manual for each model of
medical equipment. The operation manual is essential and valuable for equipment users and
for equipment technicians. Unfortunately, operation manuals are not always available, or
may be in a language not spoken or understood by equipment technicians. One engineer
expressed that:
After the user training, provision of user manual for equipment is important [ …] Also, attachment
of the user guide on the device can be regarded as a primary training for users (P9).
Another participant added that:
One of the influencing factors in maintenance management is labeling and provision of user manual
which is among the duties of biomedical engineering unit (P5).
Recording executive process
Recording and maintaining information on medical equipment and their classification in the
form of an ID according to international standards are essential for hospitals. An archive of
related activities is a requisite for the continuity of maintenance program such as: costs
associated with repairs, installation, and calibration. These data are typically contained in
work order records that provide documentation of every maintenance task performed on the
device. For instance, one interviewee commented that:
Through computerized ID, accurate and updated documentation is available (P7).
Another participant stated:
All reports about inspections, preventive maintenance or related forms need to be documented (P11).
Theme 4: education
This theme refers to user and biomedical engineer training that includes “technical and
practical training.” For the safety of the patient and the user, proper training is critical for
both the user and the technical staff. Engineers or technicians must undergo additional
training because medical equipment is highly specialized and if improperly maintained or
repaired, it may have adverse consequences on human life.
134
JQME
25,1
[PAGE 14]
Technical and practical training
User training means implementation, maintenance and presentation of report on the
performance of devices. Technical training implies the principles and methods of
maintenance, calibration, initial repairs and medical equipment management concepts.
Engineers or technicians need to have proper training because medical equipment is highly
specialized and if improperly maintained or repaired, it may have adverse consequences on
human life. One of the interviewees commented on this issue:
There are two types of training: ongoing education and training after device installation (P10).
Another participant believed that:
User training plays an important role in medical equipment maintenance because if users don ’t
learn the proper usage of the device, it may destroy the device (P14).
Theme 5: service
This theme emerged from five subthemes whi ch engineers described as factors affecting
MEMM: “Repair,”“ Decommissioning, ”“ Outsourcing, ”“ Reform and improvement system ”
and “Reporting adverse events and recall system. ” According to the study documents,
it was found that the interviewees did not mention the last two factors.
Service activities refer to report of unpleasant disasters, calling medical devices (equipment),
correction or upgrades of medical devices (equipment), repair and maintenance contracts.
Corrective maintenance (repair)
A process is used to restore the physical integrity, safety, and/or performance of a device
after a failure. In order to return a device to its full functionality, efficient repair is required
to verify the failure and determine its origin. Many of the engineers said that repair work on
the most sophisticated medical equipment is only accomplished by highly trained specialists
or reliable companies. In this regard, an interviewee stated that:
Whatever more investment in medical equipment maintenance, requirement to repair them
becomes less and thereby reduced repair costs (P5).
Nowadays repair is known completely in hospitals, but still there are deficiencies in the field of
maintenance.
Another participant mentioned that: “Repair is part of maintenance as maintenance is related to
before equipment failure and repair refers to after it ” (P4).
Decommissioning
Decommissioning process is important for decision-making in providing alternative and
obtaining the necessary funds. In the process of scrapping, it is essential to report involved
costs, future necessary costs, affordable repairs to ensure the safety and performance of the
device during use, funding for replacement, the importance of devices, measure of device
downtime and disruption created in performance of the medical center and patient ’s
dissatisfaction. One of the engineers stated:
We found the new equipment in outdated devices stock of hospitals which is a waste of
resources (P8).
Another interviewee indicated that: “Clinical engineers should be aware of the
decommissioning process [ …] when residual value of a device is less than 20%, one can
scrap it ” (P13).
135
Influential
factors on
MEMM
[PAGE 15]
Outsourcing
Service contracts and maintenance are not necessary; however, they are recommended to
increase the setup time of devices (up time) and decrease their downtime. In this regard,
third-party companies play an important role. One interviewee commented:
Usually service and maintenance contracts are for vital and capital devices (P12).
Also two of the interviewees mentioned: “In order to repair and complete quality control
tests, there should be contracts with a company that is qualified and provide exclusive
services for the device ” (P1, 2).
Reform and improvement system
“According to the maintenance guideline, the process of upgrading and reforming the
medical device in the treatment center needs to be done under the supervision of the medical
engineering unit and by the manufacturer of the device or its legal representative.
This factor is applicable through hardware and software by adding new smithereens and
tools and through software updating ” (Doc2).
Reporting adverse events and recall system
“An adverse event is an incident that results in death or serious injury to the patient, the
user of the devices or any other person. According to the participants, observing the
criteria for reporting incidents and recalli ng medical equipment are required. Adverse
events should be reported to the manufacturer of the medical device or their legal
representatives as well as to the medical equ ipment department. This report should be
prepared in written format and according to the framework set by the medical equipment
department. The producing company or its l egal representative is required to design
and implement the supervision system for quality and the performance of medical
devices. The users should be made aware o f the problem occurrence in the medical
equipment in terms of performance, safety, effectiveness and/or non-compliance with the
requirements ” (Doc 2).
Theme 6: inspection and preventive maintenance
This theme comprises three subthemes: “management processes to increase the life of the
device” and “periodic, internal, case and practical inspection. ” Inspection refers to the
evaluation and monitoring of all operations that include a variety of quality control tests of
medical equipment, study facilities and ancillary facilities related to equipment, different
inspections and assessment of the performance of technical personnel. Management
processes to increase the life of a device involves maintenance performed to extend its life
and prevent failure. These processes are sometimes referred to as “planned maintenance” or
“scheduled maintenance. ” The most appropriate method for scheduling maintenance in a
particular health-care facility should be chosen.
Periodic, internal, case and practical inspection
Generally, there are two types of inspections, including equipment inspection and
practical inspection. Equipment inspectio n is divided into three types of inspections:
periodic, internal and case inspections. Pract ical inspection includes inspection of space
and environment, the use of a medical device, and its storage and transportation. The use
of inspection can make the difference between having reliable and properly functioning
equipment or not. Almost all participants me ntioned the importance of proper inspection,
136
JQME
25,1
[PAGE 16]
b u tm o s to ft h e mh a di n a d e q u a t ei n f o r m a t i o nabout types of inspections. For example, one
interviewee commented that:
When you do not have a guideline [ …] a person who inspects biomedical engineering unit will
inspect personalization in fact (P1).
We utilize inspection from self-made and accredited checklists (P2).
Management processes to increase the life of the device (preventive maintenance)
Preventive maintenance is performed to extend the life of the device and prevent failure.
These processes are usually scheduled at specific intervals and include specific maintenance
activities such as lubrication, cleaning (e.g. filters) or replacing parts. Almost all participants
noted the importance of this item, for example: “preventive maintenance must be performed
properly. “Unfortunately, we can ’t implement preventive maintenance fully because we
don’t have adequate knowledge about it ” (P3).
Another interviewee added that: “If preventive maintenance is not well monitored in a
hospital, patients ’ lives are in grave danger ” (P7).
Theme 7: designing and implementation
This concept refers to several management aspects. This theme is composed of three sub-
themes: “processes management,”“ knowledge and attitude” and “purchasing management.”
Each sub-theme is explained in the following section.
Process management
A good number of the participants emphasized various aspects of the activities and
management of the processes. In this context, from the perspective of research participants,
these are very important items such as specification of access level to medical equipment,
development and determination of policy, weakness in management infrastructure, long
bureaucratic processes and codification of action plan. According to the interviewees:
We spent about 20% for maintaining our devices because we do not have appropriate management
and planning (P8).
Another participant said: “Heavy workload and long administrative procedures are other
factors that they make. Thus, we assign the second priority to maintenance ” (P4).
Knowledge and attitude
Level of knowledge and attitudes of managers and clinical engineers are significant in
decision-making and in the implementation of the processes and maintenance of activities.
In fact, all the taken measures reflect the attitude of the owners of the processes. In this
regard, an interviewee stated that:
Clinical engineers and users do not have sufficient knowledge with the term maintenance
management (P8).
Another interviewee argued that:
Maintenance and repair are analogous to prevention and treatment in that treatment is more costly
[…] Most medical facilities do not take maintenance seriously (P13).
Purchasing management
Effective management in the clinical engineering department primarily requires a correct
selection of medical devices. Therefore, purchasing medical equipment must occur following
a specific procedure. The purchasing management objective is buying devices and
137
Influential
factors on
MEMM
[PAGE 17]
equipment of the right quality, in the right quantity, at the right time, at the right price, and
from the right source. One of the interviewees stated that:
One of the objectives of maintenance is to purchase from reliable companies that there are on IMED
website and this prevents the contraband (P2).
Another participant mentioned:
Purchase of medical equipment should be based on hospital ’s need (P3).
Our findings showed all the influential factors (mentioned in this study) on MEMM are
interrelated to each other Figure 1.
Three factors including quality control, inspection and service are complementary to
each other, indicating a mutual relationship among them. As can be observed, inspection
includes monitoring quality control tests. Education is relevant to human resource factor,
which includes user and clinical engineer training. Preventive maintenance and repair are
two types of complementary maintenance programs. Preventive maintenance includes
management processes to increase durability of a device and prevent its failure. Repair
includes management processes to restore physical conditions, safety, and performance of
the systems after failure. Documentation is associated with each factor, meaning that all
maintenance administrative processes should be documented and saved. Design and
implementation are the setting for this framework. This indicates that all six factors are
deployed and implemented through design and implementation.
Discussion
This study provided an in-depth and rich description of the influential factors on
maintenance management. Our findings directly pointed out the importance of factors on
affecting maintenance management and the related concepts were extracted. One of the
studies concluded in developing countries reported that the useful life of the equipment
under regular maintenance programs were on average double the useful life of the
equipment that was not covered through this program (Halbwachs, 2000). This study
showed that consideration of influential factors on maintenance management results
increased patient satisfaction and cost reduction. Our findings are consisting with those of
Hasper (1991) who reported that the implementation of medical equipment management
program boosts customer satisfaction while minimizing costs (Hasper, 1991).
Factors Affecting on Medical
Equipment Maintenance Management
Resources
Physical
Human
Financial
Practical
training
Technical
training Safety tests
Performance
tests
Outsourcing
Decommissioning
Corrective
maintenance
(repair) Periodic, Internal, Case
and Practical inspection
Management processes
to increase the life of
the device
Recording
executive processes
User manual
The use of local
and global evidence
Providing medical
devices ID
Design and implementation:
Knowledge and attitude
Process management
Purchasing management
Reform and
Improvement system
Reporting adverse events
and Recall system
Adjustment
and
Calibration
Education Quality control Service Inspection and preventive
maintenance (IPM)
Documentation
Figure 1.
Framework of medical
equipment
maintenance
management (MEMM)
138
JQME
25,1
[PAGE 18]
Almost all participants stated that complete and correct implementation of preventive
maintenance is effective in reducing medical device failure. In the study about the influence of
maintenance on the survival medical equipment, concluded that preventive maintenance
implementation is effective in increasing device longevity (Khalaf et al., 2013).
The first step in the proper management of medical equipment is planning (Aghaei, 2003).
According to the findings of this study, poor planning and management infrastructure are the
main culprits behind weaknesses in maintenance management.
Conducted in one of the Latin American countries, showed that there is a dire shortage in
the number of qualified people to work with medical technical equipment maintenance. He
found that 44 percent of medical instruments were lacked even engineering or medical
technicians (Maxwell, 1985). Our study showed that inspection and maintenance of medical
equipment is effective for its function. Also another study surveyed the medical equipment
management systems in developing countries and demonstrated that 60 percent of medical
equipment cannot be used for different reasons. In Iran, nearly 60 percent of medical devices in
hospitals affiliated to medical sciences universities had not been inspected by the staff (Noori
Tajer et al., 2002). Our findings prove that the inspection of medical equipment is essential and
a necessary factor for maintenance management. Performance and safety control, activities
documentation, using computerized systems for preventive maintenance were among the
issues that mentioned in the designing a model of Medical Equipment Management for Iranian
hospitals (Nasiripour and Jadidi, 2008). Also, the Walsh’s study suggests that by creating an
efficient and proper maintenance system, capital equipment can be preserved, and this could
improve the effectiveness of hospital facilities (Walsh, 1995). While confirming the above-cited
studies, our findings showed that consideration of the factors affecting maintenance
management is necessary for reducing costs as well as decreasing amortization and failure of
medical devices and disorder in the treatment of patients.
In terms of applicability, repair and maintenance, medical and hospital instruments are
not well kept in developing and even developed countries. This negligence leads to waste of
resources in the health sector (Boisvert, 1978). The investigated wards in the study failed to
meet the expectations and requirements in terms of medical device management.
There were not in desirable situations for the usability of devices and use of informational
electronic system in these hospitals (Dargahi et al., 2014).
Management of biomedical engineering in h ospitals involved experienced and expert
staff who takes over the purchase, procurement and distribution of medical and
laboratory equipment is instrumental in cost- effectiveness (Remmelzwaal, 1997). In this
regard, our findings showed that provision of trained and expert human resources is the
first and pivotal step in establishing an effective maintenance program and purchasing
management affecting maintenance management. Furthermore, in our findings, most of
the participants stated that maintenance is most often ignored. Some of the findings of the
present study had already been discussed in th e cited studies, but they were striking
differences in objectives. Policy makers and m anagers can provide a context for evidence
informed decision making using the result so ft h i ss t u d yt oi m p r o v et h ee f f i c i e n c yo f
maintenance management in health care system.
Strengths and limitations
In our knowledge, this study is the first comprehensive study of its-kind addressing all of
the factors affecting an effective and efficient MEMM. It offers a comprehensive structure
for evaluating the status of MEMM.
Although interviewees provided in-depth and convincing information on the issue, but
lack of enough information concerning the concept of maintenance management was the
most notable challenge. Many of the participants similarly defined the concepts of
preventive maintenance and maintenance management.
139
Influential
factors on
MEMM
[PAGE 19]
Recommendations
This study provided insight into which elements of the MEMM the participants found most
helpful. The findings demonstrate that implementation of a proper maintenance management
depends on resources including financial, human resources, physical, documentation, training
and education, IPM, quality control, design and implementation, and service. Moreover, these
factors play an important role in developing and adopting the most effective maintenance
strategies. A major share of hospital costs is allocated to the procurement of medical
equipment annually. However, the related management or maintenance is particularly weak in
hospitals. It is essential for any health-care facility to implement a maintenance program for
medical equipment. An effective maintenance management of medical devices increases
efficiency and productivity of health technology resources, which is especially important
when resources are limited. This leads patients to have access to medical equipment that can
provide them with an accurate diagnosis, effective treatment or appropriate rehabilitation.
The findings of this study underscore the fact that fulfillment of these objectives requires
establishing a framework for the development of MEMM. Several factors affect the MEMM
considering each of which is important for improving functionality of the devices and
providing health care services to the patients. Also, in our context, most medical engineers are
less informed about the concept of maintenance management and that explains why there is
little attention to maintenance of medical equipment. The extracted factors can help to
managers and engineers in evaluating maintenance management systems and offer options
and interventions to decision makers or policy makers for the improvement of such systems.
This framework provides for the development of national essential health technology
programs that will have a positive impact on the burden of disease and ensure effective use of
resources. Also, it can help to identify and modify innovative technologies that can have a
significant impact on public health. Further research into maintenance management is
warranted to improve quality in this field. Themes derived from this study can be subjects
for further research in Iran and in other countries.
References
Aghaei, H.B. (2003), “Study of the state of the maintenance management of medical equipment in
NASA hospitals ”, thesis Master of Health Services Management, Tehran.
Ameriyoon, A., Hamze Aghaei, B. and Mohebi, H. (2007), “Assessing the medical equipment
maintenance management at two hospitals military in contery ”, Journal of Military Medicine ,
Vol. 9 No. 3, pp. 189-195.
Ameriyoon, A., Tofighi, S. and Zaboli, R. (2006), “Assessing the medical equipment maintenance
management at selected hospitals affiliated with the medical sciences universities in Tehran
(2003-2005)”, Journal of Health Administration , Vol. 9 No. 23, pp. 17-24.
Ameriyoon, A., Zaboli, R., Shokri, M., Aghighi, A. and Sadeghi, A. (2014), “Study of medical
equipment maintenance mana gement in NAJA hospitals ”, Journal of Police Medicine ,V o l .3
N o .2 ,p p .1 0 7 - 1 1 4 .
Augustýnek, M., Laryš, D., Kubíček, J., Marešová, P. and Ku ča, K. (2018), “Use effectiveness of medical
devices: a case study on the deployment of ultrasonographic devices ”, Therapeutic Innovation &
Regulatory Science , Vol. 52 No. 4, pp. 499-506.
Boisvert, F.A. (1978), “Considerations in developing an effective biomedical equipment repair program”,
Journal of Clinical Engineering,V o l .3N o .1 ,p p .6 1 - 6 3 .
Boyd, C.O. (1989), “From practice to grounded theory: qualitative research in Nursing Menlo Park, CA:
Addison-Wesley”, Nursing Science Quarterly , Vol. 2 No. 1, pp. 53-54.
Bracale, M. and Pepino, A. (1994), “Medical technologies in developing countries: a feasibility study on
the maintenance of medical equipment in Ethiopia ”, Medical and Biological Engineering and
Computing, Vol. 32 No. 2, pp. 131-137.
140
JQME
25,1
[PAGE 20]
Campbell, J.D. and Jardine, A.K. (2001), Maintenance Excellence: Optimizing Equipment Life-Cycle
Decisions, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Cheng, M. and Dyro, J.F. (2004), “Good management practice for medical equipment ”, in Dyro, J.F.
(Ed.), Handbook of Clinical Engineering , Chapter 31, Elsevier Academic Press, Cambridge, MA,
pp. 108-110.
Dargahi, H., Forouzanfar, F., Bakhtiari, M. and Rajabnejad, Z. (2014), “Study of medical devices
management with the approach of evaluation of usability in Tehran University of Medical
Sciences Hospitals ”, Journal of Hospital , Vol. 13 No. 1, pp. 43-51.
Downe-Wamboldt, B. (1992), “Content analysis: method, applications, and issues ”, Health Care for
Women International , Vol. 13 No. 3, pp. 313-321.
Duffuaa, S., Al-ghamdi, A. and Al-amer, A. (2002), “Quality function deployment in maintenance work
planning process ”, Proceedings of the 6th Saudi Engineering Conference KFUPM, Vol. 4,
Dhahran, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia , December, pp. 503-512.
Dyro, J.F. (Ed.) (2004), “Equipment control and asset management, computerized maintenance
management systems”, Clinical Engineering Handbook , Chapter 35, Vol. 1, Elsevier Academic
Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 122-130.
Halbwachs, H. (2000), “Maintenance and the life expectancy of healthcare equipment in developing
economies”, Health Estate , Vol. 54 No. 2, pp. 26-31.
Hasper, J.R.K. (1991), “Centralized maintenance responsibilities: a case study ”, Journal of Clinical
Engineering, Vol. 16 No. 3, pp. 191-206.
Hsieh, H.-F. and Shannon, S.E. (2005), “Three approaches to qualitative content analysis ”, Qualitative
Health Research , Vol. 15 No. 9, pp. 1277-1288.
Jamshidi, A., Rahimi, S.A., Ait-kadi, D. and Bartolome, A.R. (2014), “Medical devices inspection and
maintenance; a literature review”, IIE Annual Conference. Proceedings, Institute of Industrial and
Systems Engineers (IISE) , p. 3895.
Khalaf, A., Hamam, Y., Alayli, Y. and Djouani, K. (2013), “The effect of maintenance on the
survival of medical equipment ”, Journal of Engineering, Design and Technology , Vol. 11 No. 2,
pp. 142-157.
Kinley, C.A. (2012), Healthcare Technology: A Strategic Approach to Medical Device Management , East
Tennessee State University, Johnson City.
Krippendorff, K. (2004), Content Analysis: An Introduction to its Methodology , Sage, New York, NY.
Mahady, J., Mccullaghi, J., Grainger, P.B. and Kinsella, R. (2002), “Equipment management systems for
use in developing countries ”, IEE Seminar on Appropriate Medical Technology for Developing
Countries IEE , London, February 6 .
Maxwell, R.J. (1985), “Resource constraints and the quality ”, Lancet, Vol. 34 No. 2, pp. 936-939.
Morse, J.M. and Field, P.A. (1995a), Qualitative Research Methods for Health Professionals , Vol. 2,
Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Nasiripour, A.A. and Jadidi, R. (2008), “Designing a model of medical equipment management for
Iranian hospitals, 2007 ”, Arak Medical University Journal , Vol. 11 No. 1, pp. 97-108.
Noori Tajer, M., Dabaghi, F., Mohamadi, R. and Haghani, H. (2002), “A survey of maintenance and cost
of medical equipment in hospitals associated of Iran university of medical sciences and health
services (2000-2001) ”, Razi Journal of Medical Sciences , Vol. 9 No. 30, pp. 445-454.
Painter, F. and Baretich, M. (2011), Medical Equipment Maintenance Programme Overview , World
Health Organization Press, Geneva.
Palesh, M., Tishelman, C., Fredrikson, S., Jamshidi, H., Tomson, G. and Emami, A. (2010), “We noticed
that suddenly the country has become full of MRI. Policy makers ’ views on diffusion and use of
health technologies in Iran ”, Health Research Policy and Systems , Vol. 8 No. 9, pp. 1-10.
Pope, C., Ziebland, S. and Mays, N. (2000), “Qualitative research in health care: analysing qualitative
data”, British Medical Journal , Vol. 320 No. 7227, pp. 114-116.
141
Influential
factors on
MEMM
[PAGE 21]
Remmelzwaal, B.L. (1997), “The effective management of medical equipment in developing countries ”,
FAKT–Consult for Management, Training and Technologies GmbH, Project (390) , available at:
www.faktconsult.de/healthcare_tech(1997) (accessed March 29, 2008).
Sandelowski, M. (1995), “Qualitative analysis: what it is and how to begin ”, Research in Nursing &
Health, Vol. 18 No. 4, pp. 371-375.
Stiefel, R.H. (2009), Medical Equipment Management Manual , 7th ed., AAMI, Annapolis Junction, MD.
Tong, A., Sainsbury, P. and Craig, J. (2007), “Consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative research
(COREQ): a 32-item checklist for interviews and focus groups ”, International Journal for Quality
in Health Care , Vol. 19 No. 6, pp. 349-357.
Walsh, T.J. (1995), “Total quality management, the ISO 9002 protocol and reconditioned diagnostic
imaging equipment”, Proceedings of the National Forum: Military Telemedicine On-Line Today
Research, Practice, and Opportunities, IEEE , pp. 173-177.
Wang, B. (2012), “Medical equipment maintenance: management and oversight ”, Synthesis Lectures on
Biomedical Engineering , Vol. 7 No. 2, pp. 1-85.
Wang, B. and Levenson, A. (2000), “PEER REVIEW PAPER: equipment inclusion criteria-a new
interpretation of JCAHO ’s medical equipment management standard ”, Journal of Clinical
Engineering, Vol. 25 No. 1, pp. 26-35.
Wang, B. and Rice, W.P. (2003), “JCAHO’s equipment inclusion criteria revisited –application of
statistical sampling technique ”, Journal of Clinical Engineering , Vol. 28 No. 1, pp. 37-48.
Wang, B., Eliason, R.W., Richards, S.M., Hertzler, L.W. and Koenigshof, S. (2008), “Clinical engineering
benchmarking: an analysis of American acute care hospitals ”, Journal of Clinical Engineering ,
Vol. 33 No. 1, pp. 24-27.
Wang, B., Rui, T., Fedele, J., Balar, S., Alba, T., Hertzler, L.W. and Poplin, B. (2012), “Clinical engineering
productivity and staffing revisited: how should it be measured and used? ”, Journal of Clinical
Engineering, Vol. 37 No. 4, pp. 135-145.
Wang, Z.H. (2014), “Application research on the internet in the management of medical equipment
maintenance”, Applied Mechanics and Materials , Vols 651-653, pp. 1535-1538.
WHO (2011), “Medical equipment maintenance programme overview”, World Health Organization Press,
Geneva, available at: www.who.int
Further reading
Miles, M.B. and Huberman, A.M. (1994), Qualitative Data Analysis: An Expanded Sourcebook , Sage,
New York, NY.
Morgan, D.L. (1993), “Qualitative content analysis: a guide to paths not taken ”, Qualitative Health
Research, Vol. 3 No. 1, pp. 112-121.
Morse, J.M. and Field, P.-A. (1995b), Nursing Research: The Application of Qualitative Approaches ,
Nelson Thornes, Cheltenham.
National Medical Device Directorate (2009), “N. M. D. medical equipment maintenance management
criteria of the Ministry of Health and Medical Education of Iran ”, available at: www.fda.gov.ir/
uploads/59654f7fc6cbc314a8be0776c15f08fe.pdf
142
JQME
25,1
[PAGE 22]
Appendix. Interview guide
Number of Interviewee:
Date and venue:
Position of interviewee:
1. Please introduce yourself and briefly describe your work experience.
2. Please explain your general perception of medical equipment maintenance management.
3. Please explain the role of medical equipment maintenance management in hospitals?
4. What is the process of medical equipment maintenance in your hospital?
5. How is the medical equipment maintenance management in hospitals currently
    evaluated? What are the bottlenecks and shortcomings? Is there an instruction for
    evaluation?
6. What factors affect the assessment of medical equipment maintenance management in
    hospitals?
7. What do you know about the most important activities and responsibilities associated
    with the repair and maintenance of medical equipment?
8. Do the clinical engineers and medical equipment users have the necessary training in this
    area?
9. What are the challenges and obstacles to implementation of the medical equipment
    maintenance in health centers, in special hospitals?
10. What are your suggestions for improving medical equipment maintenance management?
11. As a final question, is there anything else you would like to say about medical equipmen
t
      maintenance management?
About the authors
Rona Bahreini is MSc Candidate in the School of Health Management and Medical Informatics, Tabriz
University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran. She holds BA in Health Care Administrative from the
School of Health Management and Medical Informatics in 2011.The current review is a part of MSc
Degree in Management and Medical Informatics.
Dr Leila Doshmangir is PhD in Health Policy. She was born in 1983. She is Graduated BA in Health Care
Administrative from Tehran University of Medical Sciences in 2006, MS in Health Care Administrative
from Tehran University of Medical Sciences in 2009 and PhD in Health Policy from Tehran/Iran University
of Medical Sciences in 2014. Her current research inte rests are centered on the field of health policy,
qualitative research, research methodology, health care administrative, etc. Currently she is working as
Teacher at the Tabriz University of Medical Sciences. She is Vice Chancellor, Center of Excellence in Health
Management. She is also a member of the Health Policy Council of Tabriz University of Medical Sciences.
Dr Leila Doshmangir is the corresponding author and can be contacted at: doshmangirl@tbzmed.ac.ir
Dr Ali Imani is PhD in Pharmacoeconomics and Pharmaceutical Management. He was born in 1980. He
graduates MS in Health Economics from School of Health management in 2007, Iran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, PhD from University of Shahid Beheshti Medical Science, Tehran, Iran in 2012. Currently
he is working as Teacher at the Tabriz University of Medical Sciences. He is also a member of the Iranian
Association of Pharma Management and Economics, the International Society for Pharmacoeconomics and
Outcomes Research, health services management research center, etc. His current research interests are
centered in the field of economic evaluation in health care, health economics, managerial finance, etc.
For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com
143
Influential
factors on
MEMM
[PAGE 23]
Reproduced with permission of copyright owner. Further
reproduction prohibited without permission.
[PAGE 24]
EXHIBIT 21 
[PAGE 25]

[PAGE 26]

[PAGE 27]

[PAGE 28]

[PAGE 29]

[PAGE 30]

[PAGE 31]

[PAGE 32]
