[PAGE 1]
 
 
 
[   ] Check here if multimedia evidence is being provided in connection with this comment 
ITEM A.  COMMENTER INFORMATION  
Petitioner: 
Coalition of Medical Device Patients and Researchers  
Hugo Campos 
hugooc@gmail.com 
(415) 794-1567 
Jay Radcliffe 
jay.radcliffe@gmail.com 
Karen M. Sandler  
karen@sfconservancy.org 
Members of Commenter Coalition of Medical Device Patients and Researchers (“the Coalition”) 
comment on, examine the safety of, and scrutinize the effectiveness of networked and personal 
medical devices. Our research requires access to a variety of networked medical devices, 
including but not limited to personal devices that are implanted or attached to our bodies. With 
the assistance of the Berkman Klein Center’s Cyber Law Clinic at Harvard Law School, we 
requested and were granted an exemption for Class 27: Software Networked and Personal 
Medical Devices in the Sixth Triennial Proceeding (2015). In the Seventh and Eight Triennial 
Proceedings (2018 and 2021), we successfully petitioned to renew the exemption. The Coalition 
now respectfully requests that the Copyright Office recommend expanding the exemption to 
remove unnecessary technical restrictions on what types of medical devices and circumvention 
methods are covered by the exemption. 
Hugo Campos is an advocate for access to health data, patient autonomy, and community 
science. He was named a White House Champion of Change for Precision Medicine by President 
Barack Obama in 2015 for his data liberation advocacy.  He has personal knowledge of the need 
for this exemption, as medical data being communicated from his own personal medical device 
[PAGE 2]
 
 
2 
has, in the past, been off limits to him. Specifically, as he has written about in “The Heart of the 
Matter,”1 he has at times been unable to access the data generated by his implanted defibrillator. 
Jay Radcliffe (CISSP) is Director of Product Security Testing and Research at Thermo Fisher 
Scientific. Jay has been working in the computer security field for over 20 years. Coming from 
the managed security services industry as well as the security consultation field, Jay has helped 
organizations of every size and vertical secure their networks and data. Jay presented ground-
breaking research on security vulnerabilities in multiple medical devices and was featured on 
national television as an expert on medical device cyber-security. As a Type I diabetic, Jay 
brings a lifetime of being a patient to helping medical facilities secure their critical data without 
compromising patient care. Not only is Jay a prolific public speaker, but also works with legal 
firms on expert witness consultation related to IoT and cyber security issues. Jay holds a Master's 
degree in Information Security Engineering from SANS Technology Institute, as well as a 
Bachelor's degree in Criminal Justice/Pre-Law from Wayne State University. SC Magazine 
named him one of the Top Influential IT Security Thinkers in 2013. 
Karen M. Sandler is the executive director of the Software Freedom Conservancy, which is the 
nonprofit home of many free and open source software projects. She is known as a “cyborg 
lawyer” for her advocacy for free software as a life-or-death issue, particularly in relation to the 
software on medical devices. Prior to joining Conservancy, she was the executive director of the 
GNOME Foundation. Before that, she was the general counsel of the Software Freedom Law 
Center where she was the primary author of “Killed by Code: Software Transparency in 
Implantable Medical Devices”2 in 2010. Karen co-organizes Outreachy, the award-winning 
outreach program for women globally and for people of color who are underrepresented in tech. 
Karen is an adjunct Lecturer-in-Law at Columbia Law School. She is the recipient of the Free 
Software Foundation's 2017 Award for the Advancement of Free Software as well as an O'Reilly 
Open Source Award.  
Representative: 
Jef Pearlman 
Director, Intellectual Property & Technology Law Clinic 
USC Gould School of Law 
jef@law.usc.edu 
(213) 740-7613 
Kate McClellan, J.D. Candidate 2022 
Keon Zemoudeh, J.D. Candidate 2021 
I
TEM B.  PROPOSED CLASS ADDRESSED 
These comments address Proposed Class 9: Literary Works—Medical Device Data.  
 
1 Hugo Campos, The Heart of the Matter, Slate (Mar. 24, 2015), https://perma.cc/4QKM-C632. 
2 Karen Sandler et al., Killed by Code: Software Transparency in Implantable Medical Devices, Software Freedom 
Center (Jul. 21, 2010), https://perma.cc/5XX2-MYZJ.  
[PAGE 3]
 
 
3 
ITEM C.  OVERVIEW 
The Coalition proposes the following language for the exemption (the “Proposed Expansion”): 
Literary works consisting of compilations  of data generated by medical devices 
or by their corresponding personal monitoring systems, where such circumvention 
is undertaken by or on behalf of a patient for the sole purpose of lawfully accessing 
the data generated by their own device or monitoring system.  
This language reflects four differences from the current language of the exemption.3 First, it 
omits the phrase “that are wholly or partially implanted in the body” from the language of the 
exemption. Second, “by a patient” is replaced with “by or on behalf of a patient.” Third it does 
not contain the requirement that patients circumvent TPMs through passive monitoring of 
wireless transmissions alone. Fourth it contains no language requiring consideration of other 
applicable laws, which are irrelevant to the exemption process. 
ITEM D.  TECHNOLOGICAL PROTECTION MEASURE(S) AND METHOD(S) OF CIRCUMVENTION 
Medical device manufacturers use a variety of technological protection measures (“TPM”s) to 
control access to the data from their devices, often in combination. Each of these methods may 
be used both in systems that transmit data wirelessly and those that use other methods, including 
older devices relying on separate memory cards.4 These TPMs include at least: 
Encryption of data during transmission. The Copyright Office has previously stated that 
encryption is a form of TPM.5 Encryption is accomplished by using an algorithm to mix up data 
into an unreadable form.6 If one has the corresponding “key” to the algorithm, one can decrypt 
the information.7 Without the corresponding key, reading encrypted data requires reverse 
engineering, which is sometimes accomplished by feeding a program data and observing the 
corresponding changes in the encrypted outputs.8 The FDA’s proposed update to its 
cybersecurity guidelines for medical devices specifically recommends manufacturers encrypt 
data during transfer and implement authentication protocols at endpoints.9 Although FDA 
guidance documents are nonbinding, conforming with the guidelines can “facilitate an efficient 
premarket review process” for new devices.10 Moreover, manufacturers regulated by the FDA 
largely follow these guidelines in order to expedite approval of new devices.11 As such, it is 
 
3 See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(4). 
4 Kingshuk De, Rise and fall of Sleepyhead: How Community Backed CPAP Hacking Got Jeopardized, Piunikaweb 
(Feb. 2019), https://perma.cc/2UY5-R7QJ. 
5 U.S. Copyright Office, Section 1201 of Title 17: A Report of the Register of Copyrights, 10 (2017), 
https://perma.cc/RZS3-J77H. 
6 Privacy Guy, What is Encryption & How Does it Work?, Internet Privacy Guy (Nov. 27, 2017), 
https://perma.cc/DK5V-V5AQ.  
7 Id. 
8 Cem Kaner, The Problem of Reverse Engineering, 2 (1998), https://perma.cc/Z3ZH-K9KX.  
9 Content of Premarket Submissions for Management of Cybersecurity in Medical Devices, Food and Drug 
Administration, 15 (Oct. 2018), https://perma.cc/LX9H-7NQF. 
10 Id. 
11 K.M. Lewis, Informal Guidance and the FDA, 66 Food & Drug L.J. 507, 541–42 (2011). 
[PAGE 4]
 
 
4 
highly probable that manufacturers will increase their use of encryption once the updated 
guidelines are finalized, which will likely occur within the next three years. Already, wearable 
hearing aids contain encryption securing wireless transmissions. 12 And encryption is likely to 
reach even more devices, including personal electrocardiogram machines and blood glucose 
monitors.  
Access to data through a proprietary reader. Proprietary file formats are readable only by 
specific programs and devices.13 This is because proprietary file formats often use “scrambling” 
encryption, in which the decryption key is hardwired into another program or device.14 As an 
example, Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (“CPAP”) machines, which patients use to treat 
sleep apnea, often store data in proprietary file formats on Secure Digital (“SD”) cards (some 
newer models transfer data wirelessly via Bluetooth or an internal modem to cloud platforms).15 
Only manufacture-specific tools can read the data, and such tools are not generally accessible to 
patients.16 Without those tools, reading the data in these proprietary formats reportedly requires 
circumventing TPMs, at least in some circumstances.17 Some of the obstacles to reading the data 
include anti-tamper software and checksummed data.18 To avoid these obstacles, one must 
compare data to known data, often by flipping settings in machine menus or by using 
commercial software with known data sets.19  
ITEM E.  ASSERTED ADVERSE EFFECTS ON NONINFRINGING USES  
I. The Proposed Expansion Covers Works That May Be Protected by Copyright 
The works within the proposed class consist of “compilations of data generated by medical 
devices or by their corresponding personal monitoring systems.”  As was undisputed in the 2015 
proceeding that resulted in the current exemption, much of this data is not copyrightable, but 
some parties assert that some such data may contain copyrightable elements as a compilation.20    
The characteristics of data outputs vary greatly between different systems. Data can be 
transmitted in streams of real-time data or as batch reports transmitted from the device on a set 
 
12 Signia (Jan. 23, 2018), https://perma.cc/Z8HE-87ZM. 
13 Paul Skidmore, Intro to CAD File Formats – Proprietary vs. Non-Proprietary, Cad Crowd (Nov. 20, 2018), 
https://perma.cc/JZ62-WE89.  
14 Frederick W. Dingledy & Alex Berrio Matamoros, What is Digital Rights Management?, Library Staff 
Publications 6, (2016), https://perma.cc/8YDA-3HJD. 
15 Kingshuk De, https://perma.cc/2UY5-R7QJ, supra.  
16 Id.; ResMed, ResScan, https://perma.cc/K4V5-FCTB (last visited Dec. 9, 2020) (restricting purchase of product 
to download, analyze, and store CPAP therapy data to licensed physicians).  
17 Cory Doctorow, Thousands of sleep apnea sufferers rely on a lone Australian CPAP hacker to stay healthy, 
Boingboing (Nov. 16, 2018), https://perma.cc/2FLT-9B43. 
18 Cathryn Virginia, I’m Possibly Alive Because it Exists: Why Sleep Apnea Patients Rely on a CPAP Machine 
Hacker, Vice (Nov. 2018), https://perma.cc/VUB2-D5CM. 
19 Id. 
20 U.S. Copyright, Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the 
Prohibition on Circumvention, 384 (2015), https://perma.cc/G4DG-YSRC (hereinafter “Section 1201 Rulemaking: 
Sixth Triennial Proceeding”). 
[PAGE 5]
 
 
5 
schedule or as prompted by a device reader.21 There is no consensus on the copyright eligibility 
of the data outputs of a computer program. Although current case law supports the idea 
that many data outputs are not copyright eligible,22 there is a possibility that a court in the 
future will determine a specific data output is arranged with the requisite originality to receive 
some copyright protection as a compilation.23 Even if most data outputs are held to be non-
copyrightable, patients seeking to access their medical data will likely be unable to determine the 
exact type of data configuration until they have circumvented a TPM. Accordingly, because 
some data outputs may be given thin copyright protection in the future, and patients have no way 
of determining the copyright eligibility of the data they wish to access before circumventing 
TPMs protecting that data, the Copyright Office should consider this proposed expansion as if 
some data outputs are eligible for copyright protection.   
II. The Uses in the Proposed Expansion at Issue are Noninfringing 
There are two broad categories of noninfringing uses that support the proposed exemption to 
circumvent TPMs in medical devices: (a) patients’ use of output data to detect anomalies, to 
adjust devices, and to adjust their medical regimens; and (b) researchers’ use of aggregated 
patient data to study device effectiveness, treatments, and genetic factors. As discussed above, 
the data outputs from medical devices are largely not copyrightable. However, to the extent that 
the data outputs are copyrightable, patient and researcher use of the data constitutes fair use. 
Patients Use Their Personal Medical Data to Manage Their Health and Support Research 
There are a number of illnesses for which patients need access to data outputs from their medical 
devices to enhance their treatment and overall health. For example, sleep apnea is a condition in 
which breathing starts and stops repeatedly during sleep.24 It occurs most often when muscles in 
the upper airway relax, causing the airway to narrow or close.25 This narrowing of the airway 
reduces blood oxygen levels and can lead to high blood pressure, heart problems, liver problems, 
and even Type 2 diabetes.26 Sleep disorders affect 35% to 40% of adults in the United States, and 
sleep apnea is associated with “increased utilization of health care resources and excess 
morbidity and mortality.”27 
As mentioned above, patients who suffer from sleep apnea use CPAP machines, which are non-
implantable devices that, utilizing a pump, tube, and mask, push air into the patient’s airway to 
 
21 Eran Levy, Batch, Stream, and Micro-batch Processing: A Cheat Sheet, Upsolver (Sep. 5, 2019), 
https://perma.cc/3TMG-E9Q7.  
22 See, e.g., Design Data Co. v. Unigate Enterprise, Inc., 847 F.3d 1169, 1173 (9th Cir. 2017) (suggesting that 
copyright protection may extend to the output of a computer program if the user’s role in creating the output is so 
marginal that the output reflects the program’s contents).    
23 Feist Publications, Inc. v. Rural Telephone Service Co., 499 U.S. 340, 344 (1991) (“[F]acts are not copyrightable, 
compilations of facts generally are.”).   
24 Sleep apnea, Mayo Clinic (July 28, 2020), https://perma.cc/4K4T-N3V8. 
25  Id. 
26  Id. 
27 Jaspal Singh, et al., American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) Position Paper for the Use of the Telemedicine 
for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Sleep Disorders, 11 J. Clin. Sleep Med. 1187 (Oct. 2015), 
https://perma.cc/3FLB-CSSS. 
[PAGE 6]
 
 
6 
prevent collapse during sleep.28 Not only do CPAP machines prevent airway collapse, but they 
also collect data while patients sleep. This data includes air pressure, air leak-rate, time spent 
sleeping, and apnea-hypopnea index (“API”) (determined by tracking the number of collapses 
and near-collapses of the airway per hour).29 CPAP machines often display a rudimentary form 
of this data to patients.30 Patients can use this data to adjust their CPAP machine settings. 
However, even if a CPAP machine displays reassuring values to the user, there are concerns that 
algorithms in CPAP machines overestimate and underestimate patients’ APIs.31 Algorithms vary 
between vendors, and there are “no specific guidelines or standards for capturing, measuring, or 
scoring” the data that CPAP machines track. Inaccurate API readings risk that patients may not 
make proper air pressure or mask adjustments to treat their sleep apnea.32 However, manual 
analysis of data outputs from CPAP machines can reveal false positives and false negatives that 
algorithms either use or fail to use in calculating patients’ APIs. 33  
Unfortunately, as mentioned above, CPAP output data is not readily available to patients nor 
researchers due to TPMs and restrictions on sales of data management software by CPAP 
machine manufacturers.34 Thus, patients and researchers must rely on free open-source software 
to circumvent TPMs on CPAP machine SD cards—rather than passively monitor wireless 
transmissions emitted from CPAP machines. 
“SleepyHead” was an free open-source software, developed by a sleep apnea patient, for 
accessing data in CPAP machines.”35 Patients and researchers alike could use SleepyHead to 
view data outputs stored on the SD cards in CPAP machines.36 SleepyHead takes data stored on 
the CPAP machine SD cards and presents it in flow waveforms.37 These are graphical 
representations of all leaks, all pressure changes, and all occurrences of four different types of 
sleep apnea events (central apneas, constructive apneas, unclassified apneas, and hypopneas).38 
Based on this information, patients are able to make informed changes in their CPAP machine 
 
28 John Donovan, How to Sleep Easier With Your CPAP Machine, WebMD (2015), https://perma.cc/RFH5-SBB6. 
29 David Repasky, What Do These Readings on My CPAP Machine Mean? (AHI, Leak, Pressure, Usage), cpap.com 
(Oct. 2018), https://perma.cc/LQL3-G9FH; Sleep Data Privacy Concerns: How to Keep Your Information Safe, 
Sistemma, https://perma.cc/LGA2-PGE4. 
30 Robert J. Thomas & Matt T. Bianchi, Urgent Need to Improve PAP Management: The Devil Is in Two (Fixable) 
Details, 13 J. Clin. Sleep Med. 5 (May 2017), https://perma.cc/B5JU-8ANU; Repasky, https://perma.cc/LQL3-
G9FH, supra. 
31 Thomas & Bianchi, https://perma.cc/B5JU-8ANU, supra. 
32 Id. 
33 Id. 
34 Kingshuk De, https://perma.cc/2UY5-R7QJ, supra; ResMed, ResScan, https://perma.cc/K4V5-FCTB 
(restricting purchase of product to download, analyze, and store CPAP therapy data to licensed physicians), supra. 
35 SleepyHead, SourceForge (April 26, 2018), https://perma.cc/QMW4-SFEL; Kingshuk De, https://perma.cc/2UY5-
R7QJ (noting that the developer “himself suffer[s] from the disorder”), supra. 
36 Thomas & Bianchi, https://perma.cc/B5JU-8ANU, supra. 
37 Id. 
38 Amin Reviews, How to Use SleepyHead to See Information from Your CPAP Machine, YouTube (Dec. 2017), 
https://perma.cc/LG9U-JKWN. 
[PAGE 7]
 
 
7 
settings that improve their sleep and energy—changes they could not make with rudimentary 
data displayed on their machine—that sometimes prove lifesaving.39 
After development of SleepyHead ceased,40 another free open-source software emerged for 
accessing CPAP machine data outputs. This software, Open Source CPAP Analysis Reporter 
(“OSCAR”), displays data in a similar manner as SleepyHead.41 
Patients’ Use of Data Outputs Constitutes Fair Use 
As the Register concluded when this exemption was proposed in 2015, to the extent medical 
device data receives copyright protection, patients’ use of data outputs from medical devices 
such as CPAP machines to enhance their treatment constitutes fair use.42 The Proposed 
Expansion is no different than the original one with respect to fair use.  All four factors remain 
the same, regardless of the manner of acquiring the data or the identity of the individual who 
performs the act on behalf of the patient. 
Courts consider four factors in the fair use analysis: (1) the purpose and character of the use, 
including whether such use is of a commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational purposes; 
(2) the nature of the copyrighted work; (3) the amount and substantiality of the portion used in 
relation to the copyrighted work as a whole; and (4) the effect of the use upon the potential 
market for or value of the copyrighted work.43 
When evaluating the purpose and character of the use, courts consider whether a defendant's use 
is (a) commercial and (b) transformative.44 First, patients’ use of data that they are unable to 
access through commercial means is noncommercial. For example, patients who use SleepyHead 
or OSCAR do not “stand[] to profit . . . without paying the customary price.” 45 That is, although 
patients benefit from using SleepyHead and OSCAR, patients cannot pay the customary price for 
similar software because manufacturers do not allow patients to buy their software products.46 
Moreover, medical professionals often do not give detailed analyses of patient data, and there is 
a substantial shortage of sleep apnea specialists across the United States.47 
 
39 John Bishop, Want to see all the data stored on your CPAP machine’s SD Card?, Mayo Clinic Connect (Nov. 
2018), https://perma.cc/LCV4-UGGU; Virginia, https://perma.cc/VUB2-D5CM, supra. 
40 Mark Watkins, SleepyHead, https://perma.cc/LQ6Y-VGTS. 
41 OSCAR, the Open Source CPAP Anlalysis Reporter: Official Download Page, SleepFiles, https://perma.cc/CT8P-
YT9P; How to Use OSCAR (Open Source CPAP Analysis Reporter), Optimize My Sleep (Feb. 2020), 
https://perma.cc/8Z39-WNYC. 
42 See U.S. Copyright Office, Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the 
Prohibition on Circumvention, 394 (Oct. 2015), https://perma.cc/G4DG-YSRC. 
43 17 U.S.C. § 107. 
44 The Fair Use Defense—In General, E-Commerce and Internet Law § 4.10[1] n. 12. 
45 Harper & Row Publishers, Inc. v. Nation Enterprises, 471 U.S. 539, 562 (1985). 
46 ResMed, ResScan, https://perma.cc/K4V5-FCTB (last visited Dec. 9, 2020) (restricting purchase of product to 
download, analyze, and store CPAP therapy data to licensed physicians), supra; 
47 Bishop, https://perma.cc/LCV4-UGGU, supra. 
(patient recounting medical clinic’s “high level” review of his data but also the detailed understanding that 
SleepyHead software provided him); Singh, et al., https://perma.cc/3FLB-CSSS (noting that “parts of the United 
States are grossly underserved or not served at all” by sleep apnea specialists and that “the specialist gap is expected 
to widen . . . .”), supra. 
[PAGE 8]
 
 
8 
Furthermore, patients use the data from these devices in many transformative ways. 
Incorporating the data with software like SleepyHead or OSCAR “alter[s] the [original work] 
with new expression . . . .”48 The software presents the raw data in graphical representations, 
thereby using the data as “as raw material, transformed in the creation of . . . new aesthetics, new 
insights and understandings.”49 Specifically, the graphical representations give patients a detailed 
understanding of their medical data, allowing them to draw conclusions about their health that 
they would be unable to appreciate otherwise. More generally, patients can also use the data on 
its own or in conjunction with data from other medical devices to better inform them of their 
own health, thereby giving the data new significance. 
As to the second factor, the output data is far from the “core of intended copyright protection” 
because it is informational rather than creative.50 The thin copyright protection afforded to the 
data outputs here weighs in favor of fair use. 
Although software like SleepyHead and OSCAR allow patients to view all of their data, using an 
entire work does not preclude a finding of fair use.51 Moreover, because the intended use is to 
view detailed data to enhance treatment, all of the data is necessary to accomplish this purpose. 
Without all of the data, patients would not be able to make accurate assessments of their health. 
Thus, patients use only the amount necessary for their intended use, so the third factor does not 
weigh against fair use.52 
Finally, viewing the data outputs from medical devices would not have a negative impact on the 
market for medical software or data outputs. In fact, access to the data outputs would allow 
patients to make proper adjustments to their machines, which would make their machines more 
effective in treating medical conditions such as sleep apnea, hearing loss, and diabetes.53 Greater 
effectiveness of the machines would increase the market for medical software and data outputs.  
Researchers’ Use of Data Outputs Constitutes Fair Use 
Similarly, to the extent that data from medical devices is copyrightable, researchers’ use of data 
outputs constitutes fair use. Primarily, such use by researchers is transformative because it has a 
“further purpose” to study device effectiveness and identify genes associated with certain 
disorders and illnesses.
54 This purpose is distinct from that of the machines, which is to use the 
data to estimate rudimentary metrics for individual medical purposes. The Copyright Act itself 
 
48 Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 579 (1994). 
49 Castle Rock Entertainment, Inc. v. Carol publishing Group, Inc., 150 F.3d 132, 141 (2d Cir. 1998). 
50 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 586; see Dr. Seuss Enterprises, L.P. v. Penguin Books USA, Inc., 109 F.3d 1394, 1402 
(1997) (noting fair use is easier to establish when the original work is informational). 
51 Kelly v. Arriba Software Corp., 336 F.3d 811, 820 (2003). 
52 Id. 
53 Sejal Kuvadia & Luis F. Camacho, Data Logging – Hearing Aid Behavior in the Real World, Audiology Online 
(Jun. 2017), https://perma.cc/UMC7-65WU (detailing the benefits of collecting and analyzing hearing-aid data); 
Sarah Zhang, People Are Clamoring to Buy Old Insulin Pumps, The Atlantic (Apr. 29), https://perma.cc/D8VG-
Z2ME (stating that demand for certain insulin pumps increased after release of free open-source algorithm for 
analyzing real-time glucose data). 
54 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 579. 
[PAGE 9]
 
 
9 
suggests use of a copyrighted work for purposes such as “scholarship . . . or research” constitutes 
fair use.55 
As noted above, the second factor favors fair use because data outputs have thin copyright 
protection, if any. Moreover, aggregating data from many patients’ is necessary to “identify rare 
genetic variants” associated with disorders like sleep apnea, so the third factor does not weigh 
against fair use.56 Further, even if researchers criticize the effectiveness of medical software or 
data, aggregating data could improve the market for medical software and data. For example, 
analysis of large sets of data would improve understanding of the factors that contribute to 
adherence to CPAP treatment.57 This knowledge could then be “leveraged to improve 
adherence” to CPAP treatment, which would increase the value of the underlying software and 
data.58 Thus, the fourth factor further supports that researchers’ use of data outputs constitutes 
fair use. 
III.  Adverse Effects Summary 
Preventing Circumvention Adversely Affects Patient Health and Medical Research 
The use of TPMs in medical devices restricts patient access to their own medical data, adversely 
affecting patient treatment and medical research into chronic illnesses in America. Many medical 
devices prevent patient access to the raw data those devices collect.59  
For example, without access to their own medical data, patients must rely on doctors to access 
the readings from CPAP machines. However, a shortage of sleep specialists in the medical 
profession means many patients suffering from sleep apnea receive treatment from primary care 
physicians who lack training in sleep medicine.60 Additionally, doctors frequently look at CPAP 
data to determine compliance for insurance purposes rather than to more effectively shape 
patient treatment, often looking at data averages over time instead of readings from individual 
nights.61 This results in ineffective treatment for many patients who are left struggling with their 
sleep disorders and feeling dismissed by their doctors.62  
CPAPs are not the only medical devices restricting patient access to data through proprietary 
software. Wearable Cardioverter-Defibrillators (“WCD”s) are an emerging therapeutic option for 
patients who have had an Implantable Cardioverter-Defibrillator (“ICD”) removed due to 
infection, or are waiting for a heart transplant.63 The device uses a transmitter to send data to the 
patient’s physician, either through a daily or weekly remote transmission.64 Like CPAP 
 
55 17 U.S.C. § 107. 
56 Rohit Budhiraja et al., The Role of Big Data in The Management of Sleep Disordered Breathing, 11 Sleep Med. 
Clinic 241 (Jun. 2016), https://perma.cc/DD7N-UQ4X. 
57 Id.  
58 Id.  
59 Doctorow, https://perma.cc/2FLT-9B43, supra.  
60 Kingshuk De, https://perma.cc/2UY5-R7QJ, supra.   
61 Virginia, https://perma.cc/VUB2-D5CM, supra. 
62 Id. 
63 Peter Magnusson et al., The Wearable Cardioverter-Defibrillator, Intechopen (Dec. 19, 2019), 
https://perma.cc/YNN7-6JU9.  
64 Id.  
[PAGE 10]
 
 
10 
machines, the software required to monitor patient data is available only to physicians—not to 
patients themselves.65  
Proprietary systems are also used to limit access to data from hearing aids.66 Many wearable 
hearing aids log data about patient usage which can be used to troubleshoot programs used by the 
hearing aid or otherwise better adjust the hearing aid to the patient’s regular environment.67 The 
specific types of data recorded by the device vary by manufacturer, but many record things like 
daily use time, time spent in different acoustic environments, average volume control, manual 
corrections made by the patient, etc.68 This data is then wirelessly transmitted by hearing aids to 
a corresponding proprietary programming system.69 These systems are accessible to physicians 
but are not available to patients.70 Although the extent to which encryption is used in hearing aid 
software is unclear, manufacturers have stated that, in accordance with FDA guidelines, hearing 
aids do contain encryption and “secure wireless technology.”71 Thus, any logged data that is 
wirelessly transmitted is likely encrypted. To the extent that these devices or proprietary formats 
use encryption or other TPMs, patients are unable to lawfully access their own medical data.  
Although physicians have substantially more medical expertise compared to the patients they 
treat, a patient has more comprehensive experience with their body and physical health over 
time. This experience puts patients in the best position to make certain executive choices 
regarding their health and treatment. Access to medical data would enable patients to better 
understand their own bodies and help them to discuss informed changes to treatment with their 
physicians. 
Additionally, by preventing access to patient data, TPMs also restricts the data available to 
medical researchers. For example, the copious amounts of data recorded by CPAP machines are 
largely unavailable to researchers in the sleep medicine field.72 Allowing patients access to that 
data would then enable opportunities to aggregate patient-volunteered CPAP readings into large 
data sets which could then be used to study sleep disorders.73 
Moreover, if patients are unable to circumvent TPMs that are currently present—or likely to 
arise in the next three years—in other non-implantable medical devices, they would be unable to 
make holistic assessments of their health. For example, nonimplantable electrocardiogram 
machines help patients evaluate their cardiovascular health.74 Because sleep apnea is associated 
with cardiovascular disease, combining data from CPAP machines and electrocardiogram 
 
65 LifeVest Network, https://perma.cc/KQD2-G3Y6 (last visited Dec. 9, 2020).  
66 Manufacturers Explain How Their Data Logging Systems Work, 60 Hearing J. 22, 22-23 (Oct. 2007), 
https://perma.cc/PJ5R-D9KS.  
67 Gustav H. Mueller, Data Logging: It’s Popular, but how can this feature be used to help patients?, 60 Hearing J. 
19, https://perma.cc/87PX-UL86.  
68 Manufacturers Explain How Their Data Logging Systems Work, https://perma.cc/PJ5R-D9KS, supra. 
69 Connexx 8.5.15, Signia, https://perma.cc/NF9Y-6S9P (last visited Dec. 14, 2020).  
70 Mandy Mroz, New hearing aid technology, Healthy Hearing (Jun. 5, 2020), https://perma.cc/K255-DFMX.  
71 Signia (Jan. 23, 2018), https://perma.cc/Z8HE-87ZM.   
72 Budhiraja et al., https://perma.cc/DD7N-UQ4X, supra. 
73 Id. 
74 Danielle Moores, Electrocardiogram, Healthline (Sep. 2018), https://perma.cc/H5R9-RCW3; KardiaMobile, 
AliveCor, https://perma.cc/G5D9-C8AN. 
[PAGE 11]
 
 
11 
machines would improve patients’ assessments of their health, help researchers understand the 
pathophysiology of sleep apnea, and improve sleep apnea treatments.75  
Limiting Circumvention to Passive Monitoring of Devices Needlessly Prevents Patient Access 
The current exemption’s language limiting circumvention to passive monitoring of wireless 
signals sent by a device would prevent many CPAP users from accessing the data from their 
machines. Although many newer CPAP machine models have wireless capabilities, older models 
store data only on an SD card.76 Uploading data from an SD card is already contemplated by the 
device manufacturers and thus does not have any negative effects on the machine.77  
Furthermore, patients should have the ability to choose a circumvention method based on their 
needs and technical capability. Without an exemption allowing general circumvention, patients 
are required to circumvent only through passive monitoring and are thus unable to experiment 
with alternative and perhaps more efficient or effective ways to access their medical data from 
these devices. A patient may want to write software that reads the data directly from a device 
rather than intercept data in transit. Giving patients the freedom to access TPM-protected data 
using methods besides passive monitoring would open new avenues for data access even for 
devices covered by the existing exemption, allowing the search for and use of better, more 
efficient, or more easily accessible methods of circumvention, thereby expanding lawful access 
to personal medical data.  
Additionally, requiring patients to circumvent through passive monitoring of wireless 
transmissions forces patients to enable wireless capabilities to access that data, which makes 
their data and devices more vulnerable to intrusion from third parties.78 For the purposes of 
copyright law, there is no meaningful difference between passive monitoring and other forms of 
circumvention. Accordingly, the exemption should not draw such a distinction and instead allow 
patients to circumvent the TPMs restricting access to their data without arbitrarily limiting the 
manner in which they do so.   
Limiting the Definition of “User” to Individual Patients Restricts Data Access to a Select Class 
of Technologically Proficient Patients 
By defining the eligible class of users for the purposes of Section 1201 to mean the individual 
patient using the device, the practical application of an exemption to access data from medical 
devices is incredibly slim. The vast majority of patients likely do not have the technical 
knowledge required to circumvent a TPM on their own. Furthermore, there is nothing within the 
statute itself limiting the definition of “user” to encompass solely the owner of a device.79 
 
75 Budhiraja et al., https://perma.cc/DD7N-UQ4X, supra. 
76 Kingshuk De, https://perma.cc/2UY5-R7QJ, supra. 
77 Virginia, https://perma.cc/VUB2-D5CM, supra.  
78 Patricia A.H. Williams & Andrew J. Woodward, Cybersecurity vulnerabilities in medical devices: 
a complex environment and multifaceted problem, 8 Medic. Devices: Evidence and Research 305, 307 (2015), 
https://perma.cc/X5AN-U8SS.  
79 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(B). 
[PAGE 12]
 
 
12 
The Copyright Office has structured previous amendments to allow third parties working on 
behalf of a device owner to assist the device owner in circumventing TPMs. As the Copyright 
Office noted in the Section 1201 Study’s Final Report, the exemption for assistive technology 
only requires that the device be lawfully acquired by a person with disabilities; it does not 
require that person to be the one actually doing the circumventing.80 Additionally, in the 2018 
Recommendation, the Office recommended allowing circumvention of TPMs restricting wireless 
devices from connecting to wireless telecommunication networks to be carried out by the owner 
of a device or another person “at the direction of the owner.”81  
Although the Copyright Office has previously suggested that, outside explicit authorization from 
Congress, third party assistance cannot be permitted through the exemption process,82 this is 
based on an erroneous understanding of the Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless 
Competition Act (“Unlocking Act”) and Congress’s legislative intent therein. The Unlocking Act 
was a direct reaction to the Librarian’s failure to renew existing exemptions that allowed 
consumers to “unlock” phones for use on the wireless network of their choice.83 The Act was 
intended to reinstate a popular exemption, not limit the scope of other exemptions. A report by 
the Senate Judiciary Committee explicitly states that the bill “makes no changes to Section 
1201 . . . [and] does not alter the authority of the Librarian in future rulemakings.”84 
Accordingly, language in the Unlocking Act allowing third party circumvention under certain 
circumstances was intended to outline the specific exemption Congress wished to reinstate and, 
when combined with the “makes no changes” section, strongly suggests that the Librarian (and 
therefore the Copyright Office) already had the authority to allow unlocking at an owner’s—or 
patient’s—direction.  
The same policy considerations that require a broader definition of user for unlocking 
circumvention apply here as well; many consumers are likely unable to circumvent TPMs 
without assistance from a third party due to the substantial technical knowledge required to do 
so.85 Defining “user” to include a third party acting on behalf of a patient would enable patients 
to access their own data from their own devices without first getting a degree in computer 
science.  
Expanding the user definition would also allow patients to share their data in a more direct way 
with family members or friends. Nightscout, an open source software project created by the 
parents of children with Type 1 diabetes, allows parents to remotely view blood sugar readings 
from their children’s continuous glucose monitors (“CGM”s).86 James Wedding, one of the 
software engineers involved with the project, stated that the application changed the way he and 
 
80 U.S. Copyright Office, Section 1201 of Title: 17 A Report of the Register of Copyrights, 61, 
https://perma.cc/RZS3-J77H, supra. 
81 U.S. Copyright Office, Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the 
Prohibition on Circumvention, 337 (Oct. 26, 2018), https://perma.cc/VY6Z-35SN.  
82 Id., 59 (Oct. 26, 2018), https://perma.cc/VY6Z-35SN (citing Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial 
Proceeding, 247, https://perma.cc/G4DG-YSRC.).  
83 S. Rep. No. 113-212, (2014), https://perma.cc/GZE8-2NDA.  
84 Id.  
85Id. 
86 Welcome to Nightscout, https://perma.cc/J8B2-BW3Q (last visited Dec. 11, 2020). 
[PAGE 13]
 
 
13 
his wife interacted with his child.87 Remote monitoring allows parents to leave their child with a 
babysitter or send them on a school trip without worrying about their health.88 It is doubtful a 
child would have the technological proficiency required to circumvent a TPM without parental 
assistance. However, the current exemption language does not clearly address whether parents 
have the ability to circumvent TPMs on their children’s devices. 
Finally, allowing third parties acting on behalf of patients to circumvent TPMs on patient 
medical devices comports with established agency law. It is a fundamental principle of agency 
law that the actions of an agent acting within their actual authority are considered the actions of 
the principal.89 Accordingly, any party acting under the authority of a patient to access the 
patient’s medical device data should be treated as if they were the patient for the purposes of a 
section 1201 exemption.  
The Copyright Office Should Not Consider Policy Concerns Unrelated to Copyright Law 
Policy considerations unrelated to the protection of copyright law should not underly any 
decision about the scope or appropriateness of an exemption. For example, device 
manufacturers’ concerns about the safety and morality of circumventing TPMs are unrelated to 
copyright law, and the Copyright Office should not consider them or integrate them into the 
exception. Moreover, even if this exemption is granted, device manufacturers’ concerns about 
unrelated regulatory schemes are irrelevant: this exemption will not prohibit device 
manufacturers from bringing actions under existing regulations or laws unrelated to copyright.   
That is, if a patient accessing their medical data violates FDA regulations, that will continue to 
be true even if it is no longer a violation of copyright law. Similarly, the presence of an 
exemption allowing owners to circumvent TPMs in their devices would not eliminate remedies 
for breach of contract for business models that rely on contractional relationships.
90 The 
Copyright Office should therefore remove references to FDA regulations, HIPAA, the CFAA, 
and other legal requirements from this exemption. 
 
IV. Statutory Factors 
(i) the availability for use of copyrighted works 
The first factor under section 1201(a)(1)(C) has been interpreted by the Copyright Office to 
require consideration of whether the availability of the work in its protected format enhances or 
 
87 Michelle Boise, NIGHTSCOUT — THE TECHNOLOGY THAT CHANGED THE WORLD WE KNOW, Beyond 
Type 1 (Dec. 7, 2016), https://perma.cc/4W22-QJKL.  
88 Id.  
89 E.g., United States v. Forbes, 515 F.2d 676, 680 (D.C. Cir. 1975).  
90 ProCD, Inc. v. Zeidenberg, 86 F.3d 1447, 1450 (7th Cir. 1996) (holding that a user who violated a 
software program‘s license was still liable to the manufacturer for breach of contract, agnostic of any applicable 
infringement claims).  
[PAGE 14]
 
 
14 
inhibits public use of the work, whether the protected work is available in other formats, and, if 
so, whether such formats are sufficient to accommodate noninfringing uses.91 
Here, the availability of medical devices in a protected format inhibits public use because it 
prevents patients from using their personal medical data to adjust treatment, thereby making it 
more likely that a patient will give up using the device. CPAP machines have notoriously low 
patient compliance; 46-83% of patients do not adhere to treatment.
92 Unsurprisingly, studies 
have shown that patients who are satisfied with their CPAP treatment are more likely to continue 
using their device.93 Conversely, a study by the Scottish National Sleep Center found that 20% of 
patients who stopped using their CPAP machine did so due to a lack of benefit from the 
treatment.94 Accordingly, enhancing the effectiveness of CPAP treatment is likely to increase 
long term use of CPAP machines by patients. 
Even though CPAP machines capture extensive amounts of data that can be used to adjust 
machine settings to provide better treatment, many patients struggle to improve the effectiveness 
of their devices. A patient’s doctor has access to the data from the CPAP machine, but doctors 
trained in sleep medicine are in short supply.95 Many primary care physicians only follow up 
with patient usage to check compliance for insurance purposes, and do not significantly evaluate 
the data from the patient’s machine.96 Christy Lynn, a woman living in rural Arizona, spent 
months seeking a diagnosis for her persistent tiredness before one doctor recognized her 
symptoms matched sleep apnea.97 But even after starting CPAP treatment, Lynn’s symptoms 
hadn’t improved and her doctors were unable to get her Apnoea-Hypopnea Index (“AHI”), the 
number of times she stopped breathing per night, down.98 Using data she accessed by 
circumventing TPMs on her device, Lynn was able to look at individual nights, unlike her 
doctors that had only looked at six month averages.99 Lynn could then adjust her treatment, 
which successfully brought down her AHI.100 
There do not appear to be alternative medical devices available to the general public without 
TPMs. Additionally, because FDA guidelines heavily encourage the use of TPMs to protect 
 
91 U.S. Copyright Office, Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding Recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights, 152 (Oct. 12, 2012), https://perma.cc/EW9T-6TLY (citing Recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights in RM 2008-8, Rulemaking on Exemptions from Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection 
Systems for Access Control Technologies, 56 (June 11, 2010)). 
92 Terri E. Weaver & Ronald R. Grunstein, Adherence to Continuous Positive Airway Pressure Therapy, 5 Proc. 
Am. Thoracic Soc’y 173 (2008), https://perma.cc/LZN4-UPKP.   
93 Norman Wolkove et al., Long-term compliance with continuous positive airway pressure in patients with 
obstructive sleep apnea, 15 Can. Respiratory J. 365, 368 (2008), https://perma.cc/6VZP-TYSF.  
94 Nigel McArdle et al., Long-term Use of CPAP Therapy for Sleep Apnea/Hypopnea Syndrome, 159 Am. J. 
Respiratory Critical Care Medic. 1108, 1110 (1999), https://perma.cc/9RRM-NGAN.  
95 Barbara Phillips et al., What Is the Future of Sleep Medicine in the United States?, 192 Am. J. Respiratory and 
Critical Care 915, 915 (2015), https://perma.cc/5XLS-RPRX.  
96 Kristina Weaver, Primary Care Physician vs. Sleep Specialist: Who Knows Best?, AAST (Feb. 22, 2018), 
https://perma.cc/CSM7-KSVG; Virginia, https://perma.cc/VUB2-D5CM, supra.  
97 Virginia, https://perma.cc/VUB2-D5CM, supra.  
98 Id.  
99 Id.  
100 Id.  
[PAGE 15]
 
 
15 
patient data in medical devices, manufacturers are unlikely to create equivalent devices without 
TPMs in the future.  
(ii) the availability for use of works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational 
purposes 
As discussed above, identical medical devices are not available with or without TPMs, and FDA 
guidelines point to increasing use of encryption and other access controls within medical device 
software moving forward. Thus, any educational use of data from a medical device will likely 
require circumventing TPMs.  
(iii) the impact that the prohibition on the circumvention of technological measures applied to 
copyrighted works has on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research 
Allowing patients to circumvent TPMs to access medical data from their devices will increase 
the availability of reliable self-reported patient data, which will in turn encourage additional 
observational studies on chronic illnesses such as sleep apnea. The use of self-reported patient 
data to conduct studies has been widely discussed among the medical community.101 Self-
reported patient data is a cheaper method of data collection than alternatives but has validity 
problems due to the possibility of patient misrepresentation or embellishment.102 However, 
patient data obtained from medical devices do not have the same credibility issues as patient 
surveys. Already, some medical researchers use patient data gleaned from personal medical 
devices to study the efficacy of these devices. 103  
Currently, nonprofit organizations have been able to aggregate patient volunteered data obtained 
from implanted medical devices such as continuous glucose monitors.104 These organizations are 
then able to share that data with research groups who use the data sets to refine or expand upon 
existing treatments.105 By contrast, limitations on available patient data have stymied research 
into broad issues within the field of sleep medicine.106 Although CPAP machines track a 
significant amount of data, that data is primarily used to ensure patient compliance for insurance 
purposes and then subsequently discarded.107 Granting patients the right to access that data 
would provide a feasible path for widespread data collection and preservation across a wider 
range of individuals than the data sets gathered from a few clinical centers.108 
 
101 BMJ, Self-report versus observation, Injury Prevention (Jun. 14, 2015), https://perma.cc/YT78-6L94.   
102 Jeanne M. Ferrante et al., Self-report versus Medical Records for Assessing Cancer-Preventative Services 
Delivery, 17 Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers & Prevention 2987, 2988 (Nov. 2008), https://perma.cc/V8FZ-89JF.  
103 Thomas & Bianchi, https://perma.cc/B5JU-8ANU, supra.    
104 Tidepool, https://perma.cc/G9W4-XSJG (last visited Dec. 10, 2020).  
105 Id. 
106 Budhiraja et al., https://perma.cc/DD7N-UQ4X, supra. 
107 Id. 
108 Id. 
[PAGE 16]
 
 
16 
(iv) the effect of circumvention of technological measures on the market for or value of 
copyrighted works 
Circumvention of TPMs on medical devices to gain access to patient data will have no negative 
effect on the value of the software operating these medical devices or the data they produce 
because, as discussed under the first statutory factor, patients will still purchase medical devices 
irrespective of their access to data and may even be more likely to do so if the data is readily 
accessible. Rather, for the reasons stated above, it is more likely that patient access to data will 
increase patient satisfaction with their medical devices and in turn increase the value and market 
for the software within those medical devices.   
Conclusion 
For the above reasons, the Coalition respectfully requests that the Register recommend granting 
the proposed exemption language, thereby allowing patients to access their own medical data 
without fear of liability under the DMCA. 
 
