[PAGE 1]
Comments of Organization for Transformative Works [Submitter:  Betsy Rosenblatt] 
 
 
Please submit a separate comment for each proposed class. 
NOTE: This form must be used in all three rounds of comments by all commenters not 
submitting short-form comments directly through regulations.gov, whether the commenter is 
supporting, opposing, or merely providing pertinent information about a proposed exemption. 
When commenting on a proposed expansion to an existing exemption, you should focus your 
comments only on those issues relevant to the proposed expansion.  
[   ] Check here if multimedia evidence is being provided in connection with this comment 
Commenters can provide relevant multimedia evidence to support their arguments. Please note 
that such evidence must be separately submitted in conformity with the Office’s instructions for 
submitting multimedia evidence, available on the Copyright Office website at 
https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2021. 
ITEM A.  COMMENTER INFORMATION  
The Organization for Transformative Works (OTW) is a nonprofit organization established in 
2007 to protect and defend fans and fanworks from commercial exploitation and legal challenge. 
We represent artists who make works commenting on and transforming existing works, adding 
new meaning and insights—from reworking a film from the perspective of the “villain,” to using 
storytelling to explore racial dynamics in media, to retelling the story as if a woman, instead of a 
man, were the hero. We represent individuals who find community and common ground in 
shared affection for and criticism of media in a world that is all too often divided and isolating. 
The OTW’s nonprofit website hosting transformative noncommercial works, the Archive of Our 
Own, has over 3 million registered users, hosts over 6 million unique works, and receives almost 
350 million page views per week.  
The OTW’s contact information is: Betsy Rosenblatt, betsy_rosenblatt@post.harvard.edu, or 
legal@transformativeworks.org. 
ITEM B.  PROPOSED CLASS ADDRESSED 
Proposed Class 1: Audiovisual Works—Criticism and Comment 
ITEM C.  OVERVIEW 
The OTW proposes the following language for the exemption for noncommercial video: 
[PAGE 2]
 
 
2 
 
Motion pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in 17 U.S.C. 101, where 
circumvention is undertaken solely in order to make use of short portions of the motion pictures 
for the purpose of criticism or comment in noncommercial videos, and where the person 
engaging in circumvention believes and has reasonable grounds for believing that circumvention 
is necessary to fulfill the purpose of the use. For purposes of this exemption, “noncommercial 
videos” includes videos created pursuant to a paid commission, provided that the commissioning 
entity’s use is noncommercial. 
ITEM D.  TECHNOLOGICAL PROTECTION MEASURE(S) AND METHOD(S) OF CIRCUMVENTION 
The TPMs and methods of circumvention addressed are the same as those in the existing 
exemption. More detail is available in the records of previous rulemakings. 
ITEM E.  ADVERSE EFFECTS ON NONINFRINGING USES  
This proposal is based on the 2010 Recommendation, as amended by later clarification in the 
2012 Recommendation about the meaning of “noncommercial” and the 2015 Recommendation’s 
reformulation of the exemption to encompass non-DVD sources in recognition of the rise of Blu-
Ray and streaming as increasingly the only feasible means of access to many works. 
 
As explained in the petition for renewal of the existing exemption, the factual bases for granting 
the exemption remain stable. The law remains clear that many such uses will be fair.1  In 
addition, the non-legal facts remain as they were: licensing of audiovisual clips is generally 
unavailable to noncommercial users; available licenses restrain criticism of exactly the type most 
likely to be fair use; and alternatives to circumvention still do not provide the necessary quality 
for fair criticism and comment.2 The OTW is prepared to present testimony from individuals 
familiar with the exemption, current vidding community practices, and the practical and legal 
reasons why the suggested revision will have no adverse effects on noninfringing uses, including 
Francesca Coppa and Tisha Turk.  However, the evidence from prior rulemakings also supports 
the suggested revision and is not stale because nothing of substance has changed.3 The suggested 
language is all language the Copyright Office has used in the past. 
 
The real issue is whether the overly complex structure of the existing exemption serves the 
purposes for which it was granted and renewed. It does not, instead retaining traps for the 
unwary, who are the ones most in need of its protection.  
 
                                                      
1 Along with the cases previously cited, see Hughes v. Benjamin, 2020 WL 528704 (S.D.N.Y. 
Feb. 3, 2020) (finding 6 video clips, juxtaposed without additional commentary beyond 
disparaging title, to be fair use). 
2 This comment incorporates by reference previous submissions to prior rounds of the 
rulemaking, including the examples, testimony, and exhibits. 
3 The distribution mechanisms have expanded to services such as TikTok, but the young women 
making transformative works in which they add themselves to Harry Potter movies are still 
using the same kind of editing software and techniques such as keying, masking and color 
correction. Lena Wilson, ‘Harry Potter’ and the Prisoners of Quarantine, N.Y. Times, Nov. 17, 
2020, https://www.nytimes.com/2020/11/17/movies/harry-potter-tiktok.html. 
[PAGE 3]
 
 
3 
 
The division of exemptions into screencapture/not screencapture is not justified by the record or 
by the law. 
 
I. There Is No Technological or Statutory Basis for the Distinction 
 
First, no participant in these proceedings can distinguish screencapture from other technologies. 
To date, no participant in the exemption proceedings has been able to look “under the hood” of 
screencapture software. The Office has therefore proceeded by declaring that advertising will be 
used as a proxy for whether a program is a screencapture program, but it has not justified that 
conclusion with references to the statute or to the purposes served by the exemption. 
 
For example, although exemption opponents have long touted screencapture as an “alternative” to 
circumvention, they will not commit to that position in a way that would bind them in court 
against a fair user, nor can they bind other copyright owners, any of whom could assert that 
screencapture is itself circumvention.4 Many video sources attempt to—and do—block 
screencapture software from working.5 The Copyright Office does not have the statutory 
authority to bind litigants or courts on this issue, and so it should not proceed as if screencapture 
is a preferable alternative from the perspective of anticircumvention law. 
 
There has never been any explanation of why encouraging use of screencapture is better for any 
copyright purpose. Indeed, the uniform testimony has always been that a “good enough” copy 
created by screencapture may often be suitable for unauthorized consumptive uses even when it is 
unsuitable for editing or close reading.  
 
Given that both screen capture and other methods of circumvention are subject to TPMs in the 
current environment, people who are entitled to an exemption on the merits of their uses should 
                                                      
4 See, e.g., UMG Recordings, Inc. v. PMG Technologie UG, No. 16-cv-07210 (C.D. Cal., filed 
Sept. 26, 2016) (including §1201 claim against software provider allowing capture of audio from 
YouTube); Abby Vollmer, Standing up for developers: youtube-dl is back, Github, November 
16, 2020, https://github.blog/2020-11-16-standing-up-for-developers-youtube-dl-is-back/ 
(discussing §1201 claim sent to Github by RIAA for code that allows downloads of Youtube 
videos). 
5 As Gizmodo explains, “There’s only one big block on screenshots on Android and indeed iOS: 
when DRM-protected video is playing, with Netflix the best example. Right now there’s no way 
around this restriction, even using the desktop applications we’ve mentioned.” David Nield, How 
to Take Screenshots of Anything (Even When They're Blocked), Jan. 23, 2017, 
https://fieldguide.gizmodo.com/how-to-take-a-screenshot-of-anything-even-when-theyre-
1791505218; see also https://www.dvd-cloner.com/knowledge/about-dvd-copy-for-mac/how-to-
take-screenshots-in-mac-os-x-s-dvd-player-application.html; 
https://support.techsmith.com/hc/en-us/articles/203732478-Snagit-Mac-Cannot-capture-DVD-
video-on-OS-10-7-or-later; Open Broadcaster Software, Recording Netflix get sound but only 
black screen video, Sept. 19, 2017, https://obsproject.com/forum/threads/recording-netflix-get-
sound-but-only-black-screen-video.74657/; see also iOS 11 Prevent Screen Record like Netflix, 
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/46319665/ios-11-prevent-screen-record-like-
netflix/46370265#46370265 (explaining the technical steps used by Netflix and others on iOS). 
[PAGE 4]
 
 
4 
 
not be limited to capturing the video at a particular point in its journey through the computer.  The 
statutory factors do not provide the Office with reasons to determine that people entitled to an 
exemption must use a particular technology to do so.6  
 
II. There Is No Practical Basis for the Distinction 
 
Fundamental principles of due process counsel in favor of recognizing the fact that the 
screencapture distinction is one that ordinary fair users of video do not make.  The uniform 
testimony, uncontroverted by opponents for more than a decade, is that—with the exception of the 
participants in these proceedings—remixers generally use the tools that work for them, because 
they are unaware of §1201. Indeed, as past submissions have explained, even federal prosecutors 
and experienced trademark attorneys are unaware of §1201’s potential constraints.7 Given the 
actual uses that are being made, the only way to protect concededly fair users such as the 
attorneys who don’t know the DMCA exists is to make the exemption technology-neutral. The 
vast majority of the people whose works are protected by the exemption are not copyright 
lawyers, are not advised by copyright lawyers, and only find out about §1201 when they receive a 
copyright claim and wish to assert fair use, when it is too late for them to choose a technology. 
 
The situation is similar for National History Day students making educational videos examining 
historical events. In 2015, the Copyright Office rejected the example of such students because, 
although the competition requirements made clear that video quality would be part of the 
                                                      
6 The Office has indicated that it intends to follow the Administrative Procedure Act. Under the 
APA, a decision is arbitrary and capricious where “the agency has … entirely failed to consider 
an important aspect of the problem [or] offered an explanation for its decision that runs counter 
to the evidence before the agency ….” Nat. Res. Def. Council v. U.S. E.P.A., 658 F.3d 200, 215 
(2d Cir. 2011) (quoting Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of U.S., Inc. v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. 
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983).).  Simply put, “the agency must explain why it decided to act as it 
did.” Butte Cty. v. Hogen, 613 F.3d 190, 194 (D.C. Cir. 2010); see also Nat’l Ass’n of Clean 
Water Agencies v. EPA, 734 F.3d 1115, 1136–38 (D.C. Cir. 2013) (rejecting agency rule under 
APA substantial evidence standard where group challenging rule presented credible evidence 
contrary to agency findings and agency offered only “mere assertion” that rule accounted for 
contrary evidence in reply); Butte Cty., 613 F.3d at 194 (rejecting agency finding under APA 
substantial evidence standard where agency failed to “articulate a satisfactory explanation” and 
agency “ignore[d] evidence contradicting its position” (internal quotation marks and citations 
omitted)); N.L.R.B. v. E-Systems, Inc., 103 F.3d 435, 439 (5th Cir. 1997) (agency must not 
“ignore[] relevant evidence without explaining and justifying its decision to do so”); Water 
Quality Insurance Syndicate v. United States, 225 F. Supp. 3d 41, 68-69 (D.D.C. 2016) (APA’s 
substantial evidence standard isn’t met “when an agency ignores factual matters or fails to 
respond adequately to meritorious arguments raised in opposition to the agency’s action;” agency 
“is not free to ignore, without explanation, the record evidence”). 
7 See, e.g., Comments of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, New Media Rights, Organizational 
for 
Transformative Works on Proposed Class 1 – Audovisual Works – Criticism and Comment, at 
10 & nn. 20-21 (2017), https://lca.x0x8kvd0-liquidwebsites.com/wp-
content/uploads/2018/04/EFF_NMR_OTW_1201_Comment__proposed_class_1.pdf. 
[PAGE 5]
 
 
5 
 
assessment, top quality video was not absolutely required to win.  That conclusion, wrong in 
itself (since it required students to impair their own persuasiveness) missed the point. It is 
uncontested that knowledge of the DMCA is highly limited, and that the National History Day 
instructions direct students to consider factors relevant to fair use, but not to §1201.  As a result, 
students attempting to do well will make the best video they can. Only when challenged—for 
example, when they post their videos on TikTok and wish to contest a DMCA takedown—will 
they discover they are lawbreakers. This unnecessary, accidental legal exposure is a substantial 
harm to lawful uses. 
 
The idea that it could be unlawful to perform the steps necessary to take a lawful act is 
mystifying to most people. It is particularly notable that, over six rounds of rulemaking, 
exemption opponents have developed no evidence that anticircumvention law is known to 
creators.8  As researcher Katharina Freund discovered in her empirical work interviewing 
remixers: “The complexity of copyright law makes it very difficult for non-experts to 
understand, particularly, the anti-circumvention requirements of the DMCA.”9 Indeed, as 
researcher Lucas Hilderbrand observed, “when people learn about the extent of the DMCA 
restrictions, they respond with shock and outrage, which tends to turn either to pessimism or to 
willful disregard for the law.”10  
 
In its substantive consideration of whether an exemption is needed, the Office considers 
alternatives to circumvention.  In this evaluation, the Office should weigh not just whether 
alternatives exist in theory, but whether the relevant group understands and practically can and 
will use those alternatives.  We’ve had over twenty years for knowledge of §1201 to permeate 
ordinary consciousness.  It hasn’t.  It’s not going to.  Denying coverage by an exemption because 
an alternative is theoretically available, when the relevant user group doesn’t know about it and 
won’t use it, is inconsistent with the statute, which asks for evidence about harms to 
noninfringing uses in the real world.  Looking at reality on the ground would provide a more 
innovation-friendly environment.  
 
Many fair users are not part of preexisting artistic or political communities, and have no reason 
to know about the specialized requirements of §1201.  Successful fair users like the anti-abortion 
group Center for Bio-Ethical Reform11 or a critic of an anti-Muslim speaker12 made speech about 
                                                      
8 See also Krzysztof Bebenek,  Strong Wills, Weak Locks: Consumer Expectations and the 
DMCA Anticircumvention Regime, 26 Berkeley Tech. L.J. 1457 (2011) (“[B]ecause the 
DMCA’s anticircumvention regime relies on a combination of complex law and porous 
technology that fails to reflect consumer expectations, there is good reason to believe that it is 
also fairly ineffectual.”). 
9 See Katherine Freund “Fair use is legal use”: Copyright Negotiations and Strategies in the Fan-
Vidding Community, 17 New Media & Society 1, 5 (2014). 
10 Lucas Hilderbrand, Inherent Vice: Bootleg Histories of Videotape and Copyright 79 (2009). 
11 See Northland Family Planning Clinic, Inc. v. Ctr. for Bio-Ethical Reform, 868 F. Supp. 2d 
962, 972, 982-93 (C.D. Cal. 2012) (re-edited video critiquing original video was fair use). 
12 Caner v. Autry, 2014 WL 2002835 (W.D. Va. May 14, 2014).  As explained in the EFF/OTW 
comment, Autry was sued over multiple critical videos, including his remix video, though the 
court only ultimately ruled on one video.  EFF/OTW 2014 Comment, at 9. 
[PAGE 6]
 
 
6 
 
specific matters, using circumvention to do so, rather than starting from an intent to make 
transformative works.  Likewise, the anti-Redskins video highlighted by the Office in a prior 
exemption proceeding was made within a political community, not by people who routinely deal 
with technical copyright issues.13   
 
When assessing the evidence of risk from exemptions, it is important to recall that, just as the 
MPAA predicted that the VCR would destroy the film industry,14 the MPAA, along with like-
minded organizations, repeatedly claimed that any exemption at all to §1201 would lead to the 
collapse of TPMs.15  Indeed, they specifically predicted that the 2006 exemption for college film 
studies would, like the VCR before it, destroy the film industry.16  They’ve been wrong each 
                                                      
13 Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding, Recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights 86 (Oct. 2015). 
14 “[T]he VCR is to the American film producer and the American public as the Boston strangler 
is to the woman home alone.”  Jack Valenti, the MPAA lobbyist who made this claim, conceded 
a few minutes later that he owned and used a video tape recorder.  1982 Home Recording 
Hearing, Home Recording of Copyrighted Works: Hearing on H.R. 4783, H.R. 4794, H.R. 4808, 
H.R. 5250, H.R. 5488, and H.R. 5705 Before the Subcomm. on Courts of the H. Comm. on the 
Judiciary, 97th Cong. (1982), at 8, 10 (testimony of Jack Valenti, Motion Picture Association of 
America); see also Michael A. Carrier, Innovation for the 21st Century: Harnessing the Power of 
Intellectual Property and Antitrust Law 107 (1st Ed. 2009) (recounting the content industries’ 
grim and inaccurate history of predicting that new technologies—including player pianos and 
records—would destroy the production of creative works). 
15 Transcript of Testimony at 76, Section 1201 Rulemaking, Docket No. RM 2005-11A (U.S. 
Copyright Office Apr. 3, 2006), available at http:// 
www.copyright.gov/1201/2006/hearings/transcript-april03.pdf (testimony of Fritz Attaway, 
Motion Picture Ass’n of Am.) (opposing any exemptions as threats to the effectiveness of entire 
1201 regime); Comments of Motion Picture Ass’n of Am. (MPAA) at 11, Section 1201 
Rulemaking, Docket No. RM 2008-8 (U.S. Copyright Office Feb. 2, 2009), available at 
http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2008/responses/mpaa-46.pdf (same); Comments of DVD Copy 
Control Ass’n, Inc. at 2, Section 1201 Rulemaking, Docket No. RM 2002-3 (U.S. Copyright 
Office Feb. 19, 2003), available at http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2003/reply/028.pdf (“even . . 
. ‘limited exemptions’ will essentially render CSS ineffective as a means of protecting 
copyrighted content”); see also Comments of the DVD Copy Control Ass’n, Inc. at 14, Section 
1201 Rulemaking, Docket No. RM 2005-11 (U.S. Copyright Office Feb. 2006), available at 
http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2006/reply/01taylor_DVDCCA.pdf (nearly identical argument); 
Comments of Time Warner, Inc. at 10-11, Section 1201 Rulemaking, Docket No. RM 2005-11 
(U.S. Copyright Office Feb. 2006), available at 
http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2006/reply/18aistars_TWI.pdf (“Granting [an exemption] with 
respect to any particular [DRM] technology would be tantamount to outlawing the use of that 
technology.”). 
16 Joint Reply Comments of Ass’n of Am. Publishers et al. at 30, Section 1201 Rulemaking, 
Docket No. RM 2005-11 (U.S. Copyright Office Feb. 2, 2006), available at 
http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2006/reply/11metalitz_ AAP.pdf (“[T]he very medium that 
educators have grown to appreciate and desire to use in their classrooms would be threatened by 
the recognition of the requested exemption.”). 
[PAGE 7]
 
 
7 
 
time, and in the 2015 proceedings abandoned opposition to the renewal of many existing 
exemptions, conceding their prior errors.  Five years later, the video market was exploding even 
before the pandemic appeared.17 
 
The Office should additionally consider the overriding objective of understanding of and respect 
for the law. As Lucas Hildebrand observed above, the DMCA’s provisions create contempt for 
the law.  One reason so many laypeople are dismissive of copyright law is because it is 
counterintuitive and arcane, resulting in seeming unfairness and futility.  Jessica Litman has 
explained: 
 
The less workable a law is, the more problematic it is to enforce. The harder it is to 
explain the law to the people it is supposed to restrict, the harder it will be to explain to 
the prosecutors, judges, and juries charged with applying it. The more burdensome the 
law makes it to obey its prescriptions, and the more draconian the penalties for failing, 
the more distasteful it will be to enforce. The more people the law seeks to constrain, the 
more futile it can be to enforce it only sporadically. Finally, the less the law’s choices 
strike the people it affects as legitimate, the less they will feel as if breaking that law is 
doing anything wrong. In other words, if a law is bad enough, large numbers of people 
will fail to comply with it, whether they should or not.18 
 
The United Kingdom’s Intellectual Property Office surveyed numerous copyright stakeholders, 
and heard the same point that simple rules promote understanding and compliance: 
 
[Some stakeholders] saw the complexity of copyright as the main challenge to lawful use 
of works. In their view, the current situation online was too confusing to understand and 
as a result many people gave up trying. Even some long-time professionals in the creative 
industries indicated a lack of knowledge of all relevant copyright developments in their 
area. 
The copyright system suffers from a marked lack of public legitimacy. . . . The system is 
often unable to accommodate certain uses of copyright works that a large proportion of 
the population regards as legitimate fair and reasonable. . . . The problems become more 
pronounced as people feel a sense of ownership or attachment to material in which the 
copyright is owned by others. Consumers may have strong ties to material . . . because of 
the time and effort they have devoted to it . . . .19  
                                                      
17 The Sky Is Rising, https://skyisrising.com/TheSkyIsRising2019.pdf, at 13-24 (2019). 
18 Jessica Litman, Digital Copyright 195 (2001); see also Joyce E. Cutler, On Copyright’s 300th 
Anniversary, Scholars Question Effectiveness of Current Formulation, 15 Electronic Com. & L. 
Rep. 641 (2010) (“Copyright law is ‘out of balance’ and action must be taken to restore the 
public’s respect for copyright, [then-]Register of Copyrights Marybeth Peters said. . . . ‘[W]e 
have lost the respect of the public in many ways,’ Peters said. . . . Copyright law should be 
understandable so that people will obey and respect it, Peters said. Further, the way copyright is 
viewed has changed, and there are lots of new players, including consumers, who Peters said ‘are 
really key in the copyright debate.’”). 
19 U.K. Intellectual Prop. Office, © the Way Ahead: A Strategy for Copyright in the Digital Age 
24, 27 (2009), available at http://www.ipo.gov.uk/c-strategy-digitalage.pdf (citations omitted). 
[PAGE 8]
 
 
8 
 
 
While they encourage disrespect from some people, incomprehensible rules also deter risk-
averse creators from making fair uses.  The solution, as the UK IPO report put it, is to “hid[e] the 
wiring”—to simplify copyright law so that it comes into better alignment with ordinary logic.20   
 
The Office has simplified the exemption renewal process in the name of greater public 
accessibility and transparency.  This simplification should extend to the resulting exemptions 
themselves, as the Office has recognized.21  The proposed language would clarify the exemption 
for ordinary users and further the Office’s stated policies. 
 
The proposal is not different in substance from the existing exemptions the Office has already 
indicated its intent to renew.  The proposal seeks to recognize that the existing limits on those 
exemptions aren’t serving the purpose the Office intended for them; instead, they create arbitrary 
barriers and traps for the unwary. 
                                                      
20 U.K. Intellectual Prop. Office, supra, at 33 (“Calls have been made for solutions which lessen 
or remove a non-commercial consumer’s need to understand copyright law. The analysis above 
would suggest that ‘hiding the wiring’ by simplifying the situation for users could help tackle 
some of the problems of the copyright system.” (citation omitted)). 
21 See U.S. Copyright Office, Section 1201 of Title 17 vii (June 2017), 
https://www.copyright.gov/policy/1201/section-1201-full-report.pdf (describing Office’s 
commitment to “simplified regulatory language”); 151 (“[D]rafting the section 1201 regulatory 
language in plain language is a worthy goal, echoing efforts from the Legislative and Executive 
Branches to promote clear communication to the public ….”).   
