[PAGE 1]
 
 
Item A. Commenter Information  
Association of Transcribers and Speech-to-Text Providers  
Alison Nelson Chabot, President  
info@atspnetwork.org 
The Association of Transcribers and Speech-to-Text Providers (ATSP) is a non-
profit organization devoted to advancing the delivery of real-time speech-to-text 
services to deaf or hard-of-hearing people. 
Represented by: 
Samuelson-Glushko Technology Law & Policy Clinic at Colorado Law  
Scott A. Goodstein, Dakotah Hamilton, and Rachel Hersch, Student Attorneys 
Blake E. Reid, Director 
blake.reid@colorado.edu  
Association on Higher Education and Disability  
Stephan Smith, Executive Director  
stephan@ahead.org 
The Association on Higher Education and Disability (AHEAD) is the leading 
professional membership association for individuals committed to equity for 
persons with disabilities in higher education. Since 1977, AHEAD has offered an 
unparalleled member experience to disability resource professionals, student affairs 
personnel, ADA coordinators, diversity officers, AT/IT staff, faculty and other 
instructional personnel, and colleagues who are invested in creating welcoming 
higher education experiences for disabled individuals.  
Library Copyright Alliance 
The Library Copyright Alliance (LCA) consists of three major library associations—
the American Library Association (ALA), the Association of College and Research 
Libraries (ACRL), and the Association of Research Libraries (ARL)—that 
collectively represent over 100,000 libraries in the United States. Libraries provide 
services to visually impaired people, both inside and outside of educational 
settings, in particular by converting works into formats accessible to the print 
disabled.  
Represented by: 
Jonathan Band, policybandwidth  
jband@policybandwidth.com
  
  
[PAGE 2]
 
 
2 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Item A. Commenter Information ........................................................................ 1 
Item B. Proposed Class Addressed: Proposed Class 3: Audiovisual Works—
Accessibility ............................................................................................ 3 
Item C. Overview ................................................................................................ 4 
Item D. Technological Protection Measure(s) and Method(s) of 
Circumvention ........................................................................................ 7 
Item E. Asserted Adverse Effects on Noninfringing Uses ................................... 8 
 The proposed class continues to include copyrighted motion pictures............... 9 
 Section 1201(a)(1) continues to adversely affect the ability of disability 
services professionals to make works accessible to people with disabilities. ...... 9 
i. EIUs must be lawfully able to remediate resources for faculty and staff. ... 10 
ii. EIUs must be able to proactively remediate resources for students, 
faculty, and staff with disabilities. ............................................................ 11 
iii. The exemption must require that “accessible versions” be of sufficient 
quality. ..................................................................................................... 12 
iv. The exemption must qualify the commercial availability requirement to 
clarify the contours of the terms “reasonable effort” and “fair price.” ....... 13 
v. EIUs must be able to reuse remediated resources. .................................... 14 
 Making videos accessible through the provision of captions and 
descriptions remains a quintessentially noninfringing fair use. ....................... 15 
 Section 1201’s statutory factors weigh in favor of the proposed 
modifications. .................................................................................................  19 
i. Allowing the remediation of videos for faculty and staff would satisfy 
the statutory factors. ................................................................................. 20
 
ii. Clarifying that the exemption allows disability services professionals to 
proactively remediate videos would satisfy the statutory factors. ............. 22 
iii. Clarifying that “accessible versions” are only accessible if they are of 
sufficient quality would satisfy the statutory factors. ................................ 23 
iv. Qualifying the commercial availability requirement to clarify the terms 
“reasonable effort” and “fair price” would satisfy the statutory factors. .... 25
 
v. Clarifying that EIUs can reuse remediated resources would satisfy the 
statutory factors. ....................................................................................... 26
 
Item F. Documentary Evidence ......................................................................... 28 
 Statement of Jason Kapcala, Assistant Director of Captioning and 
Interpreting at West Virginia University .......................................................... 28
 
 Statement of Anonymous Disability Services Professional ............................... 31 
 Statement of Gretchen Rumsey-Richardson, Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing 
Services Manager at a Higher Education Institution ........................................ 32 
[PAGE 3]
 
 
3 
 
 
Item B. Proposed Class Addressed: 
Proposed Class 3: Audiovisual Works—Accessibility  
The Copyright Office initiated the eighth triennial rulemaking to consider 
exemptions from the anticircumvention provisions of the Digital Millennium 
Copyright Act (DMCA) on June 22, 2020 by issuing a Notice of Inquiry and Request 
for Petitions.1 In response, the above-signed petitioners filed a petition2 to renew 
the existing exemption for disability services professionals to circumvent 
technological protection measures (TPMs) on audiovisual works for “the of purpose 
of adding captions and/or audio description to a motion picture to create an 
accessible version” under Rule 201.40(b)(2).3 The Copyright Office issued a Notice 
of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) for this proceeding on October 15, 2020.4 In the 
NPRM, the Office announced that “[b]ased on the information provided in the 
renewal petition and the lack of opposition, the Office believes that the conditions 
that led to adoption of this exemption are likely to continue during the next 
triennial period” and that “the Office intends to recommend renewal of this 
exemption.”
5  
The current exemption applies to: 
(2)(i) Motion pictures (including television shows and 
videos), as defined in 17 U.S.C. 101, where the motion 
picture is lawfully acquired on  a DVD protected by the 
Content Scramble System, on a Blu -ray disc protected by 
the Advanced Access Content System, or via a digital 
transmission protected by a technological measure, where: 
(A) Circumvention is undertaken by a disability services 
office or other unit of a kindergarten through twelfth-grade 
educational institution, college, or university engaged in 
and/or responsible for the provision of accessibility services 
to students, for the purpose of adding captions and/or audio 
                                                      
1 Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted Works, 
85 Fed. Reg. 37,399 (Jun. 22, 2020) (2020 NOI). 
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2020-06-22/pdf/2020-12911.pdf
 . 
2 Petition for Renewal of ATSP, AHEAD, & LCA (July 22, 2020), 
https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2021/petitions/renewal/Renewal%20Pet.%20-
%20Captioning%20-%20ATSP%20et%20al.pdf.  
3 37 C.F.R § 201.40(b)(2)(i)(A). 
4 2020 Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, 85 Fed. Reg. 65,293 (Oct. 15, 2020) (2020 
NPRM), https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2020-10-15/pdf/2020-
22893.pdf. 
5 Id at 65,298. 

[PAGE 4]
 
 
4 
 
description to a mot ion picture to create an accessible 
version as a necessary accommodation for a student or 
students with disabilities under an applicable disability law, 
such as the Americans With Disabilities Act, the Individuals 
with Disabilities Education Act, or Sectio n 504 of the 
Rehabilitation Act; 
(B) The educational institution unit in paragraph 
(b)(2)(i)(A) of this section has, after a reasonable effort, 
determined that an accessible version cannot be obtained at 
a fair price or in a timely manner; and 
(C) The acce ssible versions are provided to students or 
educators and stored by the educational institution in a 
manner intended to reasonably prevent unauthorized 
further dissemination of a work.
6 
The above-signed organizations then filed a petition to modify the existing 
exemption in several distinct ways described in Item C.7  
Item C. Overview 
The existing disability services exemption has been widely used and 
appreciated by disability services professionals that must circumvent technological 
measures protecting audiovisual works to provide remediated versions for students 
at educational institutions.8 A significant proportion of the apprehension and lack 
of clarity surrounding the unique intersection of copyright law and disability law 
has been addressed by the existing exemption. 
Nevertheless, there is still work to be done to ensure that disability services 
professionals can do their jobs to improve accessibility for students, faculty, and 
staff with disabilities who depend on their work.
9 Disability services professionals 
have identified five specific improvements that would further empower them to 
make works accessible for people with disabilities in educational contexts: 
                                                      
6 37 C.F.R § 201.40(b)(2)(i). 
7 Petition for Modification of ATSP, AHEAD & LCA (“Modification Petition”) (Sept. 
8, 2020), 
https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2021/petitions/proposed/New%20Pet.%20-
%20Association%20of%20Transcribers%20and%20Speech-to-
Text%20Providers%20et%20al.pdf. The Office sought comment on this petition. 
2020 NPRM, 85 Fed. Reg. at 65,304. 
8 See discussion infra, Item F.1 (Statement of Jason Kapcala). 
9 See discussion infra, Item F.3 (Statement of Gretchen Rumsey-Richardson). 
 

[PAGE 5]
 
 
5 
 
1. Remediation for Faculty and Staff. Expand the language of subsection 
201.40(b)(2)(i)(A) of the existing exemption10 to allow for the remediation of 
motion pictures for faculty and staff with disabilities in Educational Institution 
Units (EIUs) in addition to the exemption’s current allowance of remediation 
for students with disabilities. 
2. Proactive Remediation. Clarify that the exemption allows for the proactive 
remediation of motion pictures by EIUs in addition to remediation in response 
to an accommodation request. 
3. “Accessible Versions” of Sufficient Quality. Clarify that “accessible versions” 
that satisfy limiting the application of the exemption under subsection 
201.40(b)(2)(i)(B)
11 must be of sufficient quality. 
4. Qualifying the Commercial Availability Requirement. Qualify the 
“reasonable effort” and “fair price” terms to clarify that under subsection 
201.40(b)(2)(i)(B), an EIU has met the “reasonable effort” requirement when 
the publisher has not included an accessible version of audiovisual materials 
included with a purchased textbook.12 
5. Reuse of Remediated Works. Clarify that the reuse of previously remediated 
works is permissible. 
The final exemption, as amended, would read: 
(i) Motion pictures (including television shows and videos), 
as defined in 17 U.S.C. 101, where the motion picture is 
lawfully acquired on a DVD protected by the Content 
Scramble System, on a Blu -ray disc protected by the 
Advanced Access Content System, or via a digital 
transmission protected by a technological measure, where: 
(A) Circumvention is undertaken by a disability services 
office or other unit of a kindergarten through twelfth-grade 
educational institution, college, or university engaged in 
and/or responsible for the provision of accessibility services 
for the purpose of adding captions and/or audio description 
to a motion picture to create an accessible version f or 
students, faculty, or staff with disabilities; 
(B) The educational institution unit in paragraph 
(b)(2)(i)(A) of this section has, after a reasonable effort, 
determined that an accessible version of sufficient quality 
cannot be obtained at a fair market  price or in a timely 
manner, including where a copyright holder has not 
                                                      
10 37 C.F.R § 201.40(b)(2)(i)(A). 
11 37 C.F.R § 201.40(b)(2)(i)(B).  
12 Id. 

[PAGE 6]
 
 
6 
 
included an accessible version of a motion picture included 
with a digital textbook; and 
(C) The accessible versions are provided to students or 
educators and stored by the educationa l institution in a 
manner intended to reasonably prevent unauthorized 
further dissemination of a work, except  for storage that 
allows for future reuse of the material by students, faculty, 
or staff with disabilities pursuant to subparagraphs (A) and 
(B). 
(ii) For purposes of this paragraph (b)(2), “audio 
description” means an oral narration that provides an 
accurate rendering of the motion picture. 
The proposed exemption language above would work to mitigate the adverse 
effects of the anticircumvention provisions of the DMCA on people with disabilities 
and, as recommended by NTIA in 2018, “increase clarity by removing requirements 
that overly complicate exemptions.”
13 NTIA recommended exemptions that are “as 
clear and simple in formulation as possible . . . so that potential users of 
exemptions can properly understand the options and limitations.”14  
NTIA also recommended that the Office adopt a “more structured” approach to 
applications for exemptions by laying out the “class of work, groups of 
beneficiaries, and types of circumvention permitted” to “improve readability” and 
streamline the process for managing applications for renewal or expansions during 
each rulemaking.
15 Under this potential new framing of the exemptions, our 
proposed modifications would result in the following language:  
Class:  Motion pictures (including television shows and videos) distributed via 
DVD, Blu-ray disc, or digital transmission 
Use:  Adding captions and/or audio description—an oral narration that provides 
an accurate rendering—to create an accessible version for students, faculty, 
or staff with disabilities 
Users:  A disability services office or other unit of a kindergarten through twelfth-
grade educational institution, college, or university engaged in and/or 
responsible for the provision of accessibility services 
 
  
                                                      
13 See Recommendations of the National Telecommunications and Information 
Administration to the Register of Copyrights at 3 (2018 NTIA Recommendation), 
https://www.ntia.doc.gov/files/ntia/publications/ntia_dmca_consultation_092520
18.pdf. 
14 Id. at 4 
15 Id. 

[PAGE 7]
 
 
7 
 
Limitations: 
• A user must determine that an accessible version of sufficient quality cannot 
be obtained at a fair market price or in a timely manner, including where a 
copyright holder has not included an accessible  version of a motion picture 
included with a digital textbook; and 
• A work m ust be provided to students or educators and stored by the 
educational institution in a manner intended to reasonably prevent 
unauthorized further dissemination of the work, except for storage that 
allows for future reuse of the material by students, faculty, or staff consistent 
with the permissible use. 
Item D. Technological Protection Measure(s) and Method(s) of Circumvention 
Disability services professionals deal primarily with two types of videos: those 
delivered via fixed media, such as Digital Versatile Discs (DVDs), and videos 
delivered via online streaming services. These two video sources are controlled by 
content creators and distributors using TPMs. While the TPMs used for videos 
delivered via fixed media and videos delivered via online streaming services vary in 
a technical sense, both types of videos are circumvented for the noninfringing 
accessibility purposes encompassed by the exemption. These TPMs are substantially 
the same as the TPMs that were in use and considered during the last triennial 
review when the Acting Register recommended the existing exemption,
16 and the 
same as those considered by the Register in announcing the Office’s intent to 
recommend renewal of the exemption in this triennial review.17  
Video Delivered via Fixed Media: When a DVD or Blu-ray disc is provided to 
disability services professionals for remediation, the disability services professionals 
will likely encounter either the Content Scramble System (CSS) in the case of DVDs 
or the Advanced Access Content System (AACS) in the case of Blue-ray discs.
18 
According to the Register’s 2015 Recommendation, “[t]he vast majority of DVDs 
use the Content Scramble System (“CSS”) to encrypt audiovisual works on DVDs 
using a fixed set of decryption keys.”19 Additionally, “Blu-ray discs are protected 
primarily by the Advanced Access Content System (“AACS”), which allows vendors 
                                                      
16 See Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights at 92-93 (Oct. 2018) 
(2018 Recommendation), 
https://cdn.loc.gov/copyright/1201/2018/2018_Section_1201_Acting_Registers_R
ecommendation.pdf. 
17 2020 NPRM, 85 Fed. Reg. at 65,298.  
18 Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights at 29 (Oct. 8, 2015) (2015 
Recommendation), https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2015/registers-
recommendation.pdf. 
19 Id. 
 

[PAGE 8]
 
 
8 
 
to revoke compromised keys and distribute new keys.”20 Just as the 2018 Comment 
supporting the existing exemption explained, the specific method used for 
circumvention will depend on how sophisticated the person doing the 
circumvention is.21  
Video Delivered via Online Streaming: While disability services professionals 
must still circumvent TPMs concerning fixed media, a significant number of videos 
that must be remediated come from online streaming sources.22 As the Office has 
previously explained, “access controls used by online streaming services vary 
widely” and often rely on various “encryption and other protocols” to protect 
streamed content.23  
Item E. Asserted Adverse Effects on Noninfringing Uses  
The NPRM encourages commenters to focus on the following elements to 
demonstrate that proposed modifications to existing exemptions satisfy the 
requirements for the exemption to be granted under Section 1201:  
1. The proposed class includes at least some works protected by copyright; 
2. The proposed uses are noninfringing under title 17; 
3. Users are adversely affected in their ability to make such noninfringing uses 
and users are likely to be adversely affected in their ability to make such 
noninfringing uses during the next three years; and 
4. The statutory prohibition on circumventing access controls is the cause of the 
adverse effects.
24 
The exemption, as modified by the proposed changes, would continue to 
include copyrighted motion pictures. The uses contemplated by the proposed 
exemption, which would continue to center on accessibility of motion pictures for 
students with disabilities, would continue to be noninfringing. The users adversely 
affected in their ability to make noninfringing uses are disability services 
professionals at K-12 educational institutions, and they will continue to be 
adversely affected in their ability to make noninfringing accessibility uses during 
the next three years. Lastly, 1201(a)(1)’s prohibition on circumventing access 
controls continues to cause these adverse effects. 
                                                      
20 Id. 
21 Long Comment of ATSP, et al. at 7 (Dec. 18, 2017) (2018 Comment), 
https://cdn.loc.gov/copyright/1201/2018/comments-121817/class2/class-02-
initialcomments-atsp-et-al.pdf.  
22 See discussion infra, Item F.1 (Statement of Jason Kapcala). 
23 2015 Recommendation at 29. 
24 2020 NPRM at 65,294. 
 

[PAGE 9]
 
 
9 
 
 The proposed class continues to include copyrighted motion pictures. 
The existing exemption, as amended by the proposed modifications, would 
continue to include copyrighted motion pictures, just like the exemption granted in 
2018. The Register’s 2018 Recommendation of the exemption stated that “[t]here 
[was] no dispute that at least some of these works [were] protected by 
copyright.”25 Nothing about the proposed modifications would change the focus of 
the class on copyrighted motion pictures. Accordingly, the proposed class continues 
to include at least some works protected by copyright. 
 Section 1201(a)(1) continues to adversely affect the ability of disability 
services professionals to make works accessible to people with disabilities. 
Disability services professionals in educational institution units (EIUs) are 
adversely affected by Section 1201(a)(1)(A)’s prohibition on circumvention in their 
ability to make noninfringing uses of a class of copyrighted works and are likely to 
be adversely affected in the next three years. In particular, the prohibition 
continues to complicate EIUs’ ability to comply with disability law.26 Under 
disability law, EIUs are required to provide individuals with disabilities with access 
to resources on par with their typical peers. EIUs often must circumvent TPMs on 
copyrighted works to create remediated versions. Although Congress, the courts, 
and the Office have recognized this type of remediation as non-infringing fair use,
27 
Thus, the prohibition adversely affects EIUs by impeding EIUs ability to make 
noninfringing uses of copyrighted works.  
Governing disability law prevents EIUs from discriminating against students, 
faculty, and staff with disabilities by denying these individuals reasonable and 
necessary accommodations. As the above-signed organizations explained in 2018, 
nearly all EIUs continue to be required to make copyrighted works available to 
their students under the Americans with Disabilities Act, Section 504 of the 
Rehabilitation Act, and the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA).
28 
These requirements extend to ensuring accessibility for the faculty and staff they 
employ under Title I of the ADA, which prohibits employers from discriminating 
against employees with disabilities.
29 
In 2018, the Acting Register highlighted the need for EIUs to be able to provide 
its students, faculty, and staff with disabilities with access to materials, which is 
archetypal fair use and necessitated by disability law. The Acting Register noted 
that “the prohibition on circumvention [was] adversely affecting the ability of 
                                                      
25 2018 Recommendation at 95. 
26 See id. at 97. 
27 See discussion infra, Item E.3 
28 2018 Comment at 8-9. 
29 See 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). 
 

[PAGE 10]
 
 
10 
 
educational institutions to offer accessible formats of motion pictures on an equal 
basis in conformance with their legal responsibilities.”30 The 2020 NPRM reaffirms 
this proposition in recommending renewal of the exemption.31  
Though the current exemption has provided important relief for EIUs, EIUs 
continue encountering the prohibition’s adverse effects, which subsequently hinders 
students, faculty, and staff with disabilities’ access to accommodations. EIUs 
continue to struggle to timely provide remediated materials of sufficient quality to 
students, faculty, and staff—a struggle that has only intensified under COVID -19.32 
Thus, the exemption must be modified to enable EIUs to provide its students, 
faculty, and staff with access to sufficiently remediated materials in a timely 
fashion. Accordingly, the exemption must be altered by: 
• Enabling remediation for faculty and staff in addition to students; 
• Enabling proactive remediation; 
• Qualifying “accessible versions” as versions of “sufficient quality”; 
• Qualifying the commercial availability requirement to clarify the contours of 
the “reasonable effort” and “fair price” terms; and  
• Enabling reuse of remediated materials. 
i. EIUs must be lawfully able to remediate resources for faculty and staff. 
The prohibition adversely affects EIUs’ ability to make noninfringing uses by 
prohibiting EIUs from circumventing TPMs to remediate resources for faculty and 
staff. EIUs are currently prohibited from engaging in this noninfringing fair use 
because the current exemption only allows for remediation of video “as a necessary 
accommodation for a student or students with disabilities.”33 
EIUs’ inability to circumvent TPMs for faculty and staff adversely affects EIUs 
ability to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act. Title I mandates that 
educational institutions remediate materials for faculty and staff if necessary.34 Yet, 
                                                      
30 2018 Recommendation at 107. 
31 2020 NPRM, 85 Fed. Reg. at 65,298. 
32 See discussion infra, Item F.1 (Statement of Jason Kapcala). 
33 37 C.F.R § 201.40(b)(2)(i)(A) (emphasis added). 
34 See 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A) (discrimination against employees with disability 
includes “not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental 
limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who is an applicant 
or employee”); 42 U.S.C. § 12111(9)(B) (“The term ‘reasonable accommodation’ 
may include—(B)  . . . acquisition or modification of equipment or devices, 
appropriate adjustment or modifications of examinations, training materials or 
policies, the provision of qualified readers or interpreters, and other similar 
accommodations for individuals with disabilities.”). 
 

[PAGE 11]
 
 
11 
 
faculty and staff currently fall outside the scope of the current exemption. 
Accordingly, this apparent prohibition on circumvention is adversely affecting the 
ability of educational institutions to offer accessible formats of motion pictures on 
an equal basis in conformance with their legal responsibilities. 
ii. EIUs must be able to proactively remediate resources for students, 
faculty, and staff with disabilities.  
The prohibition also adversely affects EIUs’ ability to proactively remediate 
resources into accessible formats. This effect is because it is unclear whether the 
current exemption extends to proactive remediation, or rather is limited to reactive 
responses to accommodation requests.  
The current exemption limits eligibility to remediation undertaken as “a 
necessary accommodation . . . under an applicable disability law.”35 
“Accommodation” is a term of art among disability services professions that 
typically implies an accommodation request by a student that an EIU acts upon 
only after receiving it.
36  
The inclusion of the term “necessary accommodation” has led EIUs to question 
whether they can make use of the current exemption proactively. EIUs increasingly 
aim to proactively remediate materials to ensure that students, faculty, and staff 
with disabilities receive their remediated materials in a timely manner. For 
example, some EIUs seek to remediate materials that are commonly used in large 
classes that are likely to be the subject of future accommodation requests.
37 
Proactive remediation eliminates the turnaround time that students, faculty, and 
staff with disabilities must wait to receive accessible materials after submitting an 
accommodation request.38 Proactive remediation is so important that it is an 
affirmative policy of some educational institutions.39 
A failure to proactively remediate may in turn violate disability law. Students, 
faculty, and staff with disabilities rely on remediated materials to engage in their 
education and employment equal to that of their typical peers. Accordingly, 
students with disabilities are effectively “excluded from participation in . . . the 
                                                      
35 37 C.F.R § 201.40(b)(2)(i)(A). 
36 See, e.g., Barbara Palmer & Wendy Ulibarri, Colorado Options: A Handbook of 
Post-Secondary Education Services for Students with Disabilities, Colorado 
Department of Education Exceptional Student Leadership Unit, Eighth Edition 
(2014), https://www.cde.state.co.us/cdesped/options (“The student has an 
obligation to self-identify that she or he has a disability and that she or he needs 
accommodation.”). 
37 See discussion infra, Item F.1 (Statement of Jason Kapcala). 
38 Id. 
39 See discussion infra, Item F.2 (Statement of Anonymous Disability Services 
Professional). 
 

[PAGE 12]
 
 
12 
 
services, programs, or activities” of their educational institution until they receive 
their remediated materials.40 Likewise, until faculty and staff receive their 
remediated materials, they are effectively “limit[ed] . . . in a way that adversely 
affects [the employee’s] opportunities.”41 
Obtaining remediated materials of sufficient quality takes time, and EIUs are 
overburdened and understaffed, particularly during the pandemic.42 EIUs thus 
struggle to provide individuals with their accommodated materials within an 
appropriate time to enable students, faculty, and staff complete participation in 
school and employment.43 Modifying the exemption to endorse the proposition that 
EIUs can proactively remediate materials would ensure students, faculty, and staff 
receive their remediated materials as soon as possible—a disability law mandate . 
iii. The exemption must require that “accessible versions” be of sufficient 
quality. 
The prohibition also adversely affects EIUs’ ability to provide students, faculty, 
and staff with disabilities with accessible versions of sufficient quality. EIUs have 
raised questions about whether the “accessible version” limitation in the existing 
exemption precludes eligibility for the exemption when an EIU is able to locate 
with reasonable effort a version of a video, but that version has captions or 
descriptions with insufficient quality, in the EIU’s judgment, to facilitate equal 
access to the video. 
The current exemption’s use of the term “accessible” does not specify what 
level of “accessibil[ity]” in an existing version of a video is sufficient to limit the 
application of the exemption.44 Accordingly, EIUs have encountered confusion 
about whether they can circumvent to remediate videos that are captioned or 
described but with errors that require further remediation. 
To comply with disability law, EIUs must have sufficient leeway under 
copyright law to remediate a video when a captioned or described version is 
already available but not of sufficient quality to facilitate access. Aside from 
compliance with Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, the IDEA, and the ADA, 
many EIUs adhere to specific quality standards for captions and descriptions, such 
as the Federal Communications Commission’s closed captioning quality standards 
                                                      
40 See 42 U.S.C. § 12132; 28 C.F.R. § 35.130(a). 
41 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(1). 
42 See discussion infra, Item F.2 (Statement of Anonymous Disability Services 
Professional). 
43 Id. 
44 See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(2)(i)(B).  
 

[PAGE 13]
 
 
13 
 
requirements.45 Accordingly, EIUs must provide their students, faculty, and staff 
with remediated versions of sufficient quality to provide these individuals with 
equal access to materials, and to comply with disability and communications law. 
The Acting Register supported this proposition in 2018, noting that “the 
passage of the ADA, IDEA, and Section 504 demonstrate Congress’s desire to 
provide meaningful access to students with other types of disabilities.”46 The Office 
has recognized the spirit of disability laws: people with disabilities require 
meaningful access to educational and training resources. If a student, faculty, or 
staff member with a disability is able to “access” a version of an educational or 
training resource but the quality of that version’s captions and/or descriptions are 
so deficient that the version is an inadequate accommodation, the person is being 
denied meaningful access. Accordingly, the exemption should be modified to limit 
its application only where an accessible version of sufficient quality can be obtained 
with a reasonable effort. 
iv. The exemption must qualify the commercial availability requirement 
to clarify the contours of the terms “reasonable effort” and “fair 
price.” 
The prohibition also adversely affects EIUs’ ability to protect themselves against 
discriminatory practices by publishers in furnishing accessible versions of videos 
included with digital textbooks. Because the scope of the exemption’s “reasonable 
effort” requirement is unclear, fears have arisen that publishers may have latitude 
to deny the application of the exemption by offering to make an accessible version 
of videos included in a textbook available, but at a price higher than the market 
rate that the EIU would pay to caption or describe the video itself or at an 
untenably later date. 
In particular, Rule 201.40(b)(2)(i)(B) allows circumvention only after an EIU 
“has, after a reasonable effort, determined that an accessible version cannot be 
obtained at a fair price or in a timely manner.”
47 However, this limitation on the 
exemption contemplates a market search of mass market offerings like 
“Amazon.com or Netflix,”
48 and does not provide guidance on how a market search 
might occur when an EIU has an ongoing relationship with the video’s copyright 
holder, as may be the case with an inaccessible video included with a textbook that 
a student with disabilities has purchased as a bundle. 
                                                      
45 See 47 C.F.R. § 79.1(j)(2); see also Recommendation of the Federal 
Communications Commission Disability Advisory Committee (Oct. 14, 2020), 
https://www.fcc.gov/file/19830/download (laying out preliminary 
recommendations on quality for audio description). 
46 2018 Recommendation at 97.  
47 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(2)(i)(B). 
48 2018 Recommendation at 110. 

[PAGE 14]
 
 
14 
 
As a result, questions have arisen about what an EIU must do to satisfy 
this “reasonable effort” obligation when no accessible version of a video included 
with a textbook exists, but upon request a publisher offers to generate an accessible 
version of the video at extra cost beyond the cost of the textbook itself. While an 
EIU could pay the additional cost, doing so would effectively allow the publisher a 
windfall, at the EIU’s expense, for price discriminating against students, faculty, 
and staff with disabilities on the basis of accessibility, and potentially delay the 
delivery of captions.  
Thus, the exemption should be modified to specify that “accessible versions” 
must exist at the time an EIU undertakes the “reasonable effort” and be available at 
no additional cost beyond the cost of the inaccessible version of the work. 
Qualifying the “reasonable effort” requirement in this manner would motivate 
publishers to make their original works sufficiently accessible and reduce 
turnaround time for the remediation of single-source works by allowing disability 
services professionals to begin remediation upon receipt of materials and 
confirmation that they lack sufficient accessibility features. 
v. EIUs must be able to reuse remediated resources. 
Lastly, the prohibition on circumvention adversely affects EIUs’ ability to make 
noninfringing uses because disability services professionals are unsure if they can 
reuse remediated materials. The current exemption does not explicitly address 
reuse, but requires EIUs to “store” their accessible versions “in a manner intended 
to reasonably prevent unauthorized further dissemination of a work.”
49 
EIUs have questioned whether retaining and reusing remediated resources for 
future accommodation requests—for example, if different students with disabilities 
are in the same professor’s class over the course of multiple semesters—is allowed 
under the terms of the exemption. While some institutions have enacted their own 
policies affirmatively allowing for reuse of remediated works,50 the exemption does 
not clarify whether this act is officially sanctioned by the Office.51 
This practice forces EIUs to unnecessarily incur the cost of repeating 
remediation work each time a resource is requested in a future term.52 
Consequently, students have faced unnecessary delays and complications, and EIUs 
have wasted resources performing duplicative remediation that has already been 
completed.
53 Reuse of remediated materials would ensure faster and more efficient 
                                                      
49 See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(2)(i)(C). 
50 See discussion infra, Item F.2 (Statement of Anonymous Disability Services 
Professional). 
51 See discussion infra, Item F.1 (Statement of Jason Kapcala). 
52 See discussion infra, Item F.1 (Statement of Jason Kapcala). 
53 See discussion infra, Item F.1 (Statement of Jason Kapcala) & Item F.3 
(Statement of Gretchen Rumsey-Richardson). 

[PAGE 15]
 
 
15 
 
remediation and delivery of accessible materials to students, faculty, and staff with 
disabilities and reduces the amount of time they spend excluded from participation 
in school and/or work. Thus, reuse of remediated works alleviates the prohibitions 
adverse effects on EIUs ability to comply with disability law. 
 Making videos accessible through the provision of captions and 
descriptions remains a quintessentially noninfringing fair use. 
As the Acting Register concluded in 2018 and as the Register reaffirmed in the 
2020 NPRM in announcing her intent to recommend renewal of the 
recommendation, making videos accessible for faculty, staff, and students with 
disabilities in educational contexts remains a quintessentially noninfringing fair 
use.54 The proposed modifications do not alter this core purpose of the exemption 
or the Register used in 2018. Accordingly, the Library and the Office should again 
conclude that the exemption, as amended by the proposed modifications, is 
noninfringing. 
Congress and the courts have all but confirmed that making copyrighted works 
accessible to people with disabilities is a noninfringing use.55 As the above-
referenced organizations’ 2018 comment on the initial exemption explained: 
[T]he legislative history of the 1976 Copyright Act makes 
clear that converting works into formats that are accessible 
to people with sensory disabilities is a quintessential 
example of fair use. The House Committee Reports 
explicitly states:  
“Another special instance illustrating the application of the 
fair use doctrine pertains to making copies or phonorecords 
of works in special forms for blind persons. These special 
forms. . . are not usually made  by the publishers for 
commercial distribution. . . the mak ing of a single copy or 
phonorecord as a free service for a blind person would 
properly be considered a fair use under section 107.”  
The courts have affirmed Congress’s “commitment to 
ameliorating the hardships faced by” people with sensory 
disabilities. In Sony v. Universal City Studios , the Supreme 
Court stated that “[m]aking a copy of a copyrighted work 
for the convenience of  people with sensory disabilities is 
expressly identified by the House Committee Report as an 
example of fair use, with no suggestion that anything more 
than a purpose to entertain or to inform need motivate the 
copying.” 
                                                      
54 2018 Recommendation at 101; 2020 NPRM, 85 Fed. Reg. at 65,298. 
55 2018 Comment at 9-10. 

[PAGE 16]
 
 
16 
 
In Authors Guild, Inc. v. HathiTrust, the Second Circuit 
likewise affirmed that conversion of inaccessible 
copyrighted works into accessible digital formats for use by 
people who are blind, visually impaired, or print disabled is 
a fair use. As the HathiTrust court held, “the doctrine of fair 
use allows [the] provi[sion of] full digital access to 
copyrighted works to [the] print -disabled.” Copyright 
jurisprudence has  established that making digital works 
accessible to the print-disabled is non infringing fair use on 
grounds that are equally applicable to making motion 
pictures accessible to people who are blind, visually 
impaired, deaf or hard of hearing, through the provision of 
closed captions and audio description.
56 
In 2018, the Acting Register echoed Congress and the Courts in agreeing that 
accessibility uses are typically noninfringing and fair.57 Specifically, the Acting 
Register in 2018 concluded that “[c]iting the legislative history of the 1976 
Copyright Act, the Chafee Amendment, the HathiTrust decision, and other existing 
disability laws, [the disability services] exemption proponents offer[ed] credible 
support for their claim that converting motion pictures into accessible formats for 
students with disabilities by adding captions and/or audio description [was] a 
noninfringing fair use.”
58 The Register reaffirmed this position in announcing her 
intent to recommend renewal of the exemption in the 2020 NPRM.59 
The proposed modifications to the exemption fall within the scope of the 
Register’s 2018 fair use analysis. The proposed modifications do not meaningfully 
expand the uses for which circumvention can be undertaken, but rather add 
modest qualifiers that would ensure the exemption aligns with anti-discriminatory 
spirit and letter of the 1976 Copyright Act, the Chafee Amendment, the HathiTrust 
decision, and other existing disability laws. Analyzing the exemption under the 
familiar four-factor fair use test confirms this conclusion.60 
Purpose and Character. The purpose and character of the proposed 
modifications continue to weigh in favor of fair use. The modifications do not alter 
the core nature of the uses at issue, but merely when and how such uses will occur. 
Accordingly, the Acting Register’s 2018 conclusion—that the purpose and character 
of the existing exemption weighs in favor of fair use—is equally appropriate here. 61 
                                                      
56 Id. at 9-10 (internal citations and footnotes omitted). 
57 2018 Recommendation at 101. 
58 Id. 
59 2020 NPRM, 85 Fed. Reg. at 65,298. 
60 See 17 U.S.C. § 107. 
61 See 2018 Recommendation at 97-98. 
 

[PAGE 17]
 
 
17 
 
The Register reaffirmed this position in announcing her intent to recommend 
renewal of the exemption in the 2020 NPRM.62 
Petitioners’ proposed modifications reiterate and strengthen the exemption’s 
purpose. Each modification works to remove one of the many barriers clouding an 
EIUs ability to prevent discrimination against students, faculty, and staff with 
disabilities. The purpose of these modifications is to further access that will provide 
tangible benefits to people with disabilities in educational contexts. Accordingly, 
the purpose and character of the modifications to the exemption weigh in favor of 
fair use.  
Nature of the Works: The proposed modifications likewise do not alter the 
nature of the copyrighted works being used from the previous exemption. Thus, the 
analysis for this second factor is the same. 
As the above-signed organizations’ 2018 comment explained, “the proposed 
exemption would cover access to motion pictures, which come in many formats and 
genres.”
63 In the words of the HathiTrust court, “[t]his does not preclude a finding 
of fair use, however, given [the] analysis of the other factors.”64 The Acting 
Register’s recommendation in 2018 echoes this conclusion.65 The Register again 
reaffirmed this position in announcing her intent to recommend renewal of the 
exemption in the 2020 NPRM.
66 
Amount and Substantiality: Likewise, the proposed modifications do not alter 
the amount and substantiality of the works used from the 2018 exemption.67 EIU 
professionals will continue to “use only what is necessary to convert motion 
pictures into an accessible format[—] a partial replication of the original 
copyrighted work. Adding captions and audio description to a video utilizes only 
the aural and visual components of that video, respectively.”68 The Acting Register 
stated in 2018 that this amount would “not weigh against a finding of fair use.’”69 
The proposed modifications to the exemption do not seek to permit the use of 
any additional portions of a video than were contemplated in the original 
exemption. As such, the amount copied is “reasonable in relation to the purpose of 
the copying.”70 The third factor thus weighs in favor of fair use, consistent with the 
                                                      
62 2020 NPRM, 85 Fed. Reg. at 65,298. 
63 2018 Comment at 11. 
64 Authors Guild v. HathiTrust, 755 F.3d 87, 102. (2d Cir. 2014). 
65 2018 Recommendation at 101. 
66 2020 NPRM, 85 Fed. Reg. at 65,298. 
67 See 2018 Comment at 11. 
68 Id. 
69 2018 Recommendation, at 98-99 (quoting HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 98). 
70 See Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 586 (1994). 
 

[PAGE 18]
 
 
18 
 
Acting Register’s recommendation in 201871 and the Register’s announcement of 
her intent to renew the exemption in the 2020 NPRM.72 
Effect on the Market: The proposed modifications to the exemption would not 
adversely affect the market or value of copyrighted works. The modifications would 
not expand the type of accessibility uses permitted under the exemption, nor would 
they meaningfully impact any aspect of the meager market for accessible versions 
of videos used in educational contexts. The modifications merely seek to enable 
EIUs to provide individuals with remediated materials only when remediated works 
of sufficient quality are, as is often the case, unavailable in the market. Accordingly, 
the fourth factor weighs in favor of fair use. 
The Register’s 2018 Recommendation found the fourth factor weighed in favor 
of fair use for the Exemption for two key reasons: 
1. “[T]hat the overall market ha[d] not yet adequately met the needs of 
individuals with disabilities by retroactively offering catalog videos in 
accessible formats, and that in some cases, new works [were] not being issued 
in accessible formats;” and  
2. “[T]hat the accessible versions would be created from authorized versions of 
motion pictures and would typically be disseminated through a password-
protected mechanism providing accessible materials—as is traditionally done 
by disability service professionals when—thereby reducing the likelihood of 
negatively affecting the market for the copyrighted motion pictures.”
73 
The Register’s announcement of her intent to recommend renewal of the 
exemption in the 2020 NPRM affirms that the market does not yet adequately meet 
the need for accessible versions of motion pictures.74 Thus, because the market for 
accessible works utilized by educational institutions has remained stagnant and 
EIUs continue to restrict access to remediated works, the adverse market effects 
continue to weigh in favor of fair use.  
Until and unless the market for accessible works meets the demand for these 
accessible works, the proposed modifications to the exemption will be necessary to 
ensure fair use. This reality is underscored by the maintenance of the requirement 
of a reasonable market check, subject to the proposed qualification of the 
                                                      
71 See 2018 Recommendation at 101. 
72 2020 NPRM, 85 Fed. Reg. at 65,298. 
73 2018 Recommendation, at 100-01 (footnotes omitted). 
74 2020 NPRM, at 298 (“the Office believes that the conditions that led to adoption 
of this exemption are likely to continue during the next triennial period.”). 
 

[PAGE 19]
 
 
19 
 
commercial availability requirement to clarify the contours of the terms “reasonable 
effort” and “fair price.”75  
As the Register noted, “[w]hen an accessible version is not available in the 
marketplace, the proposed use is less likely to interfere with the primary or 
derivative markets for the motion picture.”76 Disability services professionals 
continue to lament the lack of sufficiently acceptable remediated versions of 
requested material on the open market,
77 even though many disability services 
professionals prefer materials that are “born” accessible in many circumstances 
because remediation is timely and costly. But as the 2020 Notice of Proposed 
Rulemaking confirms, the market does not fully serve the need for accessible videos 
in educational contexts.
78 Accordingly, the Register’s 2018 determination—that the 
fourth factor weighs in favor of fair use79—is applicable here, too.  
 Section 1201’s statutory factors weigh in favor of the proposed 
modifications.  
Under Section 1201(a)(1)(C), the Librarian examines five factors in 
considering whether to grant an exemption: 
1. The availability for use of copyrighted works; 
2. The availability for use of works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and 
educational purposes;  
3. The impact that the prohibition on the circumvention of technological 
measures applied to copyrighted works has on criticism, comment, news 
reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research; 
                                                      
75 See discussion supra, Item E.2.iv. A publisher willing to include a remediated 
version of a video with the purchase of a textbook at a reasonable market price 
would meet the demand, for example, while a publisher willing to provide the 
remediated version only after negotiations with an EIU professional for an 
additional price would not. A protracted negotiation process would be inefficient 
and time-consuming, and would therefore impede EIUs’ ability to provide students, 
faculty, and staff with disabilities with their remediated works as quickly as 
possible to prevent further discrimination. If a publisher wishes to provide a 
remediated work of sufficient quality after the fact, the publisher may place it on 
the open market at that point. 
76 2018 Recommendation, at 100. 
77 See discussion infra, Item F.1 (Statement of Jason Kapcala) & Item F.3 
(Statement of Gretchen Rumsey-Richardson). 
78 2020 NPRM, at 65,298 (“[T]he Office believes that the conditions that led to 
adoption of the exemption are likely to continue during the next triennial period.”) 
79 2018 Recommendation at 100-101. 
 

[PAGE 20]
 
 
20 
 
4. The effect of circumvention of technological measures on the market for or 
value of copyrighted works;  
5. Such other factors as the Librarian considers appropriate.80 
The Office has consistently found that the Section 1201(a)(1)(C) statutory 
factors weigh in favor of accessibility-related exemptions for assistive 
technologies.81 Likewise, the statutory factors weigh in favor of each of the 
proposed expansions and revisions to the exemption for motion pictures: allowing 
remediation for faculty and staff with disabilities; clarifying that the exemption 
allows disability services professionals to proactively remediate videos; clarifying 
that “accessible versions” are only accessible if they are of sufficient quality; 
qualifying the commercial availability requirement to clarify the contours or the 
terms “reasonable effort” and “fair price;” and clarifying that EIUs can reuse stored 
accessible versions of videos. 
i. Allowing the remediation of videos for faculty and staff would satisfy 
the statutory factors.
  
Availability for Use of Copyrighted Works. In the 2020 NPRM, the Office 
recommended a streamlined renewal of Section 201.40(b)(2)(i)(A), noting that 
“[n]o oppositions were filed against readoption of this exemption” and that “[t]he 
petition demonstrated the continuing need and justification for the exemption.”82 
The Office recommended streamlined renewals for exemptions only after 
determining “that, due to a lack of legal, marketplace, or technological changes, the 
factors that led the Office to recommend adoption of the exemption in the prior 
rulemaking will continue into the forthcoming triennial period.”
83 Because faculty 
and staff with disabilities require access to the same resources as students with 
disabilities—for compara ble reasons—the first factor favors both the baseline 
exemption and the proposed expansion. 
The remediation for faculty and staff expansion is consistent with this analysis 
because faculty and staff rely on the same educational resources that are made 
                                                      
80 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C).  
81 See 2018 Recommendation at 104 (finding that all of the statutory factors favor 
an exemption for disability services); 2015 Recommendation at 135-36 (finding 
that all of the statutory factors strongly favor an exemption to facilitate assistive 
technologies); Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights at 22 (Oct. 12, 
2012), (“2012 Recommendation”) 
https://cdn.loc.gov/copyright/1201/2012/Section_1201_Rulemaking_2012_Reco
mmendation.pdf (finding that all of the statutory factors favored an exemption for 
assistive technologies). 
82 2020 NPRM, 58 Fed. Reg. at 65,298. 
83 See id. at 65,294. 
 

[PAGE 21]
 
 
21 
 
accessible to students via the baseline exemption. Allowing faculty and staff 
meaningful access to these resources is necessary for EIUs to be able to fulfill their 
educational and research goals. Expanding the exemption to include faculty and 
staff would ensure that faculty and staff who are blind, visually impaired, deaf, or 
hard of hearing are afforded equal access to the materials used in the educational 
environment that are utilized by nondisabled faculty and staff. 
Availability for Use of Works for Nonprofit Archival, Preservation, and 
Educational Purposes. Although referencing a slightly different context, the Office 
acknowledged in the 2020 NPRM that “educators and students continue to rely on 
excerpts from digital media for class presentations and coursework.”
84 Given the 
commonplace use of videos in the educational setting, motion picture materials—
including excerpts from digital media—must necessarily be made accessible to 
students, faculty, and staff with disabilities. Faculty and staff with disabilities 
require meaningful access to educational and training resources in order for EIUs to 
accomplish their educational purposes. As such, this factor favors both the baseline 
exemption and the proposed expansion. Expanding the exemption to include 
faculty and staff would increase availability of educational and training resources 
with meaningful access for faculty and staff with disabilities.
 
Impact on Criticism, Comment, News Reporting, Teaching, Scholarship, or 
Research. This factor favors the proposed expansion to the exemption for 
substantially the same reasons stated for the first two factors.85 Faculty and staff 
with disabilities require meaningful access to educational and training resources for 
teaching, scholarship, and research purposes. Expanding the exemption is 
necessary to provide them with this meaningful access. 
Effect on the Market for or Value of Copyrighted Works. As discussed in the 
context of fair use,
86 expanding the exemption to include faculty and staff with 
disabilities would have a negligible effect on the market value for motion pictures.  
In the 2018 triennial rulemaking, the Acting Register emphasized a need for 
the exemption to “take into account and further incentivize the marketplace 
offerings, including by requiring a reasonable market check for usable copies, while 
balancing the legitimate needs of disability services offices to create accessible 
versions.”
87 By requiring a reasonable market check for the exemption, the Acting 
Register sought to “prevent copies being made of works already available in 
accessible formats, while supporting the motion picture industry’s effort to further 
expand the availability of accessible versions in the marketplace.”
88 Because the 
exemption would continue to require a reasonable market check even if it includes 
                                                      
84 Id. at 65,295. 
85 See discussion supra, Item E.4.i & ii. 
86 See discussion supra, Item E.3. 
87 2018 Recommendation at 106. 
88 Id. at 110. 

[PAGE 22]
 
 
22 
 
faculty and staff with disabilities, this modification would not have a meaningfully 
different effect on the market than the existing exemption. 
Other Factors. The Office should consider that drawing a distinction between 
“students with disabilities” and faculty and staff with disabilities is arbitrary and 
would contradict the overarching logic of the exemption. The Acting Register 
recommended in 2018 that the exemption be available “for units of an educational 
institution engaged in and/or responsible for the provision of accessible options.”89 
The Acting Register in 2018 noted that the proposed petition language was 
intended to enable the work of “disability services offices, organizations that 
support people with disabilities, libraries, and other units at educational institutions 
that are responsible for fulfilling those institutions’ legal and ethical obligations to 
make works accessible to people with disabilities.”90  
As previously discussed, EIUs are obligated under disability laws to make 
accessibility accommodations for employees with disabilities.91 The exclusion of 
faculty and staff with disabilities from the existing exemption was an oversight that 
should be clarified by expressly covering faculty and staff with disabilities. 
ii. Clarifying that the exemption allows disability services professionals 
to proactively remediate videos would satisfy the statutory factors. 
Availability for Use of Copyrighted Works. Much like how the first statutory 
factor favors the baseline exemption,92 the first statutory factor also favors altering 
the current exemption language as necessary to make clear that EIUs can create 
accessible versions proactively. Allowing for proactive remediation would create 
greater availability of accessible copyrighted works and resources for people with 
disabilities. 
Currently, people with disabilities are being forced to wait for their 
accommodation requests to be completed by disability services offices, even as 
courses are simultaneously progressing.
93 This forces people with disabilities into a 
position of playing catch-up throughout the semester as they wait for their 
accessible content, all while juggling their ongoing educational responsibilities.94 
Allowing disability services offices to make captions and audio descriptions for 
people with disabilities without requiring that they first submit formal 
                                                      
89 Id. at 107. 
90 Id. (emphasis added). 
91 See discussion supra, Item E.2.i. 
92 See discussion supra, Item E.4.i. 
93 See discussion infra, Item F.1 (Statement of Jason Kapcala) & Item F.3 
(Statement of Gretchen Rumsey-Richardson). 
94 See discussion infra, Item F.3 (Statement of Gretchen Rumsey-Richardson). 
 

[PAGE 23]
 
 
23 
 
accommodation requests would make these necessary resources available sooner, 
thereby improving their availability. 
Availability for Use of Works for Nonprofit Archival, Preservation, and 
Educational Purposes. Altering the current exemption language to make clear that 
EIUs can create accessible versions proactively would create greater availability for 
meaningful access of content for educational purposes. The 2020 NPRM affirmed 
both that there is a need for the accessibility exemption going forward and that this 
need is “likely to increase significantly in light of the ongoing COVID–19 pandemic 
as many educational institutions shift to online learning and the use of digital 
multimedia by faculty increases.”
95 As such, it is imperative that unnecessary 
delays—such as the requirement for formal accommodation requests before 
disability services offices make captions and audio descriptions—be eliminated so 
that people with disabilities are not hindered in receiving meaningful access to 
resources for educational purposes. 
Impact on Criticism, Comment, News Reporting, Teaching, Scholarship, or 
Research. This factor favors the proposed expansion to the exemption for 
substantially the same reasons stated in the first two factors.
96 People with 
disabilities require meaningful access to educational and training resources for 
teaching, scholarship, and research purposes. To provide them with this meaningful 
access, it is critical to modify the current exemption language so as to make clear 
that EIUs can create accessible versions proactively. 
Effect on the Market for or Value of Copyrighted Works. As discussed in the 
context of fair use,
97 revising the exemption’s language to make clear that EIUs can 
create accessible versions proactively would have a negligible effect on the market 
value for motion pictures. Given that the exemption would still require a 
reasonable market check before disability services offices could proactively make 
content accessible,
98 the revised language would not have a negative impact on the 
market. Proactive remediation would only become necessary if disability services 
offices determined, after a reasonable market check, that there is no accessible 
version of the content. 
iii. Clarifying that “accessible versions” are only accessible if they are of 
sufficient quality would satisfy the statutory factors. 
Availability for Use of Copyrighted Works. The Register affirmed in the 2020 
NPRM that this factor favors the baseline exemption.
99 Revising the exemption’s 
                                                      
95 2020 NPRM, 85 Fed. Reg. at 65,298. 
96 See discussion supra, Item E.4.ii. 
97 See discussion supra, Item E.3. 
98 See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(2)(i)(B). 
99 See discussion supra, Item E.4.i. 
 

[PAGE 24]
 
 
24 
 
language to clarify that “accessible versions” are not accessible unless they are of 
sufficient quality is consistent with this analysis. 
The Acting Register recognized in 2018 that “[a]n exception to promote 
accessibility ‘is not merely a matter of convenience, but is instead intended to 
enable individuals [with disabilities] to have meaningful access to the same content 
that individuals without such impairments are able to perceive.’”
100 Clarifying the 
exemption’s language would create greater availability of resources with 
meaningful access for people with disabilities, as it would allow disability services 
professionals to proceed in efforts to make accessible content without fear of 
liability when captioned or audio described versions of a video technically exist but 
are of such haphazard quality that they are functionally inaccessible for people with 
disabilities.
101  
Availability for Use of Works for Nonprofit Archival, Preservation, and 
Educational Purposes. For substantially the same reasons previously discussed 
regarding access to resources for educational purposes,102 this factor supports both 
the baseline exemption and the proposed addition of clarifying language. The same 
factors that justified an exemption to grant people with disabilities meaningful 
access to resources are still present, and therefore justify clarifying ambiguous 
language so as to ensure that people with disabilities still have meaningful access. 
Impact on Criticism, Comment, News Reporting, Teaching, Scholarship, or 
Research. This factor favors clarifying the exemption’s ambiguous language for 
substantially the same reasons stated with respect to the first two factors.
103 People 
with disabilities require meaningful access to educational and training resources for 
teaching, scholarship, and research purposes. To provide them with this meaningful 
access, it is necessary to alter the current exemption language so as to make clear 
that educational and training content is only considered an “accessible version” 
when it is of sufficient quality.
 
Effect on the Market for or Value of Copyrighted Works. Revising the exemption’s 
language to make clear that only versions of sufficient quality are considered 
“accessible” would have a negligible effect on the market value for videos. Given 
that the exemption would still require a reasonable market check before disability 
services offices could circumvent TPMs,
104 the revised language would not have a 
negative impact on the market. In circumstances where there are already existing 
versions of educational or training resources but they are functionally inaccessible 
due to their poor quality, then people with disabilities are unable to access these 
                                                      
100 2018 Recommendation at 104 (internal citations omitted). 
101 See discussion supra, Item E.2.iii. 
102 See discussion supra, Item E.4.i. 
103 See discussion supra, Item E.4.iii. 
104 See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(2)(i)(B). 
 

[PAGE 25]
 
 
25 
 
versions on equal terms.105 As a result, the remediation of these works does not 
impact a cognizable market. 
Other Factors. Revising the exemption’s language such that “sufficient quality” 
is required for content to be considered “accessible” is a simple and common-sense 
way to ensure that people with disabilities are truly receiving the meaningful access 
to which they are entitled. The baseline exemption itself was created under the 
assumption that it would allow people with disabilities to receive captions and 
audio descriptions sufficient to facilitate access to their educational and training 
content.106 The Office has historically supported exemptions that provide 
meaningful access of resources for people with disabilities.107 Furthermore, by 
passing several laws specifically centered around providing people with disabilities 
meaningful access to opportunities and resources, Congress has clearly shown its 
strong support for meaningful disability accessibility as well.
108 Revising the 
exemption’s language to resolve its current ambiguity is both rational and 
necessary in order to fulfill the baseline exemption’s intended purpose and secure 
meaningful access for people with disabilities.
 
iv. Qualifying the commercial availability requirement to clarify the terms 
“reasonable effort” and “fair price” would satisfy the statutory factors. 
Availability for Use of Copyrighted Works. In its current form, the exemption’s 
ambiguous “reasonable effort” and “fair price” requirements raise the possibility 
that publishers can insist on extra payment to remediate videos included with 
textbooks.109 Though publishers may make remediated versions of these works 
available to disability services professionals and thereby obviate the need for 
circumvention, disability services professionals and the students, faculty, and staff 
that they serve should not have to pay a higher price for these works than their 
non-disabled counterparts. As such, the first factor favors modifying the exemption 
to clarify that a disability services professional has met the “reasonable effort” 
requirement when the publisher has not included an accessible version of the 
materials with a purchased textbook. 
                                                      
105 See discussion supra, Item E.2.iii. 
106 See 2018 Recommendation at 107 (“[T]he Acting Register concludes that the 
prohibition on circumvention is adversely affecting the ability of educational 
institutions to offer accessible formats of motion pictures on an equal basis in 
conformance with their legal responsibilities.”). 
107 See id. (“The Acting Register is sensitive to the need to ensure that access 
controls do not prevent students with disabilities from gaining meaningful access to 
motion pictures distributed in electronic formats.”). 
108 See discussion supra, Item E.2. 
109 See discussion infra, Item F.1 (Statement of Jason Kapcala). 
 

[PAGE 26]
 
 
26 
 
Availability for Use of Works for Nonprofit Archival, Preservation, and 
Educational Purposes. Revising the language in the existing exemption to qualify the 
commercial availability requirement would self-evidently serve an educational 
purpose. Revising the exemption’s language would allow for greater availability of 
accessible resources for people with disabilities to use for educational purposes, as 
well as discouraging publishers from acting in bad faith by refusing to provide 
remediated versions of works unless paid extra cost. 
Impact on Criticism, Comment, News Reporting, Teaching, Scholarship, or 
Research. Through the passage of the ADA, Section 504, and IDEA, Congress has 
evinced a clear intent that educational resources be made accessible for people 
with disabilities.110 Notably, the 2018 rulemaking recommendation highlighted 
that the ADA is imbued with “principles against imposing unnecessary costs to 
improve accessibility for people with disabilities.”111 As such, the third factor favors 
revising the exemption to include language clarifying that an EIU has met the 
“reasonable effort” requirement when the publisher has not included an accessible 
version of the materials with a purchased textbook. 
Effect on the Market for or Value of Copyrighted Works. In its current form, the 
ambiguous language in the “reasonable effort” requirement may serve as an 
incentive for publishers to withhold accessible versions of motion pictures from the 
market.112 By not providing accessible versions of content at the outset, publishers 
can tack on additional profits by demanding additional fees for generating 
accessible versions.113 The fourth factor favors revising the exemption to include 
language clarifying that an EIU has met the “reasonable effort” requirement when 
the publisher has not included an accessible version of the materials with a 
purchased textbook. 
v. Clarifying that EIUs can reuse remediated resources would satisfy the 
statutory factors. 
Availability for Use of Copyrighted Works. In its current form, the ambiguous 
language in Rule 201.40(b)(2)(i)(C)114 has left disability services offices uncertain 
of whether they are allowed to store accessible versions of videos created such that 
they may be used for future accommodation requests. In the 2018 rulemaking 
recommendation, the Acting Register explained that the accessible versions should 
                                                      
110 See discussion supra, Item E.2. 
111 2018 Recommendation at 103. 
112 See discussion infra, Item F.1 (Statement of Jason Kapcala). 
113 See discussion infra, Item F.1 (Statement of Jason Kapcala). 
114 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(2)(i)(C). 
 

[PAGE 27]
 
 
27 
 
be stored “by the educational institution in a manner that reasonably prevents” 
unauthorized dissemination of the work.115  
Given that courses often utilize the same videos each time that they are taught, 
certain videos may require accessible versions in multiple semesters. However, 
some EIUs are currently disposing of accessible versions at the end of semesters, 
and then creating accessible versions of the same videos in subsequent 
semesters.116 Revising the language to clarify that EIUs can reuse stored accessible 
versions would still comport with the Acting Register’s intentions, as the accessible 
versions would only be distributed to people with disabilities who need 
accommodations. 
Availability for Use of Works for Nonprofit Archival, Preservation, and 
Educational Purposes. For substantially the same reasons as the first factor, the 
second factor favors revising the language in the exemption to clarify that EIUs can 
reuse accessible versions of educational resources for educational purposes. 
Impact on Criticism, Comment, News Reporting, Teaching, Scholarship, or 
Research. The prohibition on the circumvention of technological measures applied 
to copyrighted works impacts teaching by limiting the tools available for teachers 
when teaching individuals with disabilities. As a result, students face unnecessary 
delays and complications while waiting for an accessible version to be created, and 
EIUs incur the cost of creating subsequent accessible versions of videos that they 
had already made accessible before.117 The third factor thereby favors revising the 
exemption to add clarifying language making clear that an EIU can reuse stored 
accessible versions. 
Effect on the Market for or Value of Copyrighted Works. Revising the exemption 
to clarify the exemption’s ambiguous language would have a negligible effect on 
the market for and value of motion pictures. People with disabilities are entitled to 
accessible versions of educational resources as per the ADA, Section 504, and the 
IDEA.
118 As such, providing accessible versions of videos in the educational context 
to people with disabilities is non-infringing fair use, even if those accessible 
versions were created in a previous semester. Furthermore, disability service offices 
will remain bound by the exemption’s reasonable market check requirement to 
search for accessible versions before circumvention can take place.
119 Thus, any 
accessible versions already in existence will be located during the course of the 
reasonable market check. 
  
                                                      
115 2018 Recommendation at 110. 
116 See discussion infra, Item F.1 (Statement of Jason Kapcala) 
117 See discussion infra, Item F.1 (Statement of Jason Kapcala) & Item F.3 
(Statement of Gretchen Rumsey-Richardson). 
118 See discussion supra, Item E.2. 
119 See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(2)(i)(B). 

[PAGE 28]
 
 
28 
 
* * * 
For the foregoing reasons, Section 1201 imposes adverse effects on the ability 
of disability services professionals to make works accessible to people with 
disabilities. As such, the Office should recommend, and the Librarian should accept, 
expanding the language in the current exemption for motion pictures to address 
the need for remediation for faculty and staff, proactive remediation, “accessible 
versions” of sufficient quality, qualifying the commercial availability requirement, 
and reuse of remediated materials. 
Item F. Documentary Evidence 
 Statement of Jason Kapcala, Assistant Director of Captioning and 
Interpreting at West Virginia University 
The current exemption to Section 1201 of the DMCA is crucial for providing 
closed captioning accommodations for students with disabilities. However, much is 
left to interpretation when it comes to proactively making media accessible for 
unidentified students with disabilities and other stakeholders. More colleges and 
universities are adopting ethical principles of Universal Design which make 
accessibility a standard practice in all classrooms. We know, based on studies 
conducted by the Office of Communications, that 80% of people who use 
captioning regularly do not identify as deaf or hard of hearing, while 41% of videos 
are incomprehensible to them without captioning. We also project that only about 
1/3 of students with disabilities on our campus request accommodations. That does 
not obviate our responsibility to provide equal access for the other 2/3 who choose 
not to self-identify. 
Like many colleges and universities, we require that online courses pass a 
Quality Matters screening to ensure that content is fully accessible and adherent to 
the international standard of accessibility, the Web Content Accessibility 
Guidelines, WCAG 2.1. As a matter of compliance with these standards, videos 
must have closed captioning, irrespective of whether a formal request has been 
made by someone with a disability. As the exemption is currently written, it is 
unclear if a school, wishing to ensure or mandate that all video content shown in 
class be shown with effective captioning, can take proactive steps to create 
captions. 
Additionally, it is unclear if a school, having created closed captions for a class, 
may securely store that captioned media for reuse in future classes. Most 
introductory courses use a standard curriculum across all sections. This curriculum 
is used semester after semester, and the video content infrequently changes. Every 
semester, we have students enrolled in these courses who are deaf and hard of 
hearing. The commonsense approach would be to caption these videos once, store 
the captions, and reuse them, rather than recreating the same captions over and 
over, which is costly and time-consuming, and which could result in unnecessary 
delays that expose the University to liability. With an increase in the number of 
[PAGE 29]
 
 
29 
 
high-profile Department of Justice Office of Civil Rights complaints being filed over 
inaccessible media, this is not merely a speculative concern. A more efficient 
approach would be to ensure that accessible media is shown in every section, every 
semester, as a standard practice. 
Captioning remains a time-consuming process. According to a survey 
conducted by our office, it takes a trained transcriber approximately seven hours to 
create a captioned version of a one-hour video. Having media proactively captioned 
also means that, at the beginning of a semester, when students are changing their 
schedules, adding and dropping classes before the final deadline, disability service 
offices would be better equipped to provide accessible media content in a timely 
manner. 
Quality remains another important consideration. We have developed in-house 
Closed Captioning Quality Guidelines, based on the National Association of the 
Deaf’s Described and Captioned Media Program Captioning Key, to ensure that all 
captioned media meets a standard necessary for effective accommodation in a 
higher education classroom. These guidelines cover not only caption accuracy but 
also matters such as punctuation, speaker identifiers, non-verbals, line breaking, 
timing, visual contrast, and caption placement/orientation. This is especially 
important for native sign language users for whom English is a second language. 
We have yet to encounter a machine-generated or autogenerated caption program 
that has been able to meet these standards. For example, during recent testing of a 
new machine-generated captioning product to determine its suitability to the 
higher-education classroom, we discovered that the product continually took the 
spoken phrase, “These captions are terrible” and captioned them as “These captions 
are bearable.” Obviously, that changes the entire meaning of the content, and could 
have severe ramifications for a student in an academic classroom. We encounter 
similar issues with the auto-captioning provided for the video content available to 
millions of hearing individuals already on YouTube. Most auto-captions don’t even 
come close to meeting our standards and are largely unusable. As written, the 
exemption is unclear if a school may establish quality standards and create new 
captions if/when it finds that existing captions are insufficient. 
Finally, just this past semester, we encountered a situation in an advanced 
Forensics class where an online textbook included video content that was not 
captioned. We reached out to the publisher, and they were willing to create a 
captioned version (albeit with some delay, as they did not have any captioning 
experts on staff). Had this delay persisted, we would have liked the option to 
caption the media ourselves in order to provide the content to the student in a 
reasonable time frame. A question has been raised as to whether offices like ours 
would be willing to pay for a publisher to remediate existing media content to 
make it accessible at extra cost. This feels like an opportunistic request to profit off 
the need for accessibility and accommodation. If a student has already purchased 
the textbook or supplemental material, then there should be no additional charge 
to make that material accessible. 
[PAGE 30]
 
 
30 
 
In closing, it is worth noting that the current COVID-19 pandemic has only 
intensified captioning needs, with more students requesting accommodation and 
more classes moving online. At the time of this writing, the demand for media 
captioning here has gone up 849% compared to pre-pandemic semesters. There is 
currently a nationwide shortage of speech-to-text service providers, resulting in 
increased turn-around times for captioning requests and new concerns that caption 
quality could suffer. The need to meet demand, to respond proactively to the call 
for accessibility, to create and reuse captions efficiently, to promote timely delivery, 
and to ensure caption quality and accuracy, is more important now than ever 
before. 
  
[PAGE 31]
 
 
31 
 
 Statement of Anonymous Disability Services Professional 
I am a disability services professional and I work at a medium sized institution. 
My job responsibilities include serving a significant number of deaf and hard of 
hearing students in the student population.  
Remediation for Faculty and Staff: We have a lot of deaf and hard of hearing 
staff at our institution. While another department handles requests for 
employment-related requests, my department captions and describes videos for 
faculty intending to use video in class—including in circumstances where the 
faculty member has a disability. To request captions, the faculty member logs onto 
our website and checks a box stating the video is for a credit-bearing course and 
they have to enter in the course number—then we caption  it. There has been a 
significant uptake this year in captioning requests—about four times as much —as a 
result of the virtual learning requirements of the pandemic. 
Proactive Remediation: With the number of deaf or hard of hearing students 
that attend my school, we must proactively remediate inaccessible video. Generally, 
the faculty submit a request for any videos they intend to use in their class to be 
captioned. There is a blanket mandate under our university’s policy that all videos 
need to be captioned. It would not be possible to caption at the volume that we do 
if we had to wait for a student accommodation request before remediating 
classroom materials. 
Qualifying the Commercial Availability Requirement: The policies at my 
school regarding accessibility would prevent the kinds of circumstances where a 
publisher will only provide an accessible version at extra cost. The faculty know 
that they can only use audiovisual works that are either already captioned or can 
be captioned by my office; the Provost sends out a notice to all faculty members 
that all of their material must be captioned. 
Reuse of Remediated Resources: Our library stores the DVDs that have been 
remediated—we have a separate server that holds that content and it is shared 
across the faculty. The DVDs themselves are set to be available for a limited time, 
and they are no longer shared with the faculty member when the faculty member is 
supposed to be done using them in their class. Instructors request the use of DVD 
content whenever necessary. We keep captioned videos and reuse them via our 
library system. Faculty have their own libraries on our server and this is where they 
store their classroom videos. Faculty members can log into their server, place files, 
add metadata, and stream. The streams are obfuscated. This is a streaming solution 
that is integrated so as to limit access. However, many courses use the same 
content semester after semester, so it would be inefficient to re-remediate every 
classroom every semester. 
* * * 
The current exemption was a good first step towards helping students with 
disabilities have access to necessary resources for their classes. However, three 
years have shown that the exemption has some flaws that still need to be fixed. 
 
[PAGE 32]
 
 
32 
 
 
 Statement of Gretchen Rumsey-Richardson, Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing 
Services Manager at a Higher Education Institution120 
I have worked in the field of Deaf and hard-of-hearing equal communication 
access services for over 15 years and equitable access is extremely important to me. 
I am continually aware of situations where, despite best efforts on the part of 
service providers, many D/deaf and hard-of-hearing students still do not have 
equitable access to their education for a variety of reasons. There are institutional 
barriers to the timely captioning of content already and laws related to captioning 
present further barriers in making that content accessible.  How will our society 
ever evolve to be more inclusive, accessible, and equitable if there are laws 
that prevent us from making it so?
 
It is possible for content and the environment to be accessible from the start by 
following universal design principles. In this way, a student with disabilities does 
not have to go through extra effort to have access to the material, and they would 
have access at the same time as their non-disabled peers. This is true equity.
 
But we do not live in a world that is universally designed, and so students with 
disabilities at most colleges and universities must go through a litany of steps 
before they have equitable access: they must see a doctor to get documentation of 
their disabilities so that they can receive accommodations; they have to meet with 
the disability service office to explain the barriers they’re facing due to their 
disabilities; they must request the accommodations they want to use in each class 
they take; they have to check in regularly with their disability services 
representative and their instructors regarding their accommodations; they have to 
reach out when a remediated video is not displaying correctly, etc. This is in 
addition to the work all students must do. I think it’s possible to live in a world 
where some, if not all, of these extra steps are reduced or eliminated, and in return, 
we will have more participation from a diverse population of individuals, which 
will only benefit academia and society as a whole. 
 
Disability services is inherently very reactive, always scrambling to remediate 
content so that students have equitable access to the content. The captioning 
process generally takes at least three times the length of the video, sometimes more 
depending on the audio quality, accents, terminology, etc. Further, as our 
university has turned to remote learning due to the COVID-19 pandemic, 
captioning requests have dramatically increased and most classes have anywhere 
from 3 to 12 videos per week. Being able to proactively caption content would 
eliminate, or at the very least reduce, the delay the student with disabilities 
experiences in receiving their accessible content.  Whenever possible, students with 
                                                      
120 This statement represents Ms. Rumsey-Richardson’s personal views and not 
necessarily those of her employers. 

[PAGE 33]
 
 
33 
 
disabilities should have equitable access to the content at the same time as their 
non-disabled peers, and proactively captioning would help achieve that. 
The first step I take when I receive a captioning request is to search for 
previously captioned versions. However, it is not uncommon for captions to be 
lacking, inaccurate, or not following captioning standards and best practices. On 
several occasions I have had to edit closed captions due to inaccuracies and a 
complete lack of atmospherics. Oftentimes, supposed “closed captions” are actually 
just subtitles, as they do not include explanations of non-verbal sounds. While I do 
want to ensure content is compliant, my main concern is that it is equitable to the 
students I was hired to specifically serve. Subtitles are not equitable for students 
who are D/deaf or hard-of-hearing; they need actual closed captions.
121 
A lack of clarity in the law prohibits the storage of captioned content, which 
generates more work, causes delays in getting the D/deaf or hard-of-hearing 
student their accessible material, and is yet another structural barrier that impedes 
equitable access.  Instructors tend to reuse content in their courses, especially 
lower-level general graduation requirement courses. Because of this, service 
providers often re-caption the same videos quarter after quarter.  This wastes time 
and resources. We are regularly faced with more captioning requests than a small 
team can coordinate or caption in-house in a work week, and re-captioning videos 
is inefficient.
 
People who are D/deaf or hard-of-hearing must constantly transverse an 
inaccessible world and it is exhausting to have to work so much harder than their 
peers. While I work tirelessly to address the barriers posed by inaccessible content, 
it is doubly frustrating that structural barriers ultimately limit genuine efforts 
towards creating a system of equity. Reforms to Section 1201 would help facilitate 
progress towards accessibility and equity, which is long overdue. 
                                                      
121 National Deaf Center, Why Captions Provide Equal Access, 
https://www.nationaldeafcenter.org/sites/default/files/Why%20Captions%20Prov
ide%20Equal%20Access.pdf (last visited Dec. 14, 2020). 
