[PAGE 1]
 
 
Item A. Commenter Information  
American Council of the Blind (ACB) 
Eric Bridges, Executive Director 
ebridges@acb.org 
The American Council of the Blind (ACB) is a national grassroots consumer 
organization representing Americans who are blind and visually impaired. With 70 
affiliates, ACB strives to increase the independence, security, equality of 
opportunity, and to improve quality of life for all blind and visually impaired 
people. 
Represented by: 
Samuelson-Glushko Technology Law & Policy Clinic (TLPC) at Colorado Law 
Scott A. Goodstein, Dakotah Hamilton, and Rachel Hersch, Student Attorneys 
Blake E. Reid, Director 
blake.reid@colorado.edu
 
American Foundation for the Blind (AFB) 
Sarah Malaier, Public Policy and Research Advisor 
smalaier@afb.org
 
The American Foundation for the Blind (AFB) works to create a world of no limits 
for people who are blind or visually impaired by mobilizing leaders, advancing 
understanding, and championing impactful policies and practices using research 
and data. 
Association for Education and Rehabilitation of the 
Blind and Visually Impaired (AER) 
Mark Richert, Esq., Interim Executive Director 
Mark@AERBVI.org
 
571-438-7895 
The Association for Education and Rehabilitation of the Blind and Visually 
Impaired (AER) strives to support and advocate for AER members who represent 
all major professional disciplines serving children, working-age adults and older 
people living with vision loss. Through direct member services, professional 
development, publications, networking, leadership development, accreditation, and 
public education, AER is the leading national and international voice of the 
professional vision loss community. 
[PAGE 2]
 
 
2 
 
Association of Late-Deafened Adults (ALDA) 
Richard Brown, President 
President@alda.org  
The Association of Late Deafened Adults (ALDA) is a non-profit membership 
corporation comprised principally of people who lost some or all of their hearing 
after having acquired spoken language. Its members include people who 
communicate primarily through sign language and people who use hearing aids or 
cochlear implants and communicate aurally. Part of its mission includes advocating 
for measures that will better enable its members and other similarly situated people 
to fully participate in all aspects of life. 
Association of Transcribers and Speech-to-Text Providers (ATSP) 
Alison Nelson Chabot, President 
info@atspnetwork.org
 
The Association of Transcribers and Speech-to-Text Providers (ATSP) is a non-
profit organization devoted to advancing the delivery of real-time speech-to-text 
services to deaf or hard-of-hearing people. 
Association on Higher Education and Disability (AHEAD) 
Stephan Smith, Executive Director 
stephan@ahead.org 
The Association of Higher Education and Disability (AHEAD) is the leading 
professional membership association for individuals committed to equity for 
persons with disabilities in higher education. Since 1977, AHEAD has offered an 
unparalleled member experience to disability resource professionals, student affairs 
personnel, ADA coordinators, diversity officers, AT/IT staff, faculty and other 
instructional personnel, and colleagues who are invested in creating welcoming 
higher education experiences for disabled individuals. 
Benetech/Bookshare 
Brad Turner, VP/GM, Global Education and Literacy 
bradt@benetech.org
  
Bookshare is an ebook library that makes reading easier. People with dyslexia, 
blindness, cerebral palsy, and other reading barriers can read in ways that work for 
them with ebooks in audio, audio + highlighted text, braille, and other 
customizable formats.  
  
[PAGE 3]
 
 
3 
 
Gallaudet University Technology Access Program 
Christian Vogler, PhD, Director 
christian.vogler@gallaudet.edu 
The Gallaudet University Technology Access Program (TAP) conducts research 
related to communication technologies and services, with the goal of producing 
knowledge useful to industry, government, and deaf and hard of hearing 
consumers in the quest for equality in communications. The program provides 
education to Gallaudet students through coursework and mentored research 
projects related to TAP’s research mission. TAP is one of Gallaudet 
University’s research centers and has faculty affiliated with the School of Science, 
Technology, Accessibility, Mathematics and Public Health. 
HathiTrust 
Mike Furlough, Executive Director 
furlough@hathitrust.org
 
HathiTrust’s Digital Library contains over 17 million books digitized from academic 
libraries. Through its Accessible Text Request Service, print disabled users in higher 
education institutions in the US and in Marrakesh Treaty nations may obtain DRM-
free digital access to the text of any item in this collection, consistent with Section 
121 of the Copyright Act. 
Hearing Loss Association of America (HLAA) 
Barbara Kelley, Executive Director 
Contact: Lise Hamlin, Director of Public Policy  
lhamlin@Hearingloss.org
 
The Hearing Loss Association of America (HLAA) has opened the world of 
communication to people with hearing loss through information, education, 
support, and advocacy since 1979. In addition to the Walk4Hearing, HLAA holds 
annual conventions, publishes the magazine, Hearing Life, serves as an advocate 
for people with hearing loss across the broad spectrum of communication access 
needs. HLAA has a nationwide network of more than 140 chapters and state 
associations reaching out to and supporting people with hearing loss across the 
country. 
  
[PAGE 4]
 
 
4 
 
Library Copyright Alliance (LCA) 
The Library Copyright Alliance (LCA) consists of three major library associations—
the American Library Association (ALA), the Association of College and Research 
Libraries (ACRL), and the Association of Research Libraries (ARL)—that 
collectively represent over 100,000 libraries in the United States. Libraries provide 
services to visually impaired people, both inside and outside of educational 
settings, in particular by converting works into formats accessible to the print 
disabled. 
Represented by: 
Jonathan Band, policybandwidth 
jband@policybandwidth.com
  
National Association of the Deaf (NAD) 
Howard Rosenblum, Chief Executive Officer 
Contact: Zainab Alkebsi 
zainab.alkebsi@nad.org  
The National Association of the Deaf, established in 1880, is the oldest national 
civil rights organization in the United States of America. The NAD is also the largest 
consumer-based advocacy organization safeguarding the civil and accessibility 
rights of deaf and hard of hearing individuals in the USA through public education, 
litigation, and policy advocacy. The advocacy scope of the NAD is broad, covering 
the breadth of a lifetime and impacting future generations in the areas of 
education, technology, and more. 
National Federation of the Blind (NFB) 
Mark A. Riccobono, President 
officeofthepresident@nfb.org
  
The National Federation of the Blind has advocated for equality of opportunity for 
the nation’s blind since 1940, and as part of that mission, the Federation has 
vigorously stood for equal access to information through its leadership in many 
ways including leading efforts to secure passage of the Chafee Amendment to the 
Copyright Act and adoption of the Marrakesh Treaty and its intervention as a party 
in the HathiTrust case. 
  
[PAGE 5]
 
 
5 
 
Perkins Braille & Talking Book Library 
A Division of the Perkins School for the Blind 
Kim Charlson, Executive Director 
kim.charlson@perkins.org  
Telecommunications for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing, Inc.  
Eric Kaika, Chief Executive Officer  
Kaika@TDIforAccess.org  
Telecommunications for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing, Inc.(TDI) shapes America’s 
public policy in telecommunications, media, and information technology to 
advance the interests of all people who are deaf, hard of hearing, late-deafened, 
deafblind, and deaf-plus (with other disabilities). 
  
[PAGE 6]
 
 
6 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Item A. Commenter Information ........................................................................ 1 
Item B. Proposed Class Addressed: Proposed Class 17: All Works—
Accessibility Uses ................................................................................... 7 
Item C. Overview ................................................................................................ 8 
Item D. Technological Protection Measure(s) and Method(s) of 
Circumvention ...................................................................................... 10
 
Item E. Asserted Adverse Effects on Noninfringing Uses ................................. 14 
1. The proposed class of works includes works protected by copyright. .............. 15 
2. The prohibition on circumvention adversely affects innovative modes of 
making copyrighted works accessible. ............................................................. 15 
3. Making works accessible is an uncontroversially noninfringing fair use. ......... 18 
i. The purpose and character of making works accessible weighs in favor 
of fair use. ................................................................................................ 20
 
ii. The nature of inaccessible works is heterogeneous and not dispositive. ... 21 
iii. The amount and substantiality of the portion used in converting an 
inaccessible work into accessible formats varies and is not dispositive. .... 21
 
iv. The effect of converting inaccessible works into accessible formats on 
the potential market or value weighs in favor of fair use. ......................... 22
 
4. The Section 1201(a)(1)(C) statutory factors weigh in favor of granting a 
broad, general exemption for accessibility uses. .............................................. 23
 
i. The three availability factors weigh in favor of granting a broad, 
general exemption for accessibility uses. .................................................. 24
 
ii. A broad, general exemption for disability accessibility would have no 
negative impact on the market for or value of copyrighted works. ........... 25 
iii. The Librarian should consider emergencies like the COVID-19 crisis, 
which highlight the disastrous impact of delaying access to necessary 
resources, as a factor for a broad, general exemption for accessibility. ..... 25
 
5. The Office should reinterpret its definition of “class of copyrighted works” 
to grant the proposed exemption. ................................................................... 27
 
i. The Office’s interpretation of “class of copyrighted works” has evolved 
from a strict focus on Section 102(a) categories to a more flexible 
common-attributes approach. ................................................................... 28 
ii. The Office must allow use-based classes, including for accessibility, to 
satisfy the DMCA’s commitment to protecting fair use. ............................. 31 
iii. Attribute-based classes of works, including for accessibility, are 
consistent with Section 102(a)’s flexible conception of works. ................. 32 
iv. Recommending attribute-based classes of works would align with the 
legislative history and language of the DMCA while supporting 
technological innovation enabling fair uses, including accessibility. ......... 33 
[PAGE 7]
 
 
7 
 
 
Item B. Proposed Class Addressed: 
Proposed Class 17: All Works—Accessibility Uses  
The Copyright Office initiated the eighth triennial rulemaking to consider 
exemptions from the anticircumvention provisions of the Digital Millennium 
Copyright Act (DMCA) on June 22, 2020 by issuing a Notice of Inquiry and Request 
for Petitions.1 In response, the above-signed organizations filed a petition for a 
new, broadly inclusive exemption for accessibility uses.2 
On October 15, 2020, the Copyright Office issued a Notice of Proposed 
Rulemaking (NPRM) for this proceeding.3 As recognized in the NPRM, “[t]he 
proposed exemption would permit circumvention to access ‘all cognizable classes of 
works under Section 102 (a) of the Copyright Act’ to facilitate accessibility for 
persons with disabilities.”4 In the NPRM, the Office announced that there are 
“important public policy considerations raised by this request and past exemptions 
adopted with respect to facilitating accessibility uses” and “is noticing this category 
for public comment while flagging the need to further develop and refine 
petitioners’ request into separate proposed classes.”
5 
While the goal of this exemption is to “resolve the shortcomings of the current, 
piecemeal approach to Section 1201 exemptions for accessibility,”6 the Office states 
that “its authority in this proceeding is bound by the provisions of [Section 1201],” 
implying that Section 1201 imposes a barrier to noninfringing accessibility uses.7 
To the contrary, we believe it is within the Office’s authority under Section 1201 to 
recommend more general exemptions like the one proposed here where a 
compelling use—here, accessibility —is identified . The proposed class, which would 
broadly allow for circumvention for accessibility purposes consistent with fair use 
precedent, is an acceptable and necessary categorization for these proceedings. 
                                                      
1 Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted Works, 
85 Fed. Reg. 37,399 (Jun. 22, 2020) (2020 NOI). 
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2020-06-22/pdf/2020-12911.pdf
. 
2 Petition for New Exemption of ACB, et al. (Sept. 8, 2020) (Accessibility Petition), 
https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2021/petitions/proposed/New%20Pet.%20-
%20Accessibility%20Petitioners.pdf. 
3 Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted Works, 
85 Fed. Reg. 65,293 (Oct. 15, 2020) (2020 NPRM) 
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2020-10-15/pdf/2020-22893.pdf
. 
4 Id. at 65,308. 
5 Id. at 65,309.  
6 Accessibility Petition at 4. 
7 See 2020 NPRM, 85 Fed. Reg. at 65,309. 
 

[PAGE 8]
 
 
8 
 
Item C. Overview 
People with disabilities and supporting organizations face the difficult 
challenge of interpreting a patchwork of underinclusive Section 1201 exemptions 
when navigating making copyrighted works encumbered with technological 
protection measures (TPMs) accessible. The civil and human rights of people with 
disabilities demand a broad and clear exemption from Section 1201 that allows for 
uncontroversially noninfringing accessibility uses can be made beyond the narrow, 
circumscribed carveouts for accessibility uses that the Library of Congress and the 
Copyright Office have thus far been willing to consider.
8 Such an exemption is 
critical to ensure the creative third-party approaches to accessibility can arise in 
response to new technological barriers and do not become stifled by the necessity 
of waiting years on end and the burden of navigating the triennial review. 
In addition to the separately filed renewal and expansion requests for 
accessibility-oriented exemptions for making e-books and motion pictures 
accessible,9 a broader, more flexible exemption would permit circumvention of 
access controls on a comprehensive range of copyrighted works. The need for 
significant changes to exemptions to accommodate new non-infringing accessibility 
uses arise as facts on the ground change, exemptions begin to be used, and 
unpredictable shortcomings of the highly specific exemptions crafted by the Office 
become clear. These dynamics occur notwithstanding the good-faith efforts of 
proponents to articulate, and the Office to consider, a thorough record for 
exemptions sufficiently broad to address the wide array of accessibility needs 
during the triennial review.  
                                                      
8 See, e.g., Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection 
Systems for Access Control Technologies, 77 Fed. Reg. 65,260, 65,270 (Oct. 26, 
2012) (2012 Final Rule), https://www.copyright.gov/fedreg/2012/77fr65260.pdf 
(granting a narrow exemption for research on closed captioning and audio 
description technologies).  
9 See Renewal Petition of ATSP, et al., (July 22, 2020) (2020 Captioning Renewal 
Petition), 
https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2021/petitions/renewal/Renewal%20Pet.%20-
%20Captioning%20-%20ATSP%20et%20al.pdf, Renewal Petition of ACB, et al., 
(July 22, 2020) (2020 E-books Renewal Petition), 
https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2021/petitions/renewal/Renewal%20Pet.%20-
%20Assistive%20Technologies%20-%20ACB%20et%20al.pdf, Modification Petition 
ATSP, et al., (Sep. 8, 2020) (2020 Captioning Petition), 
https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2021/petitions/proposed/New%20Pet.%20-
%20Association%20of%20Transcribers%20and%20Speech-to-
Text%20Providers%20et%20al.pdf, Petition of Class 8. ACB et al, (Sep. 8 2020) 
https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2021/petitions/proposed/New%20Pet.%20-
%20American%20Council%20of%20the%20Blind%20et%20al.pdf.  
 

[PAGE 9]
 
 
9 
 
The proposed exemption would account for new barriers to accessibility that 
materialize during the interim period of each triennial review by making clear that 
the widespread need for accessibility—particularly during a pandemic that has 
shifted much of America’s educational, economic, and cultural activity to virtual 
spaces—can be met without waiting for y ears for the instantiation of the triennial 
review or the Office’s lengthy review. Such an exemption would serve the core 
goals of the Americans with Disabilities Act by ensuring that viewers, readers, and 
users of copyrighted works with disabilities can have some means of engaging in 
self-help or seeking the assistance of third parties to access those works on equal 
terms when copyright holders fail to make access available.
10 
While the Office states that the “proposed exemption is beyond the Librarian’s 
authority to adopt because it does not meet the statutory requirement to describe ‘a 
particular class of copyrighted works,’”11 we urge the Office to reconsider its 
restrictive interpretation of “classes of works” eligible for exemption under the 
triennial review.
12 Instead, the Office can and should grant the proposed exemption 
by defining classes by similar attributes—in this case, use intended to facilitate the 
accessibility of copyrighted works for people with disabilities.  
Doing so would serve Congress’s clear intent to make all the features of the 
information age accessible to people with disabilities. Of course, the accessibility of 
copyrighted works frequently can and should be achieved by copyright holders and 
their distribution partners with universal design approaches
13 and a commitment to 
ensuring that their works are “born accessible.”14 However, it is vitally important 
that copyright policy allow sufficient flexibility not only for the routine need of 
after-the-fact remediation where copyright industries fail to take accessibility 
                                                      
10 See 42 U.S.C. § 12101(a)(7) (declaring that “the Nation’s proper goals regarding 
individuals with disabilities are to assure equality of opportunity, full participation, 
independent living, and economic self-sufficiency for such individuals”). 
11 2020 NPRM at 65,309. 
12 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(B) exempts “particular class[es] of works” from the 
circumvention prohibition in 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(A), while 17 U.S.C. § 
1201(a)(1)(C)’s description of the triennial review process uses the term 
“particular class of copyrighted works,” and 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(D) uses both 
terms. For the sake of brevity, we use “class of works” to refer to this concept 
throughout the document. 
13 See generally National Disability Authority, What is Universal Design, 
http://universaldesign.ie/What-is-Universal-Design/ (last visited Dec. 13, 2020). 
14 See, e.g., Gerardo Capiel, Born Accessible, 17 Books In Browsers IV Proceedings 1 
(2014) (“Making content “born accessible” means that the often prohibitive cost of 
time and resources required to retrofit content for accessibility is eliminated.”). 
 

[PAGE 10]
 
 
10 
 
seriously,15 but to ensure the freedom for people with disabilities and those they 
work with to adapt copyrighted works for their own, individual needs.16 
The adoption of a single, broad accessibility exemption would allow people 
with disabilities, their advocates, and organizations that produce accessible 
versions and adaptations of copyrighted works to creatively push technical 
boundaries and fill accessibility gaps routinely left by a wide range of copyright 
holders. Accordingly, the Office should recommend an exemption for the 
circumvention of technological protection measures on all works for non-infringing 
accessibility uses. The proposed exemption would read:  
Any work protected by a technological protection measure 
where circumvention is undertaken for the purpose of 
creating an accessible version of the work for people with 
disabilities.  
In 2018, NTIA recommended considering adopting a “more structured” format 
for each individual exemption setting out the classes of works, the groups of 
beneficiaries, and the types of circumvention permitted
17. According to NTIA, this 
approach would likely improve readability and might make it easier to manage 
requests to expand or modify existing exemptions in future rulemaking cycles.18 
Under this potential new framing of the exemptions, our proposed modifications 
would result in the following language: 
Class: All works 
Use: Creating an accessible version of a work for the benefit of a person or 
people with disabilities. 
Item D.  Technological Protection Measure(s) and Method(s) of Circumvention 
It is impossible to list every TPM that controls access for every resource that is 
being made inaccessible to people with disabilities, and it is similarly infeasible to 
list every method of circumvention for these TPMs. However, there are a number of 
exemplary TPMs and modes of circumvention that respectively illustrate the 
                                                      
15 See, e.g., Alan F. Newell, David Sloan & Peter Gregor, Disability and Technology: 
Building Barriers or Creating Opportunities? in Advances in Computers, Vol. 64 at 
283-346 (2005); see discussion supra, Item E.2. 
16 See, e.g., Cory Doctorow, Human Rights and TPMs: Lessons from 22 Years of the 
U.S. DMCA (Sep. 9, 2020), https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2020/09/human-rights-
and-tpms-lessons-22-years-us-dmca. 
17 Recommendations of the National Telecommunications and Information 
Administration to the Register of Copyrights at 4 (2018 NTIA Recommendation), 
https://www.ntia.doc.gov/files/ntia/publications/ntia_dmca_consultation_092520
18.pdf. 
18 Id. 
 

[PAGE 11]
 
 
11 
 
technical barriers that must be overcome to facilitate accessibility—some that are 
already familiar subjects in the triennial review.  
Past triennial reviews have acknowledged that most copyrighted motion 
pictures are encumbered with some form of access control measures,19 which have 
required some disability services professionals to circumvent them before 
converting the works into accessible formats for people with disabilities such as 
captions and audio descriptions.20 These access control measures include, but are 
not limited to: the Content Scramble System (CSS) on Digital Versatile Discs 
(DVDs), the Advanced Access Content System (AACS) on Blu-ray discs, and BD+ 
on some Blu-ray discs.21 A multitude of Digital Rights Management (DRM) 
technologies also exist for controlling access to online streaming content.22 
The 2015 triennial review likewise acknowledged that “many e-books are 
protected by TPMs that interfere with the proper operation of assistive 
technologies,”
23 as all major e-book platform providers including Amazon, Barnes 
and Noble, and Apple utilize TPMs that can affect accessibility or render an 
otherwise accessible e-book completely inaccessible to people with disabilities.24 
Without circumvention, these resources are all inaccessible to people with 
disabilities who are otherwise entitled to access and fair use. 
TPMs can also interfere with the accessibility of a wide range of web content. 
For example, the World Wide Web Consortium’s “Encrypted Media Extensions” 
(EME) technology
25 indiscriminately blocks “any unauthorized alterations to 
videos, including color-shifting.”26 This prevents the use of digital video analysis 
                                                      
19 Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights at 29 (Oct. 8, 2015) (2015 
Recommendation), https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2015/registers-
recommendation.pdf (describing several TPMs employed on DVDs, Blu-ray discs, 
and various online streaming services); Recommendation of the Acting Register of 
Copyrights at 34 (Oct. 2018) (2018 Recommendation), 
https://cdn.loc.gov/copyright/1201/2018/2018_Section_1201_Acting_Registers_R
ecommendation.pdf (same). 
20 2018 Recommendation 92-93. 
21 2015 Recommendation at 29. 
22 2018 Recommendation at 34 
23 2015 Recommendation at 128. 
24 Id. at 129. 
25 See Encrypted Media Extensions, W3C (Dec. 19, 2019), 
https://www.w3.org/TR/encrypted-media/. 
26 Cory Doctorow, Disabilities vs DRM: the World Cup Edition, Electronic Frontier 
Foundation (June 22, 2018), https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2018/06/disabilities-
vs-drm-world-cup-edition.  
 

[PAGE 12]
 
 
12 
 
applications like DanKam,27 an app that exists to help people with colorblindness 
view videos by shifting the colors displayed on devices, replacing the colors that 
they are unable to perceive with colors that they can actually see.28 Because of 
EME, people with red/green colorblindness were unable to fully watch and enjoy 
the 2018 World Cup because they could not perceive the differences between the 
Russian team’s red jerseys and the Saudi team’s green jerseys.29 The U.K. Colour 
Blind Awareness organization notes “[c]olour blindness is an important issue in 
sport . . . and [can] spoil the enjoyment of watching sport (live or on TV) and have 
an adverse effect on revenues.”30 
EME also blocks currently existing technologies that “protect people with 
photosensitive epilepsy from strobe effects in videos.”31 Due to EME, people with 
photosensitive epilepsy cannot use automated tools to “identify and skip past 
strobing effects in videos that could trigger dangerous seizures.”
32 Without EME, 
people with photosensitive epilepsy would be able to utilize accessibility 
adaptations so as to better protect themselves from potentially dangerous triggers 
in videos.
33  
Accessibility-related barriers caused by TPMs also extend to software used by 
people with disabilities. In 2019, a user created a patch to the FreeStyle LibreLink 
app,34 which allows people with diabetes to monitor their blood-glucose levels. The 
patch, entitled Libre2-patched-App, allowed people with diabetes to “link their 
                                                      
27 See DanKam, Dan Kaminski (last visited Dec. 13, 2020), 
https://dankaminsky.com/dankam/. 
28 Paul Ridden, DanKam App Clears Up Color Blind Confusion, New Atlas (Jan. 04, 
2011), https://newatlas.com/dankam-smartphone-app-helps-color-blind/17451/. 
29 See Dankam, supra note 26; see also Rebecca Seales, World Cup 2018: Why 
Millions of Fans See the Football Like This, BBC (July 11, 2018), 
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-44535687. 
30 Colour Blindness and Sport, Colour Blind Awareness (last visited Dec. 6, 2020), 
http://www.colourblindawareness.org/colour-blindness-and-sport/. 
31 Disabilities vs DRM, supra note 26. 
32 Human Rights and TPMs, supra note 16. 
33 See Carol Pinchefsky, The Laws That are Ruining the Internet, Hewlett Packard 
Enterprise (Sept. 14, 2017), https://www.hpe.com/us/en/insights/articles/the-
laws-that-are-ruining-the-internet-1709.html (describing a person with epilepsy 
who was hospitalized after watching a Netflix video, and how the copyright holder 
prevented the creation of an accessibility adaptation that would have necessitated 
running Netflix video through an analysis program). 
34 See FreeStyle LibreLink, Abbot (last visited Dec. 13, 2020), 
https://www.freestylelibre.us/system-overview/continous-glucose-monitor-
app.html. 
 

[PAGE 13]
 
 
13 
 
glucose monitors to their insulin pumps, in order to automatically calculate and 
administer doses of insulin in an ‘artificial pancreas.’”35 However, because this 
patch bypassed a TPM in the app by disassembling the LibreLink program, Abbot 
Diabetes Care Inc.—the copyright holder —used a DMCA 1201 takedown notice to 
force Github to cease making the patch available.36 
AbleGamers is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit charity organization that uses assistive 
technology expertise to build customized devices to help make video games 
accessible for people with a wide variety of disabilities.37 AbleGamers published 
Includification: A Practical Guide to Game Accessibility, an “award-winning, first of 
its kind, outline on how to make games accessible for players with disabilities,” 
recently updated with an array of accessible design patterns designed in 
partnership with the University of York.38 In Includification, several video game 
TPMs are outlined, including “Game Guard,” which blocks third-party applications 
and hardware from accessing the video game.39 Includification states that the use of 
Game Guard can prevent “people from being able to use the very technology they 
have become dependent upon in order to use their computer and play games.”
40  
When developers use Game Guard in their video games, “the software prevents 
the use of on-screen keyboards and head-mice and [other accessible gaming 
technology], virtually locking out anyone who could not use a standard keyboard 
and mouse.”41 For example, the use of Game Guard in NCSoft’s MMORPG Aion 
prevented people with disabilities from meaningful access.42 Even in 2020, several 
popular games still utilize nProtect GameGuard, including Sega’s Phantasy Star 
                                                      
35 Human Rights and TPMs, supra note 16. 
36 Patching LibreLink for Libre2 – Clearing the FUD, Diabettech (July 19, 2019), 
https://www.diabettech.com/wearenotwaiting/patching-librelink-for-libre2-
clearing-the-fud/. 
37 See Frequently Asked Questions, AbleGamers (last visited Dec. 13, 2020), 
https://ablegamers.org/faq/. 
38 Includification, Accessible.Games (last visited Dec. 13, 2020), 
https://accessible.games/includification/. 
39 Mark C. Barlet & Steve D. Spohn, Includification, AbleGamers at 15, 
https://accessible.games/wp-
content/uploads/2018/11/AbleGamers_Includification.pdf (last visited Dec. 5, 
2020). 
40 Id. 
41 Id. 
42 See id. 
 

[PAGE 14]
 
 
14 
 
Online 2,43 Estsoft Inc.’s Cabal Online,44 and Redfox Games’s 9Dragons.45 
Includification explains that “[i]t is important for developers and publishers to be 
careful when choosing the proper scheme to watch over their games and/or DRM. 
If every guideline in this paper is followed, but the wrong protection software is 
included, then your work implementing other parts of this document will be for 
naught.”
46  
These are just some examples of the ways that TPMs prevent accessibility for 
people with disabilities. While many more no doubt exist, we urge the Office not to 
impose on people with disabilities the burden of pinpointing every detail and every 
instance of problematic TPMs, and instead recognize the well-developed record 
over the past two decades that access controls so routinely cause access problems 
that a more categorical treatment based on accessibility use is appropriate.  
Item E. Asserted Adverse Effects on Noninfringing Uses 
The NPRM encourages commenters to focus on the following elements to 
demonstrate that proposed modifications to existing exemptions satisfy the 
requirements for the exemption to be granted under Section 1201:  
1. The proposed class includes at least some works protected by copyright; 
2. The proposed uses are noninfringing under title 17; 
3. Users are adversely affected in their ability to make such noninfringing uses 
and users are likely to be adversely affected in their ability to make such 
noninfringing uses during the next three years; and 
4. The statutory prohibition on circumventing access controls is the cause of the 
adverse effects.
47 
The proposed class includes works protected by copyright because the class 
includes all inaccessible copyrighted works. The uses of this proposed exemption 
are making works accessible, and the users who are adversely affected are people 
attempting to make works accessible and people with disabilities. As a result, the 
prohibition on circumvention also restricts technological innovation in accessibility 
                                                      
43 See @play_pso2, Twitter (June 10, 2020, 5:26 AM), 
https://twitter.com/play_pso2/status/1270678761294360576?lang=en (Phantasy 
Star Online 2’s official Twitter apologizing to players for an error caused by the 
game’s utilization of nProtect GameGuard). 
44 See Milan Stanojevic, Windows 10 GameGuard Error: What it is and How to Fix it, 
Windows Report (May 12, 2020), https://windowsreport.com/windows-10-
gameguard-error/ (noting that Cabal Online is an MMORPG that utilizes nProtect 
GameGuard). 
45 See id. (noting that 9Dragons is also an MMORPG that utilizes nProtect 
GameGuard). 
46 Includification, supra note 39 at 15. 
47 2020 NPRM, 85 Fed. Reg. at 65,301. 

[PAGE 15]
 
 
15 
 
and the civil rights of individuals with disabilities. Making works accessible is an 
uncontroversially noninfringing fair use and the 1201(a)’s five statutory factors 
weigh in favor of the exemption.  
Finally, the Office should reinterpret the term “class of works” to govern 
instances where the works obvious common attributes and the uses governed by 
the exemption are indisputably fair. This re-interpretation would enable the fair use 
the DMCA was intended to protect, further technological innovation, and secure 
the civil rights of marginalized populations.  
1. The proposed class of works includes works protected by copyright. 
 The exemption would cover all copyrighted works. Accordingly, the proposed 
class necessarily includes works protected by copyright. 
2. The prohibition on circumvention adversely affects innovative modes of 
making copyrighted works accessible. 
The Office must recommend the proposed exemption to enable technological 
innovation and accessibility, honor Congresses’ dedication to civil rights, and 
celebrate America’s foundational ideals of freedom and equality. The statute 
assigns the Office the power to grant this exemption. The DMCA demands the 
Office grant this exemption to comply with the provision’s recognition of 
innovation and dedication to safeguarding fair use.  
The current prohibition on circumvention imposes barriers not only on access, 
but imagination. Chancey Fleet, a blind scientist, has described the effect of 
inaccessibility of copyrighted works for people who are blind or visually impaired 
as “image poverty”: 
[A]s a Blind child, I thought I was someone who didn’t have 
any aptitude at all in STEM, even though I did well 
academically. . . . Looking back, it seems as though I wa s a 
spatial learner. . . . If the images are [accessible], it turns 
out that the aptitudes are there.”
48 
Across the country, children with disabilities may face barriers to realizing their 
dreams, not for lack of trying nor desire, but for lack of opportunity. The 
circumvention prohibition thus creates barriers not only to accessing copyrighted 
works, but to the knowledge of the existence and attributes of works. 
Inaccessible technology used to deliver copyrighted works excludes people with 
disabilities from many professions, places them at a disadvantage in their chosen 
                                                      
48 David M. Perry, Disabled Do-It-Yourselfers Lead Way to Technology Gains, N.Y. 
Times (updated Jul. 20, 2020), 
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/14/style/assistive-technology.html. 
 

[PAGE 16]
 
 
16 
 
professions, and alienates them from economic and social opportunities.49 As 
scholars have noted, “[t]his exclusion is becoming increasingly problematic as the 
developed world relies more and more on this technology.”50 Thus, innovators 
desiring to create accessible technology must have the freedom to do so to ensure 
that individuals with disabilities are increasingly included in society.   
The proposed class would empower innovators to continue creating technology 
for everyday use because this technology provides individuals with disabilities 
access to a world often built without disability in mind. As Mark Riccobono, 
President of the National Federation of the Blind, explains, “GPS and spell-check, 
so ubiquitous for so many people, are technologies that assist me with dyslexia. 
Smartphones, where I find my GPS, may be the most powerful accessibility devices 
in history, especially now that voice control offers an alternative to touch screens 
for Blind and low-vision users, or people without the manual dexterity to operate 
them.”
51   
As the world becomes increasingly more digitized, technology will continue to 
empower individuals with disabilities in unimaginable ways. As scholar David Perry 
explains, “[d]isability-related technologies are not just growing through 
incremental adjustments to existing products; transformative ones are on the 
horizon.”
52 For instance, smartphones may soon be capable of driving power chairs 
and driverless cars, and “companies are working on mapping interior spaces to help 
people navigate them the same way detailed exterior maps currently do.”53  
This technology will increasingly be intermediated by copyright law. Prominent 
disability organizations and innovation leaders such as Christian Vogler, computer 
scientist and professor at Gallaudet University, routinely identify and imagine 
digital technologies that would break down barriers for people who are deaf, hard 
of hearing, blind, visually impaired, or DeafBlind to access copyrighted works. In 
developing this comment, Dr. Vogler identified:
54 
• A project to enable tactile accessibility for images via digitizing the contours 
and colors into tactile patterns and descriptive labels, an idea that has already 
gained traction in recent accessibility research. 
• A project that would enable people who are deaf or hard of hearing to 
individualize not only the format but the pace and even the content of subtitles 
and captions, overcoming the limitations of a one-size-fits-all model that 
ignores the unique reading needs of individual people.  
                                                      
49 Newell, Sloan, & Gregor, supra note 15. 
50 Id. at 285. 
51 Perry, supra note 47.  
52 Id. 
53 Id. 
54 Zoom Interview with Dr. Christian Vogler (Oct. 2020). 

[PAGE 17]
 
 
17 
 
• A project that would enable people with disabilities to visualize digital audio 
with color patterns, transform audio into individualized custom forms to 
reduce distortion among hearing device users, and allow individuals to focus 
on the features most of interest to them, such as a singer’s voice, or a lead 
instrument over the accompanying ones.  
The Office can contribute to the inclusive and accessible digital future 
contemplated in projects like these by granting the proposed exemption, which 
would provide innovators with the authority to turn these possibilities into reality.  
The Office must also grant the exemption to grant individuals with disabilities 
the freedom to provide themselves with the equal access they deserve. People with 
disabilities are experts in technological inaccessibility. Yet, as Ian Smith, a software 
engineer who is Deaf, has dwarfism and uses a power wheelchair, points out, “too 
often disabled people are not permitted to tinker with devices” because of 
1201(a)(1)’s prohibition.
55 And as Sara Hendren, a design professor at Olin College 
of Engineering in Massachusetts and parent of a child with Down syndrome, 
explains, a benefit of “empowering disabled designers” is that “the right technology 
can make the ‘world bend a little bit’ toward the user rather than just bending the 
user toward a normative world.”
56 Thus, the proposed exemption not only serves 
the goal of innovation, but champions America’s do-it-yourself attitude and 
emphasis on independence, too. 
The exemption also addresses the needs of the growing American population. 
Currently, approximately one in four American adults “have some type of 
disability.”57 However, “America is getting older,”58 and since “as people grow 
older, they are increasingly likely to have a disability.”59 Thus, technology built for 
people with disabilities to access copyrighted works is technology that will also 
benefit the majority of Americans as they become increasing reliant on technology 
to access copyrighted works.  
The proposed exemption champions technological innovation beneficial to each 
and every individual. Americans will feel the adverse effects of 1201(a)(1), as 
access to copyrighted works becomes increasingly digital and Americans become 
correspondingly more reliant on digital accessibility. Futhermore, “[t]echnology 
                                                      
55 Perry, supra note 47. 
56 Id. 
57 Disability Impacts All of Us, CDC, 
https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/disabilityandhealth/infographic-disability-impacts-
all.html. 
58 E.g., Leonard A. Sandler & Brian Kaskie, A Protocol for Examining and Mapping 
Elder Abuse Pathways in Iowa, 59 Wash. U. J.L. & Pol’y 27, 30–31 (2019). 
59 Robert G. Schwemm & Michael Allen, For the Rest of Their Lives: Seniors and the 
Fair Housing Act, 90 Iowa L. Rev. 121, 129 (2004). 
 

[PAGE 18]
 
 
18 
 
goes beyond mere tool making; it is a process of creating ever more powerful 
technology using the tools from the previous round of innovation.”60 Thus, the 
future of technological innovation for accessibility is dependent on what today’s 
innovators will create, and the Office should address the adverse effects of Section 
1201 on accessibility innovation by granting the proposed exemption. 
3. Making works accessible is an uncontroversially noninfringing fair use. 
As a general matter, Congress, the courts, and the Copyright Office have 
routinely recognized that accessibility is fair use. First, the legislative history of the 
1976 Copyright Act makes clear that converting works into formats that are 
accessible to people with sensory disabilities is a quintessential example of fair use. 
The House Committee Reports explicitly states: 
Another special instance illustrating the application of the 
fair use doctrine pertains to making copies or phonorecords 
of works in special forms  for blind persons. These special 
forms . . . are not usually made by the publishers for 
commercial distribution . . . the making of a single copy or 
phonorecord as a free service for a blind person would 
properly be considered a fair use under section 107.
61 
Additionally, the courts have affirmed Congress’s “commitment to ameliorating 
the hardships faced by” people with sensory disabilities.62 In Sony v. Universal City 
Studios, the Supreme Court stated that when copyrighted works are made 
accessible for the convenience of people with sensory disabilities, it “is expressly 
identified by the House Committee Report as an example of fair use, with no 
suggestion that anything more than a purpose to entertain or to inform need 
motivate the copying.”
63 
The Second Circuit elaborated in Authors Guild v. HathiTrust: 
In the Americans with Disabilitie s Act, Congress declared 
that our ‘Nation’s proper goals regarding individuals with 
disabilities are to assure equal ity of oppor tunity, full 
participation, independent living, and economic self-
sufficiency for such individuals.’ 42 U.S.C.  Section  
12101(7). Similarly, the Chafee Amendment illustrates 
Congress’s intent that copyright law make appropriate  
                                                      
60 Ray Kurzweil, The Law of Accelerating Returns (Mar. 7, 2001), 
https://www.kurzweilai.net/the-law-of-accelerating-returns.  
61 H.R. Rep. No. 94-1476, at 73 (1976). 
62 See HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 102. 
63 464 U.S. 417, 455 n.40 (1984); see also HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 102. 
 

[PAGE 19]
 
 
19 
 
accommodations for the blind and print disabled. See 17  
U.S.C. Section 121.  
The HathiTrust court held that “the doctrine of fair use allows [the] provi[sion of] 
full digital access to copyrighted works” to people with disabilities.64  
Not only have the courts affirmed Congress’s commitment to accessibility for 
people with disabilities, but the Office also has consistently adopted exemptions to 
Section 1201 that allow for accessibility-related circumvention.65 In 2012 the Office 
recommended an exemption for “the circumvention of literary works that are 
distributed electronically to allow blind and other persons with disabilities to 
obtain books through the open market and use screen readers and other assistive 
technologies to read them.”
66 The e-book exemption was renewed by in 201567 and 
2018,68 and recommended for renewal again in 2020.69  
For similar reasons, in 2018 the Office recommended a circumvention 
exemption that allowed “adding captions and/or audio description to motion 
pictures for the purpose of making them accessible to students with disabilities.”70 
This audiovisual works exemption for accessibility has also been recommended for 
renewal by the Register in 2020.
71  
Making works accessible to people with sensory disabilities is an 
uncontroversially fair, noninfringing use. Moreover, the same conclusion flows 
from the traditional four factor analysis of noninfringing fair use, which focuses on 
the purpose and character of the use, the nature of the copyrighted work, the 
amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the copyrighted work 
                                                      
64 See HathiTrust, 755 F. 3d at 103. 
65 2012 Final Rule, 77 Fed. Reg. at 65,262 (exemption for e-book accessibility) & 
65,270-71 (exemption for accessibility research on audiovisual works); Exemption 
to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, 80 Fed. Reg. 65,944, 65,950 (Oct. 28, 2015) (2015 Final Rule), 
https://www.copyright.gov/fedreg/2015/80fr65944.pdf
 (e-book accessibility); 
Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for 
Access Control Technologies, 83 Fed. Reg. 54,010, 54,013 (e-book accessibility) & 
54,019 (accessibility for audiovisual works by disability services professionals); 
2020 NPRM, 85 Fed. Reg. at 65,298 (e-book accessibility and disability services). 
66 2012 Final Rule, 77 Fed. Reg. at 65,262. 
67 2015 Final Rule, 80 Fed. Reg. at 65,950. 
68 2018 Final Rule, 83 Fed. Reg. at 54,013. 
69 2020 NPRM, 85 Fed. Reg. at 65,298 
70 2018 Final Rule, 83 Fed. Reg. at 54,019. 
71 2020 NPRM, 85 Fed. Reg. at 65298. 
 

[PAGE 20]
 
 
20 
 
as a whole, the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the 
copyrighted work.72  
i. The purpose and character of making works accessible weighs in favor 
of fair use. 
The first factor of the fair use analysis focuses on the purpose and character of 
the use.73 This first factor requires that the use “serve broader public purposes.”74 
Converting an inaccessible copyrighted work into an accessible format serves a 
broad public benefit and results in direct and tangible benefits for people with 
disabilities. For the same reasons that the Acting Register concluded that the first 
factor weighs in favor of fair use in both the cases of audiovisual work accessibility 
in 2018, accessibility uses weigh the first factor in favor of fair use.75 
First, Congress has routinely enshrined in law the civil rights of people with 
disabilities.76 This supports a finding of fair use under the first factor.77 In the 
Americans with Disabilities Act, Congress declared the goal of “assur[ing] equality 
of opportunity, full participation, independent living, and economic self-sufficiency 
for such individuals.”
78 Congress reaffirmed this commitment with the Chafee 
Amendment,79 which “illustrates Congress’s intent that copyright law make 
appropriate accommodations for the blind, visually impaired, or print disabled.”80 
Whether the underlying works are books, motion pictures, architectural works, or 
musical scores, people with disabilities have the right to access copyrighted works 
to the extent necessary to secure “the opportunity to compete on an equal basis and 
to pursue those opportunities for which our free society is justifiably famous.”81 
Both the Supreme Court and the Second Circuit have made it clear that 
accessibility for people with disabilities is fair use under the first factor.82 In Sony 
the Supreme Court made clear that making copyrighted works accessible to people 
who are blind, visually impaired, deaf, or hard of hearing is a fair use under the 
first factor. In Sony, the Court expressed that “[m]aking a copy of a copyrighted 
work for the convenience of a blind person is expressly identified by the House 
                                                      
72 See 17 U.S.C. § 107. 
73 Id. 
74 Twin Peaks v. Publications Int’l, 996 F.2d 1366, 1375 (2d Cir. 1993). 
75 2018 Recommendation at 97 (audiovisual accessibility). 
76 See HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 102. 
77 See id. 
78 42 U.S.C. § 12101(7). 
79 17 U.S.C. § 121. 
80 HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 102. 
81 See 42 U.S.C. § 12101(a)(8). 
82 Sony, 464 U.S. at 455 n.40 (1984); see also HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 102. 
 

[PAGE 21]
 
 
21 
 
Committee Report as an example of fair use, with no suggestion that anything more 
than a purpose to entertain or to inform need motivate the copying.”83 The 
HathiTrust court also pointed out that the legislative history referred to by the 
Supreme Court provides clear “guidance support[ing] a finding of fair use in the 
unique circumstances presented by print-disabled readers.”
84  
The Copyright Office’s own history supports the conclusion that accessibility 
generally weighs in favor of fair use under factor one. In 2018 the Register agreed 
that, for the audiovisual works accessibility exemption, current precedent, 
“including the 2014 HathiTrust opinion,” weighed in favor of fair use for the first 
factor. 
85  Additionally, the Register recognized that the precedent created in 
HathiTrust was not limited “to individuals with disabilities relating to sight 
impairments, thereby implying that creating accessible formats for individuals with 
other types of disabilities also constitutes a ‘valid purpose’” for the purpose of the 
first factor.86  
ii. The nature of inaccessible works is heterogeneous and not dispositive. 
The second fair use factor asks courts to examine the nature of the copyrighted 
work.87 The proposed exemption would cover all works that are inaccessible to 
people with disabilities. While they share a common characteristic of inaccessibility, 
the formats and genres come in many different forms. As the HathiTrust court 
explained, the mixed nature of works used for accessibility purposes “does not 
preclude a finding of fair use . . . given [the] analysis of the other factors”.88 The 
Acting Register’s 2018 Recommendation echoes this conclusion.89 
iii. The amount and substantiality of the portion used in converting an 
inaccessible work into accessible formats varies and is not dispositive. 
The third fair use factor asks courts to consider “whether ‘the amount and 
substantiality of the portion used in relation to the copyrighted work as a whole’ 
are reasonable in relation to the copying’s purpose.” 90 Put another way, this 
inquiry asks whether “no more was taken than necessary.”91  
                                                      
83 Id. 
84 HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 102. 
85 2018 Recommendation at 97. 
86 Id. (citing HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 103).  
87 HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 102. 
88 Id at 102. 
89 See 2018 Recommendation at 98. 
90 Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 586 (1994) (internal citations 
omitted). 
91 Id. at 589 (internal citations omitted). 
 

[PAGE 22]
 
 
22 
 
The HathiTrust court explained that “[f]or some purposes, it may be necessary 
to copy the entire copyrighted work, in which case Factor Three does not weigh 
against a finding of fair use”—a principle the court applied in concluding that the 
third factor does not weigh against accessibility uses.92 The Register likewise 
concluded in 2018 that, “[f]or some purposes, however, ‘it may be necessary to 
copy the entire copyrighted work,’ and in such cases, the third factor, ‘does not 
weigh against a finding of fair use.’”
93  
iv. The effect of converting inaccessible works into accessible formats on 
the potential market or value weighs in favor of fair use. 
Making inaccessible works accessible would not negatively affect the market or 
the value of copyrighted works. In fact, the need for this exemption is due to the 
routine failure of copyright holders to address markets of accessible works.  
The House Report on the 1976 Copyright Act noted that accessible versions, 
“such as copies in Braille and phonorecords of oral readings (talking books), are 
not usually made by the publishers for commercial distribution.”
94 The same 
shortcomings of accessible works was again recognized by the HathiTrust court, 
which noted that “[i]t is undisputed that the present-day market for books 
accessible to the handicapped is so insignificant that ‘it is common practice in the 
publishing industry for authors to forgo royalties that are generated through the 
sale of books manufactured in specialized formats for the blind.”
95 A comment in 
favor of the 2018 exemption for the accessibility of motion pictures explained that 
in HathiTrust:  
The industry’s failure to provide accessible e-books signaled 
to the court that preserving the ability to convert books into 
accessible versions that can be consumed and enjoyed by 
people who are blind, visually impaired, or print disabled 
weighed the fourth factor conclusively in favor of fair use.
96  
In the Acting Register’s 2018 recommendation regarding accessibility for 
audiovisual works, the Acting Register likewise found the fourth factor weighed in 
favor of fair use for accessibility purposes. Specifically, the Register recommended 
that, “the overall market has not yet adequately met the needs of individuals with 
                                                      
92 HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 98, 103. 
93 2018 Recommendation at 98-99 (citing HathiTrust at 98). 
94 H.R. Rep. No. 94-1476, at 73 (1976). 
95 HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 102. 
96 Long Comment of ATSP, et al. at 9-10 (Dec. 18, 2017) (2018 Disability Services 
Comment), https://cdn.loc.gov/copyright/1201/2018/comments-
121817/class2/class-02-initialcomments-atsp-et-al.pdf. 
 

[PAGE 23]
 
 
23 
 
disabilities by retroactively offering catalog videos in accessible formats.”97 Where 
“an accessible version is not available in the marketplace, the proposed use is less 
likely to interfere with the primary or derivative markets for the motion picture.”98 
Audiovisual works and e-books are not the only copyrighted materials that 
people with disabilities should be free to access. The entire class of inaccessible 
works are similar in that copyright holders routinely choose not to serve the market 
of people with disabilities. The foregoing examples demonstrate that the same 
dynamic is likely to recur with respect to other categories of works, weighing the 
fourth factor in favor of fairness. 
4. The Section 1201(a)(1)(C) statutory factors weigh in favor of granting a 
broad, general exemption for accessibility uses.  
The Office requires that proponents show a need for circumvention by 
analyzing the five statutory factors listed in Section 1201(a)(1)(C).99  Under 
Section 1201(a)(1)(C), the Librarian examines five factors in considering whether 
to grant an exemption: 
1. The availability for use of copyrighted works; 
2. The availability for use of works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and 
educational purposes;  
3. The impact that the prohibition on the circumvention of technological 
measures applied to copyrighted works has on criticism, comment, news 
reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research; 
4. The effect of circumvention of technological measures on the market for or 
value of copyrighted works;  
5. Such other factors as the Librarian considers appropriate.
100 
The Office has consistently found that the Section 1201(a)(1)(C) statutory 
factors weigh in favor of accessibility-related exemptions.101 Likewise, the statutory 
                                                      
97 2018 Recommendation at 100. 
98 Id. 
99 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 
100 Id.  
101 See 2018 Recommendation at 104 (finding that all of the statutory factors 
favored the disability services exemption); 2015 Recommendation at 135 (finding 
that all of the statutory factors favored the e-book accessibility exemption); 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights at 22 (Oct. 12, 2012), (“2012 
Recommendation”) 
https://cdn.loc.gov/copyright/1201/2012/Section_1201_Rulemaking_2012_Reco
mmendation.pdf (same). 
 

[PAGE 24]
 
 
24 
 
factors weigh in favor of granting a broad, general exemption for disability 
accessibility. 
i. The three availability factors weigh in favor of granting a broad, 
general exemption for accessibility uses. 
Comparable to the 2018 triennial rulemaking’s disability services accessibility 
exemption, the prohibitions on circumvention have a similar impact under each of 
the first three Section 1201(a)(1)(C) factors.102 The Office has already 
acknowledged that exemptions “to facilitate assistive technologies” enhance the 
availability for use of copyrighted works “because [they] increas[e] the number of 
works that may be accessed” by people with disabilities.103 
As previously noted, accessibility to resources is vital for people with 
disabilities to retain their independence and lead fulfilling lives.104 As such, the 
Office has historically granted exemptions for people with disabilities in order to 
facilitate technologies necessary for accessibility.105 A broad, general exemption for 
accessibility would help ensure that people with disabilities “have meaningful 
access to the same content that individuals without such impairments” access 
without need of circumvention.
106 
Without a broad exemption for accessibility, people with disabilities are denied 
equal access to copyrighted works, which contradicts Congress’s commitment to the 
civil rights of people with disabilities.107 The triennial exemption petition process 
unduly burdens people with disabilities by forcing them to repeatedly make 
petitions to the Office every three years for access to necessary resources. The 
Office’s 2017 Policy Study recommended that Congress adopt a permanent 
exemption that would “enable blind or visually impaired persons to utilize assistive 
technologies” because “an assistive technologies exemption has been adopted as a 
temporary exemption in the past five triennial rulemakings.”
108 The Register 
acknowledged that “repeated participation in the rulemaking process has become 
especially burdensome and time‐consuming for the blind and print‐disabled 
                                                      
102 See 2018 Recommendation at 101 (“In discussing the purported adverse effects 
and addressing the section 1201 statutory factors, proponents combined discussion 
of the first three factors because ‘the prohibitions on circumvention have a similar 
impact under each factor.’”) (internal citations omitted). 
103 See 2015 Recommendation at 135. 
104 See discussion supra, Item E.2 
105 See 2018 Recommendation at 104; 2015 Recommendation at 135. 
106 2012 Recommendation at 22. 
107 See HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 102. 
108 U.S. Copyright Office, A Report of the Register of Copyrights at 84 (June 2017), 
https://www.copyright.gov/policy/1201/section-1201-full-report.pdf.  
 

[PAGE 25]
 
 
25 
 
community.”109 Congress has even inquired about the possibility of a permanent 
accessibility exemption in the context of broader reform to the DMCA.110 
By defining “class of works” in terms of accessibility rather than activity-specific 
categorization, people with disabilities would be given a greater opportunity to 
access copyrighted works on equal terms. Doing so would broadly serve the first 
three statutory factors. 
ii. A broad, general exemption for disability accessibility would have no 
negative impact on the market for or value of copyrighted works. 
An exemption would have no negative impact on the market for or value of 
copyrighted works. As previously noted, the need for this exemption is in large part 
rooted in the routine failure of copyright holders to serve the market for accessible 
works.111 As such, this exemption would protect current markets and only add to 
potential future markets of copyrighted works. 
iii. The Librarian should consider emergencies like the COVID-19 crisis, 
which highlight the disastrous impact of delaying access to necessary 
resources, as a factor for a broad, general exemption for accessibility.  
The COVID-19 crisis has created a situation that highlights how “[d]igital 
accessibility is more important than ever before.”112 Level Access, a digital 
accessibility company, notes that people are now relying on digital services for 
everyday activities including shopping, remote work, education, healthcare, and 
banking, and that people with disabilities in particular “need these services more 
than ever before.”
113 “Websites, mobile apps, video/audio conferencing, electronic 
documents, emails, and social media posts need to be accessible to them.”114 The 
Office should recognize that a failure of copyright holders to make fully accessible 
the software, graphical, audiovisual, and other aspects of works involved in the 
delivery of digital services demands latitude for people with disabilities, and the 
organizations and advocates that they work with to engage in self-help. 
                                                      
109 Id. at 84. 
110 Are Reforms to Section 1201 Needed and Warranted? Before the Subcommittee on 
Intellectual Property of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 116th Cong. at 8-10 
(2020) (Response of Blake Reid to questions submitted for the record), 
https://www.judiciary.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Reid%20Responses%20to%20Q
FRs.pdf. 
111 See discussion supra, Item E.3.iv. 
112 COVID-19: Digital Accessibility Support and Resources, Level Access, 
https://www.levelaccess.com/covid-19-digital-accessibility/ (last visited Dec. 13, 
2020). 
113 Id. 
114 Id. 
 

[PAGE 26]
 
 
26 
 
When accessibility is not considered from the outset of designing digital 
services, people with disabilities face barriers to necessary activities for healthcare, 
employment, and education. For example, people who are blind or visually 
impaired have less access to vital information on the spread of COVID-19.115 In 
2020, WebAIM analyzed one million home pages for accessibility issues and found 
that 98.1 percent of websites had at least one Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 
2.0 (WCAG 2.0) failure.116 WebAIM also found that websites averaged 60.9 WCAG 
2.0 errors per home page.117 Likewise, video-conferencing platforms such as Zoom 
have raised significant accessibility issues in a variety of employment, healthcare, 
and other contexts.118 Hadi Rangin, an IT Accessibility Specialist at the University 
of Washington, noted that “[a]t the time Zoom was introduced to us, it almost had 
zero percent accessibility.”119 Although updates to Zoom have increased 
accessibility, problems still persist. For example, people who are deaf or hard of 
hearing are now able to pin multiple videos such that they can watch both the 
active speaker and the sign language interpreter, but “[u]nfortunately, and 
inexplicably, the host must explicitly enable permission to multi-pin on a per-
participant basis . . . . This limitation reduces the overall scalability of this 
approach.”120 Zoom’s whiteboard and polling features also remain inaccessible for 
people with motor or visual disabilities.121 
                                                      
115 See Abrar Al-Heeti, COVID-19 Exposes Hypocrisy Over Lack of Disability 
Accommodations, CNET (May 21, 2020), https://www.cnet.com/health/the-covid-
19-crisis-highlights-how-far-accessibility-still-has-to-go/. 
116 See What is Digital Accessibility?, Global Accessibility Awareness Day (last visited 
Dec. 13, 2020), https://globalaccessibilityawarenessday.org/. 
117 See id. 
118 See Blake E. Reid, Christian Vogler, and Zainab Alkebsi, Telehealth and Telework 
Accessibility in a Pandemic-Induced Virtual World, Colo. L.R. Forum. (Nov. 9, 2020), 
https://lawreview.colorado.edu/digital/telehealth-and-telework-accessibility-in-a-
pandemic-induced-virtual-world/.  
119 Ignacio Lobos, No One Left Behind: COVID-19 Pandemic Underscores Need for 
Accessibility, University of Washington (May 20, 2020), 
https://www.washington.edu/uwit/stories/covid-19-pandemic-underscores-need-
for-universal-accessibility-on-the-web/. 
120 Christian Vogler, Tina Childress, Michael McKee, Christopher Moreland, Robert 
Roth and Chad Ruffin, Webinar Accessibility for Deaf and Hard of Hearing People, 
DHH-RERC (Oct. 25, 2020), https://www.deafhhtech.org/rerc/webinar-
accessibility-for-deaf-and-hard-of-hearing-people/. 
121 See Zoom Considerations for Teaching Students with Disabilities, The University of 
Chicago (last visited Dec. 14, 2020), https://teachingremotely.uchicago.edu/zoom-
students-with-disabilities/ (“The whiteboard and polling features in Zoom are 
currently not accessible for people with motor or visual disabilities.”); Zoom 
 

[PAGE 27]
 
 
27 
 
Furthermore, people with disabilities are facing longer-than-usual delays for 
disability services professionals to provide them with proper access to necessary 
resources.122 The U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) 
expressly warned that “the extraordinary circumstances of the COVID-19 pandemic 
may result in delay in discussing requests and in providing accommodation where 
warranted,”123 leaving employees with disabilities to fend for themselves. 
This situation has highlighted the inherent problems that come about as a 
result of needlessly delaying people with disabilities from necessary access to 
resources. Three years is too long of a period to force people with disabilities to 
wait in order to obtain accessibility, and the extra complications that have come 
about due to the COVID-19 crisis make that waiting period all the more untenable. 
5. The Office should reinterpret its definition of “class of copyrighted works” 
to grant the proposed exemption. 
Finally, the Office’s contention that the proposed class is incompatible with 
Section 1201’s temporary exemption provisions is based off a faulty interpretation 
of the term “class of works” in Section 1201(a)(1). The Office has concluded that 
classes of works must be defined by reference to 17 U.S.C. § 102(a) categories.124 
Accordingly, the Office has preliminarily rejected the notion that a broad 
accessibility exemption can be granted because “its authority in this proceeding is 
bound by the provisions of the statute.”
125 
The Office should reconsider its interpretation of the statutory terminology to 
align with its own evolving approach to classes of works over the history of the 
triennial review, the purpose of the DMCA, and the judicial interpretation of the 
Section 102(a) categories. More specifically, the Office should recognize a “class of 
works” where the works share obvious common attributes, the users, and/or the 
                                                      
Considerations for Teaching Students with Disabilities, Yale University (last visited 
Dec. 14, 2020), https://academiccontinuity.yale.edu/faculty/how-
guides/zoom/zoom-considerations-teaching-students-disabilities (“The whiteboard 
and polling features in Zoom are currently not accessible for people with motor or 
visual disabilities.”). 
122 See generally Karen Weintraub & Jayne O’Donnell, COVID-19 is a Disaster for 
People with Disabilities. Without 30-Year-Old Law, it Would be Worse, USA Today 
(July 26, 2020), https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/health/2020/07/26/ada-
turns-30-covid-hits-those-disabilities-especially-hard/5490448002/. 
123 What You Should Know About COVID-19 and the ADA, the Rehabilitation Act, and 
Other EEO Laws, U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Sep. 8, 2020), 
https://www.eeoc.gov/wysk/what-you-should-know-about-covid-19-and-ada-
rehabilitation-act-and-other-eeo-laws. 
124 NPRM 2020, 85 Fed. Reg. at 65,309. 
125 Id. 
 

[PAGE 28]
 
 
28 
 
uses, and the purpose of the exemption is to enable indisputably fair uses, even 
where the works do not adhere to a “narrow and focused subset”126 of a singular 17 
U.S.C. §102(a) category.127 
Under this definition, the proposed exemption implicates is a “particular class 
of works” under the meaning of Section 1201 because: 
• It shares common attributes among the covered works themselves— i.e., all 
works are inaccessible to their users; 
• The works share common users—i.e., all users are either unable to access the 
works as a result of the works’ inaccessibility or are attempting to make such 
works accessible to such users; 
• All works have a common use that is being adversely affected—i.e., the 
accessibility uses are prohibited by 1201(a)(1); and  
• The purpose of the exemption—i.e., accessibility —is an indisputably fair and 
noninfringing use.  
The Office should adopt this interpretation because the Office has yet to 
commit to a singular interpretation of “class of works,” as evidenced by its 2006 
rulemaking process, 2010 rulemaking process, and 2015 rulemaking process. The 
Office should also adopt this interpretation because it is necessary to fulfill the 
DMCA’s insistence on protecting fair use. Finally, the Office should adopt this 
interpretation because unlike the Office’s current interpretation, it is more 
consistent with judicial understanding of the Section 102(a) categories. 
i. The Office’s interpretation of “class of copyrighted works” has evolved 
from a strict focus on Section 102(a) categories to a more flexible 
common-attributes approach. 
The Office has broadened its interpretation of “class of copyrighted works” 
since its first rulemaking two decades ago. A component of this expansion is 
noticeable in the Office’s stated definition of the term, which now encompasses 
classes of works that share common attributes among users and uses, and not 
simply commonalities between works. Moreover, this evolution demonstrates that 
the Office believes it has the authority to alter its interpretation, notwithstanding 
its declaration to the contrary in the 2020 NPRM.
128  
                                                      
126 H.R. Rep. No. 105–551, pt. 2, at 38 (1998) (‘‘Commerce Comm. Report’’). 
127 17 U.S.C. § 102(a) categories include: “(1) literary works; (2) musical works, 
including any accompanying words; (3) dramatic works, including any 
accompanying music; (4) pantomimes and choreographic works; (5) pictorial, 
graphic, and sculptural works; (6) motion pictures and other audiovisual works; 
(7) sound recordings; and (8) architectural works.” 
128 See 2020 NPRM, 85 Fed. Reg. at 65,305 & 65,309. 
 

[PAGE 29]
 
 
29 
 
In the 2000 rulemaking, the Office derived an initial meaning of “class”: a 
“class” would share common attributes of the works themselves, but not common 
attributes of the users or uses.129 In later assessing the proposed exemptions, 
however, the Librarian acknowledged that the Act and legislative history lacked an 
affirmative approach to analyzing “class of works.”
130 Accordingly, the Librarian 
noted that “[t]he only examples cited and guidance provided in the legislative 
history [led] the Register to conclude that a class must be defined primarily by 
reference to attributes of the works themselves, typically based upon the categories 
set forth in section 102(a) or some subset thereof, e.g., motion pictures or video 
games.”
131 
The Office continued to use the 2000 narrow definition until 2006, when the 
Register took a new approach that allowed for refinements of classes of works 
under Section 1201(a)(1)(C) by common attributes of intended use and users.132 
The change in approach was prompted by an exemption that called for professors 
to be able to circumvent TPMs on lawfully acquired audiovisual works for 
educational purposes.133 The Register acknowledged that a new approach was 
                                                      
129 See Librarian of Congress, Copyright Office, Exemption to Prohibition on 
Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies: 
Final Rule, 65 Fed. Reg. 64,556, 64,559 (Oct. 27, 2000) (“2000 Final Rule”), 
https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2000-10-27/pdf/00-27714.pdf. 
130 Id. 
131 Id. at 64,562. Curiously, the Librarian described a video game as a discrete 
subset of a Section 102(a) category, in contrast to the Register’s 2010 treatment of 
video games as a “hybrid” that “f[e]ll within two statutory classes of works.” See 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights at 178 (2010) (“2010 
Recommendation”), https://cdn.loc.gov/copyright/1201/2010/initialed-registers-
recommendation-june-11-2010.pdf. Also, the Librarian failed to incorporate the 
1975 House Judiciary Committee’s report explaining that the 102(a) categories 
formed a non-exhaustive list of overlapping categories. See H.R. Rep. No. 94-1476, 
at 53 (1976) (“1976 Judiciary Report”). See discussion infra, Item E.5.iii. 
132 See Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights at 10 (2006) (“2006 
Recommendation”), 
https://cdn.loc.gov/copyright/1201/docs/1201_recommendation.pdf (“However, 
in the current proceeding the Register has concluded, based upon the record before 
her, that in appropriate circumstances a ‘class of works’ that is defined initially by 
reference to a section 102 category of works or a subcategory thereof, may 
additionally be refined not only by reference to the medium on which the works 
are distributed or the access control measures applied to them, but also by 
reference to the particular type of use and/or user to which the exemption shall be 
applicable.”). 
133 Id. at 13-24. 
 

[PAGE 30]
 
 
30 
 
needed to enable fair use,134 and so recommended expanding the scope of 1201 
classes of works to include works sharing common attributes of intended users 
and/or uses.135  
Though the Register has continued to iterate the same narrow definition of 
class of works, the Register’s approach in 2010 and 2015 further departed from 
strict adherence to Section 102(a) categories. First, in 2010, the Register 
recommended an exemption for video games, a non-102(a) category, noting “[f]or 
purposes of categorization under Section 102(a) of the Copyright Act, video games 
are ‘hybrid’ in that they fall within two statutory classes of works”—literary works 
and “audiovisual elements.”136 Thus, the Register embraced a 1201 class that was 
not a “narrow subset” of an enumerated 102(a) category.137  
Second, the Register entertained an expansive exemption in 2015 that did not 
comport with the Office’s narrow definition of class: a “broad, open- ended 
exemption for all consumer machines—or the Internet of Things — which would 
encompass a diverse range of devices and equipment” 138 The proposed exemption’s 
class of works was not “a narrow and focused subset of the broad categories of 
works . . . identified in section 102.” 139 Yet, the Office did not criticize the broad 
and generally scoped class.140 Instead, the Office rejected the exemption on 
                                                      
134 Id at 24 (“Thus, the four nonexclusive factors enumerated in § 
1201(a)(1)(C)(i)-(iv) favor both (1) an approach to defining ‘classes’ of works that 
may, when appropriate, be refined by reference to particular types of users and/or 
uses, and (2) an exemption pertaining to the class described below.”)  
135 Id. at 10. 
136 2010 Recommendation at 178. 
137 Id. at 15 (“While starting with a Section 102 category of works, or a subcategory 
thereof, the description of a “particular class” of works ordinarily should be further 
refined by reference to other factors that assist in ensuring that the scope of the 
class addresses the scope of the harm to noninfringing uses.”). 
138 2015 Recommendation at 146. Though the Register recommended denying this 
exemption, the Register’s rationale centered not on the “class of works,” but rather 
on the petitioners’ alleged inability to develop an adequate record. Generally, the 
Register recommended denying the exemption because “proponents of Class 15, 
encompassing a broad and undefined range of ‘consumer machines’ or ‘smart 
devices,’ have failed to make a case for an exemption. Proponents declined to 
provide any specific information about the kinds of devices the proposal 
encompasses, what noninfringing uses would be facilitated by circumvention of 
TPMs on those devices, or any adverse effects understood to flow from the 
prohibition on circumvention.” Id. at 170.  
139 See 2015 Recommendation at 10.  
140 See discussion supra, note 138. 
 

[PAGE 31]
 
 
31 
 
evidentiary grounds.141 Thus, the fact that the Register did not assert the 102(a) 
category issue as at least a reason why the Register would not recommend this 
exemption implies that the Register did not view the “narrow and focused subset” 
of a 102(a) category requirement as dispositive.  
The Office’s historical approach to “class of works” highlights the evolving and 
gradually increasing-in-breadth approach to the “class” definition that has over the 
years departed from a strict focus on 102(a) categories. The 2006 Register 
reinterpreted the “class” interpretation to incorporate common attributes, the 
Register in 2010 designated a “hybrid” class of Section 102(a) as a “narrow and 
focused subset” of a singular category, and the 2015 Register did not reject a class 
that bore no particular relationship to the Section 102(a) categories. Accordingly, 
the Office has laid the groundwork for accepting 1201 classes that are not narrow 
or focused subsets of a particular Section 102(a) category, but rather are refined 
simply by reference to common attributes that can simply include uses or users. 
ii. The Office must allow use-based classes, including for accessibility, to 
satisfy the DMCA’s commitment to protecting fair use.  
The Office’s rule that a “class” be confined to a singular enumerated §102(a) 
category, wherein each category is independent from the other, is also contradicted 
by the DMCA’s embedding of fair use and the understanding of 102(a) itself. The 
legislative history of the Act along with the Act’s language underscore this notion.  
While Congress enacted the DMCA’s circumvention prohibition to cover 
emerging digital distribution technologies, Congress included the rulemaking 
process specifically to shield fair uses from Section 1201’s far-reaching ban.
 142 In 
particular, as the House Committee Report explains, Congress “[was] concerned 
that marketplace realities may someday dictate a different outcome, resulting in 
less access, rather than more, to copyrighted materials that are important to 
education, scholarship, and other socially vital endeavors.”
143 Thus, Congress 
included a rulemaking process for particular exemptions where “it [would] be 
appropriate to modify the flat prohibition against the circumvention of effective 
technological measures that control access to copyrighted materials, in order to 
ensure that access for lawful purposes [was] not unjustifiably diminished.”
144  
                                                      
141 Id. 
142 See, e.g., Letter from Gregory L. Rohde, Assistant Secretary of Commerce for 
Communications and Information and Administrator of National 
Telecommunications and Information Administration, to Marybeth Peters, Register 
of Copyrights, 2-3 (Sept. 29, 2000), 
http://www.copyright.gov/1201/commerce.pdf
. 
143 Committee Comm. Report, supra note 126 at 36. 
144 Committee Comm. Report, supra note 126 at 36. 
 

[PAGE 32]
 
 
32 
 
iii. Attribute-based classes of works, including for accessibility, are 
consistent with Section 102(a)’s flexible conception of works. 
Likewise, Section 102(a) was written in accordance with Congresses’ 
recognition of the unpredictable virtual future of expression.145 As the 1975 House 
Judiciary Committee report explains,  
The second sentence of secti on 102 lists seven broad 
categories which the concept of “works’ of authorship” is 
said to “include.” The use of the word “include,” as defined 
in section 101, makes clear that the listing is “illustrative 
and not limitative,” and that the seven categories  do not 
necessarily exhaust the scope of “original works of 
authorship” that the bill is intended to protect.
146  
In other words, the categories were never meant to be an exclusive nor a final 
list of works, as Congress’s 1990 “architectural works” addition personifies.147 
Instead, the scope of copyrighted works was meant to evolve with technology, not 
hinder technological growth.148 
The Legislative History also clarifies that the categories were not isolated but 
intersecting. The 1975 Judiciary Report states that “[t]he [Section 102] items are 
also overlapping in the sense that a work falling within one class may encompass 
works coming within some or all of the other categories.”
149 There the legislative 
history reveals the authors’ understanding of these categories -- that they were 
listed independent of one and other but were likely to bleed into one and other, 
too. Thus, Section 102(a) was intended as a non-exhaustive list of intermingling 
categories in order to enable the Act to serve future copyright holders and users 
alike according to the balanced approach demanded by the Progress Clause. 
                                                      
145 1976 Judiciary Report, supra note 131 at 53 (“Section 102 implies neither that 
that subject matter is unlimited nor that new forms of expression within that 
general area of subject matter would necessarily be unprotected.”). 
146 Id. 
147 Architectural Works Copyright Protection Act, Pub. L. No 101-650 § 703, 104 
Stat. 5089 (1990). 
148 Thus, the Office’s continues insistence that “the legislative history confirms that 
this language is intended to refer to ‘a narrow and focused subset of the broad 
categories of works . . . identified in section 102 of the Copyright Act,’” 2020 
NPRM, 85 Fed. Reg. at 65,309 (emphasis original), fails to account for the 
possibility that a “class” could be encompassed in a category not enumerated in 
Section 102(a).  
149 1976 Judiciary Report, supra note 131 at 53. 

[PAGE 33]
 
 
33 
 
iv. Recommending attribute-based classes of works would align with the 
legislative history and language of the DMCA while supporting 
technological innovation enabling fair uses, including accessibility.  
For the foregoing reasons, the Office must adopt an attribute-based 
interpretation of “class of works”—i.e., a group of works that share common 
attributes among works, users, and/or uses— to encourage technological innovation 
and promote fair uses, including accessibility. The Office’s historical approach to 
“class of works” underscores the Office’s ability to expand its interpretation for fair 
use purposes. An attribute-based interpretation also comports with the text and 
purpose of the DMCA. Accordingly, the Office can and should adopt an attribute-
based interpretation of “class” and, as a result, grant the proposed exemption. 
