[PAGE 1]
EXHIBIT 27 
[PAGE 2]

[PAGE 3]

[PAGE 4]

[PAGE 5]

[PAGE 6]

[PAGE 7]
EXHIBIT 28 
[PAGE 8]

[PAGE 9]

[PAGE 10]

[PAGE 11]

[PAGE 12]

[PAGE 13]

[PAGE 14]

[PAGE 15]

[PAGE 16]

[PAGE 17]
EXHIBIT 29 
[PAGE 18]
united states copyright office
section 1201 rulemaking:  
Seventh Triennial Proceeding to Determine 
Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention
IntroductIon and recommended regulatory language october 2018 
[PAGE 19]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
1 
I. Introduction 
Enacted in 1998 as part of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (“DMCA”), section 1201 
of Title 17 plays a critical role in fostering the dissemination and enjoyment of creative 
works online.  In adopting section 1201, Congress recognized that the development of 
the online marketplace for copyrighted works required a legal framework that 
adequately addressed the harm of internet piracy and encouraged copyright owners to 
make their works available to the public in emerging digital formats.1  Section 1201 
accordingly affords copyright owners important legal protections against those who 
circumvent technological measures used to prevent unauthorized access to their works.  
Many have credited section 1201 as a key factor in the growth of the vast array of 
content delivery platforms available to consumers today, which offer more lawful 
options to access expressive material than ever existed previously.2 
In adopting these new protections, however, Congress also recognized the need to 
ensure that legitimate uses of copyrighted works not be inhibited unnecessarily.  The 
triennial section 1201 rulemaking is a key part of the statutory scheme, striking a balance 
between copyright and digital technologies.  Every three years, the Librarian of 
Congress, upon the recommendation of the Register of Copyrights, determines whether 
the prohibition on circumvention is having, or is likely to have, an adverse effect on 
users’ ability to make noninfringing uses of a particular class of copyrighted works.
3  
Upon such a determination, the Librarian may adopt a temporary exemption waiving 
the prohibition for such users for the ensuing three-year period.4   
The rulemaking occurs through a formal public process administered by the Register of 
Copyrights, who consults with the National Telecommunications and Information 
Administration of the Department of Commerce (“NTIA”).  The first rulemaking was 
completed in 2000, and subsequent rulemakings have taken place every three years since 
then. 
                                                      
1 See U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, SECTION 1201 OF TITLE 17 9–10 (2017), https://www.copyright.gov/
policy/1201/section-1201-full-report.pdf (“Section 1201 Report”). 
2 See, e.g., Chapter 12 of Title 17: Hearing Before the Subcomm. on Courts, Intellectual Prop. & the 
Internet of the H. Comm. on the Judiciary, 113th Cong. 2 (2014) (statement of Rep. Tom Marino, Vice-
Chairman, Subcomm. on Courts, Intellectual Prop. & the Internet) (“The digital economy has 
enabled wide distribution of movies, music, eBooks and other digital content.  Chapter 12 seems  
to have a lot to do with [that] economic growth . . . .”); id. at 3 (statement of Rep. Jerrold Nadler, 
Ranking Member, Subcomm. on Courts, Intellectual Prop. & the Internet) (“Section 1201 has 
proven to be extremely helpful to creators because it has helped creators to have the confidence 
to provide video content over the internet despite the risk of piracy.”). 
3 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 
4 Id. § 1201(a)(1)(D). 
[PAGE 20]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
2 
Revised Rulemaking Procedures 
For this seventh triennial proceeding, following a comprehensive policy study,5 the 
Copyright Office implemented new streamlining procedures to facilitate the renewal of 
previously adopted exemptions to which there is no meaningful opposition.  This 
process proved successful, allowing stakeholders to seek renewal of noncontroversial 
exemptions—some of which had been repeatedly granted over multiple rulemakings —
without the need to provide wholly new evidentiary showings in support.  For example, 
in 2015, the American Foundation for the Blind participated in three rounds of 
comments and sent two affiliates to a hearing regarding an unopposed exemption to 
facilitate assistive technology for e-books.  This time, the same exemption was renewed 
through a brief four-paragraph statement.   
In fact, the Office did not receive meaningful opposition to renewal of any of the 
exemptions granted in the 2015 rulemaking, which enabled the Acting Register to 
announce her intention to recommend readoption of those exemptions at the early 
stages of this proceeding.  This in turn allowed participants to concentrate their energies 
on new proposals, including requested expansions of existing exemptions.  Indeed, the 
significant number of petitions received in this cycle indicates that stakeholders now are 
able to devote resources to a broad range of additional issues.   
The Acting Register expects that the streamlining process likewise will benefit the 
records in future proceedings.  In this regard, the new procedures underscore the 
importance of ensuring that exemption proposals are supported by sufficient evidence, 
as the same record can now be relied upon in multiple subsequent proceedings.  At the 
same time, the process gives opponents the opportunity to demonstrate that the factual 
or legal grounds supporting an exemption in a prior cycle have changed to the point that 
the renewal petition should be considered as part of the full rulemaking process.  The 
Acting Register continues to believe that a legislative change providing for presumptive 
renewal of existing exemptions would introduce even greater efficiencies by eliminating 
the need for parties to petition for, and the Office to consider, readoption of uncontested 
exemptions.
6  Nevertheless, the streamlining procedures appear to have accomplished 
their goal of reducing unnecessary burdens on both participants and the Office. 
Policy Considerations 
This proceeding involves many of the same proposed uses of copyrighted works that the 
Office has frequently considered in prior rulemakings.  Several exemption petitions seek 
                                                      
5 See Section 1201 Report at 141. 
6 See id. at 141; The Register’s Perspective on Copyright Review: Hearing Before the H. Comm. on the 
Judiciary, 114th Cong. 27 (2015) (statement of Maria A. Pallante, Register of Copyrights and Dir., 
U.S. Copyright Office).   
[PAGE 21]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
3 
to access traditional forms of expressive content for purposes such as teaching and 
facilitating use by persons with disabilities— activities that Congress undoubtedly had in 
mind when it created the triennial review process and that have long been a focus of the 
rulemaking.  This cycle also saw an increased focus on ensuring that preservation 
activities undertaken by libraries, archives, and museums can reach a wide and 
increasing range of digital works, including computer software and video games. 
At the same time, the landscape for the seventh section 1201 rulemaking differs in 
important ways from that of its inception in 1998, and even from 2008.  A significant 
portion of the exemption proposals received in this cycle reflect a new consumer reality 
resulting from the growing pervasiveness of the Internet of Things.  Like the 2015 
rulemaking, this proceeding saw numerous requests to access copyrighted software 
contained in consumer products and other devices and systems.  Proponents of these 
exemptions do not wish to access such software for its creative content, but instead are 
seeking to study, repair, or modify the functionality of the device or system itself.  In the 
written comments and public hearings, many of these stakeholders expressed frustration 
at the notion that copyright should prevent owners of devices from repairing, tinkering 
with, or otherwise exercising control over their own property.  In the words of one 
individual, “[i]t’s my own damn car, I paid for it, I should be able to repair it or have the 
person of my choice do it for me.”
7 
Several of these proposals seek to extend exemptions granted in the last rulemaking to a 
broader range of products.  For example, security researchers currently authorized to 
circumvent technological measures in consumer devices, vehicles, and medical devices 
petition to apply that exemption to software-enabled devices generally.  Similarly, other 
petitioners seek to broaden the current exemption for repair and modification of motor 
vehicles to encompass other devices ranging from smartphones to home appliances to 
consumables.  In considering these proposals, the Office again notes that many of these 
activities seem to “have little to do with the consumption of creative content or the core 
concerns of copyright.”8  It should be emphasized, however, that section 1201 does not 
permit the Acting Register to recommend, or the Librarian to grant, exemptions on that 
basis alone.  They may do so only where specific evidence demonstrates that the statute 
                                                      
7 DeVolve Class 7 Reply.  Comments received in this rulemaking are available at 
http://copyright.gov/1201/2018.  References to these comments in this Recommendation are by 
party name (abbreviated where appropriate), followed by class number and “Initial,” “Opp’n,” or 
“Reply” for comments submitted in the first, second, or third round, respectively. 
8 REGISTER OF COPYRIGHTS, SECTION 1201 RULEMAKING: SIXTH TRIENNIAL PROCEEDING TO 
DETERMINE EXEMPTIONS TO THE PROHIBITION ON CIRCUMVENTION, RECOMMENDATION OF THE 
REGISTER OF COPYRIGHTS 2 (2015). References to the Register’s Recommendations in prior 
rulemakings are cited by the year of publication followed by “Recommendation” (e.g., “2015 
Recommendation”).  Prior Recommendations are available on the Copyright Office website at 
https://www.copyright.gov/1201/.   
[PAGE 22]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
4 
is causing, or is likely to cause, an adverse impact on noninfringing uses of copyrighted 
works.  Moreover, the Acting Register’s ability to consider broad exemptions in these 
categories, encompassing wide and varied assortments of devices, is limited by the 
statutory rulemaking standard, which restricts the inquiry to “particular class[es] of 
copyrighted works” for which there is evidence of adverse effects.9 
It is also important to acknowledge the significant countervailing interests that could be 
implicated by overbroad exemptions.  Copyright owners participating in this 
proceeding emphasized the substantial investments they have made in distributing their 
creative works through subscription streaming services and other protected ways to 
lawfully access music, movies, games, books, and more.  These platforms provide a 
critical revenue source for modern artists and authors, and are supplanting more 
traditional avenues for users to access a wide variety of cultural works.  And they all 
rely on ensuring that the devices and formats used to access this content remain secure 
and are not used to facilitate infringement.  Confronting a very real history of massive 
piracy of music, movies, and other creative works, rightsholders have concerns over 
what they characterize as a perfunctory dismissal of serious infringement risks and the 
blurring of important nuances in the copyright law. 
Given these competing policy interests, as well as the inherent constraints of the 
rulemaking process, the Acting Register recently has advised Congress that many of 
these issues would be appropriate subjects for legislation.  Specifically, in its 2017 
Section 1201 Report, the Office recommended that Congress consider expanding the 
permanent exemption under section 1201(j) permitting circumvention for purposes of 
security testing.
10  Additionally, the Office recommended congressional consideration of 
new permanent exemptions for diagnosis, repair, and maintenance of software-enabled 
devices,11 and for unlocking of wireless devices.12  While the Acting Register has 
attempted to appropriately balance stakeholder interests to the extent permitted under 
the regulatory framework, legislative review would enable Congress and interested 
parties to address these issues in a more comprehensive manner. 
This rulemaking also echoes the 2015 proceeding in that some proposed exemptions 
potentially involve activities subject to legal or regulatory regimes outside of copyright.  
In 2015, the Environmental Protection Agency, the Department of Transportation, and 
the Food and Drug Administration expressed concerns over the impact that the 
proposed exemptions for security research and vehicle modification could have on 
health and safety matters within their jurisdictions.  While recognizing that such 
                                                      
9 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 
10 Section 1201 Report at 71–80. 
11 Id. at 88–95. 
12 Id. at 97–99. 
[PAGE 23]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
5 
concerns did not directly implicate copyright, the Register concluded that they were 
sufficiently serious that other agencies should have the opportunity to prepare for any 
potential impacts.  Therefore, the Register recommended, and the Librarian 
implemented, a one-year delay in the effective date of those exemptions.13  
Subsequently, however, the Office noted that it did not anticipate the need for future 
delays now that those agencies have had time to respond, and that going forward it 
“will generally decline to consider health, safety, and environmental concerns” as part of 
the rulemaking.14  Consistent with those statements, the Acting Register in this 
proceeding did not accord significant weight to such considerations, despite the urging 
of some participants.  While the Acting Register certainly appreciates the seriousness of 
these issues, they generally are best addressed through other legal frameworks and by 
agencies with expertise in those areas.  Indeed, in contrast to 2015, only one additional 
federal agency submitted comments in this proceeding, and that agency— the U.S. 
Department of Justice’s Computer Crime and Intellectual Property Section (“CCIPS”)—
agrees with this view.  
Finally, this proceeding again raises the question of whether, or to what extent, third 
parties, such as independent automobile repair shops, may provide assistance to persons 
entitled to exercise an exemption.  In 2015 the Register declined requests to recommend 
an exemption for circumvention “on behalf of the owner” of a motor vehicle, finding 
that such assistance could run afoul of the prohibition on trafficking in circumvention 
“service[s]” under section 1201(a)(2) and (b).  The anti-trafficking provisions provide 
vital protections to copyright owners, and Congress did not authorize the Librarian to 
grant exemptions from them.  In this proceeding, proponents of the vehicle repair 
exemption again request provision for third-party assistance, arguing that limiting the 
exemption to individual owners threatens to render it effectively meaningless for those 
who lack the technical knowledge to access and manipulate increasingly complex 
embedded computer systems.  The Acting Register is sympathetic to these concerns and 
has attempted to draft the exemption language in a manner that accommodates such 
assistance to the extent it does not implicate the anti-trafficking provisions.  As the Office 
has recently noted, however, the scope of those provisions is uncertain,15 and it is 
beyond the scope of the rulemaking for the Acting Register to opine on that issue.  The 
Office continues to believe that legislation permitting third-party assistance in 
appropriate circumstances would benefit stakeholders and provide valuable clarity to 
the overall statutory scheme.16 
 
                                                      
13 See 2015 Recommendation at 3. 
14 Section 1201 Report at 125–26. 
15 See id. at 56–59. 
16 See id. at 59–61. 
[PAGE 24]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
6 
Summary of Recommendations 
The Librarian has previously adopted six sets of exemptions under section 1201 based 
upon prior Recommendations of the Register.17  In this seventh triennial proceeding, as 
discussed more fully below, the Acting Register recommends that the Librarian adopt 
another set of exemptions covering the following types of uses:  
• Excerpts of motion pictures (including television programs and videos) 
for criticism and comment: 
 For educational uses,  
 By college and university or K-12 faculty and students 
 By faculty of massive open online courses (“MOOCs”) 
 By educators and participants in digital and literacy 
programs offered by libraries, museums and other 
nonprofits  
 For nonfiction multimedia e-books  
 For uses in documentary films and other films where the use is in 
parody or for a biographical or historically significant nature 
 For uses in noncommercial videos 
• Motion pictures (including television programs and videos), for the 
provision of captioning and/or audio description by disability services 
offices or similar units at educational institutions for students with 
disabilities 
• Literary works distributed electronically (i.e., e-books), for use with 
assistive technologies for persons who are blind, visually impaired or 
have print disabilities 
• Literary works consisting of compilations of data generated by implanted 
medical devices and corresponding personal monitoring systems 
• Computer programs that operate the following types of devices, to allow 
connection of a new or used device to an alternative wireless network 
(“unlocking”): 
                                                      
17 Each of these Final Rules and the Register’s Recommendations can be found at 
http://www.copyright.gov/1201. 
[PAGE 25]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
7 
 Cellphones 
 Tablets 
 Mobile hotspots 
 Wearable devices (e.g., smartwatches) 
• Computer programs that operate the following types of devices, to allow 
the device to interoperate with or to remove software applications 
(“jailbreaking”): 
 Smartphones 
 Tablets and other all-purpose mobile computing devices 
 Smart TVs 
 Voice assistant devices 
• Computer programs that control motorized land vehicles, including farm 
equipment, for purposes of diagnosis, repair, or modification of the 
vehicle, including to access diagnostic data  
• Computer programs that control smartphones, home appliances, or home 
systems, for diagnosis, maintenance, or repair of the device or system 
• Computer programs for purposes of good-faith security research 
• Computer programs other than video games, for the preservation of 
computer programs and computer program-dependent materials by 
libraries, archives, and museums 
• Video games for which outside server support has been discontinued, to 
allow individual play by gamers and preservation of games by libraries, 
archives, and museums (as well as necessary jailbreaking of console 
computer code for preservation uses only), and preservation of 
discontinued video games that never required server support 
• Computer programs that operate 3D printers, to allow use of alternative 
feedstock 
The Register declines to recommend the following requested exemptions: 
• Audiovisual works, for broad-based space-shifting and format-shifting 
(declined due to lack of legal and factual support for exemption) 
[PAGE 26]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
8 
• Audiovisual works protected by HDCP/HDMI, for non-infringing uses 
(declined due to lack of legal and factual support for exemption) 
• Access to avionics data (declined due to lack of factual support that 
access controls were protecting copyrighted works) 
  
[PAGE 27]
section 1201 rulemaking
u.s. copyright office
appendix  recommended regulatory language
[PAGE 28]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights  
9
Recommended Regulatory Language 
(a) General. This section prescribes the classes of copyrighted works for which the
Librarian of Congress has determined, pursuant to 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C) and (D), that
n
oninfringing uses by persons who are users of such works are, or are likely to be,
a
dversely affected. The prohibition against circumvention of technological measures that
control access to copyrighted works set forth in 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(A) shall not apply to
such users of the prescribed classes of copyrighted works.
(b)
Classes of copyrighted works. Pursuant to the authority set forth in 17 U.S.C.
1201(
a)(1)(C) and (D), and upon the recommendation of the Register of Copyrights, the
Librarian has determined that the prohibition against circumvention of technological
measures that effectively control access to copyrighted works set forth in 17 U.S.C.
1201(
a)(1)(A) shall not apply to persons who engage in noninfringing uses of the
following classes of copyrighted works:
(1) Mo
tion pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in 17
U.S
.C. 101, where the motion picture is lawfully made and acquired on a DVD
protected by the Content Scramble System, on a Blu-ray disc protected by the
Advanced Access Content System, or via a digital transmission protected by a
te
chnological measure, and the person engaging in circumvention under
paragraph (b)(1)(i) and (b)(1)(ii)(A) and (B) of this section reasonably believes
th
at non-circumventing alternatives are unable to produce the required level of
high-quality content, or the circumvention is undertaken using screen-capture
technology that appears to be offered to the public as enabling the reproduction
of motion pictures after content has been lawfully acquired and decrypted,
where circumvention is undertaken solely in order to make use of short portions
o
f the motion pictures in the following instances:
(
i) Fo
r the purpose of criticism or comment:
(A) Fo
r use in documentary filmmaking, or other films where the
motion picture clip is used in parody or for its biographical or
historically significant nature;
(B)
Fo
r use in noncommercial videos (including videos produced
f
or a paid commission if the commissioning entity’s use is
n
oncommercial); or
(C) For use in nonfiction multimedia e-books.
[PAGE 29]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights  
10
(
ii) Fo
r educational purposes:
(A) By c
ollege and university faculty and students or kindergarten
through twelfth-grade (K-12) educators and students (where the
K-12 student is circumventing under the direct supervision of an
educator), including of accredited general educational
development (GED) programs, for the purpose of criticism,
comment, teaching, or scholarship;
(B)
By 
faculty of massive open online courses (MOOCs) offered by
a
ccredited nonprofit educational institutions to officially enrolled
students through online platforms (which platforms themselves
m
ay be operated for profit), in film studies or other courses
requiring close analysis of film and media excerpts, for the
purpose of criticism or comment, where the MOOC provider
through the online platform limits transmissions to the exten
t
te
chnologically feasible to such officially enrolled students,
i
nstitutes copyright policies and provides copyright informational
materials to faculty, students, and relevant staff members, and
applies technological measures that reasonably prevent
u
nauthorized further dissemination of a work in accessible form
to others or retention of the work for longer than the course
session by recipients of a transmission through the platform
, as
c
ontemplated by 17 U.S.C. 110(2); or
(C) By 
educators and participants in nonprofit digital and media
literacy programs offered by libraries, museums, and other
nonprofit entities with an educational mission, in the course of
face-to-face instructional activities, for the purpose of criticism or
comment, except that such users may only circumvent using
screen-capture technology that appears to be offered to the public
as enabling the reproduction of motion pictures after content has
b
een lawfully acquired and decrypted.
(2) 
(i) Motion pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in
17 U.S.C. 101, where the motion picture is lawfully acquired on a DVD
protected by the Content Scramble System, on a Blu-ray disc protected by
t
he Advanced Access Content System, or via a digital transmission
protected by a technological measure, where:
(A) C
ircumvention is undertaken by a disability services office or
other unit of a kindergarten through twelfth-grade educational
[PAGE 30]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights  
11
i
nstitution, college, or university engaged in and/or responsible 
for the provision of accessibility services to students, for the 
purpose of adding captions and/or audio description to a motion 
picture to create an accessible version as a necessary 
accommodation for a student or students with disabilities under 
an applicable disability law, such as the Americans With 
Disabilities Act, the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, or 
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act; 
(B)
T
he educational institution unit in paragraph (b)(2)(i)(A) of
this section has, after a reasonable effort, determined that an
accessible version cannot be obtained at a fair price or in a timely
manner; and
(C)
T
he accessible versions are provided to students or educators
an
d stored by the educational institution in a manner intended to
reasonably prevent unauthorized further dissemination of a work.
(
ii) Fo
r purposes of this paragraph(b)(2), “audio description” means an
oral narration that provides an accurate rendering of the motion picture.
(3) L
iterary works, distributed electronically, that are protected by technological
measures that either prevent the enabling of read-aloud functionality or interfere
with screen readers or other applications or assistive technologies:
(i) When a copy of such a work is lawfully obtained by a blind or other
p
erson with a disability, as such a person is defined in 17 U.S.C. 121;
p
rovided, however, that the rights owner is remunerated, as appropriate,
f
or the price of the mainstream copy of the work as made available to the
general public through customary channels; or
(ii) W
hen such work is a nondramatic literary work, lawfully obtained
and used by an authorized entity pursuant to 17 U.S.C. 121.
(4) L
iterary works consisting of compilations of data generated by medical
devices that are wholly or partially implanted in the body or by their
corresponding personal monitoring systems, where such circumvention is
undertaken by a patient for the sole purpose of lawfully accessing the data
generated by his or her own device or monitoring system and does not constitute
a violation of applicable law, including without limitation the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, the Computer Fraud and Abuse Ac
t
o
f 1986 or regulations of the Food and Drug Administration, and is accomplished
through the passive monitoring of wireless transmissions that are already being
produced by such device or monitoring system.
[PAGE 31]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights  
12
(
5) C
omputer programs that enable the following types of lawfully acquired
w
ireless devices to connect to a wireless telecommunications network, when
circumvention is undertaken solely in order to connect to a wireless
t
elecommunications network and such connection is authorized by the operator
of such network:
(i) W
ireless telephone handsets (i.e., cellphones);
(ii) A
ll-purpose tablet computers;
(iii) Portable mobile connectivity devices, such as mobile hotspots,
r
emovable wireless broadband modems, and similar devices; and
(iv) W
earable wireless devices designed to be worn on the body, such as
sm
artwatches or fitness devices.
(
6) C
omputer programs that enable smartphones and portable all-purpose
mobile computing devices to execute lawfully obtained software applications,
w
here circumvention is accomplished for the sole purpose of enabling
i
nteroperability of such applications with computer programs on the smartphone
or device, or to permit removal of software from the smartphone or device. For
purposes of this paragraph (b)(6), a “portable all-purpose mobile computing
d
evice” is a device that is primarily designed to run a wide variety of programs
rather than for consumption of a particular type of media content, is equipped
with an operating system primarily designed for mobile use, and is intended to
be carried or worn by an individual.
(7) C
omputer programs that enable smart televisions to execute lawfully
obtained software applications, where circumvention is accomplished for the
sole purpose of enabling interoperability of such applications with computer
programs on the smart television
.
(
8) C
omputer programs that enable voice assistant devices to execute lawfully
obtained software applications, where circumvention is accomplished for the
sole purpose of enabling interoperability of such applications with computer
programs on the device, or to permit removal of software from the device, and is
n
ot accomplished for the purpose of gaining unauthorized access to other
copyrighted works. For purposes of this paragraph (b)(8), a “voice assistant
d
evice” is a device that is primarily designed to run a wide variety of programs
r
ather than for consumption of a particular type of media content, is designed to
take user input primarily by voice, and is designed to be installed in a home or
office.
[PAGE 32]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights  
13
(
9) C
omputer programs that are contained in and control the functioning of a
lawfully acquired motorized land vehicle such as a personal automobile,
c
ommercial vehicle, or mechanized agricultural vehicle, except for programs
ac
cessed through a separate subscription service, when circumvention is a
n
ecessary step to allow the diagnosis, repair, or lawful modification of a vehicle
function, where such circumvention does not constitute a violation of applicable
law, including without limitation regulations promulgated by the Department of
Transportation or the Environmental Protection Agency, and is not accomplished
f
or the purpose of gaining unauthorized access to other copyrighted works.
(10) C
omputer programs that are contained in and control the functioning of a
lawfully acquired smartphone or home appliance or home system, such as a
re
frigerator, thermostat, HVAC, or electrical system, when circumvention is a
n
ecessary step to allow the diagnosis, maintenance, or repair of such a device or
system, and is not accomplished for the purpose of gaining access to other
copyrighted works. For purposes of this paragraph (b)(10):
(i)
The “maintenance” of a device or system is the servicing of the device
or system in order to make it work in accordance with its original
specifications and any changes to those specifications authorized for th
at
d
evice or system; and
(ii)
The “repair” of a device or system is the restoring of the device or
system to the state of working in accordance with its original
specifications and any changes to those specifications authorized for that
d
evice or system.
(11) 
(i) C
omputer programs, where the circumvention is undertaken on a
l
awfully acquired device or machine on which the computer program
operates, or is undertaken on a computer, computer system, or computer
network on which the computer program operates with the authorization
of the owner or operator of such computer, computer system, or
computer network, solely for the purpose of good-faith security research
and does not violate any applicable law, including without limitation the
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986.
(ii)
Fo
r purposes of this paragraph (b)(11), “good-faith security research”
m
eans accessing a computer program solely for purposes of good-faith
testing, investigation, and/or correction of a security flaw or vulnerability,
w
here such activity is carried out in an environment designed to avoid
any harm to individuals or the public, and where the information derived
f
rom the activity is used primarily to promote the security or safety of the
[PAGE 33]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights  
14
c
lass of devices or machines on which the computer program operates, or 
those who use such devices or machines, and is not used or maintained in 
a manner that facilitates copyright infringement. 
(12) 
(i) V
ideo games in the form of computer programs embodied in physical
or downloaded formats that have been lawfully acquired as complete
games, when the copyright owner or its authorized representative has
c
eased to provide access to an external computer server necessary to
facilitate an authentication process to enable gameplay, solely for the
purpose of:
(A)
P
ermitting access to the video game to allow copying and
m
odification of the computer program to restore access to the
game for personal, local gameplay on a personal computer or
video game console; or
(B) Permitting access to the video game to allow copying an
d
m
odification of the computer program to restore access to the
game on a personal computer or video game console when
necessary to allow preservation of the game in a playable form by
an eligible library, archives, or museum, where such activities are
carried out without any purpose of direct or indirect commercial
advantage and the video game is not distributed or made
available outside of the physical premises of the eligible library,
archives, or museum.
(ii)
V
ideo games in the form of computer programs embodied in physical
or downloaded formats that have been lawfully acquired as complete
games, that do not require access to an external computer server for
gameplay, and that are no longer reasonably available in the commercial
marketplace, solely for the purpose of preservation of the game in
 a
p
layable form by an eligible library, archives, or museum, where such
activities are carried out without any purpose of direct or indirect
c
ommercial advantage and the video game is not distributed or made
available outside of the physical premises of the eligible library, archives,
or museum.
(iii) C
omputer programs used to operate video game consoles solely to
the extent necessary for an eligible library, archives, or museum to engage
in the preservation activities described in paragraph (b)(12)(i)(B) or
(b)(12)(ii) of this section.
[PAGE 34]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights  
15
(
iv) F
or purposes of this paragraph (b)(12), the following definitions shall
apply:
(A) Fo
r purposes of paragraph (b)(12)(i)(A) and (b)(12)(ii) of this
section, “complete games” means video games that can be played
by users without accessing or reproducing copyrightable content
stored or previously stored on an external computer server.
(B)
Fo
r purposes of paragraph (b)(12)(i)(B) of this section,
“c
omplete games” means video games that meet the definition in
paragraph (b)(12)(iv)(A) of this section, or that consist of both a
c
opy of a game intended for a personal computer or video game
console and a copy of the game’s code that was stored or
previously stored on an external computer server.
(C) “C
eased to provide access” means that the copyright owner or
its authorized representative has either issued an affirmative
statement indicating that external server support for the video
game has ended and such support is in fact no longer available or,
alternatively, server support has been discontinued for a period of
at least six months; provided, however, that server support h
as
n
ot since been restored.
(
D) “L
ocal gameplay” means gameplay conducted on a personal
computer or video game console, or locally connected personal
computers or consoles, and not through an online service or
facility
.
(
E) A library, archives, or museum is considered “eligible” when
the collections of the library, archives, or museum are open to the
public and/or are routinely made available to researchers who are
not affiliated with the library, archives, or museum.
(13) 
(i)
C
omputer programs, except video games, that have been lawfully
acquired and that are no longer reasonably available in the commercial
marketplace, solely for the purpose of lawful preservation of a computer
program, or of digital materials dependent upon a computer program
 as
a c
ondition of access, by an eligible library, archives, or museum, where
such activities are carried out without any purpose of direct or indirect
commercial advantage and the program is not distributed or made
available outside of the physical premises of the eligible library, archives,
o
r museum.
[PAGE 35]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights  
16
(
ii) F
or purposes of the exemption in paragraph (b)(13)(i) of this section, a
l
ibrary, archives, or museum is considered “eligible” if—
(A)
The collections of the library, archives, or museum are open to
the public and/or are routinely made available to researchers who
are not affiliated with the library, archives, or museum;
(B)
The library, archives, or museum has a public service mission;
(C)
The library, archives, or museum’s trained staff or volunteers
p
rovide professional services normally associated with libraries,
ar
chives, or museums;
(D)
The collections of the library, archives, or museum are
composed of lawfully acquired and/or licensed materials; and
(E)
The library, archives, or museum implements reasonable
digital security measures as appropriate for the activities
p
ermitted by this paragraph (b)(13).
(14) C
omputer programs that operate 3D printers that employ microchip-
reliant technological measures to limit the use of feedstock, when
circumvention is accomplished solely for the purpose of using alternative
feedstock and not for the purpose of accessing design software, design
files, or proprietary data.
(c
)
Persons who may initiate circumvention. To the extent authorized under
paragraph (b) of this section, the circumvention of a technological measure that
r
estricts wireless telephone handsets or other wireless devices from connecting to
a wireless telecommunications network may be initiated by the owner of any
su
ch handset or other device, by another person at the direction of the owner, or
by a provider of a commercial mobile radio service or a commercial mobile data
service at the direction of such owner or other person, solely in order to enable
such owner or a family member of such owner to connect to a wirele
ss
t
elecommunications network, when such connection is authorized by the
operator of such network.
[PAGE 36]
u .s. copyright of fi ce · library of  congress · 101  independence avenue se · washington, dc 20559 · www.copyright.gov
