[PAGE 1]
This is a Word document that allows users to type into the spaces below. The comment may be single-spaced, but 
should be in at least 12-point type. The italicized instructions on this template may be deleted.  
 
 
 [   ] Check here if multimedia evidence is being provided in connection with this comment 
ITEM A. COMMENTER INFORMATION  
Summit Imaging, Inc. 
15000 Woodinville-Redmond Rd. NE 
Suite B800 
Woodinville, WA 98072 
 
c/o  
Marc Levy, counsel 
Seed IP Law Group LLP 
701 Fifth Ave., Suite 5400 
Seattle, WA 98104 
Tel: (206) 694-4811 
Email: marcl@seedip.com 
 
I
TEM B. PROPOSED CLASS ADDRESSED 
Proposed Class 12: Computer Programs—Repair (specifically, Medical Devices)  
ITEM C. OVERVIEW 
Petitioner Summit Imaging, Inc. (“Summit”) is an independent service provider (“ISO”) for 
medical imaging devices. Summit provides repair services and replacement parts for diagnostic 
medical imaging equipment to hospitals and other medical providers nationwide. Summit 
focuses its services on ultrasound and mammography diagnostic imaging devices.  
Today, medical imaging devices are controlled by computers installed on-board the devices. The 
computers are integral to the operation and maintenance of the systems. These computers 
typically run on standard operating system environments such as Microsoft Windows. The 
original equipment manufacturer (“OEM”) adds its own application software to the computer to 
provide both for the clinical operation of the device and its maintenance. 
[PAGE 2]
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
Servicing of medical devices and their components requires the use of the installed software and 
data files. For example, to diagnose error or faults in a medical imaging device requires access to 
error log files stored on the system. And access to the error log files requires access to the 
software driving the system. 
OEMs, however, restrict access to diagnostic software and data files in their medical imaging 
systems through the use of access codes, passwords, keys, or other similar technological 
measures (“TPMs”). OEMs use TPMs and the anti-circumvention provision of the DMCA to 
deter owners, lessees, and their ISO agents from accessing the software, including error log files, 
by threatening and filing lawsuits. OEMs allege that their TPMs constitute a “technological 
measure that effectively controls access to a work protected under [Title 17]” the circumvention 
of which is prohibited by the DMCA. And yet, OEMs use these threats and lawsuits to prevent 
access to all data files on their systems, including error logs, configuration files, and other 
unprotected works. By using TPMs to restrict access to both protected and unprotected works, 
OEMs are using the DMCA to prevent access to unprotected works and interfere with basic 
service for medical imaging devices. 
Summit itself is currently the subject of a pending lawsuit by an OEM claiming that Summit has 
violated the anti-circumvention provisions of the DMCA. Philips North America LLC, et al. v. 
Summit Imaging, Inc., at al., Case No. 2:19-cv-01745 (W.D. Wash. 2019). In this case, Philips 
specifically alleges that Summit is liable under the DMCA for accessing log files on Philips 
ultrasound systems. Philips’ case against Summit is not unique. Over just the last few years, 
Philips has filed numerous lawsuits against ISOs stating DMCA claims for allegedly 
circumventing Philips’ access controls in connection with the service of Philips medical imaging 
devices. E.g., Philips Med. Sys. Nederland B.V., TEC Holdings, Inc., et al., Case No. 3:20-cv-
00021 (W.D.N.C. 2020); Philips Med. Sys. Puerto Rico, Inc., et al. v. Alpha Biomedical and 
Diagnostic Corp., Case No. 3:19-cv-01488 (D.P.R. 2019), Philips N. Am. LLC, et al. v. 626 
Holdings, Inc., et al., Case No. 9:19-cv-81263 (S.D. Fla. 2019); Philips N. Am. LLC v. KPI 
Healthcare Inc., Case No. 19-1765 (C.D. Cal. 2019).  
OEMs’ use of TPMs to prevent access to software and files needed to service medical devices is 
particularly pernicious when it comes to older equipment that OEMs no longer support because 
they claim they have reached the end of their commercial life. For such older equipment, OEMs 
do not provide access codes at all. Thus owners and their ISO agents are preventing from 
accessing the computer programs and data files needed to service their equipment. Medical 
providers operating under tight budgets desire to keep older equipment properly serviced. 
OEMs’ use of TPMs prevents them from doing that. 
I
TEM D. TECHNOLOGICAL PROTECTION MEASURE(S) AND METHOD(S) OF CIRCUMVENTION 
As described above, OEMs restrict access to the computer programs and data files on their 
medical devices using access codes, passwords, and keys. For example, one method used by 
Philips is an access key contained on a flash drive or dongle. The access key must be present to 
[PAGE 3]
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
identify the access level of the user. Philips provides dongles to its field service engineers that 
give them access to the software and data needed to service Philips equipment. For owners, 
however, Philips only provides basic access to the clinical features of the device unless they 
purchase an expensive service contract. This limited access is insufficient to allow owners or 
their ISO agents to service the device.  
 
Another method OEMs use to restrict access is a combination of username and password to 
access a medical device system. As with the dongles, owners’ passwords will not provide access 
to the software and files needed to service the medical device. 
 
 
I
TEM E. ASSERTED ADVERSE EFFECTS ON NONINFRINGING USES  
Adverse Effects Caused by Prohibition 
Hospitals and other medical providers who own medical devices are directly adversely affected 
by the DMCA anti-circumvention provision. They are affected in two primary ways. First, the 
prohibition reduces competition from ISOs. Medical providers are left to seek service from 
OEMs who charge much higher prices for service than ISOs. Absent effective competition from 
ISOs, OEMs can be expected to charge higher prices still. Second, the DMCA prevents medical 
providers from servicing their own equipment using in-house service departments. Without 
access to the software and files needed to service their equipment, medical providers are captive 
to the OEMs and cannot troubleshoot and conduct repairs promptly.  
This last adverse effect highlights the most significant adverse effect: harm to public health and 
safety. Delayed repair of medical equipment has real effects on patient outcomes. The longer 
needed medical equipment remains out of service, the longer patients are denied the benefit of 
that equipment. In smaller facilities such as rural hospitals or clinics, that may result in the delay 
of essential medical service that requires the use of that equipment. Delayed medical services, in 
turn, can lead to negative patient outcomes.1   
Much has been written on this subject, particularly recently in light of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
In the case of ventilators, the availability of a working ventilator can make the difference 
between life and death. Over 300 medical device technicians signed a letter in May calling for 
OEMs to stop withholding what technicians need to fix their medical devices such as 
ventilators.2  Five state treasurers called on OEMs to release service information to repair 
                                                        
1 See, e.g., Rona Bahreini, Leila Doshmangir, and Ali Imani, Influential factors on medical maintenance 
management In search of a framework, Journal of Quality in Maintenance Engineering, Volume 25, Issue 1 (June 
12, 2018) (“Lack of proper maintenance of medical equipment leads to equipment downtime, reduces the level of 
device performance, and wastes costs and resources . . . If preventive maintenance [on a medical device] is not well 
monitored in a hospital, patients’ lives are in grave danger”). 
2 https://calpirg.org/news/cap/hospital-repair-professionals-just-let-us-fix-life-saving-devices-ventilators.  
[PAGE 4]
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
ventilators.
3  Nader Hammoud, manager of biomedical engineering at John Muir Health in 
Walnut Cree, California stated in May:  
 
It’s not that it could mean life or death—it’s definitely life or death, especially during a 
pandemic. … I had situations in the past, before Covid-19, where we had to come into the 
hospital in the middle of the night and try to pull parts from different devices, different 
sources, because a patient was waiting on a device. We’ve had to do this multiple times 
throughout my career.
4 
 
This is one of the reasons why Senator Wyden recently introduced his bill entitled The Critical 
Medical Infrastructure Right to Repair Act, seeking immediate exemptions for the DMCA during 
the pandemic.
5  
 
When the proper functioning of a machine can be a difference between life and death, hospitals 
and other machine owners need as many service options as possible to keep their machines up 
and running. As the FDA has recognized in a 2018 report: “The continued availability of third 
party entities to service and repair medical devices is critical to the functioning of the U.S. 
healthcare system.”
6 
 
Proposed Exemption Covers Non-Infringing Uses 
Running computer software and accessing data files by owners of medical devices or 
those acting on behalf, such as ISOs, for the purpose of diagnosing, repairing, or 
maintaining their systems and devices, is non-infringing. This is for at least three 
independent reasons: 
 
1. Fair use (17 U.S.C. § 107); 
2. Essential step in the utilization of a computer program in connection with a 
machine (17 U.S.C. § 117(a)(1)); and 
3. Machine maintenance and repair (17 U.S.C. § 117(c)). 
Each of these reasons is discussed more fully below. 
                                                        
3 patreasury.gov/newsroom/archive/2020/04-14-Call-On-Manufacturers.html 
 
4 Quotation from https://www.wired.com/story/right-to-repair-medical-equipment-ifixit/.  
5 wyden.senate.gov/news/press-releases/wyden-and-clarke-introduce-bill-to-eliminate-barriers-to-fixing-critical-
medical-equipment-during-the-pandemic- 
6 FDA Report on the Quality, Safety, and Effectiveness of Servicing of Medical Devices, Published May 15, 2018, 
available at https://www.fda.gov/media/113431/download  
[PAGE 5]
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
1. Fair Use 
The Copyright Act sets forth four factors to consider when determining whether a 
use of a copyrighted work is noninfringing fair use: 
 the purpose and character of the use, including whether such use is of a 
commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational purposes; 
 the nature of the copyrighted work; 
 the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the 
copyrighted work as a whole; and  
 the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the 
copyrighted work. 
17 U.S.C. § 107.  
In connection with existing exemptions, the Librarian has recognized the fair use of 
computer programs for the diagnosis, repair, and modification of motorized land vehicles 
and the fair use of computer programs for the maintenance and repair of appliances. 37 
CFR § 201.40(b)(9), (10). In its 2018 Recommendation7 in support of the latter 
exemption, the Registrar wrote as follows: 
In analyzing the first fair use factor, the Acting Register notes that the 
Copyright Office’ Software Study observed that, because the 
fundamental purpose of repair is to restore the functionality of a device 
so that it may be used, “repair supports— rather than displaces—the 
purpose of the embedded programs.” Applying similar logic, the 2015 
rulemaking concluded that the first factor favored an exemption for 
vehicle repair because the activities were personal, noncommercial, and 
would “enhance the intended use” of the vehicle programs. Moreover, the 
Office’s Section 1201 Report observed an emerging “general 
understanding that bona fide repair and maintenance activities are 
typically noninfringing.” Because proponents express the same desire to 
engage in these bona fide repair activities with respect to other devices, 
the Acting Register concludes that this factor favors proponents. 
2018 Report at p. 203. 
The same reasoning applies to medical devices. Repair supports rather than displaces the 
purpose of the embedded programs. The whole point of repair is to make the devices 
                                                        
7 2018 Recommendation of the Acting Registrar of Copyrights for Rule Making: Seventh 
Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions on the Prohibition on Circumvention (Oct. 
2018). 
[PAGE 6]
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
useful for the purpose for which they are intended.  
The second factor also supports fair use. The computer programs and data files at issue 
are functional works used to control the operation of the medical device systems and the 
diagnosis, repair, and maintenance of them. For example, error logs are computer files 
containing events that occur during the use of a medical device by its owner. As such, 
they are the property of the equipment owner, not the OEM. In any event, because they 
are functional, they are no protected by copyright. Lexmark International, Inc. v. Static 
Control Components, Inc., 3877 F.3d 522, 536 (6
th Cir. 2004) (configuration files and 
lock-out codes generally “fall on the functional-idea rather than the original-expression 
side of the copyright line”); Sony Comput. Entm’t, Inc. v. Connectix Cor., 203 F.3d 
596,603 (9th Cir. 2000) (“[T]he fair use doctrine preserves public access to the ideas and 
functional elements embedded in copyright computer software programs.”).  
The third fair use factor similarly supports fair use. It is necessary to execute the 
computer programs and access the data files during servicing activities to understand 
system or device performance and, in several instances, update the data files such as 
service logs. The computer programs and data files involved are but a small portion of the 
entire software package used to operate and service medical imaging devices and are 
integrated into the machine. For example, the software on a Philips ultrasound system 
consists of a number of different components, most of which are involved in the clinical 
operation of the machine. The software for diagnosing problems with the system, 
including error logs, comprise only a small part of the system software.  
Finally, the fourth factor also supports fair use. The effect of the use upon the potential 
market for or value of the copyrighted work is minimal.9 The computer programs and 
data files are necessary for the operation and control of the medical equipment, including 
the basic servicing of the equipment, and are sold together with the equipment in which 
they are employed. They have no other use. Thus, the OEMs must include them or make 
them available to enable operation, control, and servicing of new equipment. Although 
OEMs might sell or make available updates to their software, there is no independent 
market for the computer programs and data files outside of the purchase of new 
equipment because the software is not of any value outside of use on this equipment. 
Of course, the TPMs that restrict access to the computer programs and data files provide 
value to the OEMs by allowing them to control the market for repair services for their 
machines. But, as the Registrar recognized in its 2017 policy review of Section 12018 
(the “1201 Report”), this is not a valid purpose of Section 1201. “[V]irtually all agree 
that section 1201 was not intended to facilitate manufacturers’ use of TPMs to facilitate 
product tying or to achieve a lock-in effect under which consumers are effectively limited 
to repair services offered by the manufacturer.”  1201 Report at 92.  
                                                        
8 Section 1201 of Title 17-A Report of the Registrar of Copyrights (June 2017), 
https://www.copyright.gov/policy/1201/section-1201-full-report.pdf.  
[PAGE 7]
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
OEMs will argue that their investments in computer software enable them to serve 
customers better than ISOs. The FDA rejected this proposition in its 2018 report on the 
quality, safety, and effectiveness of servicing medical devices (“FDA Report”).
9  Faced 
with OEMs requesting that the FDA impose additional regulations on ISOs, the FDA 
rejected the invitation concluding: “the objective evidence indicates that many OEMs and 
third party entities provide high quality, safe, and effective servicing of medical devices.”  
FDA Report at i. 
2. Essential Step (17 U.S.C. § 117(a)(1)) 
Title 17 U.S.C. §117 (a)(1) provides: 
(a)(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 106, it is not an 
infringement for the owner of a copy of a computer program to make or 
authorize the making of another copy or adaptation of that computer 
program provided that such a new copy or adaptation is created as an 
essential step in the utilization of the computer program in conjunction 
with a machine and that it is used in no other manner. 
The access, use, and modification of computer programs and data files embedded in 
medical equipment is an essential step in the servicing and repair activities associated 
with that equipment and in maintaining its usefulness. The software is integrated into and 
is inseparable from the machines. Medical equipment purchases represent substantial 
investments by their owners. And that equipment is useless without the included 
software. Some OEMs attempt to only “license” the embedded software. However, there 
is no alternative to the software as it is tailored to the equipment, and there are no market 
alternatives. Regardless, the owner of the machine owns the copy of the computer 
programs installed on that machine. To the extent that the owners or the service 
companies that work on that their behalf copy or adapt that copy, they are “created as an 
essential step in the use of the computer program in conjunction with a machine,” and 
“used in no other manner.”10  
                                                        
9 FDA Report on the Quality, Safety, and Effectiveness of Servicing of Medical Devices, 
Published May 15, 2018, available at https://www.fda.gov/media/113431/download. 
10 See, e.g., Krause v. Titleserv, Inc., 402 F.3d 119 (2d Cir. 2005) (holding company's 
modification of copyrighted computer programs created for it by former consultant, 
after consultant declined to turn over source code, was “essential step” in their 
utilization, within meaning of Copyright Act's safe harbor provision; modifications, 
which fixed bugs, allowed company to add new client information, adapted program so 
it would function on company's new system, and added new features, were necessary if 
company was to make use of programs on its machines); Universal Instruments Corp. 
v. Micro Sys. Eng'g, Inc., 924 F.3d 32 (2d Cir. 2019) (holding that modifications made 
by licensee, a medical device company, to server software customized by software 
developer for licensee's multi- phased test handling system project that allowed existing 
[PAGE 8]
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
3. Hardware Maintenance and Repair (17 U.S.C. § 117(c)) 
Title 17 U.S.C. §117 (c) provides: 
Machine Maintenance or Repair.—Notwithstanding the provisions of section 106, 
it is not an infringement for the owner or lessee of a machine to make or authorize 
the making of a copy of a computer program if such copy is made solely by virtue 
of the activation of a machine that lawfully contains an authorized copy of the 
computer program, for purposes only of maintenance or repair of that machine, 
if— 
(1) such new copy is used in no other manner and is destroyed 
immediately after the maintenance or repair is completed; and  
(2) with respect to any computer program or part thereof that is not 
necessary for that machine to be activated, such program or part thereof is not 
accessed or used other than to make such new copy by virtue of the activation of 
the machine. 
To perform service on a medical imaging device, it is necessary to activate the device. In 
performing service, diagnostic software and data files such as error logs are used to 
diagnose the operating conditions to determine if the device and its components are 
performing according to their specifications. Data files may be accessed to diagnose 
issues, confirm operating information, or to update servicing information. 
Following a servicing activity, except for any updated data reflecting the service, the 
computer programs and data files are left in their original condition. To the extent that 
any new copy is created, it is destroyed upon deactivation or reactivation of the device. 
 
Conclusion 
For the foregoing reasons, Summit requests that the Librarian determine that the non-infringing 
uses described above are, and are likely to be adversely affected by the anti-circumvention 
provisions of Section 1201(a) and therefore approve the proposed exemptions. 
                                                        
server software to interact with additional systems in manner intended when source 
code was developed for licensee was essential step in utilization of computer programs 
in conjunction with machine). 
