[PAGE 1]
Ever since I got my first iPhone I’ve been fascinated with all the technology 
is put into Apple products, and all the features of iOS. But some aspects of the 
operating system have always been to constricting. Jailbreaking has allowed me 
to change the aspects of the phone, and customize it the way I want. Not the way 
Apple has forced their features upon us, the users. As a long time Jailbreaker, and 
still being at a young age. Jailbreaking my iOS device has been a great learning 
experience, opening doors to learning about the file system and how to make 
themes for the phone. 
From gaining root access to the file system, I have learned a lot about iOS 
and how it works. From changing certain little aspects of my Phone to completely 
changing every icon to the way I want it. Being part of the younger generation, I’ll 
be able to carry this knowledge into jobs, and maybe even make a career out of it. 
Technology is advancing at a very fast rate, and we’ll need a lot of programmers 
and developers in the future, and Jailbreaking has let me get a head start in that 
aspect. 
The iPhone screen uses very bright blue light for its display, and that has 
always been hard on my eyes. iOS doesn’t have anything to fix the lighting, but 
Jailbreaking my phone lets me change the lighting to more of a candle-light like 
display. Just download a little tweak called F.lux and you can change the lighting 
to anything you would like. Having the ability to do that has helped me a lot.  
Finally, Jailbreaking has let me fix all the annoyances of iOS. For example, 
frequently I use my iPhone as an alarm clock, and when the alarm goes off it not 
only rings but vibrates. It would vibrate its way right off my desk sometimes, and 
Apple has never put an option to disable that. With Jailbreaking, I’ve been able to 
disable that feature, and save my phone from falling off the desk almost every 
day. 
In conclusion, Jailbreaking is very helpful, and shouldn’t be made illegal. It a 
has taught me about the iPhone file system and how it works, put less strain on 
my eyes, and has even saved my phone from falling off the desk. So please decide 
against forcing us to do everything Apples way, and let us, the people, decide 
what’s best for us and our phone. 
[PAGE 2]
 
 
