[PAGE 1]
	   1	  
Comment	  Regarding	  a	  Proposed	  Exemption	  Under	  17	  U.S.C.	  Section	  1201	  for	  Software	  Security	  Research	  (Class	  25)	  	  February	  6,	  2015	  	  1.	  	  Commenter	  Information	  	  Professor	  Candice	  Hoke,	  Cleveland	  State	  University*	  Professor	  Douglas	  W.	  Jones,	  University	  of	  Iowa*	  Professor	  Deirdre	  Mulligan,	  University	  of	  California,	  Berkeley*	  Professor	  Vern	  Paxson,	  University	  of	  California,	  Berkeley*	  Professor	  Pamela	  Samuelson,	  University	  of	  California,	  Berkeley*	  Bruce	  Schneier	  Erik	  Stallman,	  Center	  for	  Democracy	  &	  Technology	  (CDT)	  	  *	  Affiliation	  for	  identification	  purposes	  only	  	  Contact	  person:	  Erik	  Stallman,	  CDT,	  (202)	  407-­‐8817,	  estallman@cdt.org	  	  2.	  	  Proposed	  Class	  Addressed	  	  These	  comments	  address	  Proposed	  Class	  25:	  	  Software	  –	  Security	  Research.	  	  3.	  	  Overview	  	  An	  exemption	  for	  software	  security	  research	  is	  essential	  to	  promote	  the	  active	  research	  and	  testing	  efforts	  necessary	  to	  keep	  pace	  with	  evolving	  cybersecurity	  risks.	  	  Software	  and	  related	  access	  controls	  are	  increasingly	  embedded	  in	  a	  wide	  range	  of	  systems,	  from	  consumer	  goods	  to	  medical	  devices	  to	  infrastructure	  to	  industrial	  equipment.	  	  This	  trend	  carries	  tremendous	  opportunities,	  but	  it	  inevitably	  will	  bring	  a	  raft	  of	  new	  security	  flaws	  and	  vulnerabilities	  as	  well.	  	  Due	  to	  the	  widespread	  integration	  of	  software	  in	  tangible	  products	  and	  physical	  world	  processes,	  these	  flaws	  pose	  risks	  that	  are	  qualitatively	  different	  from	  the	  risks	  associated	  with	  traditional	  security	  defects	  confined	  to	  the	  digital	  environment.	  The	  emergence	  of	  the	  Internet	  of	  Things	  is	  one	  example	  of	  the	  spreading	  risk.1	  	  In	  this	  rapidly	  evolving	  environment,	  active	  security	  research	  and	  testing	  are	  crucial.	  	  Without	  an	  exemption,	  however,	  the	  DMCA’s	  anti-­‐circumvention	  provisions	  will	  substantially	  chill	  such	  research,	  for	  the	  same	  reasons	  the	  Copyright	  Office	  cited	  in	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  1	  Federal	  Trade	  Commission,	  internet	  of	  things:	  Privacy	  and	  Security	  in	  a	  Connected	  World,	  Jan.	  2015,	  http://www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/reports/federal-­‐trade-­‐commission-­‐staff-­‐report-­‐november-­‐2013-­‐workshop-­‐entitled-­‐internet-­‐things-­‐privacy/150127iotrpt.pdf.	  	  
[PAGE 2]
	   2	  
granting	  previous	  exemptions	  for	  CD	  and	  video	  game	  security	  testing:	  the	  scope	  of	  the	  security	  exception	  in	  1201(j)	  is	  simply	  not	  clear2	  and	  that	  lack	  of	  clarity	  chills	  the	  kind	  of	  security	  research	  that	  needs	  to	  happen	  today.	  	  	  Given	  the	  rapid	  proliferation	  in	  the	  kinds	  of	  products	  and	  systems	  subject	  to	  software-­‐based	  security	  flaws	  and	  vulnerabilities,	  an	  exemption	  needs	  to	  cover	  more	  than	  just	  a	  single	  product	  or	  class	  of	  product.	  	  Product-­‐by-­‐product	  exemptions	  –	  say,	  for	  security	  research	  regarding	  the	  software	  contained	  in	  Internet-­‐connected	  thermostats	  –	  would	  make	  little	  sense	  in	  a	  world	  where	  harmful	  flaws	  may	  exist	  in	  any	  of	  a	  wide	  variety	  of	  products	  or	  systems.	  	  Security	  researchers	  need	  appropriate	  legal	  latitude	  to	  engage	  in	  good	  faith	  security	  research.	  If	  researchers	  are	  forced	  to	  wait	  for	  the	  next	  triennial	  review	  process	  each	  time	  they	  discover	  that	  software	  on	  an	  additional	  type	  of	  specific	  product	  carries	  significant	  security	  vulnerabilities,	  the	  damage	  will	  already	  be	  done.	  	  In	  a	  world	  moving	  at	  Internet	  speed,	  security	  researchers	  cannot	  help	  protect	  the	  public	  if	  each	  new	  research	  effort	  has	  to	  be	  put	  on	  hold	  until	  the	  next	  triennial	  permission	  cycle.	  	  For	  these	  reasons,	  the	  Copyright	  Office	  should	  grant	  the	  petitions	  for	  an	  exemption	  covering	  good-­‐faith	  security	  research.	  	  Without	  such	  an	  exemption,	  security	  risks	  will	  lie	  unaddressed	  and	  the	  public	  will	  be	  substantially	  less	  safe.	  	  	  4.	  	  Technological	  Protection	  Measures	  and	  Methods	  of	  Circumvention	  	  As	  set	  forth	  in	  the	  petitions	  for	  a	  software	  security	  research	  exemption,	  the	  access	  control	  technologies	  relevant	  to	  this	  exemption	  will	  likely	  include	  challenge-­‐response	  mechanisms	  such	  as	  access	  codes,	  passwords,	  keys,	  or	  digital	  signatures;	  encryption;	  and	  software	  features	  designed	  to	  prevent	  tampering	  with	  or	  changing	  the	  software,	  such	  as	  code	  obfuscation	  and	  runtime	  checks.	  	  Security	  researchers	  also	  must	  be	  able	  to	  reverse	  engineer	  malware	  to	  protect	  computers,	  systems,	  and	  their	  users.	  	  	  5.	  	  Asserted	  Noninfringing	  Uses	  	  In	  the	  2010	  recommendation	  for	  a	  video	  game	  security	  research	  exemption,	  the	  Register	  concluded	  that:	  	  the	  factors	  set	  forth	  in	  17	  U.S.C.	  107	  tend	  to	  strongly	  support	  a	  finding	  that	  such	  good	  faith	  [security	  vulnerability]	  research	  constitutes	  fair	  use.	  	  The	  socially	  productive	  purpose	  of	  investigating	  computer	  security	  and	  informing	  the	  public	  do	  not	  involve	  use	  of	  the	  creative	  aspects	  of	  the	  work	  and	  are	  unlikely	  to	  have	  an	  adverse	  effect	  on	  the	  market	  for	  or	  value	  of	  the	  copyrighted	  work	  itself.3	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2	  See	  77	  FR	  68427,	  68477	  (Nov.	  27,	  2006).	  	  3	  75	  Fed.	  Reg.	  43833	  (July	  27,	  2010).	  
[PAGE 3]
	   3	  
The	  identical	  logic	  applies	  here.	  	  Good	  faith	  security	  research	  for	  the	  purpose	  of	  identifying	  potentially	  harmful	  security	  flaws	  and	  vulnerabilities	  constitutes	  a	  non-­‐infringing	  use	  of	  the	  software	  subjected	  to	  such	  research	  and	  testing.	  	  6.	  	  Asserted	  Adverse	  Effects	  	  	  Without	  an	  appropriate	  exemption,	  the	  DMCA’s	  anti-­‐circumvention	  provisions	  create	  a	  significant	  barrier	  to	  research	  on	  software	  flaws	  and	  vulnerabilities.	  	  The	  computer	  security	  researchers	  listed	  above	  are	  all	  aware	  of	  instances	  in	  which	  they	  or	  their	  colleagues	  have	  refrained	  from	  conducting	  or	  disseminating	  security	  research	  due	  to	  legal	  fears	  stemming	  from	  the	  DMCA.	  The	  prominent	  security	  researchers	  who	  submitted	  the	  exemption	  petitions	  have	  stated	  that	  they	  have	  chosen	  not	  to	  perform	  or	  disseminate	  security	  research	  that	  could	  have	  benefitted	  public	  safety	  because	  of	  the	  legal	  risks.4	  	  A	  group	  of	  corporate	  computer	  security	  leaders	  representing	  nearly	  50	  companies	  have	  stated	  that	  the	  DMCA	  “hamper[s]	  both	  our	  ability	  to	  protect	  our	  businesses	  and	  the	  public	  from	  information	  security	  threats	  and	  to	  conduct	  critical	  security	  research.”5	  	  As	  the	  Register	  concluded	  in	  2010,	  Congress	  recognized	  the	  importance	  of	  not	  discouraging	  computer	  security	  research:	  	  “Section	  1201(j)	  is	  evidence	  of	  Congress’s	  general	  concern	  to	  permit	  circumvention	  under	  appropriate	  circumstances	  for	  purposes	  of	  security	  testing.”6	  	  But	  the	  existing	  security	  testing	  exemption	  in	  section	  1201(j)	  is	  insufficient	  to	  ensure	  that	  the	  anti-­‐circumvention	  provisions	  will	  not	  chill	  research	  on	  systems	  security,	  for	  at	  least	  two	  reasons.	  	  First,	  as	  the	  Register	  concluded	  in	  both	  2010	  and	  2006,	  “it	  is	  unclear	  whether	  Section	  1201(j)	  applies	  in	  cases	  where	  the	  person	  engaging	  in	  security	  testing	  is	  not	  seeking	  to	  gain	  access	  to,	  in	  the	  words	  of	  Section	  1201(j),	  ‘a	  computer,	  computer	  system,	  or	  computer	  network.’”7	  	  	  This	  same	  ambiguity	  is	  fully	  applicable	  to	  security	  testing	  of	  software	  associated	  with	  numerous	  devices	  and	  systems.	  	  Second,	  Section	  1201(j)	  requires	  that	  testing	  be	  done	  “with	  the	  authorization	  of	  the	  owner	  or	  operator	  of	  such	  computer,	  computer	  system,	  or	  computer	  network.”8	  This	  creates	  additional	  ambiguity,	  as	  it	  seems	  to	  reflect	  an	  assumption	  that	  security	  testing	  will	  be	  performed	  by	  employees	  or	  agents	  of	  the	  entity	  deploying	  or	  using	  computer	  systems	  and	  associated	  software.	  	  In	  an	  Internet-­‐connected	  environment,	  some	  security	  testing	  may	  need	  to	  be	  performed	  by	  independent	  security	  researchers.	  	  It	  is	  far	  from	  clear	  that	  all	  relevant	  parties	  would	  readily	  provide	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  4	  Petition	  of	  Profs.	  Bellovin,	  Blaze,	  Felten,	  Halderman,	  and	  Heninger	  at	  3.	  5	  See	  Coalition	  for	  Security	  Research,	  Support	  DMCA	  and	  CFAA	  Reform	  to	  Protect	  Security	  Research,	  https://www.c4sr.org.	  6	  75	  Fed.	  Reg.	  43833	  (July	  27,	  2010).	  7	  75	  Fed.	  Reg.	  43833	  (July	  27,	  2010).	  8	  17	  U.S.C.	  1201(j)(1).	  
[PAGE 4]
	   4	  
authorization	  for	  research	  that	  could	  expose	  embarrassing	  flaws	  or	  vulnerabilities	  in	  their	  products.	  	  Granting	  the	  petitions	  for	  a	  software	  security	  exemption	  would	  promote	  security	  research	  by	  providing	  greater	  clarity	  and	  certainty	  to	  researchers.	  	  Without	  such	  an	  exemption,	  the	  public	  will	  face	  reduced	  security	  and	  significantly	  elevated	  risk	  of	  harm	  from	  security	  flaws	  and	  vulnerabilities.	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
