[PAGE 1]
  
Short Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption 
Under 17 U.S.C. 1201 
  
Item 1. Commenter Information  
My name is Jeffrey Philip Roddy, originally of Indianapolis, Indiana, now residing in Barrow, 
Alaska. 
 
Item 2.  Proposed Class Addressed 
Proposed Class 16: Jailbreaking - wireless telephone handsets  
 
Item 3. Statement Regarding Proposed Exemption 
I own an iPhone simply because it's the best mobile phone platform currently available.  Apple's 
quality craftsmanship means the older pre-owned handsets I buy and use retain their 
functionality long enough to make it worth the meager amount I can afford to spend.  In Barrow, 
the sun stays below the horizon for about 2 months every Winter.  Since there are no roads in or 
out of the community, there is also no terrestrial link to the outside world.  This means that 
although our "broadband cable internet" technically meets the definition of broadband according 
to the United States government, for most purposes in today's world it is barely adequate.  This is 
because all of our internet infrastructure is ultimately served by a satellite link.  The connection 
latency of 700 milliseconds means that when you submit a request on a webpage, the server on 
the other end does not get the input for well over half a second.  While this may not sound like a 
long time, consider that the 2014 Measuring Broadband America Report on Fixed Broadband 
published by the FCC found that "Across all terrestrial technologies during peak periods, latency 
averaged 34. 9 ms.".  That means the average US household has a response time that is over 20 
times as fast as the best choice I have.  That best option would cost me over $300.00 per month, 
and my monthly throughput would be capped at 100 GigaBytes.  A slightly more reasonable 
option would cost me half that, but limit my throughput to a measly 40 GigaBytes per month.  
My actual limit is 25 GB at $100 per month.  For this reason, I use whatever tools I can get my 
hands on to reduce my data usage.  One of these tools is a software Firewall for my iPhone, 
which I use not only to reduce my data usage, but also to ensure my device is not passing traffic 
to servers and services I don't recognize.  Apple may insist that their system is intrinsically safe, 
but the jailbreaking community has proven themselves by finding and patching security holes in 
the mobile operating system on more than one occasion, even before Apple themselves was able 
to address the exploits.  The fact that Apple doesn't allow tweaks like iPhone FireWall in their 
stock implemenation means the jailbreak community has to make up for it.  Another tweak I use 
daily is the ability to quickly turn on and off my phone's flashlight without accessing the 
graphical user interface(i.e without touching the screen).  In the dead of Winter, I always have a 
flashlight at the ready, because I bring my phone everywhere.  Other tweaks I use regularly 
include SSH functionality, f.lux, FolderEnhancer, NoMotion, NoSlowAnimations, CCSettings, 
Infinifolders, and BTstack.  Many of the tweaks I've used in the past have been made features of 
the mobile operating system.  This proves the jailbreak community is contributing to innovation 
within the field.  Lastly, but certainly not least, I've been a computer hobbyist since my father 
first let me sit in front of his green screen, over 25 years ago.  One of the best parts of using a 
computer is the ability to make it do whatever you want it to, and for people using the stock 
implementation of iOS, that is simply not an option.  I, for one, refuse to surrender that ability, 
and so I respectfully request that you renew the DMCA exemption for Class 16 devices. 
