[PAGE 1]
 
PRIVACY ACT ADVISORY STATEMENT Required by the Privacy Act of 1974 (P.L. 93-579) 
The authority for requesting this information is 17 U.S.C. §§ 1201(a)(1) and 705. Furnishing the requested information is voluntary. 
The principal use of the requested information is publication on the Copyright Office website and use by Copyright Office staff for 
purposes of the rulemaking proceeding conducted under 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1). NOTE: No other advisory statement will be given 
in connection with this submission. Please keep this statement and refer to it if we communicate with you regarding this submission. 
Short Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption 
Under 17 U.S.C. 1201 
  
Item 1. Commenter Information  
 
Kyle Moschell 
 
Item 2.  Proposed Class Addressed 
 
Proposed Class 16: Jailbreaking—Wireless Telephone Handsets 
 
Item 3. Statement Regarding Proposed Exemption 
 
I am writing in support of readopting of the existing exemption allowing jailbreaking of wireless telephone 
handsets under Proposed Class 16. Jailbreaking wireless telephones has become a more common and 
widely-accepted practice due to the limitations that are continually imposed on wireless telephones by 
their manufacturers. The restrictions included on wireless telephones may be designed for ease of use or 
to prevent accidental changes however, for the more connected and tech-savvy owners, these limitations 
prevent using the device to its full potential and have negative consequences which cannot be disabled 
by default. Jailbreaking has existed solely as a method for unlocking the full features of a wireless 
telephone and giving the owner choice over their desired settings. This practice can be compared with 
disabling the child safety lock of your automobile if you do not have any children; a feature which many 
people may appreciate but others would find an unnecessary burden. 
 
The previously granted exemptions, originally issued in 2010 and readopted in 2012, have had no 
adverse effect on the wireless telephone marketplace or related industries. In fact, sales of wireless 
telephones and related devices have increased steadily since 2010 [1]. The market leaders in the United 
States, Apple and Samsung, have seen especially strong success and increasing sales figures over the 
last 4 years [2]. It remains extremely unlikely that any jailbreaking exemption would negatively affect the 
marketplace for wireless telephones, and may have a positive effect since owners are happier using their 
devices freely. 
 
Recent surveys have identified the most common problems that wireless telephone owners encounter. 
Many of the problems that wireless telephone owners encounter can be alleviated by minor modifications, 
or “tweaks”, that can be performed after jailbreaking. For example, a recent study found that 68% of 
wireless telephone owners receive unwanted sales or marketing calls, and 69% of text messaging users 
receive unwanted spam text messages. Additionally, 77% of mobile telephone internet users say they 
experience slow download speeds. [3] The most common changes that users make after jailbreaking 
include installing tweaks to allow call blocking and text message blocking, as well as advertisement 
blocking. Call and text message blocking is not a standard telephone feature in most cases and 
jailbreaking allows users to install this kind of protection against unwanted calls or text messages. 
Advertisement blocking facilitates faster internet browsing by declining to load advertisements, frequently 
video or audio ads, which consume excess bandwidth. 
Another common wireless telephone issue is regarding privacy and location tracking. As GPS and 
location-tracking features have been integrated into wireless telephones, manufacturers have not always 
provided clear ways to monitor and disable these tracking features. Pre-installed applications may also be 
locked onto the device and not removable by default. Personal data privacy is of upmost importance to 
wireless telephone users and jailbreaking allows additional control and insight into the tracking features 
on a mobile telephone, as well as the ability to remove any unwanted applications. 
[1]: http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2408515 
[2]: http://blog.thomsonreuters.com/index.php/smartphone-market-share-graphic-of-the-day-2/ 
[3]: http://www.pewinternet.org/fact-sheets/mobile-technology-fact-sheet/ 
