[PAGE 1]
February 6, 2015 
 
Music Library Association 
8551 Research Way 
Suite 180 
Middleton, WI 53562 
Ph. 608-836-5825 
 
The Music Library Association (MLA) respectfully submits the following comment in 
response to the call for comments, "Section 1201 Exemptions to Prohibition Against 
Circumvention of Technological Measures Protecting Copyrighted Works,” 
(http://copyright.gov/1201/).  The MLA is the professional association for music libraries 
and librarianship in the United States.  Founded in 1931, MLA has an international 
membership of over 800 librarians, musicians, scholars, educators, and members of the 
book and music trades.  Complementing the Association's national and international 
activities are eleven regional chapters that carry out its programs on the local level.  The 
Music Library Association provides a professional forum for librarians, archivists, and 
others who support and preserve the world's musical heritage. 
 
This comment addresses the fifth proposed class of exemptions out of 27 created by the 
Copyright Office in December 2014: 
 
5. Audiovisual works – derivative uses – multimedia e-books
 
 
This proposed class would allow circumvention of access controls on lawfully 
made and acquired motion pictures used in connection with multimedia e-book 
authorship. This exemption has been requested for audiovisual material made 
available in all formats, including DVDs protected by CSS, Blu-ray discs 
protected by AACS, and TPM-protected online distribution services. 
 
A core mission of music libraries is to support innovative scholarship and research. This 
exemption speaks directly to new modes of scholarship that currently cannot be legally 
pursued by scholars or supported by music libraries who have lawfully acquired much of 
the audiovisual content in question. This exemption would allow music librarians to aid 
scholars in new modes of research and communication to further our understanding and 
promote the value of our collections. Scholarly projects that would need this exemption 
could include multimedia books that provide contextualized analysis of audiovisual 
content and newer forms of scholarship not yet imagined. 
 
 
 
  
 
	
