[PAGE 1]
  
1 
   
Long Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption 
Under 17 U.S.C. 1201 
  
[  ]   Check here if multimedia evidence is being provided in connection with this 
comment 
Please note that such evidence must be separately submitted on a disc or flash drive.  See the Notice of 
Proposed Rulemaking for detailed instructions.   
  
Item 1. Commenter Information  
Identify the commenting party and, if desired, provide a means for others to contact the commenter or an 
authorized representative of the commenter by email and/or telephone.  (Please keep in mind that any 
private, confidential, or personally identifiable information in this document will be accessible to the public.) 
 
Commenting Party: Competitive Carriers Association (“CCA”)  
 
CCA is the nation’s leading association for competitive wireless providers and 
stakeholders across the United States. CCA’s membership includes more than 100 competitive 
wireless providers ranging from small, rural carriers serving fewer than 5,000 customers to 
regional and national providers serving millions of customers. The licensed service area of 
CCA’s carrier members covers more than 95 percent of the nation. CCA also represents 
approximately 200 associate members consisting of small businesses, vendors, and suppliers that 
serve carriers of all sizes.  
 
Contact: Rebecca Murphy Thompson, General Counsel  
  C. Sean Spivey, Assistant General Counsel 
Email:  sean.spivey@competitivecarriers.org  
Telephone: (800) 722-1872 
 
Item 2.  Proposed Class Addressed 
Identify the proposed exemption that your comment addresses by the number and name of the class set 
forth in the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (e.g., “Proposed Class 7: Audiovisual works – derivative uses  
– noncommercial remix videos”).  
 
 Proposed Class 12: Unlocking—All Purpose Tablet Computers.1  As noted in the 
NPRM, “This proposed class would allow the unlocking of all-purpose tablet computers. This 
class would encompass devices such as the Apple iPad, Microsoft Surface, Amazon Kindle Fire, 
and Samsung Galaxy Tab, but would exclude specialized devices such as dedicated e-book 
                                                 
1 CCA originally sought four separate exemptions addressing the following categories: (i) 
wireless handsets; (ii) all-purpose tablet computers; (iii) mobile hotspots and MiFi devices; and 
(iv) connected wearables and consumer machines (the Internet of Things).  For consistency and 
efficiency, however, CCA reiterates its request that these exemptions, and other similar 
exemptions, should be consolidated into a single “wireless device” exemption, as they all involve 
computer programs used in devices that connect to a telecommunications and/or broadband 
network.  Consumers do not distinguish among categories of connected devices, and having an 
exemption only applicable to a subset of wireless devices is likely to cause consumer confusion 
and frustration.  
[PAGE 2]
 2 
 
readers and dedicated handheld gaming devices.”2  CCA believes that all-purpose tablet 
computers of the type and nature can be broadly defined as “mobile computers that are operated 
with fingers or a stylus through the use of a touch screen display.”  This definition is both 
specific enough to clearly define the class of machines to be covered by the exemption, and 
broad enough so as to not be unduly restrictive if new technologies arise during the exemption 
period. 
 
 CCA has proposed the following exemption for Proposed Class 12:3 
 
Computer programs, in the form of firmware, software, or data 
used by firmware or software, that enable all-purpose tablet 
computers to connect to a wireless network that offers  
telecommunications and/or information servi ces, when 
circumvention is initiated by the owner of the device, or by another 
person at the direction of the owner of the device, in order to 
connect to a wireless network that offers telecommunications 
and/or information services, and access to the netwo rk is 
authorized by the operator of the network. 
 
 CCA believes that this exemption properly enables users to take control over the use of 
their tablets, and permits them the choice of which network they will be connected to.  Rather 
than relying on the presumed goodwill of wireless carriers, or the availability of unlocking codes 
from manufacturers, with this exemption consumers will be empowered to retain their current 
tablets when selecting the wireless service provider of their choice. 
 
 Given the growing importance of data as a form of wireless communication among 
consumers, CCA believes that the most appropriate exemption language is for devices that 
connect to “telecommunications and/or information services.”  At present, very few wireless 
providers offer significant numbers of voice-only plans, and the ever-increasing demand by 
consumers for data weighs in favor of the Copyright Office clarifying the exemption in this 
proceeding to confirm that consumers have the right to unlock their devices for the purpose of 
connecting to wireless networks for both telecommunications and information service uses. 
 
Item 3. Overview 
Provide a brief summary of the circumvention activity sought to be exempted or opposed and why. 
 
CCA proposes an exemption to circumvent software or firmware locks on a tablet that 
prevent the tablet from accessing the wireless network of the owner’s choosing. 
 
The exemption is being sought because tablet owners have a clear ownership interest in 
the tablet itself, as well as the underlying operating system software, and should be afforded the 
                                                 
2 Exemption to Prohibition of Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, Docket No. 2014-07, 79 FR 73856, 73865 (Dec. 
12, 2014) (“NPRM”). 
3 NPRM at 73865, fn. 46; see also CCA Tablet Unlocking Pet. at 1-2. 
[PAGE 3]
 3 
 
ability to make non-infringing uses of these products.  Absent an exemption, tablet owners may 
be forced to purchase a new wireless device in order to change service providers and connect to 
the wireless network of their choice.  This may result in substantial costs to the consumer, not 
only in the form of the price paid for a new tablet (while their current tablet becomes obsolete), 
but also in the form of personal information stored on the tablet, contacts, music, apps, and other 
investments made in peripheral items. 
 
CCA’s proposed exemption is not only consistent with the Copyright Office’s mandate to 
allow circumvention where the public interest is served by permitting non-infringing use of the 
copyrighted material, but also will promote competition and consumer choice in an increasingly 
consolidated wireless industry.4 
 
Item 4. Technological Protection Measure(s) and Method(s) of 
Circumvention 
Describe the TPM(s) that control access to the work and the relevant method(s) of circumvention. The 
description should provide sufficient information to allow the Office to understand the nature of the 
relevant technologies, as well as how they are disabled or bypassed. 
 
Tablets can be hardware or software-locked using a using a variety of methods, including 
service provider code locking, system operator code locking, band order locking and Subscriber 
Identity Module locking or Universal Integrated Circuit Card locking.  These locking 
mechanisms bind the device to specific wireless networks and prevent consumers from accessing 
the wireless network of their choice.  Only by circumventing these various TPMs can a tablet 
owner transfer the use of the tablet to a network and provider of one’s choosing. 
 
While software locks can, in some instances, serve legitimate, non-copyright related 
purposes like preventing customers from accidentally damaging the firmware on the tablet, these 
locks are most often used to inappropriately prevent a tablet from being moved from one 
network to another. 
 
Tablets are unlocked using a variety of methods, typically by changing the variables in 
certain tablet memory locations and updating the preferred roaming list (“PRL”) to make the 
tablet compatible with a new network.  These variables are effectively a “blank slate” when the 
tablet comes off the assembly line, and then are updated to make them compatible with the 
network with which the tablet is intended to be used.  Thus, these variables are intended by the 
copyright owner to be changed based on which network a particular tablet will be connected to.  
In this respect, no unusual or unexpected alterations are being made to the underlying operating 
system code – instead, anticipated changes are being made that will permit the tablet to operate. 
                                                 
4 The Federal Communications Commission’s recently-released Seventeenth Report on mobile 
wireless competition found that the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (“HHI”), a measure of market 
concentration, averaged 3,027 across the country—more than 20% above the level at which a 
market is considered “highly concentrated.”  The HHI numbers for the wireless industry have 
consistently been on the rise over the last five years or more.  See Annual Report and Analysis of 
Competitive Market Conditions With Respect to Mobile Wireless, Including Commercial Mobile 
Services, Seventeenth Report, WT Docket No. 13-135, DA 14-1862, ¶¶ 32-33 (rel. Dec. 18, 
2014). 
[PAGE 4]
 4 
 
Item 5. Asserted Noninfringing Use(s)  
Explain the asserted noninfringing use(s) of copyrighted works said to be facilitated by the proposed 
exemption, including all legal (statutory or doctrinal) bases for the claim that the uses are or are likely 
noninfringing. Commenters should provide an evidentiary basis to support their contentions, including 
discussion or refutation of specific examples of such uses and, if available, documentary and/or 
separately submitted multimedia evidence.  
 
Consumers who unlock tablets may engage in one or more of several noninfringing uses 
of the copyrighted software or firmware that resides on their tablet and permits it to connect to 
networks.  Typically, the circumvention of the TPM allows an owner, who has fulfilled all 
obligations to the original provider, to operate the device on the network of a new, compatible 
wireless provider of one’s choosing.  However, tablets may also be unlocked by charitable 
organizations, which donate the tablets for use or re-sell them to finance charitable works, or by 
environmental organizations that encourage the re-use or recycling of devices to keep toxic 
chemicals out of landfills.  Noninfringing use of these copyrighted works is supported under 
multiple legal theories, three of which are explained here.  
 
Unlocking Constitutes “Fair Use” Under 17 U.S.C. Section 107 
 
Tablet unlocking constitutes “fair use” under Section 107 of Title 17 of the United State 
Code.  When most tablets are unlocked, the device owner is simply changing the variables in 
certain memory locations and updating the PRL to make the tablet useable on a new network. 
Carriers regularly update the PRL on their customers’ tablets, so the original author of the 
copyrighted work intended these variables to be changed without constituting a copyright 
violation.  Further, unlocking a tablet meets all four factors of the “fair use” test set forth in 
Section 107: (1) the purpose of the use is to allow the lawful owner of the tablet to connect to a 
wireless network of their choice, a reasonable and noninfringing use; (2) the copyrighted work is 
intended to be changed in this manner and is necessary for the tablet owner to derive any 
continued value from the copyrighted work; (3) the amount of the code used in an altered state is 
extremely small compared to the tablet operating system as a whole; and (4) the market for and 
value of the copyrighted work actually increases, as it allows the tablet to be transferred on the 
secondary market more easily and to a broader array of buyers. 
 
Unlocking a Tablet Does Not Create an Infringing Derivative Work 
 
Unlocking a tablet does not create an infringing “derivative work.”  This is because, in 
most instances, unlocking a tablet does not change the underlying tablet software, but rather it 
merely changes underlying variables accessed by the program.  As discussed above, these 
variables are intended by the software designer to be changed, and their change, therefore, does 
not create an infringing derivative work.  Instead, the software is merely being operated by the 
tablet owners as intended. 
 
Any Derivative Work Created is Protected Under 17 U.S.C. Section 117(a)(1) 
 
If, however, a derivative work is, in fact, created, it falls within the exception set forth in 
17 U.S.C. Section 117(a)(1).  This subsection states that a derivative work may be created by the 
owner of a copyrighted work if the “new copy or adaptation is created as an essential step in the 
[PAGE 5]
 5 
 
utilization of the computer program in conjunction with a machine and that it is used in no other 
manner.”  Since the changes being made to the copyrighted work are the same ones that need to 
be made by the underlying carrier in order for the tablet to operate properly on its wireless 
network, such adaptations are inherently “essential step[s] in the utilization of the computer 
program in conjunction with [the device].”  Indeed, in 2012, the Register agreed that unlocking 
was an “essential step” in the utilization of handsets, finding again that “[m]odifications to the 
firmware or software on the [device] may be necessary to make the device functional with 
another service and better serve the legitimate needs of the consumer.”5 
 
Relevant Case Law Demonstrates That Tablet Owners are Owners of the Underlying 
Operating System Software for Section 117(a)(1) Exemption Purposes 
 
In order to fall within the exception set forth in 17 U.S.C. Section 117(a)(1), the party 
creating the derivative work must also be the owner of the software – that is, if a device owner is 
a mere licensee of the software, Section 117(a)(1) protections are unavailable to him or her.6  
Although the Supreme Court has not articulated a national framework on this issue, the two 
leading cases on licensing vs. ownership are Krause v. Titleserv, Inc., 402 F.3d 119 (2d Cir. 2005) 
and Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc., 621 F.3d 1102 (9th Cir. 2010).  In the 2012 Recommendation, the 
Register concluded that the state of the law was sufficiently unclear as to make it impossible to 
determine whether all device owners were licensees or owners of the software.7  Despite this 
determination, the current state of the market and the terms on which much of the operating 
system software is provided to consumers in connection with a tablet purchase make it clear that 
tablet owners are the also the owners of the operating system software under either the Krause or 
the Vernor tests. 
 
In Krause, the Second Circuit held that ownership of a copyrighted work, as opposed to a 
license, is indicated by balancing seven factors:  
 
(1) whether substantial consideration was paid for the copy; (2) whether the copy 
was created for the sole benefit of the purchaser; (3) whether the copy was 
customized to serve the purchaser’s use; (4) whether the copy was stored on 
property owned by the purchaser; (5) whether the creator reserved the right to 
repossess the copy; (6) whether the creator agreed that the purchaser had the right 
to possess and use the programs forever regardless of whether the relationship 
                                                 
5 2012 Recommendation at 93.  The same reasoning applies as to tablets.   
6 Contrary to the arguments raised by CTIA in the 2012 proceeding, simply stating that a piece of 
software is being provided under “license” does not make it so.  See Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc., 
621 F.3d 1102, 1180 (9th Cir. 2010) (holding that simply labeling a software agreement as a 
license is not “dispositive”). 
7 2012 Recommendation at 92 (“The Register concludes that the state of the law remains unclear. 
Although Vernor and Krause are useful guideposts in considering the status of software 
ownership, they are controlling precedent in only two circuits and are inconsistent in their 
approach; whether and how those standards would be applied in other circuits is unknown.”) 
[PAGE 6]
 6 
 
between the parties terminated; and (7) whether the purchaser was free to discard 
or destroy the copy anytime it wished.8   
 
With respect to tablets, tablet owners pay substantial consideration for the copy of the 
software as part of the tablet price.9  The copy of the software is stored on property owned, 
namely the physical tablet, and the software creator permits the underlying operating system 
software to be used by the tablet owner indefinitely (and in some cases, even longer due to 
transfer rights).  Further, the tablet owner is free to discard or destroy the copy (along with the 
physical tablet) anytime that he or she wishes.  On balance, these Krause factors strongly favor a 
finding of ownership of the copyrighted operating system software by the wireless device owner. 
 
In Vernor, the Ninth Circuit held that “a software user is a licensee rather than an owner 
of a copy where the copyright owner (1) specifies that the user is granted a license; (2) 
significantly restricts the user’s ability to transfer the software; and (3) imposes notable use 
restrictions.”10  These factors can be seen as more stringent, and it has been argued by some that 
they favor the view that the device owner is a licensee.  Nevertheless, the test for ownership of a 
tablet’s underlying operating system is met under the Vernor test as well.  Importantly, the 
Vernor test is a conjunctive test, and therefore demands that all three elements be met if a 
software user is to be considered a licensee, rather than an owner.11 
 
As applied to the facts at hand, tablets do not have “notable use restrictions.”  Customers 
are permitted to use their tablets for any lawful purpose, and as the Register stated in the 2012 
Recommendation, “no wireless provider has taken the position that customers are unable to sell 
devices that they no longer use, or transfer them to a spouse, child or friend.”12  Indeed, the 
Register’s findings have been validated by the voluntary agreement recently entered into by the 
nation’s five largest carriers.13 Accordingly, tablet operating system software fails one element of 
the Vernor test, and on this basis alone one could conclude that an owner of a tablet is also an 
owner of the copy of the operating system software. 
 
However, there is also a second, independent basis on which to find that the tablet owner 
is also the owner of the software copy under Vernor.  At least two significant mobile operating 
                                                 
8 Krause, 402 F.3d at 124. 
9 For example, the price for an unlocked iPad Air 2 rages from $629 to $829, with the hardware 
components of the tablet combining to form only a small portion of the cost of the device.  See 
http://store.apple.com/us/buy-ipad/ipad-air-2/.  
10 Vernor, 621 F.3d at 1111.   
11 See YULE KIM, CONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH SERVICE, STATUTORY INTERPRETATION: GENERAL 
PRINCIPLES AND RECENT TRENDS, Order Code 97-589 at 8 (updated Aug. 31, 2008) (“Ordinarily, 
as in everyday English, use of the conjunctive ‘and’ in a list means that all of the listed 
requirements must be satisfied . . . .”). 
12 2012 Recommendation at 92 (quoting MetroPCS Comments at 17). 
13 See CTIA Consumer Code of Conduct § 12. 
[PAGE 7]
 7 
 
system software license agreements, Apple iOS 8.114 and Windows 8.1 Pro,15 contain language 
that run explicitly counter to the second element in the Vernor test, that the copyright owner 
“significantly restricts the user’s ability to transfer the software.”16  Notably, iOS alone accounts 
for nearly one-third of the tablet market, according to recent market surveys.17 
 
Given the evidence above, it is clear that tablet owners should be considered owners of a 
copy of the operating system software, and therefore entitled to the protections of Section 
117(a)(1), and be permitted to create a derivative work in order to allow the tablet to connect to a 
wireless network of the tablet owners choice. 
 
Item 6. Asserted Adverse Effects  
Explain whether the inability to circumvent the TPM(s) at issue has or is likely to have adverse effects on 
the asserted noninfringing use(s), including any relevant legal (statutory or doctrinal) considerations. 
Commenters should also address any potential alternatives that permit the asserted noninfringing use(s) 
without the need for circumvention. Commenters should provide an evidentiary basis to support their 
contentions, including discussion or refutation of specific examples of such uses and, if available, 
documentary and/or separately submitted multimedia evidence.  
 
The most clear, and most immediate, adverse effect that the TPMs that lock tablets have 
is to prevent consumers from easily switching their tablets to the competing network of their 
choice. Although carriers may unlock under certain circumstances, owners should not be 
beholden to the carrier after completion of service agreement commitments.  As the Senate has 
noted, there are also “circumstances in which additional avenues for unlocking may be preferable 
over attempting to unlock through the carrier.”18  Absent an exemption, TPMs used to lock 
                                                 
14 See iOS Software License Agreement, Section 3 – “Transfer”, available at 
http://images.apple.com/legal/sla/docs/iOS81.pdf (permitting device owners to “make a one-time 
permanent transfer of all of your license rights to the iOS Software to another party in connection 
with the transfer of ownership of your iOS Device” – that is, it explicitly allowing the transfer of 
the software to a third party). 
15 See Windows 8.1 Pro Microsoft Software License Agreement, “Can I transfer the software to 
another computer or user?” available at 
http://www.google.com.hk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&
ved=0CB0QFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fdownload.microsoft.com%2Fdownload%2F7%2F2%
2F1%2F72103B1C-DE58-478C-BECF-
4D846C2B4A15%2FUseTerms_Retail_Windows_8.1_Pro_update_%2528to_Windows_8_Pro_
which_was_acquired_from_retail_or_Microsoft%2529_English.pdf&ei=FsTFVOP2NIuP8QXus
YGoDA&usg=AFQjCNElAfxk7QlZwkt7h5LMCwb6wBNDNA (stating that “[y]ou may also 
transfer the software (together with the license) to a computer owned by someone else,” subject 
to certain conditions and the agreement of the third party to abide by the terms of the license.). 
16 Vernor, 621 F.3d at 1111. 
17 Lance Whitney, “iPad sheds more market share but still dominates,” Cnet.com, (May 1, 2014), 
available at http://www.cnet.com/news/ipad-sheds-more-market-share-but-still-dominates/.  
18 Senate Report 113-212, available at http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CRPT-
113srpt212/html/CRPT-113srpt212.htm.  
[PAGE 8]
 8 
 
tablets to a particular network will foreclose the ability to exercise preferable, and in some cases, 
the only, avenues to unlock devices. Since circumvention to connect to an alternative network 
would be a noninfringing use of the copyrighted work, consumers should have the freedom to 
unlock their tablets on their own or through an agent of their choosing. 
 
“Voluntary” Unlocking Policies are Insufficient to Protect Consumer Interests 
 
While some carriers have “voluntary” unlocking policies for tablets, the exemption 
remains necessary in the event that incomplete or voluntary agreements to unlock devices fail to 
provide an owner the ability to unlock a tablet. For example, original equipment manufacturers 
(“OEMs”) are not signatories to existing voluntary agreements and are not bound by the current 
voluntary agreement entered into by the nation’s five largest carriers.19  As NTIA noted in the 
last triennial review, and the voluntary agreement confirms, oftentimes carriers must have the 
necessary code or the ability to reasonably obtain it to unlock the device.20  Where a voluntary 
agreement only requires that a carrier “initiate a request to the OEM to unlock the eligible 
device” it is possible for the carrier to comply with the agreement in a manner that does not 
ultimately result in the consumer’s device being unlocked.   
 
This also highlights the fact that OEMs (or third-party software developers) often 
consider themselves to be the owners of the copyrighted software, which is provided under a 
purported license to carriers.  So, there remains the possibility that an OEM or software 
developer may refuse to allow carriers to alter their software in any respect, which would 
eliminate the ability of carriers to implement their voluntary unlocking promises.  In such a 
circumstance, a consumer unlocking exemption granted in this proceeding would be the only 
path to allowing customers to switch wireless providers with their devices in hand.   
 
This circumstance is not farfetched or theoretical.  Indeed, in a recent discussion of the 
company’s post-sale transition plan, Cincinnati Bell Wireless (“CBW”) stated that it would only 
be allowing customers to unlock their handsets to move to another carrier if the handsets were 
“one year old or newer.”21  Even with this significant restriction, CBW would only permit 
customers to “transition to another provider by providing unlock codes (if available),” 
suggesting that there are a sufficient number of circumstances in which unlock codes are not 
available to warrant a specific disclosure.22  Although this was in the context of wireless handsets, 
it is not a significant leap to assume that the same is or would be the case for similarly-situated 
tablet customers.   
 
                                                 
19 See CTIA Consumer Code of Conduct § 12. 
20 NTIA Reply Comments at 16, available at 
http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2012/2012_NTIA_Letter.pdf; CTIA Consumer Code of Conduct 
§ 12. 
21 Phil Goldstein, “Cincinnati Bell customers frustrated by transition amid network shutdown,” 
FierceWireless (Jan. 12, 2015), available at http://www.fiercewireless.com/story/cincinnati-bell-
customers-frustrated-transition-amid-network-shutdown/2015-01-12.  
22 Id. 
[PAGE 9]
 9 
 
Thus there is clear evidence that these voluntary unlocking policies do not obviate the 
need for an exemption.  As a result, customers must have the option and the right to unlock their 
tablets to realize their full utility, and without unwarranted interference from their original 
wireless provider.   
 
The Availability of Unlocked Tablet Options Does Not Obviate the Need for an Exemption 
 
Further, the availability of unlocked tablet options in the marketplace does not displace 
the need for a tablet unlocking exemption.  Although some, but by no means all, tablets are 
available in an unlocked form, a consumer may not find her desired tablet as one of the unlocked 
options.  Perhaps more importantly, a consumer may simply wish to keep his current familiar 
device, or that is, for example, particularly well-suited to managing his disability.23  Where 
owners are unable to unlock their current tablet to connect to their network of choice, they are 
effectively forced to purchase a new tablet, despite having no desire to do so.  The owner may 
then lose contacts, personal information, music, apps and other content, as well as significant 
investments made in peripheral items like chargers, headsets, batteries and cases – all of which 
increase the true cost of the lack of an unlocking exemption. 
 
Substantial Evidence of Adverse Effects Exists, and Consumers Have No Reasonable 
Alternatives to Circumvention 
 
After the previous handset unlocking exemption was allowed to expire, Congress saw 
sufficient current adverse effects, as well as the potential for adverse effects, to immediately 
reinstate and expand the exemption in the “Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless 
Competition Act.” Even with other voluntary unlocking policies in place, Congress saw 
sufficient harm in the marketplace to adopt legislation.  And, in this respect, Congress was 
performing the will of the people.  A White House petition garnered more than 114,000 
signatures from concerned consumers who demonstrated the likely adverse effects of the 
rejection of the unlocking exemption.24  Indeed, this consumer outcry extended not only to the 
original exemption for wireless handsets, but to tablets as well.  As part of the “Unlocking 
Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act,” Congress directed the Copyright Office to 
expand its inquiry into other wireless devices, such as tablets, to ensure that anti-competitive 
locking policies were not harming the market for these important consumer products as well.  
Even with voluntary unlocking policies for tablets already in place, Congress saw sufficient harm 
in the marketplace to adopt legislation directing the Copyright Office to undertake this new 
examination. 
 
                                                 
23 Persons who are blind or have low vision may require tablets with special features, and those 
tablets may not be available from all carriers.  See, e.g., “Tablet test with blind users: Overview,” 
available at http://www.incobs.de/tests-english/items/tablettest-blind-en-overview.html.   
24 See R. David Edelman, “It’s Time to Legalize Cell Phone Unlocking,” Official White House 
Response to Make Unlocking Cell Phones Legal, available at 
https://petitions.whitehouse.gov/response/its-time-legalize-cell-phone-unlocking (“White House 
Unlocking Response”).  
[PAGE 10]
 10 
 
Additionally, NTIA petitioned the FCC to commence a rulemaking to require carriers to 
unlock devices upon request.25  NTIA stated that a rule would “increase competition in the 
mobile services market and enhance consumer welfare.”26  While the enactment of the 
Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act foreclosed the need for rulemaking, 
not extending an exemption would have the adverse effects of decreased competition and 
consumer welfare. 
 
Even the Obama Administration, in a statement applauding Congress for passing the 
Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act, referenced steps “to ensure 
copyright law does not undermine wireless competition,” including fixes “that make it clear: 
neither criminal law nor technological locks should prevent customers from switching carriers 
when they are no longer bound by a service agreement or other obligation.”27 Failure to grant an 
exemption would reinstate criminal penalties that may prevent consumers from switching 
carriers, a clear and immediate adverse effect. 
 
No viable alternatives to circumvention have emerged over the last three years, nor is 
CCA aware of any on the horizon.28  As a result, the Copyright Office remains consumers’ best 
hope for a continued ability to lawfully unlock their tablets.  The Copyright Office should heed 
the outcry from consumers, Congress and the Administration about the current and potential anti-
consumer harms that failing to adopt a tablet unlocking exemption would bring, and adopt 
CCA’s proposed exemption. 
 
Item 7. Statutory Factors  
Evaluate the proposed exemption in light of each of the statutory factors set forth in 17 U.S.C. 
1201(a)(1)(C): 
(i) the availability for use of copyrighted works;  
Without question locks on tablets reduce the availability for use and the usability of the 
copyrighted software operating system.  A customer who would otherwise be technically able to 
use his or her device on a competing network is prevented from doing so by artificial locks.  
Thus, the ability to use the copyrighted operating system software that powers the tablet is 
substantially limited; if a customer switches networks and has a tablet that cannot be unlocked, 
he or she is no longer able to use the copyrighted operating system. 
                                                 
25 NTIA, Petition for Rulemaking of the National Telecommunications and Information 
Administration (filed Sept. 17, 2013), available at 
http://www.ntia.doc.gov/files/ntia/publications/ntia_mobile_devices_unlocking_petition_091720
13.pdf.   
26 Id. at 1. 
27 See White House Unlocking Response. 
28 Nor have the previous exemptions adversely affected the marketplace for the accessed 
copyrighted works.  Tablets, and the copyrighted underlying operating systems, continue to be 
among the most popular consumer electronic devices in the country.  As tablet sales continue to 
increase, it simply cannot be said that the market for these works is being depressed by the 
Copyright Office’s unlocking exemption. 
[PAGE 11]
 11 
 
 
Importantly, as the Register found during the prior proceeding: 
 
There is no indication that mobile . . .  firmware is sold in any way other 
than with the [device] for which it is developed, and no indication that 
there are alternative “formats” available that would not require 
circumvention – that is, there is no  evidence that users of locked legacy 
[devices] can simply install an alternative operating system that does not 
include carrier locks. Accordingly, the first factor favors an exemption.29 
 
 These facts remain as true today as they did in 2012.  CCA is unaware of mobile tablet 
firmware being sold in any other way than bundled with the tablet for which it was developed, 
and is aware of no other formats of such operating system software available that would not 
require circumvention.  As such, the Register should make the same finding in this proceeding 
that the first statutory favor favors an exemption. 
 
(ii) the availability for use of works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational purposes;  
An exemption permitting the unlocking of tablets increases the availability of the 
copyrighted operating system works for use for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational 
purposes.  As an initial matter, a significant number of nonprofit organizations fund their 
operations through the collection, unlocking and resale of wireless devices.  In addition, artificial 
locks on tablet software may prevent those operating systems from being studied in the 
classroom or archived for future study.  An exemption to the prohibition on circumvention of 
tablet locks certainly will not negatively impact, and may in fact promote, the use of these works 
for such purposes. 
 
(iii) the impact that the prohibition on the circumvention of technological measures applied to 
copyrighted works has on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or 
research;  
Similar to the use of the works for nonprofit and educational purposes, there should be no 
concern that a tablet unlocking exemption will have any negative impact on criticism, comment, 
news reporting, teaching, scholarship or research.  In fact, there may be positive benefits for 
these fields that flow from an unlocking exemption.  For example, journalists can improve 
consumer awareness by writing about the behavior of an unlocked device moving from one 
network to another.  Similarly, this would allow industry commenters to review the performance 
of a single tablet on multiple wireless networks. 
 
(iv) the effect of circumvention of technological measures on the market for or value of copyrighted 
works; and  
If anything, the circumvention of tablet locks actually improves the market value of the 
copyrighted work.  Since the operating system conveys with the wireless device, the creator of 
the copyrighted work is actually benefited by being able to reach the widest possible audience.  
If a tablet is locked to a particular network, it inherently has a smaller base of customers on the 
                                                 
29 2012 Recommendation at 97. 
[PAGE 12]
 12 
 
secondary market, and is therefore worth less to the original purchaser.  The operating system is 
a large part of the value of the fully operational tablet, and customers will be willing to pay more 
for a tablet (and the underlying operating system) that is worth more, and can be transferred 
more easily, on the secondary market.   
 
Although the Register found that the market for mobile device operating system software 
was “unlikely to be affected by enabling consumers to alter that software for the purpose of using 
the handset on another carrier,” this was coupled with the finding that “[t]here is nothing in the 
record to suggest that the market for firmware has declined in the six years following the first 
granting of an unlocking exemption.”30  CCA agrees with the Register’s prior determination.  In 
fact, the market for firmware (and the tablets with which it is sold) has only increased since the 
Register made that determination in 2012.  A recent CTIA survey cited by the Federal 
Communications Commission found that “the number of connections grew … from 326.5 
million at the end of 2012, to 335.7 million at the end of 2013 [or 3 percent].”31  Thus, it can be 
demonstrated that the market for firmware (and the wireless devices with which it is sold) has 
only increased since the Register made its determination in 2012.  Accordingly, the Register 
should again draw the same conclusion, based on the same or stronger current evidence, that “the 
fourth factor . . . favors an exemption.”32 
 
(v) any other factor that may be appropriate for the Librarian to consider in evaluating the proposed 
exemption. 
 
The Librarian should consider the positive impact that an unlocking exemption will have 
on consumer choice and competition in the wireless industry.  By allowing customers to have 
control over their own wireless devices, and to put them on the network of their choosing, the 
Librarian is conferring a significant social benefit.  The Librarian should empower consumers to 
make informed choices about wireless services. 
 
Item 8. Documentary Evidence  
Commenters are encouraged to submit documentary evidence to support their arguments or illustrate 
pertinent points concerning the proposed exemption. Any such documentary evidence should be attached 
to the comment and uploaded through the Office’s website (though it does not count toward the 25-page 
limit).   
None submitted. 
                                                 
30 2012 Recommendation at 98. 
31 Seventeenth Report at ¶ 20 (citing CTIA Wireless Industry Indices at 7). 
32 2012 Recommendation at 98. 
