[PAGE 1]
Short Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption 
Under 17 U.S.C. 1201 
  
Item 1.Commenter Information  
Nathan Scandella, Software Engineer, Enscand, Inc. (Seattle, WA, USA) nathan@enscand.com 
 
 
Item 2.  Proposed Class Addressed  
Proposed Class 17: Jailbreaking—All-Purpose Mobile Computing Devices 
 
Item 3.Statement Regarding Proposed Exemption 
As an independent software developer, I support the ability to keep smartphones and other mobile devices legal to 
“jailbreak”.  First of all, let it be known that I do not support theft of software or digital piracy.  As the developer of 
software, including smartphone apps, myself, I am a victim of digital piracy.  Having said that, it’s crucial to 
understand that jailbreaking does not equate to piracy.  Jailbreaking simply turns a smartphone, or mobile device, 
into a computing device with comparable restrictions to what every computer user is accustomed to on their desktop 
or laptop.  The ease with which smartphone vendors like Google, Apple, etc. can develop their products is largely 
due to the fact that they are using scaled-down “computer” platforms to implement their phone or tablet designs.  If 
these are computers, why should it be illegal to treat them as such?
 
 
Vendors like Apple have burdened their devices with excessive limitations on usage that no consumer would accept 
on a laptop or desktop computer, including Apple’s OS X.  Yet, increasingly, smartphones cost as much as low-to-
mid-range computers.  On my computer, I may install software from any source I choose.  It’s unclear to me how the 
US government even allows a smartphone vendor to lock-down a device so that only that company’s “App Store” 
may be used to purchase software.  Without jailbreaking, iOS users are forced to Apple’s App Store for software, 
where Apple takes a 30% share of all sales.
 
 
As a developer, part of my job is also testing my software in ways that end-users never do.  I need to run diagnostic 
tools on my software to ensure that it’s working properly, efficiently, and without security vulnerabilities.  As iOS, 
for example, is built upon a BSD-style UNIX operating system developed far before the iPhone, there exists a wealth 
of tools and techniques available to me to test and debug my software.  Unfortunately, the restrictions Apple puts on 
the iPhone, out-of-the-box, prevents me from using these tools.  This doesn’t make the software I build for their 
users better.  It makes it worse. 
 
[PAGE 2]
Finally, consumers need to be able to perform their own audits of the mobile device vendors’ products.  As we saw 
in recent years, iOS location tracking was saving user location data in such a way as to make many users 
uncomfortable.  The detection of that issue would have been nearly impossible without having jailbroken devices.   
 
From a consumer protection standpoint, a software quality standpoint, a fairness standpoint, and an 
antimonopolistic business practice standpoint, jailbreaking must remain legal. 
 
Thank you for your consideration. 
 
Nathan Scandella 
 
 
