[PAGE 1]
Page 1 of 25   
Before the U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, LIBRARY OF CONGRESS  
In the matter of Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention  of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies Under 17 U.S.C. 1201  
Docket No. 2014-07 Comments of Electronic Frontier Foundation and Organization for Transformative Works1 1. Commenter Information:  Corynne McSherry Mitch Stoltz Kit Walsh Electronic Frontier Foundation 815 Eddy Street San Francisco, CA 94109 (415) 436-9333 x 122 corynne@eff.org 
Elizabeth Rosenblatt  Rebecca Tushnet Organization for Transformative Works 2576 Broadway, Suite 119 New York, NY 10025 (310) 386-4320 Betsy_rosenblatt@post.harvard.edu  The EFF is a member-supported, nonprofit public interest organization devoted to maintaining the balance that copyright law strikes between the interests of copyright owners and the interests of the public. Founded in 1990, EFF represents thousands of dues-paying members, including consumers, hobbyists, computer programmers, entrepreneurs, students, teachers, and researchers, who are united in their reliance on a balanced copyright system that ensures adequate protection for copyright owners while facilitating innovation, access to information and new creativity.  The OTW is a nonprofit organization established in 2007 to protect and defend fanworks from commercial exploitation and legal challenge. “Fanworks” are new, noncommercial creative works based on existing media. The OTW’s nonprofit website hosting transformative noncommercial works, the Archive of Our Own, has over 400,000 registered users and receives over 4.8 million unique visits per month.  2. Proposed Class Addressed Proposed Class 7: Audiovisual works – noncommercial remix videos Audiovisual works made available via DVDs, Blu-Ray discs, and online distribution systems, that are lawfully made and acquired and that are protected by Digital Rights Management schemes, where circumvention is undertaken for the sole purpose of extracting clips for inclusion in primarily noncommercial videos that do not infringe copyright, and the person engaging in the circumvention believes and has reasonable grounds for believing that circumvention is necessary to fulfill the purpose of the use.                                                 1 Multimedia evidence submitted under separate cover. 
[PAGE 2]
Page 2 of 25   
3. Overview  Remix is a thriving genre of fair use, accessible to ordinary citizens and widely used for political and cultural commentary. The existing exemption removes a legal cloud that would otherwise hang over these important cultural projects, and allows remixers to assert fair use defenses and file counter-notifications when their uses are challenged pursuant to the Digital Millennium Copyright Act. Absent an exemption allowing remixers to get short clips for purposes of fair use, remixers will be subject to arbitrary suppression even if their works are plainly fair use. The exemption should be renewed and expanded to cover short clips taken from Blu-Ray discs as well. 4. Technological Protection Measures and Methods of Circumvention  The vast majority of mainstream commercial works released on DVD use the Content Scrambling System (CSS) to encrypt the audiovisual work stored on the DVD. The Copyright Office and the courts have concluded that CSS is an “access control” within the scope of § 1201(a)(1).2  Blu-ray discs are locked down by a combination of measures, principally the Advanced Access Content System process, which allows vendors to revoke compromised keys and distribute new keys through new discs. Blu Ray discs may also contain another layer of restriction, called BD+. Numerous tools exist to circumvent such restrictions.3 Although many major on-line media sites use no encryption at all, several of the most popular sites providing commercially-licensed television and motion picture content do encrypt some or all of their video streams.4 RTMPE (Real Time Messaging Protocol Encryption) is an extension that adds an encryption layer to the Adobe-designed RTMP streaming media protocol. Adobe continues to maintain that third-parties are not supposed to implement RTMPE and other “secure RTMP measures,” the details of which it has not published. Along with the other technologies mentioned, Apple encodes video using its proprietary FairPlay DRM scheme. Various tools exist for overcoming FairPlay’s restrictions, and to circumvent the other restrictions as well.5  For example, RTMPE has long since been successfully reverse-engineered by third parties, and several implementations have been produced that successfully 
                                                2 See, e.g., Realnetworks, Inc. v. DVD Copy Control Ass'n, 641 F. Supp. 2d 913, 919 (N.D. Cal. 2009); DVD Copy Control Ass'n, Inc. v. Kaleidescape, Inc., 176 Cal. App. 4th 697 (2009); Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights in RM 2008-8, Rulemaking on Exemptions from Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, June 11, 2010 at 66-68 (“2010 Recommendations”), at 44-46.  3 See, e.g., http://support.newagepcs.com/archive/index.php/t-27082.html; http://www.dvd-guides.com/guides/blu-ray-rip/256-remux-blu-ray-to-mkv http://www.dvd-guides.com/guides/blu-ray-rip/256-remux-blu-ray-to-mkv 4 For example, Last.fm, Pandora, and Vimeo do not encrypt their video streams, while Hulu, Netflix, and Amazon do. Youtube uses access controls on some, though not all, of its services. 5 Common means of DVD circumvention include programs such as MactheRipper, DVDDecrypter, and Handbrake. Common means of online video circumvention include programs such as FairUse4WM and Requiem. Common means of Blu-Ray circumvention include programs such as DVDFab and MakeMKV. See, e.g., http://support.newagepcs.com/archive/index.php/t-27082.html; http://www.dvd-guides.com/guides/blu-ray-rip/256-remux-blu-ray-to-mkv. 
[PAGE 3]
Page 3 of 25   
interoperate with Adobe's Flash Media Server.6  These implementations have formed the basis of tools that help users acquire video from services that use RTMPE, such as Hulu and UnBox. SWF Verification is also quite easy to bypass, and a plethora of tools exist already to allow download from a Flash Media Server from a source that is not a whitelisted SWF player. In short, the situation is still essentially the same as it was in 2012,7 when the Office concluded that many platforms and other vehicles for distributing content use technological protection measures than control access to that content, though we agree with the Office “the landscape for access controls protecting motion pictures offered via online distribution services is constantly changing.”8  5. Asserted Noninfringing Uses  The noninfringing uses at issue are primarily noncommercial fair uses of audiovisual works for the purposes of creating remix videos.   A. Background The creative practice of “remixing” existing video content to create new original expression is a time-honored tradition stretching back to 1918 when Lev Kuleshov began splicing and assembling film fragments to tell new stories. Today, the ability to remix and share existing video content has been democratized to an unprecedented degree, thanks to the combination of inexpensive video editing tools and free, easy-to-use video hosting services such as YouTube.  Previous research indicated that between 2,000 and 6,000 original fair use videos that include clips from DRM-protected film or television sources are likely being uploaded to YouTube each day,9 and current research confirms that the pace is only increasing.10 According to one large, demographically representative study, 2.6% of U.S. internet users have produced remix video, which equates to roughly 6.5 million people.11 These videos are valuable not only in themselves, but also because they help create the next generation of artists, who can gain skills and exposure otherwise unavailable to them.12 Appendix A collects numerous specific examples of such videos, as well as more general discussions from experts in the field.                                                  6 For example, the first release of RTMPdump software was in 2008. It was able to work with RTMPE and SWF verification by April 2009 (http://rtmpdump.mplayerhq.hu/ChangeLog), just months after RTMPE and SWF verification started to become more widespread. 7 Proponents note, however that case law is not settled as to whether fair use might be a defense to 17 U.S.C. §1201(a)(1). Compare Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Corley, 273 F.3d 429, 459 (2d Cir. 2001) with Chamberlain Group, Inc. v. Skylink Techs., Inc., 381 F.3d 1178, 1202-03 (Fed. Cir. 2004). In addition, it is not clear how best to describe CSS. See R. Anthony Reese, Will Merging Access Controls and Rights Controls Undermine the Structure of Anticircumvention Law?, 18 Berkeley Tech. L.J. 619, 643-47 (2003). 8 Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights, Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention, October 2012, (“2012 Recommendations”),126 n.731. 9 See Communication from Michael Wesch, on file with OTW (Nov. 2, 2011)  10 See Aram Sinnreich & Mark Latonero, Tracking Configurable Culture from the Margins to the Mainstream, 19 J. Computer-Mediated Communic. 798, 798 (2014). 11 Id. at 805. 12 See Org. for Transformative Works, Comments to the NTIA/PTO, 30 (Nov. 17, 2013), available at http://www.ntia.doc.gov/files/ntia/organization_for_transformative_works_comments.pdf (“OTW/NTIA”); Joseph Kahne et al., The Civic and Political Significance of Online Participatory Cultures among Youth Transitioning to  
[PAGE 4]
Page 4 of 25   
Remix has come to permeate our popular and political culture. A study of remix found that political remix videos that became hits were often from nontraditional political actors. Typical party-sponsored political messages got 55,000 views, while citizen-designed political messages averaged 807,000 views, and ads created by other entities, “mostly media companies, small news organizations, groups of bloggers, or small video production groups),” averaged over 2.5 million views; of the most viral videos, “only a fifth of them were produced by the campaigners, and in all cases they were not typical ads, but edited footage.”13  Making fan/remix video is even a part of classroom learning.14 For example, at the University of Houston, which has a high percentage of non-native English speakers, the Digital Storytelling project “has produced an extraordinary range of historical videos, created by students who research the story carefully, and select from archives of images and sounds the mix that best conveys the argument they want their video to make.”15 Case Study: Vidding  Vids are fan-made videos that involve the re-cutting and remixing of footage from television shows or films, creating a video montage set to a new soundtrack. Vidders continue to be an instructive example of remixing creators because they have a history that predates digital video technologies, a strong sense of community arising out of that history and, as beneficiaries of the 2009 exemptions, can comment on its importance for their creative work.16  As Professor Francesca Coppa explains, “In vidding, the fans are fans of the visual source, and music is used as an interpretive lens to help the viewer to see the source text differently. A vid is a visual essay that stages an argument, and thus it is more akin to arts criticism than to traditional music video.”17 Indeed, vid may do traditional arts criticism one better. As scholars Kristina Busse & Alexis Lothian note, “vids offer condensed critiques of media texts that would take dozens of pages to unravel in academic analysis and whose impact would fall short of the emotional power of the vid.”18                                                                                                                                                            Adulthood 3 (2011) (“youth engagement in nonpolitical online participatory cultures may serve as a gateway to participation in important aspects of civic and political life, including volunteering, community problem-solving, protest activities, and political voice.”). 13 Limor Shifman, Memes in Digital Culture 125 (2014). 14 Paul Booth, Fandom in the Classroom (syllabus), on file with OTW (Winter 2011); see also Catherine Burwell, The Pedagogical Potential of Video Remix, Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy (2013) (explaining how video remix can be used in classrooms as part of education about representation in popular media, creativity, and copyright). 15 See Lawrence Lessig, Remix 81 (2008). 16 Vidders are certainly not the only established community of remix video creators. Along with PRVs, the anime music video (“AMV”) creator community has also received increasing attention as scholars begin documenting amateur creator communities that are arising around these new video technologies. And numerous people reinvent remix on their own every day. 17 See Francesca Coppa, Women, “Star Trek” and the Early Development of Fannish Vidding, 1 Transformative Works & Cult. (2008), http://journal.transformativeworks.org/index.php/twc/article/view/44/64; see also Francesca Coppa, An Editing Room of One’s Own: Vidding as Women’s Work, 26 Camera Obscura 2 77: 123-130 (2011). 18 See Kristina Busse & Alexis Lothian, Scholarly Critiques and Critiques of Scholarship: The Uses of Remix Video, 26 Camera Obscura 77: 139, 142 (2011). 
[PAGE 5]
Page 5 of 25   
A central characteristic of the vidding community is a commitment to creating transformative works. As one researcher noted: “There are certain traits, which vidders agree are important to a good vid, such as ‘going somewhere’ with the story or telling a narrative, saying something new about a character, relationship, or storyline from the television show, or recontextualizing a well-known song through interesting juxtaposition with the televisual source.”19 The OTW’s Test Suite of Fair Use Vids offers numerous examples of these transformative works.20  Vidding is also a distinctly feminist practice. While men’s participation generally outstrips women’s in remix culture,21 the specifically transformative practice of vidding is an exception in which women are the primary creators.22 As a result, the vidding community has been particularly valuable “training ground” for women, offering a safe context within which to teach and learn technical skills: web design, coding, video and image editing, and filmmaking.23  Creators and consumers in the vidding community also engage with issues of race and representation in media culture and other cultural, artistic, and historical topics.   This is unsurprising, because “talking back” to dominant culture using its own audiovisual forms can be particularly attractive to disempowered speakers. Historically, remix disproportionately emerged from the work of minority groups: women; gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender, and queer people; and racial minorities of all sexes and orientations.24  B. Many Remix Uses That Require Circumvention Are Fair Uses  The videos contemplated by this exemption are quintessential fair uses. Indeed, the Office was correct in its 2009 and 2012 rulings that “a significant number” of the remix uses identified in those rulemakings fell “within the favored purposes referenced in the preamble of Section 107 and therefore are likely to be fair uses.”25 As the Office explained, “clips from motion pictures may make a point about some perceived theme or undercurrent in the subject works, for example, violence against women. In other situations, motion pictures clips may be used and remixed in order to make political statements about matters of public policy.”26 In other words, the works in question were highly transformative, because they added a new meaning, message, or purpose. Current case law has further reinforced the importance of transformativeness to the fair uses analysis. Thus, the first fair use factor weighs heavily towards fair use.                                                 19 Katharina Freund, I Thought I Made a Vid, But Then You Told Me That I Didn’t: Aesthetics and Boundary Work in the Fan-Vidding Community, in Eduardo Navas et al., The Routledge Companion to Remix Studies 289 (2015) (also attached as Appx F); see id. at 292 (“In interviews, vidders commonly described their practices as a method of writing back, or against, the televisual source material as a way to critique or rewrite the text against the intentions of the (male) creators and writers.”). 20 See http://transformativeworks.org/projects/vidtestsuite. 21 See Sinnreich & Latonero, supra, n. 10, at 813. 22 See Katharina Freund, “Fair use is legal use”: Copyright Negotiations and Strategies in the Fan-Vidding Community, 17 New Media & Society 1, 4 (2014) (in ethnographic research, over 90% of subjects identified as women). 23 See Jesse Walker, Remixing Television, Reason Magazine, August/September 2008. 24 See OTW/NTIA, 29-30, 52. 25 See 2010 Recommendations; 2012 Recommendations at 127, 128 (“the record amply supports the conclusion that a substantial number of the proffered examples likely would be considered transformative”)  26 2012 Recommendations, at 127. 
[PAGE 6]
Page 6 of 25   
The nature of the work weighs neither for nor against fair use. While many of the works used in remix are creative, that is generally true of transformative fair use, and as the Office recognized, the creative nature of the initial work therefore has little weight.27 Moreover, remixes start with works that have been previously published and usually widely disseminated, favoring fair use.28  The use of short clips is also consistent with the third §107 factor, as the Office recognized.29 Remixers use what they need to communicate their message. For example, as a reverend who uses DVD decryption software to create film clips for use in his sermons notes, “When we use a clip from a popular film, people tend to remember it better than if we just used an anecdote or story,’ [because] ‘We live in a visual age.’”30 As the Second Circuit recently reinforced, “the law does not require that the secondary artist may take no more than is necessary. . . . The secondary use “must be [permitted] to ‘conjure up’ at least enough of the original” to fulfill its transformative purpose.”31 With respect to market harm, the transformativeness of remix videos also makes market harm unlikely.32 To the extent that any particular remix video changes the meaning or message of the original, or associates the original work with any political message or controversial subjects, it is unlikely that the copyright owner would license the remix. Courts have found that a fair use finding is appropriate where licensing is unlikely or impossible.33 More generally, the presence of transformativeness establishes that there is no legitimate market for copyright owners to control, even when there is some connection to financial benefit.34  
                                                27 2012 Recommendations, at 128; see also Campbell, 510 U.S. at 598 (concluding that the second factor “adds little to the first” when the use is transformative); Blanch v. Koons, 467 F.3d 244, 256 (2d Cir. 2006).. 28 See, e.g., Kelly, 336 F.3d at 820 (“Published works are more likely to qualify as fair use because the first appearance of the artist's expression has already occurred.”); Arica Inst. v. Palmer, 970 F.2d 1067, 1078 (2d Cir. 1992) (plaintiff’s work was “a published work available to the general public,” and the second factor thus favored the defendant). 29 2012 Recommendations, at 128 (“the evidence demonstrates that, in a great many noncommercial videos, not only is each relevant clip very short (rarely longer than a few seconds), but even multiple clips from the same motion picture, when used together, comprise an extremely small fraction of the entirety of the source material.”) see also Arrow Productions, LTD. v. Weinstein Co. LLC, -- F. Supp. 2d – (S.D.N.Y. Aug. 25, 2014) (use of three scenes totaling 4 minutes from 61-minute movie favored fair use). 30 See J. D. Lasica, Darknet: Hollywood’s War Against the Digital Generation 128 (2005).  31 Cariou, 714 F.3d at 710. see also, e.g., Fox News Network, LLC v. TVEyes, Inc, No. 13 Civ. 5315 (S.D.N.Y. Sept. 9, 2014) (the actual images and sounds “are as important as the news information itself –the tone of voice, arch of an eyebrow, or upturn of a lip can color the entire story, powerfully modifying the content”). 32 2012 Recommendations, at 127-29. 33 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 592-93. 34 See, e.g., Authors’ Guild, Inc. v. HathiTrust, 755 F.3d 87, 99 (2d Cir. 2014) (“any economic ‘harm’ caused by transformative uses does not count because such uses, by definition, do not serve as substitutes for the original work”); see also id. at 103 (even where use is nontransformative, market effect factor weighs in favor of fair use where market is so minimal that potential licensors usually don’t bother to license or forego royalties when they do); Arrow Prods., LTD. v. Weinstein Co. LLC, -- F. Supp. 3d --, 2014 WL 4211350 (S.D.N.Y. Aug. 25, 2014) (copies of short portions of film Debbie Does Dallas were transformative fair use; alleged licensing market was not within copyright owner’s legitimate market because uses were transformative). 
[PAGE 7]
Page 7 of 25   
The proposed exemption also comports with public expectations regarding fair use, enhancing respect for copyright law generally.35 The general contours of fair use, particularly its preference for (1) noncommercial, (2) transformative works that (3) use limited portions of previous works, are readily understandable by creators.36 As it stands, remixers turn to online sources such as iTunes in part because they can be confident that they have paid for the right to access the content. Dr. Coppa’s observation that “for most vidders, the big legal (and ethical) line remains between ‘paying’ and ‘not paying’ for source footage” applies equally whether the compensation is in the form of a DVD sale or an iTunes purchase.37 Remixers concerned about § 1201 liability, however, are likely to turn to unauthorized Internet sources that offer no means for compensating the rightsholder—a lose-lose proposition for everyone concerned.38 6. Asserted Adverse Effects.  A. Absent the Proposed Exemption, Remixers Will Face Renewed Legal Risk Failing to renew and expand the existing exemption is highly likely to result in adverse effects. To begin with, it means 1201 is once again a legal sword of Damocles. Though remix creators generally have some notion of fair use, they are unlikely to appreciate the different (and counterintuitive) ways that § 1201(a)(1) treats the following scenarios: • Ripping from a DVD, Blu-Ray, or download they lawfully possess, using widely available software in order to take short clips for remix (circumvention); • Using a camcorder and flat screen TV in order to capture the same clips for the same purpose (not circumvention, though signs in movie theaters across the country indicate that doing the same thing in public would lead to arrest); • Downloading a digital copy of a DVD or Blu-Ray disc from an unauthorized BitTorrent site, like those that can be found through The Pirate Bay, in order to excerpt the same clips for the same purpose (not circumvention). Absent an exemption, creators who take the most intuitively legitimate course—using their own computer to take excerpts from a source they lawfully possess—will have unknowingly violated § 1201(a)(1).39  Vidders, for example, are often young and unconnected to an organized group, 
                                                35 See Mark F. Schultz, Fear and Norms and Rock & Roll: What Jambands Can Teach Us About Persuading People To Obey Copyright Law, 21 Berkeley Tech. L.J. 651, 712-14 (2006) (discussing role of perceived fairness in consumers’ choice to pay for authorized versions instead of unauthorized versions). 36 See generally Peter Jaszi & Pat Aufderheide, Reclaiming Fair Use: How To Put Balance Back in Copyright (2011). 37 See 2012 EFF Comments, at 42-43, 63; see also communication from luvtheheaven, on file with OTW (Oct. 10, 2014) (“many people like me would be willing to spend their money places like iTunes on TV shows they love, if that was a way to vid with an amazingly perfect quality copy of the episode.”). 38 See LUCAS HILDERBRAND, INHERENT VICE: BOOTLEG HISTORIES OF VIDEOTAPE AND COPYRIGHT 79 (2009). 39 See Ito Interview, Appx B 20-21 (75% of anime music videos remix artists “indicated that commercial DVDs are their first choice for anime source material in making their videos”); 2006 Recommendations at 12; see also Useful Software List, http://www.animemusicvideos.org/guides/avtech/software.html (last visited Feb. 4, 2015) (recommending DVDDecrypter and Smartripper). 
[PAGE 8]
Page 8 of 25   
which makes it particularly unlikely that they will learn §1201’s complicated distinctions.40 Indeed, there is general agreement from researchers and participants in the vidding community that vidders are rarely aware of §1201.41 (This is consistent with evidence from other remix communities.)42  For example, as researcher Katharina Freund discovered: “The complexity of copyright law makes it very difficult for non-experts to understand, particularly, the anti-circumvention requirements of the DMCA. . . . The extent of knowledge on copyright laws . . . varied a great deal from vidder to vidder—several people interviewed had a complex understanding of the law, whereas others were generally unaware of the issue.”43 To be clear, a lack of familiarity with the nuances of copyright did not reflect disrespect for the law or the original authors: While vidders often see their work as resistant to media ownership, many vidders also have a set of ethical standards in regard to copyright. Abby, for example, makes sure that she has legally purchased her material before vidding: I also strongly believe in paying for my media. . . . I always, always buy the media first, either by paying for cable, buying on iTunes, or buying DVDs. . .  Most vidders try to support the musicians and television series that they utilize in their work, but also often need to circumvent DRM in order to access editable copies of their sources.44  Thus the central irony: “These attempts to act in an ethical manner (by ensuring they have paid for the media they use in their vids) for many years put vidders in more legal trouble (until the exemptions were granted in 2009).”45 What is more, many videomakers are not part of a creative remix community at all, but simply motivated to use video to make an argument about a current issue.46 For example, Jon Autry was not a remixer until his faith impelled him to make remixes criticizing Ergun Caner’s misrepresentations about his Muslim background: Fair use . . . enabled a blue collar guy like me to challenge a white collar evangelical leader in my Christian sect. What drew me to post was not so much his lies behind Christian pulpits, but that he had the audacity to lie to Marines on                                                 40 Francesca Coppa estimates that there are already tens of thousands of vids created by self-identified vidders elsewhere on the Web, a number that may climb into the millions when taking into account those who are not a part of any organized community. New vidders emerge every day, many of them “inventing” the form for themselves without first being connected to the broader vidding community, just as in previous generations budding writers and artists emerged from a variety of backgrounds. Coppa Interview, Appx G 51. 41 See Gianduja Kiss Interview, Appx B at 28 (explaining that vidders, are generally unaware of the DMCA and need the exemption most when they receive a takedown notice or other challenge to works they believe are fair use). 42 See Kriesinger Interview, Appx C; Horwatt Interview, Appx E. 43 See Katherine Freund “Fair use is legal use”: Copyright Negotiations and Strategies in the Fan-Vidding Community, 17 New Media & Society 1, 5 (2014). 44 Id. at 6. 45 Id. at 7. 46 See Northland Family Planning Clinic, Inc. v. Ctr. for Bio-Ethical Reform, 868 F. Supp. 2d 962, 972, 982-93 (C.D. Cal. 2012) (re-edited video critiquing original video was fair use).  
[PAGE 9]
Page 9 of 25   
a Marine base while he was training them for war. As the common man, I was able to challenge this audacity. There are many such men and women who need to be challenged.47  The same is true of the National Council of the American Indian, which made a video, Take It Off, as part of a campaign against the name of Washington’s football team showing that it would remain the same team without its current trademarks. At any moment, remix can become one component of any speaker’s repertoire. And that speaker will have no reason to know about §1201. Further evidence of adverse effects likely to flow from the loss of the remix exemption comes from Eric Faden, associate professor of film and media studies at Bucknell University and creator of A Fair(y) Use Tale, which uses multiple Disney clips to explain and criticize copyright law.48 He reports:  I have had students in the past literally afraid to do a project. I know that sounds ridiculous. . . . [T]here is so much good that’s come out of [having an exemption for noncommercial remix]. . . . And so what they’re doing is really taking advantage of a rich media environment but they need to have that legal room to be able to do that.49  Remixers themselves agree that the exemption is helpful to preserve remix and vidding communities.50 As Dr. Coppa explained, “The DMCA is a large part of that [increased] confidence: many vidders now understand that their use of the cultural material was fair and that they didn't break any laws by ripping their DVDs either. It is so crucial for vidders to have confidence in the legitimacy of their work and the validity of their speech, and I do believe that the DMCA exemption has given that to vidders.”51 Similarly, political remix video (PRV) pioneer Jonathan McIntosh notes that the exemption has been “critically important” for PRV makers: Before the exemptions many remixers would be afraid of making a fair use video commentary with DVD footage even if they owned the disc(s). Some remixers,                                                 47 Communication from Jon Autry, on file with OTW (Jan. 22, 2015). See Caner v. Autry, 2014 WL 2002835 (W.D. Va. May 14, 2014). Autry was issued DMCA notices and sued over multiple videos, including his remix videos, though the court only ultimately ruled on one video. His videos were all remixes except for three speeches he posted in full, having downloaded them from links provided by Viddler. He also used a capture card to extract clips from DVDs. We note that, like screen capture, there is no way for remixers to tell whether capture cards “circumvent” CSS. 48 Eric Faden, A Fair(y) Use Tale, The Center for Internet and Society (Mar. 1, 2007),  http://cyberlaw.stanford.edu/documentary-film-program/film/a-fair-y-use-tale (viewed over 14 million times). 49 Faden Interview, Nov. 20, 2011 (on file with OTW); see also Recut, Reframe, Recycle: An Interview with Pat Aufderheide and Peter Jaszi (Part Two), Feb. 8, 2008, http://henryjenkins.org/2008/02/recut_reframe_recycle_an_inter.html (“The last lesson we want to teach young people as a society is that it is wrong to participate actively in one’s own culture, and that the choice they face is between compliance and transgression.”). 50 Coppa Interview, Appx. G, 51; Gianduja Kiss Interview, Appx C, 28 ; Pogo Interview, on file with OTW (Nov. 16, 2011). 51 Coppa Interview, Appx G, 51 
[PAGE 10]
Page 10 of 25  
including myself, would resort to using the bit torrent file sharing protocol to download DVDs ripped by others rather than decrypting the DVDs from our own home collections.52  A study of 13 different remix communities revealed widespread agreement on norms “very close” to the fair use factors, valuing noncommerciality, transformativeness and creativity (while insisting that success in making art or conveying a message should not be required);53 but, like vidders, other remix groups didn’t attempt to conform their behavior to the DMCA.54 Meanwhile, major entertainment companies have repeatedly shown a willingness to file lawsuits against those who circumvent CSS or traffic in CSS circumvention tools.55 Legal threats against purveyors of tools to circumvent Blu-ray encryption have driven some companies out of the market altogether.56 Absent an exemption, Section 1201 continues to represent a set of perverse incentives and traps for the unwary. Exemptions thus avoid the adverse effects on fair use remix that would otherwise occur, as the Office recognized by first granting, then renewing and expanding, the exemption in 2010 and 2012.57  In addition, the exemption helps empower remix artists who are targets of improper DMCA takedowns. While many DMCA notices target clear cases of copyright infringement, remix video creators have found themselves mistakenly caught in the takedown notice driftnet.58 Without an exemption, the main effect of the anti-circumvention prohibitions on remixers was to surprise them when they received a takedown notice, believed they had a valid fair use defense, consulted a lawyer and discovered that the DMCA made that fair use defense irrelevant because of how they had acquired the footage they used. The OTW’s experience under the 2010 and 2012 exemptions indicates that remixers are now able to successfully contest notices, asserting their fair use arguments under the DMCA as well as other dispute resolution mechanisms. None of the vidders 
                                                52 McIntosh Interview, Appx H, 54. 53 Mette Birk, The Panopticon of Ethical Video Remix Practice, in Routledge Companion, supra n.19 246, 248-49. 54 See also Horwatt Interview, Appx E, 32 (“While many may be technically aware of the legal measures that the DMCA implies, most PRV makers believe their work falls under the umbrella of fair use, and thus trumps those restrictions implied by the DMCA.”). 55 See, e.g., Universal v. Corley, 273 F.3d 429 (2d Cir. 2001); 321 Studios v. Metro-Goldwyn-Myer Studios, 307 F. Supp. 2d 1085 (N.D. Cal. 2004)  56 See Andy, Countries Withdraw Blu-Ray Rippers Following DVDFab Lawsuit, Torrent Freak (March 14, 2014), See https://torrentfreak.com/companies-withdraw-blu-ray-rippers-following-dvdfab-lawsuit-140314/ 57 Although the exemption process is de novo, the evidence previously submitted is still evidence the Office can take into account. See Mark Gray, New Rules for a New Decade: Improving the Copyright Office’s Anti-Circumvention Rulemakings, 29 Berkeley Tech. L.J. 759 (2014). 58 See, e.g., Oday, DMCA Double Jeopardy, YouTomb (Oct. 31, 2009), https://web.archive.org/web/20140715082243/http://youtomb.mit.edu/blog/; see also MG Siegler, Hitler is Very Upset That Constantin Film is Taking Down Hitler Parodies, TechCrunch (Apr. 19, 2010), http://techcrunch.com/2010/04/19/hitler-parody-takedown/ (reporting on the removal of the popular Hitler internet memes). 
[PAGE 11]
Page 11 of 25  
with whom the OTW has had contact who have counternotified or contested a YouTube Content ID match have faced further action from copyright owners.59 B. Potential Alternatives Are Inadequate.  The Register summarized the situation in 2012: “motion pictures are not widely and reasonably available in other formats not subject to technological protections. . . . [A]ll of the most popular forms of commercial distribution of motion pictures, including DVD, Blu-ray, and online distribution services, are protected by access controls.”60 This continues to be true. 1. Availability Online-only sources. An increasing amount of content is available only through online services, whether iTunes or YouTube, making circumvention the only option.61 For example, many anime series, such as the very popular Sailor Moon Crystal, never see authorized release in the U.S. except via online distribution mechanisms.62 Likewise, the pro-choice video in Northland was available only on a website.63 Often online sources are the first available sources, making them “the only sources that can be used in a time-sensitive manner.”64 DVD/Blu-Ray releases may be delayed so long that a speaker’s message would be lost or become irrelevant in the time necessary to wait for them.65 For cultural or political remixers, delay can mean no message at all. Therefore, video makers turn to online sources to obtain the audiovisual works they need. As Treon wrote, “As a vidder, I'm never able to wait for the DVDs - they can come out a year after a show aired. People want a reaction to an episode immediately…. if I'd waited for the DVDs, it would have been pointless.”66  Courts have expressly recognized the importance of “timely” expression.67 Vidder luvtheheaven explains how timely access both supports conversation and discourages infringement: “Fanvideo commentary on what is in viewers’ very recent memory is an important part of the process of                                                 59 See also Katharina Freund, “Fair use is legal use”: Copyright Negotiations and Strategies in the Fan-Vidding Community, 17 New Media & Society 1 (2014) (finding through ethnographic study that a group of knowledgeable vidders has successfully used the DMCA exemption to gain confidence to defend their fair uses). 60 2012 Recommendation at 131. 61 See, e.g., Adi Robertson, Why Netflix sends ‘Orange is the New Black’ to the Library of Congress on videotape, The Verge (Oct. 29, 2014), See, e.g., http://www.theverge.com/2014/10/29/7101597/why-netflix-sends-orange-is-the-new-black-to-the-library-of-congress (Netflix shows are unavailable on physical media). 62 See Sailor Moon Crystal, Hulu (last modified Jan. 17, 2015), http://www.hulu.com/sailor-moon-crystal; Maria Gonima, Sailor Moon Returns, Hulu Blog (May 19, 2014), http://blog.hulu.com/2014/05/19/sailor-moon-returns/. 63 Deposition of Don Cooper, Document 47-1 at 60-61, Northland Family Planning Clinic, Inc. v. Ctr. for Bio-Ethical Reform, No. 11-cv-731 (filed Apr. 16, 2012). 64 Comment on Tell Us Your Stories! (Oct. 7, 2014) https://archiveofourown.org/admin_posts/1358 65 See , e.g. Killa Statement, Nov. 17, 2011, Appx I, 55. (“I was making a vid for a show that was currently airing. I owned the DVDs for the previous four seasons of the show, but needed clips from a recent episode. The vid was timely, and had to be presented immediately to have relevance to its audience, so I couldn’t wait for the DVDs to be released if I wanted to make the artistic statement I envisioned. The vid was extremely well-received, thanks to that timeliness.”)   66 Communication from Treon Brevor, on file with OTW (Oct. 29, 2014). 67 Arizona Right to Life Political Action Committee v. Bayless, 320 F.3d. 1002 (9th Cir. 2003). 
[PAGE 12]
Page 12 of 25  
being a dedicated fan of a TV show nowadays. Waiting months and months for DVDs to come out is no longer acceptable . . . .”68 PRV makers have the same timeliness concerns: The creation and publishing of a remix video may be extremely time-sensitive if it focuses on a current issue in the news cycle. Examples of time-sensitive remixes might include responding to statements by a celebrity or public figure, discussing a political campaign, or commenting on piece of legislation while its being debated. In these cases, online streaming/downloading can be the only option to gather footage if the physical DVDs are difficult to find locally or have gone out of print (as is often the case especially with older, independent or small scale documentary productions).69  Blu-Ray only sources. In some cases, Blu-Ray discs offer unique material or quality. As one remix artist noted: Very often, studios will release special extras, including behind the scenes footage and deleted scenes, only on blu ray - which can be critical for vidding, because it expands my options. This is particularly important for vids based on movie sources, where the total amount of footage is limited. Extras or deleted scenes might be necessary to round out the story I'm trying to tell.  One quick example - in the Avengers series of films, Captain America/Steve Rogers fought in WWII before being placed in frozen suspended animation. He is then reawakened in 21st Century America. Much of his characterization is based on his difficulty adjusting to modern life. But many scenes demonstrating his isolation and loneliness did not make it into the Avengers movie, and were only distributed on blu-ray. Vidders have made extensive use of that footage when exploring Steve Rogers's characterization in vids.70   Vidder thuviaptarth reports a similar experience: I used Blu-Ray source to make "Hey Ho", a vid which argues that Marvel movies participate in the military-industrial complex by glorifying its results. Blu-Ray source was critical to the vid's argument because I used deleted scenes that were only available in the Blu-Ray editions of The Avengers and the Marvel Phase One box set. In particular, many of the people who have commented on the vid have cited the ending clips of a child handing Captain America his shield as having a deep emotional impact and effectively emphasizing the themes of the vid. These clips come from a deleted scene that is, to the best of my knowledge, available only with the Marvel Phase One box set of Blu-Ray discs.71                                                   68 Communication from luvtheheaven, on file with OTW (Oct. 23, 2014). 69 McIntosh Interview, Appx H.  70 Communication from Gianduja Kiss, on file with OTW (Sept. 14, 2014)  71 Communication on file with OTW (Sept. 7, 2014). 
[PAGE 13]
Page 13 of 25  
Limited availability is also one reason licensing is not a viable option for ordinary remixers, today as in previous two rulemaking periods.72 As this Office observed in 2012, “the scope of content offered through reasonably available licensing sources is far from complete.”73 There is no mechanism by which a noncommercial user, as opposed to a commercial entity, could select and receive high-quality clips of a range of television shows and movies (since remixers comment on many different sources) suitable for editing. Studios occasionally offer selected clips for fans to embed on their own sites or otherwise promote the official version, but that does not enable remix or commentary.74  In addition, as the Office acknowledged, licensing is not a reasonable alternative to fair use, in that “rightsholders do not have an exclusive right to markets for commentary on or criticism of their copyrighted works.”75 Licenses often reserve the right to control criticism or uses that the copyright owner does not think reflect well on its image—precisely the uses that are most highly critical and transformative, such as It Depends on What You Pay (cited by the Office in 201276). 2. Quality.  In 2010 and 2012, the Office recognized that “certain uses require high quality in order for the purpose of the use to be sufficiently expressed and communicated.”77 Many remix artists take video quality very seriously, so many of them favor DVD and now Blu-Ray ripping for aesthetic reasons.  To be clear, it’s a profound mistake, contrary to the very heart of copyright, to require artists to justify their artistic choices, especially to people unfamiliar with the art form.78 The very reason an exemption is needed is to prevent the suppression or alteration of the artistic evolution of this popular art form. However, to avoid any confusion, we will explain why high-quality source makes a difference to the results of video editing. As one scholar has explained:  [V]idders are visual artists. They are deeply invested in aesthetics. They want to make smart vids that are also beautiful. And the better the source footage you start with, the more you can do to it, the “shinier” it looks. All vidders value aesthetics, though there are other factors involved in when and how the work is                                                 72 2012 Recommendation, at 112. 73 Id. at 131. 74 See, e.g., Julie Levin Russo, User-Penetrated Content: Fan Video in the Age of Convergence, 48 Cinema J. 125, 126 (2009) (“ [Official clips from Battlestar Galactica were] extremely narrow, notably excluding the character-based dramatic scenes that make up the majority of the show.”). 75 2012 Recommendations, at 131 (citing Campbell, 510 U.S. 569 v. Acuff-Rose); see also Authors Guild, 954 F.Supp.2d 282.  76 2012 Recommendations, at 106. 77 2010 Recommendations, at 66; see also 2012 Recommendations, at 118-22.[]. 78 Bleistein v. Donaldson Lithographing Co., 188 U.S. 239, 251 (1903) (“It would be a dangerous undertaking for persons trained only to the law to constitute themselves final judges of the worth of [a work], outside of the narrowest and most obvious limits. At the one extreme, some works of genius would be sure to miss appreciation. Their very novelty would make them repulsive until the public had learned the new language in which their author spoke.”), quoted in Campbell, 510 U.S. at 582 (applying nondiscrimination principle to fair use).  
[PAGE 14]
Page 14 of 25  
created. While some vidders might make a vid quickly, almost urgently, as part of a current cultural conversation about a television show or film, others can spend easily half a year working on a single video, often working on it frame by frame like a painting.79  In addition, video quality is a “critical” consideration: Vids are a visual art form; vidders work incredibly hard to get just the right colors, timing, movement, and flow—and all of that is disrupted when the source is fuzzy or degraded. The impact of the vid is lessened tremendously if you can’t see the images clearly; you might just as well ask whether it matters to a photographer whether their shots are in focus. Like with a photograph, the vid isn’t just the literal image that appears in the frame; it’s about the overall aesthetics of the piece. Sometimes photographers might intentionally create a blurry picture, but when they do so, it’s under circumstances that the photographers control. It’s the same with vidding.80  Vidder rhoboat has also begun to use Blu-Ray in order to get the best quality: “it was most important from a technical standpoint in my James Bond vid Supremacy because I did some cropping and zooming for certain sections where the quality loss would have been more noticeable if I had used anything less than HD source. It was also important from a narrative standpoint of the vid to be able to see the lines in the actors’ faces as aging was an important plot point.”81 PRVs also need to mimic the qualities of the media sources on which the videos comment. As Dr. Horwatt notes: One of the most interesting aesthetic qualities of PRVs and a cardinal feature of the humour and incisiveness presented by PRV makers, is their capacity to mimic the qualities of commercial media. This means that editors are both able to imitate the vernaculars of commercial media (whether that be a cartoon, trailer, commercial or television program) but also to make work which looks like commercial media, with high quality rips of source material. Using high quality video of appropriated materials is instrumental to the success of a PRV.82  Quality is therefore a political tool as well as an artistic one, enabling remix artists to communicate on the same level as political campaigns and mainstream media productions. 
                                                79 Coppa Interview, Appx G 51. 80 Kiss Interview, Appx G, 38; see also Interview with Jackie Kjono, Appx K (“I was a late adopter of ripped source and was still using capture devices up until three years ago when we got the exemption… . Images are blurry and bright colors end up too bright while dark colors end up too dark.”). 81 Communication on file with OTW (Oct. 21, 2014). 82 Horwatt Interview, Appx E,, 31; see also McIntosh Interview, Appx H, 52 (“[B]ecause of the standards set by Hollywood and professional media organizations, the use of high quality footage is important because it tends to add a sense of legitimacy to an audiovisual argument; for better or worse, higher quality video footage tends to be taken more seriously by the public.”); Sabia Interview, Appx L (same). 
[PAGE 15]
Page 15 of 25  
Likewise, e-mob’s popular remix David Attenborough Observes Fangirls83 uses David Attenborough’s iconic narration about animal behavior to make subversive observations about human behavior. As the creator explained, “[h]igh quality footage/audio was definitely important to me, because the whole point of the video was that it looked like a real Attenborough documentary (and actually convinced several people of that fact).”84 Small details from the original can be important. The creators of the anti-abortion video found to be fair use in Northland explained their need for accurate replication:  [The Northland staffer’s] consistent theme is the lie that abortion is “normal.” Every aspect of her attire, demeanor, syntax, intonation, is calculated to reinforce this deception. The same with the flowers on her desk, the soft background music, and the framed art on her walls. The CBR Video rebuts all this duplicity with an accusatory literary quote in its introduction, jarring music in its score and sickening imagery in its video refutation. Every production decision CBR made was intended as an “abnormal” counterpoise to some corresponding production element in the Northland video.85  Likewise, NCAI’s Take It Off required high quality source: “To execute [our] message we needed high resolution footage since the position of the branding on the helmets was blurry on low-resolution footage. We needed high resolution footage to show removing the offensive branding and replacing it with a white circle did not change the Washington Team. If we had used low resolution footage—replacing the offensive branding with a white circle would not have made as large an impact. In fact, it may have been missed all together.”86 Similarly, the students making videos for National History Day require high quality to make their presentations successful.87 Film criticism and analysis, such as Tony Zhou’s meticulous work,88 is another instance in which high quality is necessary to see the details being analyzed; variations in color, timing, and clarity have a profound effect on one’s understanding of film. Peter Decherney’s detailed report explains in further detail the quality differences that are important to fair uses even if not immediately apparent to outsiders.89 Moreover, as personal computers and home theater systems continue down the road to convergence, remix videos will increasingly be called upon to deliver their messages on large, high-definition screens. Remix artists also show their videos at conferences, museums, and other                                                 83 Emob, David Attenborough Observes Fangirls, Daily Motion, http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x23ky3l_david-attenborough-observes-fangirls-fangirlplanet_fun (last visited Feb. 3, 2015). 84 Email from e-mob, on file with OTW (Jan. 10, 2015). 85 Defendant Center for Bio-Ethical Reform’s Answers to Plaintiff’s First Set of Interrogatories, Northland Family Planning Clinic, Inc. v. Ctr. for Bio-Ethical Reform, No. 11-cv-731 (filed Apr. 16, 2012), Doc. 47-1, at 150. 86 Communication from Rachel McIntyre, on file with OTW (Jan. 29, 2015) (“Replacing the offensive branding with a white circle (as well as branding beyond the helmets) required the use of highly specialized, expensive equipment and a uniquely skilled visual effects artist. It took the visual effects artist two weeks to remove the offensive branding from the helmets.”).”  Id. 87 See Appx A, 6. 88 See Appx A, 4. 89 Letter from Prof. Peter Decherney to Copyright Office, Aug. 2. 2012, Appx M 
[PAGE 16]
Page 16 of 25  
gatherings, where display technology is likely to be much better than online.90 As Professor Coppa notes, based on her attendance at numerous remix presentations, “many things that look okay on YouTube look TERRIBLE on big screens: vids typically look great, but other kinds of remix videos can’t make the transition.”91 Many vidders also distribute high-quality versions of their works from their own Internet sites, demonstrating a commitment to video quality. In short, now as in 2012, meaningful access to modern media requires high-quality, full-resolution excerpts.92 Screen capture cannot produce that level of quality, for a variety of reasons, from technical features to new forms of advertising adopted by networks that distort the broadcast image. Vidder Vidyutpataka explains: As someone who’s done a couple of videos I’ll point out an obvious reason not to use screen capture, at least from a TV feed: because most TV networks brand their feeds with a “screen bug” . . . that continually occupies part of the screen. These bugs can be obtrusive or change, and if you’re planning to use a clip of that feed that thing can really ruin your day. . . . That isn’t even getting into those obnoxious animated graphics some stations add in just as the show comes back from commercial that dance around in the bottom left and inform you that Show You Don’t Care About is Coming Up Next!! DVDs are really the only way to avoid these things.93  For online sources, screen capture is also “unreliable depending on video buffering and/or end user bandwidth speeds,” which are not under the control of the individual.94 It puts excessive demands on ordinary equipment, and frequently betrays the artist, as Ynitsa recounts: “I actually made a vid with screen capture recently, . . . and OMG never again. Capturing that length of footage in 10-minute increments (my computer/CamStudio couldn't handle more) was painful enough, but then not only was the framerate far too low . . . but it wasn’t until after I’d rendered and posted that I realised you could see my mouse in over half of the vid, when I swear it wasn’t visible while I was capturing.”95 And as remix artist soda_jerk put it, “[I]f we were restricted to screen capture techniques we would be unable to continue the kind of transformative postproduction processes that we deploy in our sample-based video work. In order to capture footage that is compatible with the editing programs that are available (such as Final Cut Pro or Premiere) it's crucial that the video clips are formatted to the specific codecs required. We don't use screen capture techniques to acquire footage because it doesn't allow us to sufficiently determine and control video codecs.”96  
                                                90 See Appx A, 5 91 Communication from Francesca Coppa, on file with OTW, Feb. 26, 2015  92 2012 Recommendations, at 133 (“Based on the video evidence presented, the Register is able to conclude that diminished quality likely would impair the criticism and comment contained in noncommercial videos.”) 93 Interview with Vidyutpataka, on file with OTW (Nov. 20, 2011).  94 McIntosh Interview, Appx H. 95 Communication on file with OTW (Nov. 20, 2011). 96 Communication on file with OTW (Feb. 4, 2015).  
[PAGE 17]
Page 17 of 25  
As the Office has twice recognized, screen capture and camcording produce poorer quality footage by their very nature, distorting color, contrast, and framerate. The Office summarized the problems in 2012: “the evidence indicated loss of particular frames, occasional fuzziness, loss of sense of depth, and some degree of pixelation.”97 Because of the move through the “analog hole” required for these methods, no amount of technological improvement will change the degradation in quality and change in color that occurs. Another reason for problems with screen capture is that the software is not designed to output footage that can be used in nonlinear editing programs—the programs needed to create remixes.98 Each type of editing—applying effects, filters, time changes, or even simply editing different clips together in a montage and then producing a final output file—necessarily degrades quality further.99  Vidders routinely apply the following effects to source footage, all of which inherently suffer from lower-quality source: Zooming in and out (to add internal motion to static footage, as well as to create the effect of intimacy and/or distance); extreme close-ups and/or cropping (to draw the spectator’s attention to elements in the background; to reprioritize the hierarchy of images in the frame; to eliminate some unwanted visual piece); brightness and contrast adjustment (to make certain elements easier to see; change the emotional tone of a scene; to blend footage from disparate sources); saturation and hue adjustment (same); color correction (same, but also to create specific associations with or among images using color, where the color becomes symbolic or thematic); time adjustments (speeding up and slowing down, to change the rhythm of footage, to create urgency or draw attention to certain acts of internal motion, to score footage to the fixed beat of music or otherwise synopate image and sound); and overlays (to create narrative and visual depth; to layer images associatively, to juxtapose elements within the frame). Professor Faden’s A Fair(y) Use Tale, for example, uses slowed-down footage, “scaled frames to highlight an individual character or gesture, sleight-of-hand speed changes,” and other effects on “nearly every clip.”100  Soda_jerk performs the same kinds of manipulations to make its video art.101 Here’s Luck has provided an extended analysis of her vid The Test to illuminate some of the technical choices involved, and Appendix A contains dozens of other examples of similar effects and why they were necessary.102 Editing also matters as an artistic statement: the color correction and multiple effects found in many vidders’ work serves as a signature and an instant indicator that the viewer is watching a vid, rather than an unaltered portion of a show or movie.103 The Office should not override vidders’ judgments about the necessary quality of their materials, any more than it should determine that a certain size of canvas is big enough for a painter.                                                 97 2012 Recommendations, at 123; see also id. at 133 (“[S]creen capture images, while improved in quality since the last proceeding, are still of lower quality than those available by circumvention of access controls on motion pictures. The images available from screen capture technology are somewhat diminished in clarity and depth, and may exhibit some degree of pixelation.”); 2010 Recommendations, supra, at 66. 98 See Turk Statement Appx N., 101 99 Statement of Akemi42, February 28, 2012, Appx J, 92. 100 Eric S. Faden, A Fair(y) Use Tale, in Routledge Companion, supra n.19, at 487, 493. 101 Appx A, 5. 102 See Appx A. 103 See, e.g., dazzlme89 Channel, Youtube, http://www.youtube.com/user/dazzleme7 (using color correction to sharpen footage and increase saturation as a baseline effect). 
[PAGE 18]
Page 18 of 25  
A remix made with an initially watchable low-quality digital file can easily lose important details.104 Each edit necessarily degrades the quality of the video, so unless a vidder starts with high-quality source, the output may be unwatchable or insufficient. Dr. Coppa explains: “Vidders typically want the cleanest, biggest clips their systems can handle, because they want to transform/rework the footage in various ways—changing speed, color, adding effects, creating manipulations, masking out elements—and the better the footage you start with, the more you can do with it.”105 For vids such as The Price,106 which contained footage from over thirty different sources, high quality source was required to integrate the varied sources with their different color palettes and frame sizes into a seamless story using effects, transitions, and other editing techniques. Other vids use close-ups to heighten the emotional effect of their narratives.107 Without a high quality source, the cropping, zooming, and color correction to make the final product appear uniform can be impossible. But both screen capture and recording off of a screen produce distortions in frame rate, color, and other key features that interfere with editing, even if they may be able to produce watchable copies under specific circumstances.108  3. Screen capture is impractical  Separately, screencapture software may be incompatible with the user’s operating system.109 A requirement that a fair user buy an entirely new computer or suite of editing software is an unreasonable limitation on fair use (even if she were to know about it), and requiring fair users to choose particular computer systems does nothing to promote the legitimate interests of copyright owners. The Office has previously recognized that requiring individuals to use multiple technological solutions as a workaround is a negative impact justifying an exemption.110 4. Legal concerns  Alternatives such as recording a screen with a separate device or using screen capture software are also unworkable. First, there is significant uncertainty about whether or not they would nonetheless qualify as “circumvention” under 1201.111 Neither proponents nor opponents of exemptions were able to get “under the hood” of screencapture programs to confirm how they worked. Opponents have been understandably unwilling to commit to identifying specific non-                                                104 Library of Congress Rulemaking Hearing Section 1202, Testimony of Tisha, May 7, 2009, available at http://www.copyright.gov/1201/hearings/2009/transcripts/ [hereinafter Testimony of Tisha Turk]. 105 Coppa Interview, Appx G, 49; see also Turk Statement, Appx N (explaining technical requirements for editing). 106 See 2012 Recommendations, 110 n.587. 107 See, e.g., Appx A, 15-21 (discussing need for effects and high quality); Sara K. Howe, (De)compose, Shape-Shift, and Suture: Toward a Monstrous Rhetoric of Fan Compositions (Ph.D. diss, U. Ariz. 2013), at 121 (“vids often focus closely on parts … , [paying] close attention to particular bodies, objects, and relationships”), 124, 127-28, 137 (discussing various House vids).), available at http://arizona.openrepository.com/arizona/bitstream/10150/299072/1/azu_etd_12855_sip1_m.pdf.  108 See, e.g., Appx J, 92 (Statement of Akemi42) (discussing difficulties with color, clarity, and flicker due to frame rate disparity). 109 Turk Statement, Appx N, 106 110 2012 Recommendations, at 20 (footnotes omitted) (noting the “substantial costs” and “inefficiencies” associated with having to own multiple devices in order to deal with print disabilities in the absence of an exemption). 111 2012 Recommendations, at 124 & n. 721. 
[PAGE 19]
Page 19 of 25  
circumventing technologies, meaning that no legal certainty is available through the use of screen capture; nor could any concessions by the copyright owners participating in this proceeding prevent other copyright owners from arguing that screen capture “circumvents” an access control measure.112 All that the wide availability of screen capture software does is demonstrate that the means to create entire copies of works is already widely available, and unaffected by this proceeding.113 Entirely separately, laypeople do not understand the arguable legal differences between technologies for capturing clips, because they have nothing to do with artistic considerations or fair use. By the time that any difference becomes relevant—when an artist is defending her particular work as fair use against a takedown or infringement claim—it is far too late to tell her that she used the wrong technology. That is not a matter of inconvenience. It is a matter of suppressing fair use. The statutory standard is interference with fair use, not whether alternatives are theoretically available to well-advised parties consulting with legal counsel before beginning their fair uses. And the record is clear, as it has been since 2008, that the noncommercial use exemptions serve a large population of remix artists who do not have access to counsel. Thus, even if a vidder is willing to sacrifice significant quality, does not have timing constraints that will impact the content of her vid, and has access to the necessary equipment, it is unlikely that she will appreciate that other methods are legally preferable to extracting footage from a disc she owns or an online source to which she has access. As Dr. Coppa has pointed out, this legal regime has particularly damaging effects on members of marginalized groups who are already likely to be nervous about expressing themselves.114 Female vidders have historically been reluctant to step up and claim cultural legitimacy, and uncertainty hinders both production of transformative works and vidders‘ ability to achieve mainstream recognition.115 Without an exemption, vidders—especially the tens of thousands of young people who are inventing and reinventing the form for themselves, without an established connection to a larger community—risk becoming liable or having their fair uses suppressed. 7. Statutory Factors  The statutory factors set forth in 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C) favor renewing and expanding the existing remix exemption.  A. The Availability for Use of Copyrighted Works  As the Register noted, CSS has not proven essential to the distribution of DVDs.116 Just as DVDs became well-established in the marketplace despite the concededly wide availability of circumvention technology (including, arguably, screencapture software), so have Blu-Rays and online distribution mechanisms. The existing exemption for online sources, in particular, has had                                                 112 2012 Recommendation, at 133 (noting “unsettled legal landscape” and prior litigation over similar methods). 113 See, e.g., Applian Technologies News Alerts, Replay Video Capture is Ready For Some (Super Bowl) Football!, Jan. 31, 2015 Appx N (“Stream it. Record it. Keep it.”). 114 Library of Congress Rulemaking Hearing Section 1202, Testimony of Francesca Coppa 0119.4-0120.4, May 7, 2009, available at http://www.copyright.gov/1201/hearings/2009/transcripts. 115 Id. at 0120.5-0120.17. 116 2012 Recommendations at 135. 
[PAGE 20]
Page 20 of 25  
no effect on the massive expansion of online distribution mechanisms. The experience of DVDs demonstrates that a robust market can and will form even in the presence of easy circumvention. And 17 years on, §1201’s prohibitions are still unknown to the vast majority of citizens, including noncommercial remixers unless and until they need to defend their work as fair use.117 Even remixers who are generally aware of the DMCA tend to believe that fair use trumps it.118 This widespread ignorance demonstrates that §1201 serves mainly as a trap for the unwary, suppressing the creation and use of noninfringing works. B. Nonprofit Archival, Preservation, and Educational Purposes  A remix exemption would have no effect on the availability of source works, as detailed above. However, remix videos themselves are now being archived and performed in museums and other cultural institutions, and used as objects of academic study. A renewed exemption allows their preservation and educational use by legally conservative, risk-averse institutions.119 Professor Jane Tolmie notes that developing an ability to critique visual media is a critical skill for a generation of students that has been inundated with audiovisual works. Vids are a powerful means of teaching this skill: Exposure to a particular fanvid based on Joss Whedon’s Firefly series taught the class about the unreflexive white privilege involved in producing a show in which the main characters all speak Chinese but there are no Asian actors. Exposure to a fanvid on the rebooted Star Trek franchise taught the students that the action movie, no matter how ‘futuristic,’ is still considered primarily a theatre for men. These lessons were all the more effective for being delivered as miniature and coherent visual spectacles, with the scenes and actions of the shows themselves being deployed to convey the key lessons.120  Remix videos are not only a vehicle for criticism and commentary; they are also a means for helping others develop the ability to do the same. C. Impact on Criticism, Comment, News Reporting, etc.  As the Register recognized, this factor “weighs strongly in favor of appropriately tailored exemptions to foster such uses.”121 For the reasons discussed above, failing to renew the exemption for noncommercial videos and expand to Blu-Ray would have a chilling effect on a                                                 117 For example, Library of Congress employees are apparently unaware of §1201’s restrictions. See http://blogs.loc.gov/digitalpreservation/2014/08/dukes-legacy-video-game-source-disc-preservation-at-the-library-of-congress/ (describing moving image technician’s use of circumvention technology to gain access to unreleased Sony game deposited with the Library of Congress). 118 Horwatt Interview, Appx E. 119 See, e.g., Dark Matter, http://nmwa.org/exhibitions/sodajerk-after-rainbow (remix video exhibited at National Museum of Women in the Arts); Lim, Us, http://mediacommons.futureofthebook.org/imr/2008/02/01/us-a-multivid-by-lim (exhibited at the California Museum of Photography); Spectacle: The Music Video, http://www.movingimage.us/exhibitions/2013/04/03/detail/spectacle-the-music-video/ (exhibition at the Museum of the Moving Image featuring vids). 120 Letter from Jane Tolmie to Librarian of Congress, Appx O. 121 2012 Recommendations, at 136. 
[PAGE 21]
Page 21 of 25  
wide variety of remix video creators who are engaged in criticism and commentary and suppress video remix’s use in education and scholarship.  D. The Effect of Circumvention on the Market for or Value of Copyrighted Works  Free, easy-to-use DVD ripping software has been continually available in any event. And a pirate interested only in distributing full copies of a work can easily use a camcorder, another reason that the existing exemptions have been irrelevant to non-remix uses. After the 2009 exemption, opponents were unable to identify any harm to a legitimate market,122 and the situation is no different today. There is no evidence that existing exemptions for DVDs and online video have harmed sales.123 The MPAA accepts “the creation and dissemination of fan-made works” within current law, without indicating any economic concerns.124 Prior concerns raised by opponents in previous rulemaking procedures have proven unfounded (as would be expected, given that both §1201 and its exemptions are mysteries to members of the general public until they have a direct encounter with the law). As vidders routinely testify, remix opens up new audiences and generates legitimate purchases, further enhancing the market.125 Indeed, the labor of remix inculcates genuine respect for authorship in ways no lecture can.126 Case law recognizes that transformative uses may have positive market effects, although they are of course not required.127  E. Other factors  We address here the additional questions regarding this class identified in the NPRM. Initially, we note that these additional inquiries are not required by the statute, and proponents can meet the standard set out by the statute as we have in the past with evidence of actual negative effects on fair use, even if there are endless additional limitations that could be proposed. 
                                                122 2012 Recommendations at 129, 137. See Sony, 464 U.S. at 451 (presuming noncommercial uses not to harm legitimate markets); Princeton Univ. Press, 99 F.3d at 1385–86 (“The burden of proof as to market effect rests with the copyright holder if the challenged use is of a ‘noncommercial’ nature.”). 123 See, e.g., Jacob Siegal, Digital movie sales are on the rise as rentals fall off the charts, http://bgr.com/2014/01/08/digital-movie-sales-up-47-percent/ (Jan. 8, 2014) (noting continuing surge in online sales; physical media sales have declined, but this is due to digital sales); Time Warner Annual Report to Shareholders 2013, at 16. 124 Comments of the Motion Picture Ass’n of America, Nov. 13, 2013, http://www.ntia.doc.gov/files/ntia/motion_picture_association_of_america_comments.pdf at 4-5. 125 See Freund, supra, at 5-7 (discussing how vidders find new artists and promote media through vidding); Ito Interview, Appx B (finding that remixing supports DVD markets). 126 See, e.g., Paul Booth, Fandom In The Classroom: A Pedagogy of Fan Studies, in Fan Culture: Theory/Practice, ed. Katherine Larsen & Lynn Zubernis, 174, 180 (2012) (“These mashup videos foster an understanding of copyright in the digital age because students get firsthand knowledge of video editing and theoretical knowledge of the difficulty such editing work can have.”); Henry Jenkins et al., Confronting the Challenges of Participatory Culture: Media Education for the 21st Century 10 (2006) (“[Y]oung people who create and circulate their own media [including remixes] are more likely to respect the intellectual property rights of others because they feel a greater stake in the cultural economy.”). 127 Authors Guild, Inc. v. Google Inc., 954 F.Supp.2d 282, 293 (S.D.N.Y. 2013) (noting that transformative uses enhance discovery and sales of original works). 
[PAGE 22]
Page 22 of 25  
We are concerned that the Copyright Office’s may be contemplating discrimination based on the perceived artistic needs and practices of commercial as opposed to noncommercial artists.128 Both commercial and noncommercial creators have messages; both have standards for their own work. To require some standard of gatekeeper demands from creators before affording them the protections of an exemption would be inconsistent both with copyright’s nondiscrimination principle and with the First Amendment underpinnings of fair use: “The First Amendment’s protections, advanced by the fair use defense, have never applied to some bizarre oligarchy of ‘qualified’ speakers.”129 A vidder’s artistic needs as perceived by an outsider should not be a factor. Not only is such judgment discriminatory, but it neglects the role of artistic beginnings. Today’s bad vid may lead to tomorrow’s work of searing cultural criticism. As one vidder explained, her first vid was “awful. But I was still pretty proud of it.” She kept teaching herself, developing a style, and working until her videos became popular and she ultimately pursued a degree in Cinematic Arts and a career in editing as a result of her early efforts.130 Had her efforts been stopped at her first “awful” vid, we would never have her mature contributions. Independently, the Office should recognize the practical reality that noncommercial remix artists face: a lack of legal or technical knowledge sufficient to distinguish “circumvention” from “noncircumvention” technologies for making short clips. The Office has already recognized practical reality in other exemptions.131 Based on the ethnographic research in remix communities, as well as our experience, an exemption that only protects artists who are conversant with §1201 is a cruel joke.  The Office specifically asked whether the exemption can be limited to: (a) “motion pictures” as defined under the Copyright Act rather than extending to all “audiovisual works.” We do not oppose language of this sort, providing that it can be made clear to laypeople that “motion pictures” includes television and streaming video.  (b) uses of short portions or clips of motion pictures or audiovisual works. We not oppose language of this sort, providing that it can be made clear that “short” has no specific definition outside a comparison to the particular works at issue and the remixer’s needs. A rule listing minutes, percentages or anything similar would not be appropriate. As numerous examples demonstrate and as the Office recognized in 2012, often remixes use several minutes from a full-length movie or a television series, representing a small fraction of the total.                                                 128 See Copyright Office, Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, Dec. 12, 2014, http://copyright.gov/fedreg/2014/79fr73856.pdf, at 15 (opining, in advance of evidence and contrary to findings of two previous rulemakings, that “distribution standards for commercial documentary films may require use of higher-resolution material than required for use in noncommercial remix videos”). 129 Caner v. Autry, 2014 WL 2002835, *9 (W.D. Va. May 14, 2014). 130 Communication from Isabel H., on file with OTW (Oct. 3, 2013).  131 See, e.g., 2010 Recommendations at 65-66 (finding that gatekeepers would refuse to accept documentaries with low clip quality, even though no law of man or nature required this, and accepting this as a justification for an exemption); [print-disabled Recommendation] (finding that print-disabled people should not have to buy multiple devices in order to access the full range of works).  
[PAGE 23]
Page 23 of 25  
 (c) uses for purposes of criticism, comment, or education, as opposed to other “noninfringing” or “fair” uses. We respectfully oppose any further slicing of fair use for exemption purposes. As explained above, the cases recognize that there are many paths to transformativeness.132 Section 1201 operates equally on all forms of transformativeness using video clips, harming them all. There is no need to prejudge potential types of transformative fair uses, or to create an extra category that would need to be separately analyzed even after a factfinder determined that a remix was fair use. Rather, imposing such a requirement would create new uncertainties, mandating distinctions that courts have increasingly recognized they are unequipped to make.133 Just as one man’s obscenity is another man’s lyric, one woman’s criticism is another’s truism.134 Transformativeness recognizes the variety of interpretive contexts and wisely exempts the factfinder from having to identify a specific critical message or commentary—something that can be especially hard to reduce to words when it is expressed in sounds and images.135 Indeed, courts routinely find fair use when there are multiple interpretations of the meaning of a use. Punishing or suppressing work that was transformative fair use, but not “critical” according to an outsider’s view, would suppress artistic speech and artistic evolution.  The proposed exemptions do not change the underlying substance of copyright law, including the contours of fair use. They only make those contours possible to determine, rather than cutting off any inquiry because of the separate anti-circumvention prohibition. Thus, to the extent that individual remixes are not fair uses, copyright owners would retain the ability to take action against those uses. (d) “noncommercial videos” as opposed to “primarily noncommercial videos.” We respectfully oppose limiting the language of the exemption.136 As the Office recognized previously, there are instances where an artist may be compensated for producing a noncommercial work promoting a political or social justice message.137 A recent study of viral video revealed that the high-impact                                                 132 Cariou v. Prince, 714 F.3d 694, 706 (2d Cir. 2013); (“The law imposes no requirement that a work comment on the original or its author in order to be considered transformative, and a secondary work may constitute a fair use even if it serves some purpose other than those  . . identified in the preamble to the statute.”; district court erred as a matter of law in requiring criticism or commentary).  133 See, e.g., Seltzer v. Green Day, 725 F.3d 1170 (9th Cir. 2013). 134 Sara Howe, (De)Compose, Shape-Shift, and Suture: Towards a Monstrous Rhetoric of Fan Compositions, Dissertation, Dept, of English, University of Arizona (May, 2013) at 102, avail. at http://arizona.openrepository.com/arizona/bitstream/10150/299072/1/azu_etd_12855_sip1_m.pdf (“[V]idding’s rhetorical effectiveness is dependent upon its audience, but unique to these fan compositions is the need for a particular shared knowledge . . . ”) 135 See Cariou, 714 F.3d at 706-07; see also Rebecca Tushnet, Judges as Bad Reviewers: Fair Use and Epistemological Humility, 25 L. & Lit. 20 (2013) (discussing relevance of interpretive communities); Rebecca Tushnet, Worth a Thousand Words: The Images of Copyright Law, 125 Harv. L. Rev. 683, 754-55 (2012) (discussing fair use and images). 136 In the alternative, the Office could make clear that “noncommercial” follows the First Amendment’s definition of the term. Cf. Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 584 (1994) (pointing out that most favored fair uses are in fact created with some hope of financial reward); Hoffman v. Capital Cities/ABC, Inc., 255 F.3d 1180, 1186 (9th Cir. 2001) (“A printed article meant to draw attention to the for-profit magazine in which it appears . . . does not fall outside of the protection of the First Amendment because it may help to sell copies.”). 137 2012 Recommendations, at 129; see also McIntosh Interview Appx H, 52 (explaining that PRV makers sometimes work by commission). 
[PAGE 24]
Page 24 of 25  
PRVs of the last few years were often made by “interest groups and other nontraditional actors [that were] established organizations backed by financial and social resources.”138 These messages often require production resources. For example, the NCAI hired an outside firm to make Take It Off, and in Northland, a contractor made one of the remix videos on behalf of a nonprofit advocacy organization.139 As the court recognized, the fact that the nonprofit lacked the in-house expertise to make its transformative fair use should not bar it from expressing its viewpoint in the most effective manner possible.140 Moreover, advocacy groups often use their substantive advocacy to solicit donations, because their most powerful messages are also reasons to support them. While the Northland court characterized this activity as partially commercial,141 it also recognized that the transformative aspects were more important.142 Restrictive language could have stripped the Northland defendants of any defense against a §1201 claim, despite the plaintiff’s clearly speech-suppressive motives. Thus, the exemption should have language indicating that noncommerciality is to be broadly construed. Likewise, artists may engage in museum exhibitions that are primarily noncommercial. For example, Soda_Jerk is a two-artist collective whose work—displayed at the National Museum of Women in the Arts—involves video remix, such as editing Judy Garland films so that the actress is in dialogue with her younger self in The Wizard of Oz. Soda_Jerk creates similar remixes involving River Phoenix, Marilyn Monroe, and other well-known performers. Their work comments on “experiences of time and memory and how these can be mediated by moving image technologies. . . . By borrowing, re-sequencing, and manipulating clips from films and television, Soda_Jerk demonstrates how sampling can even serve as a kind of re-animation of the dead.”143 Soda_Jerk’s work is plainly transformative and deserving of protection against §1201 liability, even if the museum provides compensation for their participation in the installation. Moreover, the litigated cases finding transformative fair use from re-workings essentially all involve commercial uses in the sense that the fair user is not purely eleemosynary. The case law is quite clear that commerciality is of limited if any relevance when a use is significantly transformative and therefore does not interfere with a market the prior copyright owner has any right to control. Commercial uses are also equally vulnerable to suppression based on disagreement with a message. Thus, while noncommercial uses are even more favored in fair use analysis, contact with the world of money in some way is both common144 and completely consistent with fair use, as the existing exemption for documentarians also recognizes. A definition that accommodates this reality avoids complicated parsing of the meaning of “commercial” (e.g., opponents have claimed that posting on YouTube is “commercial” because YouTube is operated as a business).                                                 138 Shifman, supra n.19, at 125. 139 See Northland, 868 F. Supp. 2d at 967. 140 See 2012 Recommendations, at 139 (recognizing importance of commissioned work to fair use by institutions); Sabia Interview, Appx L. 141 Northland, 868 F. Supp. 2d at 978-79. 142 See, e.g., Campbell, 510 U.S. at 579; Perfect 10, 508 F.3d at 1166; Bill Graham Arch. v. Dorling Kindersley Ltd., 448 F.3d 605, 610 (2d Cir. 2006); Hustler Mag. Inc. v. Moral Majority Inc., 796 F.2d 1148, 1152-53 (9th Cir. 1986). 143 See Dark Matter, supra n. 118 (excerpt at http:/ /vimeo.com/55280845;); Dark Matter catalogue, Appx Q. 144 Cf. Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 584 (1994) (discussing common commercial fair uses). 
[PAGE 25]
Page 25 of 25  
(e) with respect to works distributed online, those works that are not readily available on DVD and/or Blu-ray disc, and (f) with respect to Blu-ray discs, those works or content that are not readily available on DVD. We respectfully oppose any such limitation. First, as the Office is aware from discussions over orphan works, the term “readily available” is a hotly contested phrase with no case law providing guidance as to its meaning for audiovisual works. It would needlessly complicate the exemption and make it extremely risky to use.  Second, this proposal misapprehends the nature of remix. To take just one of many examples, vidder Thuviaptarth explained that her work draws on clips from the Captain America movies as shown in theaters as well as clips from the extra materials on the Blu-Ray disc.145 It is the contrast between those clips that helps form her message. Requiring vidders to buy multiple editions of films—the online version or the DVD for the version shown in theaters, then the Blu-Ray for the extras—is not only a significant additional expense, it is the type of counterintuitive requirement that traps the unwary, and could require the rejection of an exemption when a vidder did use the Blu-Ray extras, but (quite naturally) also used clips from the main movie taken from the Blu-Ray.  Third, this proposal has no relationship to fair use, artistic need for quality, or practical reality. A vidder who legitimately purchased a Blu-Ray disc or download has no reason to think that she can’t make fair use of it even if there is also a DVD version. As a matter of aesthetics, vidders prefer to use the best quality available; online source is regularly used only when it’s the only version available,146 but no legal sanction is needed to make this artistic practice into a risky rule. Moreover, this proposal suggests that a vidder may make clips from a download when it is the only version presently available (as is now common windowing practice), but if she uses the same file to make the same clips months later, on the day the Blu-Ray version has been released, she will break the law, an even more bizarre and counterintuitive proposition.147 Fourth, the current exemption is not so limited, and has worked for remixers now able to assert fair use rights with confidence. Such a limitation would only make a legitimate exemption harder to use, in contradiction to the statutory command in 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C) to consider the impact on “criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research.” The Office’s remaining inquiries can be addressed quickly. The lack of viable alternatives to circumvention is discussed in detail above, at pp 11-19. As for adverse effects, as in 2012, there is no evidence that the remix exemption has had a negative effect on the legitimate marketplace for copyrighted works.148 Exemptions for fair use remix will continue that record. 8. Documentary Evidence Please see Appendices. 
                                                145 Communication on file with OTW (Sept. 7, 2014) 146 See, e.g., Kjono Statement, Appx K; Ito Comment, Appx B; Turk Statement, Appx N 101 147 Cf. 2012 Recommendations, at 20 (concluding that people with print disabilities shouldn’t have to pay for multiple platforms; noting NTIA’s conclusion that this duplicate investment wasn’t a reasonable alternative to circumvention). 148 2012 Recommendations, at 129.  
[PAGE 26]
Appendix A Further Examples of Transformative Remix ............................................................ Appx. 1  Appendix B  Comment of Mizuko Ito ..........................................................................................Appx. 22  Appendix C Interview with Gianduja Kiss .................................................................................Appx. 26   Appendix D Interview with Elisa Kreisinger  ............................................................................. Appx. 29    Appendix E Interview with Eli Horwatt ..................................................................................... Appx. 31  Appendix F Katarina Freund, I Thought I Made You a Vid, But Then You Told Me That I Didn’t, Aesthetics and Boundary Work in the Fan-Vidding Community,  November 27, 2014 ................................................................................................. Appx. 33  Appendix G Interview with Professor Francesca Coppa  ............................................................ Appx. 46  Appendix H Interview with Jonathan McIntosh .......................................................................... Appx. 52  Appendix I Statement from Killa ............................................................................................... Appx. 55  Appendix J Reply Comment of the Organization for Transformative Works for Proposed  Class #7B and Proposed Class #7C ........................................................................ Appx. 57  Appendix K Statement from Jakie Kjono .................................................................................... Appx. 93  Appendix L Interview with Joe Sabia ......................................................................................... Appx. 94  Appendix M Letter from Peter Decherney to U.S. Copyright Office .......................................... Appx. 98  Appendix N Statement of Tisha Turk  ....................................................................................... Appx. 101  
[PAGE 27]
Appendix O Letter from Jane Tolmie, to Librarian of Congress .............................................. Appx. 109  Appendix P RVCemail ............................................................................................................. Appx. 110  Appendix Q Dark Matter Catalogue .......................................................................................... Appx. 111 	  
[PAGE 28]
Appendix A 
 
Further Examples of Transformative Remix 
 
I. Overview of remix genres 
 
There are a number of genres of short-form videos on YouTube that are popular among viewers 
and frequently depend on clips drawn from film or television sources. These genres include 
everything from movie trailer remixes to fanvids to supercuts (“A fast-paced montage of short 
video clips that obsessively isolates a single element from its source, usually a word, phrase, or 
cliche from film and TV.”)1  All these genres are transformative.   
 
Academic research reveals that movie trailers, for example, serve as as exposés, parodies, and 
critiques of genre and movie marketing conventions.
2  Other genres include film analysis (film 
critics provide their commentary and criticism using voice-over or text in combination with clips 
taken from the films being analyzed);
3 movie mistakes (film buffs collect and comment on 
anachronisms, continuity errors, and other “mistakes” found in films and television programs); 
comic juxtaposition remixes (often humorous videos created by combining video clips from one 
film with audio clips from another source); 4 political commentary (videos intended to make a 
political statement that borrow clips from film or television to illustrate their message); po litical 
criticism of movies (videos that utilize clips in the course of explicitly criticizing the underlying 
themes or politics of a film); and even “YouTube Poop” (absurdist remixes that ape and mock 
the lowest technical and aesthetic standards of remix culture to comment on remix culture itself). 
 
A. Cultural and Political Criticism 
 
Many popular online videos use remix to engage in commentary or criticism. In 2009-10, many 
remixers started creating “Downfall” parodies, or remixes of the bunker scene from the German 
film Downfall: Hitler and the End of the Third Reich  (aka Der Untergang).  The parodies 
comment on everything from the misuse of DMCA to problems with new technologies and 
cultural events.5  
 
Remix is a powerful way of engaging with important issues such as racial stereotypes.  
Numerous remixes, for example, mock the “Mighty Whitey” trope of a white savior rescuing 
“savages” from other white oppressors by combining footage from James Cameron’s film Avatar 
with audio from the Disney film Pocahontas and vice versa.
6  Recently, the National Congress of 
                                                
1  See, e.g ., http://screencrave.com/2010 -08-04/the-10-best-youtube-trailer-remixes-ever/; http://supercut.org. TV 
Guide recently created its own supercut of Supernatural.  http://tvguide.tumblr.com/post/99992489200/relive -the-
good-times-with-supernatural-bro-hugs. 
2 Nicola Maria Dusi, Remixing Movies and Trailers Before and After the Digital Age, in Eduardo Navas et al., The 
Routledge Companion to Remix Studies 154, 160 (2015).  
3 See, e.g.,  Jim Emerson, In the Cut , Sept. 21, 2011, htt p://www.rogerebert.com/scanners/annotated -transcript-in-
the-cut-part-i-shots-in-the-dark-knight. 
4 See, e.g., https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i4JZgUuy6G8 (contrasting histrionic song with sitcom Community). 
5 See Top 10 Hitler Downfall Parodies of All Time , Ranker, http://www.ranker.com/list/top -10-hitler-downfall-
parodies-of-all-time/the-master (last visited Nov. 12, 2013).  
6 See http://vimeo.com/9389738/.  
Appx. 1
[PAGE 29]
 2 
American Indians released “Take It Away,” an ad that uses footage of Washington’s football 
team, with its current trademarks digitally removed, to make the argument that the team will still 
be the same even if it changes its racially inflammatory name and mascot. 7  High-quality footage 
of the team playing was necessary to make the point that the team would be exactly the same 
without the trademarks.  This ad is an example of the need that nonprofit groups have to be able 
to hire outside producers in order to make their political and social messages; it was produced by 
Goodness Mfg., a media agency, but it furthers the NCAI’s nonprofit mission.
8 
 
Political remix videos (PRVs) engage with electoral and direct politics.  These types of remixes 
predated the internet,
9 but now routinely circulate online.  “At the heart of political remixing lies 
an impulse to rebut mainstream media and promote contemporaneous critiques of culture 
through alternative channels free from endemic corporate censorship in journalism.”
10  PRVs are 
powerful and persuasive because they can take advantage of shared public knowledge while 
commenting on public issues. Millions of viewers have watched one or more PRVs.    
 
Diran Lyons’ political remix video, combining footage of Jake Gyllenhaal in a war movie with 
footage of President Obama, screened at Los Angeles Shorts Film Festival in Hollywood, the 
Athens Video Art Festival 2010, and the RE/Mixed Media Fest in Brooklyn, among other 
venues. It was the first political remix video ever to reach #1 on the Internet Movie Database’s 
most popular short film.
11 
 
Another popular video, “The Rent is too Damn UP – A Remix,” combines footage from 
Disney’s animated film UP with audio from a New York gubernatorial debate featuring Jimmy 
McMillan, candidate for governor from the Rent is Too Damn High Party. McMillan was a 
sensation at the debate, and the remix helped keep attention on the issues he raised.
12 
 
“Fellowship of the Ring of Free Trade” adds subtitles to clips from the popular movie The Lord 
of the Rings to comment on the recent history of international free trade agreements and the 
efforts to oppose them, equating corporate power with the villain Sauron.
13  The Move Your 
                                                
7 See https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QW__6RO_ -N0. 
8 See Sam Thielman, Activist Ad Strips Away Redskins' Logo to Show ‘It’s Still Washington Football ,’ AdWeek, 
Jan. 23, 2015, http://www.adweek.com/news/advertising -branding/activist-ad-strips-away-redskins-logo-show-its-
still-washington-football-162499. 
9 See, e.g., Cultural Borrowings: Appropriation, Rew orking, and Transformation, 76 -91 (Ian Robert Smith ed. 2009), 
available at http://www.scope.nottingham.ac.uk/cultborr/Cultural_Borrowings_Final.pdf  (describing a history of  
“found footage ” culture on the internet) ; Jonathan McIntosh, A History of Subvers ive Remix Video before YouTube: 
Thirty Political Video Mashups Made between World War II and 2005 , 9 TRANSFORMATIVE WORKS & CULTURES, 
(2012) http://journal.transformativeworks.org/index.php/twc/article/view/371/299 . 
10 Cultural Borrowings, supra note 9, at 80.  See also Olivia Conti, Political Remix Video as a Vernacular 
Discourse, Routledge Companion, supra, at 346, 346 (noting that PRVs have three common traits: they present 
political messages, they use copyright- protected video, and they use dominant medi a forms, emulating “the formal 
characteristics of their sources”).  
11 See Desiree D’Alessandro & Diran Lyons, Desiree D'Alessandro and Diran Lyons Bear Arms: Weapons of Mass 
Transformation [interview] , 9 TRANSFORMATIVE WORKS & CULTURES (2012), doi:10.3983/twc.2012.0347 (2012) at 
[2.20] (“As an example of transformative storytelling, it directly takes poignant shots at Obama's duplicitous and 
malleable stance on war within the context of accepting the world's most prestigious peace prize.”).  
12 See Joe Sabia, The Rent is Too Damn Up, Political Remix Video (Oct. 19, 2010), 
http://www.politicalremixvideo.com/2010/10/19/the -rent-is-too-damn-high-up-remix. 
13 See St01en Collective, Fellowship of the Ring of Free Trade, YouTube (Nov. 24, 2006),  
Appx. 2
[PAGE 30]
 3 
Money project, which encourages citizens to move their bank accounts from the banks that 
received bailout funds, came to popular attention in part through a remix video created by 
documentary filmmaker Eugene Jarecki drawing on clips from It’s a Wonderful Life. 14  Arab- 
“Homophobic Friends,” by remixer Tijana Mamula, combines short clips from the popular TV 
show Friends to comment on homophobia in popular media. 15  As these examples demonstrate, 
“[a]t the heart of political remixing lies an impulse to rebut mainstream media and promote 
contemporaneous critiques of culture through alternative channels free from endemic corporate 
censorship in journalism.”
16 
 
In one supercut, “The Price is Creepy,” Rich Juzwiak uses short clips to call attention to the 
sexist behavior of famous TV game show host Bob Barker of The Price is Right.
17  Another 
supercut highlights just how many women have been killed in order to further male heroes’ 
narrative arcs in story after story after story. 18  A video by 16-year-old vidder ImaginarySanity 
comments on sexism in popular culture by juxtaposing clips from Star Trek with Britney Spears’ 
pop hit, “Womanizer.”19  Jonathan McIntosh mashes up Buffy the Vampire Slayer  with Twilight 
to illustrate the criticism that the Twilight phenomenon celebrates female disempowerment and 
romanticizes male stalking, leading to over 4 million views, translation into over 30 languages, 
and even positive reactions from young Twilight fans.
20 
 
Further examples come from traditions of appropriation art.  Desiree D’Alessandro explained: 
 
My remix “Woman Warrior Exposed (Sigourney Weaver Remix) ” explores how 
Sigourney Weaver is represented as a female power icon in pop culture, though 
several roles from her filmography epitomize Laura Mulvey's notion of the male 
gaze, whereby Weaver is objectified and sexualized in the character personas she 
portrays. I utilized juxtapositions of the iconic horror narrator John Newland to 
draw public attention to the discord between Weaver's selective recollection and 
her actual cinematic record. The illusion that is presented through Weaver's 
testimony is dissolved in an illuminating montage that highlights her career of 
conflicting character personas. It received positive reception at the New York 
Chashama Film Festival and at the international 2011 European Media Art 
Festival premier.
21 
                                                                                                                                                       
http://www.youtube.co m/watch?v=vkmczhkrKYA.  
14 See Eugene Jarecki, Move Your Money, YouTube (Dec. 29, 2009), 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Icqrx0OimSs. 
15 See Tijana Mamula, Homophobic Friends, Political Remix Video (July 11, 2011),  
http://www.politicalremixvideo.com/2011/07/11/homophobic- friends. 
16 Cultural Borrowings,  supra note 9 (describing a history of  “found footage” culture on the internet). 
17 See Jonathan McIntosh, The Price is Creepy -Bob Barker Supercut, Political Remix Video (Nov. 8, 2011)  
http://www.politicalremixvideo.com/2010/11/08/the -price-is-creepy/. 
18 See http://blogs.indiewire.com/womenandhollywood/watch -women-in-refrigerators-supercut-female-characters-
killed-to-give-male-characters-depth-20140822. 
19 See Captain Kirk is a Womanizer, Political Remix Video (Mar . 7, 2009)  
http://www.politicalremixvideo.com/2009/03/07/kirk -is-a-womanizer/. 
20 See Jonathan McIntosh, Buffy vs. Edward Remixed, Rebellious Pixels (June 20, 2009)  
http://www.rebelliouspixels.com/2009/buffy -vs-edward-twilight-remixed (noting coverage in o utlets ranging from 
NPR to the New York Post to Vanity Fair).  
21 D’Allessandro & Lyons, at 2.24 . 
Appx. 3
[PAGE 31]
 4 
Joe Sabia, a digital remix artist, video director, and creative consultant, likewise mixes cultural 
and political commentary in his work. Sabia’s videos include not only Prime Time Terror, cited 
by the Office in 2012, but other works such as Seven Minute Sopranos, a first of its kind video 
recap of the entire Sopranos series, which inspired numerous other recaps and was cited as the 
reason for the launch of CBS’s Eyelab, and a remixed timeline of cultural references in The 
Office.22 
 
Nor are these solely individual productions; Prime Time Terror is just one example of remix 
created for an advocacy organization.23  GreenPeace’s OnSlaught(er) video remix was created to 
draw attention to the rainforests GreenPeace contends are being destroyed in order to extract 
palm oil used in Dove products, and has been viewed over 1.5 million times.24 
 
B. Film Criticism 
 
Film criticism is another thriving genre, and is finding new forms as the tools for high-quality 
copying are increasingly available.  The channel CinemaSins features a series that explains 
“Everything Wrong With” a number of films, in ten minutes or less, with explanatory footage.
25 
 
Flixcapacitor’s work compares the color grading in select scenes from Watchman and edited 
versions, which reduced the blue tint of the original film in order to produce natural skin tones 
and reveal details about the set production designs that were inspired by the original comic book 
color palette.
26  Tony Zhou has created a number of detailed shorts focusing on, for example, the 
way that editing, framing, and blocking create comedy in Jackie Chan films 27; using analysis of 
shot composition to explore a “new formal convention” arising as filmmakers learn to portray 
new modes of communication such as texting 28; and analyzing the work of a director he dislikes 
to learn about visual perception and shot composition. 29  Other Zhou videos offer in-depth 
analyses of particular films, the work of particular directors, or particular types of shots.   
 
Going in a different direction, Jamie Benning’s work combines multiple sources, including 
deleted scenes, alternate takes, and interviews he conducts himself, in order to explore the 
                                                
22 See Joe Sabia, Remixes, The Internet Portfolio of Joe Sabia, http://www.joesabia.co/remix.html (last visited Nov. 
11, 2013). 
23 Prime Time Terror explored “the kinds of narratives about the War on Drugs and the War on Terror that are being 
told in mainstream television and to assess how these stories reflect or reimagine reality. ” Lear Center, 
http://www.learcenter.org/html/projects/?cm=mcd/drugsterror (last vis ited Nov. 30, 2011). It used clips from 
multiple primetime TV episodes depicting the  “war on terror” including NCIS, CSI, Law & Order and 24 to create a 
work that is physically and functionally different from the originals. Some of the clips are heavily al tered by the 
inclusion of original graphics, voiceovers, and manipulation of the footage speed. The resulting product is a 
completely new work that provides critical commentary about how television both reflects and reimagines reality: a 
quintessential transformative fair use.  
24 See GreenpeaceVideo, Dove Onslaught(er), YouTube (Apr. 21, 2008),  
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=odI7pQFyjso.  
25 See https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCYUQQgogVeQY8cMQamhHJcg.  
26 See http://vimeo.com/89269435.  
27 See http://vimeo.com/113439313.  
28 See http://vimeo.com/103554797.  
29 See http://vimeo.com/99798626.  
Appx. 4
[PAGE 32]
 5 
sources and choices reflected in various significant films. 30 These “love letters” are, as the New 
York Times concludes, “meticulously crafted mashups, loaded with unusual facts and teeming 
with scraps of rare video and audio.”31   
 
C. Video Art 
 
These days, many artists work in multiple genres, incorporating remix into broader artistic 
practices.  Soda_jerk, a collective whose remix work was exhibited at the National Museum of 
Women in the Arts, explains: “For us sampling is a form of cultural warfare waged along those 
lines. It is a concrete means of getting our hands on the stuff of history, a radical strategy for 
contesting and recoding the cultural record of our time.”
32 
 
Although Soda_jerk doesn’t sell its work, it does participate in the artistic economy:  
 
As video art is our full-time career, we'd classify our video work as professional. 
Our video work is not available for commercial acquisition (we do not sell our 
work), but our practice does involve commercial opportunities such as 
exhibitions, screenings, lectures and workshops. We have also had video work 
commissioned by art institutions, film archives and underground film festivals 
(and have refused a number of video commissions from commercial brands).
33 
 
Because its work is often exhibited in large venues, high-quality source is extremely important 
for artistic integrity.  When Soda_jerk does use lower quality footage, that is a deliberate artistic 
choice.
34  One reason for seeking out high quality is the nature of the editing process: 
 
There is a great deal of labor-intensive postproduction involved with our video 
work. This includes masking, compositing, tracking, morphs, 3D camera, time 
shifts, grain filters and color correction. The quality of the source clip has a huge 
impact on these effects. For instance, masking and tracking are extremely difficult 
processes to execute effectively when working with low resolution footage. 
Sometimes if a sample can not be found in a high enough resolution we will have 
to exclude it from the project on the basis that the required effect work would be 
impossible to carry off convincingly.35 
 
This focus on artistic needs is common in the video art community, which generally does not 
have a detailed appreciation of laws like §1201: “[W]e are often asked for copyright advice by 
                                                
30 See http://filmumentaries.com/fullvideos/ . See http://filmumentaries.com/reviews -and-coverage/ (“Mr. Benning’s 
works are invaluable educational tools for my students at Clemson.  His sense of structure, timing, & composition 
are superb. His ‘filmumentaries’ help show how good, practiced authors weave original sources, research, and 
voices into a magnificent peace of rhetoric”) (Allen Swords, Senior Lecturer at Clemson University).  
31 See Erik Olson,  A F ilm Fan’s Love Letter to Jaws, N.Y.Times July 5, 2013, 
http://artsbeat.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/07/05/a -film-fans-love-letter-to-jaws/. 
32 Communication on file with OTW (Feb. 4, 2015).  
33 Id. 
34 Id. 
35 Id. 
Appx. 5
[PAGE 33]
 6 
artists who are seeking to include sampled material in their work for the first time, and have 
usually been quite shocked by the lack of legal knowledge that they express.”36 
 
D. National History Day Documentaries 
 
National History Day (NHD) is a national educational competition endorsed by the major history 
associations and sponsored by the National Endowment for the Humanities, among others.  
Students create historical presentations in various media, including individual and group 
documentaries.
37  Documentaries have won awards established by the Library of Congress, 
among numerous other institutions.38 
 
According to an evaluation of the program, students who participate in NHD “perform better on 
high-stakes tests [not only in social studies, but in reading, science and math], are better writers, 
more confident and capable researchers, and have a more mature perspective on current events 
and civic engagement than their peers. Participants also show a greater ability to collaborate with 
peers, manage their time and persevere – all skills employers say are lacking in today’s 
workforce.”39  NHD is particularly valuable for students who are ‘slipping through the cracks’ of 
our education system.  For example, one special education student who’d been put into a 
program for kids “who could not learn.”  His NHD class was his only “regular” class.     he 
produced a documentary that made it to the state finals. The next year, he took two “regular” 
classes and produced another documentary for NHD that made it to nationals. By the end of high 
school, he was enrolled in all honors classes.
40 
 
Documentaries often use existing videos as part of their presentations.  Recent national winners 
that did so and that are featured on the main NHD site include The Turning Point in Deception: 
Top Secret Tactics for D-Day
41; Maddie Pavek, Out of the Closet and Into the Streets: Frank 
Kameny and the Mattachine Society of Washington D.C. 42; and The Gray Wolf Reintroduction: 
A Scientific Approach to Protect The Yellowstone Ecosystem. 43  More examples can be viewed 
at the NHD website.44  The official NHD rules explicitly contemplate use of existing clips.45  The 
rules direct students to consider fair use, but there is—understandably—no mention of the 
DMCA or its exemptions. 46  The rules encourage the use of high quality materials; clarity of 
presentation, including quality of visuals, is worth 20% of the evaluation. 47  As the NHD 
recognizes, historical arguments—like all others—are stronger when they are clear and well-
done. 
 
                                                
36 Id. 
37 See http://www.nhd.org/CategoryDocumentary.htm.  
38 See http://www.nhd.org/2014_special_prizes.html#535. 
39 See National History Day Works, http://www.nhd.org/NHDworks.htm.  
40 See http://www.nhd.org/images/uploads/NHD1_KeyFindingsbrochureFINAL.pdf. 
41 See http://www.nhd.org/images/uplo ads/Bib%20and%20PP.pdf.  
42 See http://www.nhd.org/images/uploads/Process%20Paper%202013.pdf. 
43 See http://www.nhd.org/images/uploads/The%20Gray%20Wolf%20Reintroduction.pdf.  
44 See http://www.nhd.org/StudentProjectExamples.htm. 
45 See http://www.nhd.org/images/uploads/docrules.pdf.  
46 See Contest Rule Book, http://www.nhd.org/images/uploads/RuleBook14.pdf.  
47 Id. at 39. 
Appx. 6
[PAGE 34]
 7 
E. Vidding 
 
There is immense diversity in vidding, which often partakes of the political and cultural critic ism 
of other genres while focusing on specific media texts.  For example, refocusing existing 
narratives to highlight minority characters can be a powerful transformative tool.  One vidder of 
color, Talitha78, responded to debates over race in popular culture by creating a vid, “‘White’ 
and Nerdy,” focused on an African-American character on the TV show Psych.  She explained: 
“putting this together became a way of working through my issues with regard to [fan debates 
over race known as] RaceFail 2009. Like Gus, I am a nerd of color in a society where nerdiness 
is frequently coded as ‘white.’ With this vid, I want to subvert that stereotype ….”
48   
 
Fahrbotdrusilla’s Telephone examines class structures in the films Watchmen (showing the 
struggles and ultimate failure of a poor man who wants to be a superhero) and Batman Begins 
(showing the struggles and ultimate success of a rich man who wants to be a superhero).
49  Vids 
focused on Avatar: The Legend of Korra show parallels between the supposed protagonists and 
antagonists
50 or argue that antagonists are the true heroes.51 
 
Fall of Man by obsessive24 mixes footage from the television show Supernatural with clips 
from other apocalyptic media sources and iconic religious imagery including  Michelangelo's 
“Creation of Adam."
52 Using imagery that is both haunting and divine, the vid examines an 
angel’s changing attitude towards humans and god, as the apocalypse looms. The vid was used 
as a central discussion point in an article discussing the attitudes of young people in the 
millennial generation about religion and theology. 53 Alongside the religious themes discussed 
above, Fall of Man contemplates a romantic relationship between the angel featured in the video 
(Castiel) and one of the show’s main characters (Dean Winchester). The vid’s portrayal urges the 
audience to challenge Supernatural’s portrayal of Dean Winchester as a hypermasculine 
heterosexual and to explore alternative interpretations of the characters. 
 
Another example of a vid that effectively demonstrates the value of showing versus telling is 
Gianduja Kiss’s Dollhouse vid It Depends on What You Pay,
54 which was highlighted in the 
                                                
48 See talitha78, White and Nerdy, YouTube (Mar. 31, 2009), http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Iquni9PMBMk; 
see also talitha78, Comment to New Psych V id: “White” & Nerdy (Gus) (Apr. 23, 2009) . 
http://talitha78.livejournal.com/191915.html. 
49 See http://fahrbotdrusilla.dreamwidth.org/139507.html  
50 See https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n454GHQt6jE  (paralleling struggles for control in hero and antagonist).  
51 See https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qsH_In3xZZY . In this case, the designated antagonists were anarchists, 
and some fans disagreed with the political agenda of the creators in villainizing them. By pairing footage of them 
with a song promoting anti -authoritarian revolution, the vidder contributes to a political conversation through 
analyzing/critiquing the show. Since three of these four characters were killed in the Season 3 finale, and the fourth 
was written out of the story, this had to be released while it was topical, while only online versions were available,  
to have any effect. 
52 See Obsessive24, new vid - “Fall of Man” - Supernatural - Castiel/Dean, LIVEJOURNAL (May 18, 2009, 11:42  
PM) http://obsessive24.livejournal.com/261525.html.  
53 See Louisa El len Stein, What you don't know:  Supernatural fan vids and millennial theology , TRANSFORMATIVE 
WORKS AND CULTURES, no. 4 (2010) available at http://dx.doi.org/10.3983/twc.2010.0158.  
54 Gianduja Kiss, It Depends on What You Pay , MONSTERS FROM THE VIDS (uploaded April 25, 2009) 
http://www.giandujakiss.com/index.php?set=videos&category=Dollhouse.  
Appx. 7
[PAGE 35]
 8 
2012 Recommendation. 55  Many fans and critics of Dollhouse feel that although the show 
artfully portrays a terrifying idea, it does so in a misogynistic way. The vid weaves together 
scenes from Dollhouse with an unsettling yet upbeat song about rape featured in the 1960 off-
Broadway musical The Fantasticks. 56 By blending the controversial song with cleverly cut 
images from the show, Kiss created a new work that poses intriguing questions about the show’s 
portrayal of sexuality and personal autonomy. Together, the images and sound create a new 
transformative work that points out Dollhouse’s failure to acknowledge a connection between 
rape and the apparently consensual encounters presented in the original.  
At the time of the video’s release in April 2009, Dollhouse was only legitimately available 
through online distribution services, not on DVD, so Gianduja Kiss purchased Amazon 
downloads for use in her vid.  Season 1 was later released on DVD in July 2009, and season 2 
was not released on DVD until November 2010. The use of clips obtained through 
circumventing access to online episodes of Dollhouse enabled her to comment on the show when 
it was on the air, participating in an ongoing conversation, rather than requiring her to wait 
months for the DVD release (at which point the show had been cancelled).  
 
Gianduja Kiss has continued to engage in timely criticism, requiring access to a wide array of 
sources:  
 
It is very important that vidders have immediate high quality access to source 
material.  Very often, vids are used to “comment” on a popular movie or storyline 
on a television show; waiting months for the DVDs to emerge would blunt the 
immediacy of the vidders’ point, and perhaps force the vidder to miss deadlines 
for festivals or other gatherings where vids are shown en masse. 
For example, in my vid A Different Kind of Love Song, I wanted to celebrate the 
community of media fans of which I am a part, and I chose to do it by putting 
together a montage of fictional “fans” who appear as characters in popular media.  
For example, on the television show Hawaii 5-0, the character of Max is a Star 
Trek fan; Big Bang Theory features a series of characters who are comic book and 
science fiction fans.    
One common criticism of “nerds” or “geeks” as they appear in popular media is 
that they are overwhelmingly white men; people of color and women are shown 
to be fans of science fiction and fantasy far less often.  This popular depiction of 
science fiction fans as overwhelmingly white and male has real world effects - 
there have been many public controversies about how women in particular are 
excluded from science fiction/fantasy communities. 
I am a woman who is a fan of science fiction and fantasy, and I am part of an 
online community of like-minded women; therefore, in my video, I wanted to 
make sure that women were represented as fans.  And the video was being made 
for a particular purpose:  I wanted it to be screened at Vividcon, an annual 
convention for (overwhelmingly female) vidders. 
                                                
55 2012 Recommendation, 109 n.582.  
56 Although the song was featured in early productions of the musical, recent versions either remove it completely or 
replace it with a new song. 
Appx. 8
[PAGE 36]
 9 
As I put together my vid, I found – unsurprisingly – that while it was relatively 
easy to find representations of white male fans in popular media, I had a much 
harder time finding women and people of color who were shown to be sci-
fi/fantasy fans, at least in any kind of visual way that could be illustrated in vid 
form.   Often I was forced to resort to focusing on background characters or extras 
merely to include representations of women. 
Luckily, however, just before the deadline for submission to Vividcon, the 
television show Supernatural aired an episode that featured a woman computer 
programmer who was also a science-fiction and fantasy fan.  She was shown to, 
among other things, have a Hermione Granger figurine on her desk, and drink 
from a Wonder Woman mug.  These images were a godsend to me, given how 
hard it had been to find similar images. 
In order to use those images, I purchased a copy of the episode from Amazon, and 
I circumvented the DRM.  The vid was then submitted just in time for the 
Vividcon deadline.  The day after it aired at Vividcon, I posted it online, where it 
was associated with other Vividcon vids.  This occurred anywhere from 1-2 
months before the DVDs were released.  The vid was quite successful as 
compared to my other vids, and unquestionably received attention online because 
it was part of the Vividcon collection.  Had I been unable to include the newer 
footage, I believe the vid would have suffered artistically.57 
 
As she explains, such needs for timeliness are common in the community, as she discovered by 
running a popular vidding challenge: 
I run an online annual “festival” for vidders called Festivids.  Each participating 
vidder makes a vid in a source requested by another vidder.  The sources used in 
Festivids are only those sources that are rarely used in vidding.   
Vids must be submitted by a particular deadline in order to be included in that 
year's fest.  Festivids' popularity has grown over the years, and vids included in 
Festivids tend to get far more attention than they otherwise would.  And because 
participating vidders “request” different vids every year, the mix of eligible vids 
changes year to year - a vid that is appropriate to include in one year might not be 
eligible for inclusion in the following year. 
I can see, as moderator of Festivids, that very often vidders need extremely new 
sources - such as the latest episodes aired on television - in order to complete their 
vids by the deadline while simultaneously fulfilling their artistic vision.  Their 
vids might focus on a particular character, or relationship between characters, and 
a critical episode will air well before the DVDs become available, but before the 
Festivids submission deadline.  If they did not have access to those episodes 
immediately, their vids would suffer artistically, or they would be forced not to 
include them in Festivids at all (which would mean that the vids would attract a 
much smaller audience).
58 
                                                
57 Email from Gianduja Kiss, Feb. 2, 2015 (on file with OTW).  
58 Id. 
Appx. 9
[PAGE 37]
 10 
Vidder Obsessive24’s “Piece of Me”59 uses a combination of DVD footage from Britney Spears’ 
videos and other sources to 
analyze not only the tabloid version of the singer’s story (divorce, custody battles, 
substance abuse, bad behavior, etc.) but also Spears’s counternarrative of 
control…. [T]he song [Piece of Me] and its official music video both repress an 
additional connotation of the metaphor: that of breakdown and collapse. It is this 
repressed meaning—cracking up, falling to pieces—that Obsessive24 explores in 
her vid. Taken together, the video undercuts Spears’s provocative poses and 
bravado, reminding us that two months after this ‘cry of defiance’ was released, 
Spears was taken away on a gurney and held for a seventy-two -hour involuntary 
psychiatric evaluation. While the official video to “Piece of Me” creates fake 
tabloid covers and paparazzi video, Obsessive24 uses the real thing to 
heartbreaking effect.60 
 
The multi-fandom vid On the Prowl created jointly by vidders Sisabet and Sweetestdrain
61 uses 
images from over sixty different sources (e.g., Star Trek, Twilight, Dexter, Supernatural) to 
present a self-portrait of female fans who enjoy watching their favorite male characters suffer, 
both physically and emotionally. As the intensity of the music progresses, the pain that the male 
characters in the vid are enduring becomes more extreme. By featuring increasingly disturbing, 
rapidly cut images, the vidders invite the viewer to determine the point at which the suffering 
becomes “too much.” In response to “On the Prowl,” the vidding community examined whether 
fetishizing male pain—by the media and by vidders—can be problematic. The vid has been 
recognized in the community as a particularly thoughtful and evocative form of cultural 
critique.
62 
 
Akemi42 produced God’s Love as a reaction to Supernatural Season 7 episode 2, which aired on 
September 30, 2011, and revealed the apparent death of a beloved character on the show.
63 The 
vidder relied on technology for circumventing encryption on Amazon Instant video to obtain the 
clips she needed to produce and release the work by October 1, 2011 in immediate reaction to 
revelation on the show. Without relying on the exemptions, the vidder would be unable to 
express her views about the source material in visual form. 
 
Similarly, Emma_in_oz’s Male Gaze , in the vidder’s own words, “explores the question of 
whether the film theory of the male gaze can apply to a text like *Teen Wolf*,” 64 an MTV show 
that frequently features half-clothed young men. 
                                                
59 See http://transformativeworks.org/projects/vidtestsuite. Obsessive24, following accepted vidding practices, 
purchased Spears’s videos on DVD in order to create the vid. Email from Obsessive24, Nov. 23, 2011.  
60 Francesca Coppa, An Editing Room of One’s Own: Vidding as Women’s Work, 26 Camera Obscura 123, 125, 127 
(2011). 
61 See Sisabet, New Vid!! VVC Challenge: Self Portrait , LIVEJOURNAL (August 10, 2010, 2:35 PM) 
http://sisabet.livejournal.com/400014.html.  
62 See “ On the Prowl ” Fanlore Page, FANLORE (last updated November 26, 2011) 
http://fanlore.org/wiki/On_the_Prowl (describing  “On the Prowl ” as “ an important vid that you need to watch even 
though it will be uncomfortable”).  
63 See Akemi42, God’s Love, AKEMI42 EXPERIMENTS IN VIDEO EDITING (October 1, 2011) 
http://www.akemi42.com/2011/10/01/gods -love/. 
64 See https://vidding.livejournal.com/3166344.html. 
Appx. 10
[PAGE 38]
 11 
Vids can also communicate more personal messages.  Vidder luvtheheaven makes vids that use 
clips from multiple TV shows to communicate personal—and also general human—truths.  
Horrible Mothers & Their Daughters 65 is, to her, “one of the clearest examples I have out of all 
of the fanvideos I've made that really show how vidding can be a true form of artwork, 
expressing the artist's personal emotions etc. The song is triumphant and the video was very 
cathartic for me to make, as I found examples of various mother/daughter moments on five 
different television series, plus one father/daughter relationship on a 6th series, that I strongly 
related to and that showed my story.” The vid allows her to communicate her own history: “It 
serves as a useful way to explain what it was like growing up with my mom to my friends. It 
captures what it felt like in a way that simply telling them doesn't do as well. It makes it easier 
for them to understand and empathize with me.” 
 
Another of her vids is All About *My* Sexual Orientation,
66 which uses clips from Glee, 
Gilmore Girls, Skins UK, Grey's Anatomy, Everwood, Parenthood, Switched at Birth, Joan of 
Arcadia, House, Castle, Nashville, Gossip Girl, and Friday Night Lights.  She used the vid “as an 
informative tool” to educate people about asexuality.  Although she considers it less technically 
accomplished than her best, she was still happy to have made it: “I'm asexual, this is an identity 
that is important to me, and it is something I wish I had seen a fanvideo about years ago. I didn't 
figure out my own sexual orientation until I was 23 years old because of the lack of information 
out there. … I know many teenagers enjoy viewing fanvideos, and the fact that I've made this 
video now means that a teenager in the present time might be able to learn about the existence of 
their own sexual orientation sooner than I did. Also, I used the video to try to combat many 
misconceptions people have about asexuals.” 
 
Another vidder made a “deeply personal” multi-source vid about pregnancy and miscarriage.
67 
“I've been pregnant five times, but I only have one child. The first time I miscarried I felt so 
alone, because no one I knew had ever talked about infertility or loss. It was like this dirty little 
secret that happens behind closed doors, a private grief that no one shares. … After my latest 
miscarriage, I went looking for a vid that would help my process my feelings, but all I could find 
were personal snapshots set to music, grainy soap opera clips, and other snippets of TV shows 
and movies. Nothing seemed to talk about what it felt like to see babies all over the place, from 
Facebook to grocery shopping to TV ads, when I was futilely trying so hard myself. ” The vid 
was her answer to that absence. 
 
1. Case Study: The Price 
 
Vidder Thingswithwings created The Price,
68 a carefully edited critique of standard media 
narratives of “manpain,” in which a main character—typically a white male—undergoes trauma 
                                                
65 See https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CoSxVQqMfGQ.  
66 See https://www.youtube.co m/watch?v=vM8rIfoMEaU.  
67 https://grammarwoman.livejournal.com/171058.html.  
68 See 
See Test Suite for Fair Use Fanvids, ORGANIZATION FOR TRANSFORMATIVE WORKS, http://transformativeworks.org/
node/552 (last updated Aug. 2, 2012 ) (presenting a collection of several vids discussed in this Appendix  including 
The Price) [hereinafter Test Suite].  
Appx. 11
[PAGE 39]
 12 
and often reacts by exhibiting stereotypically masculine behaviors and attitudes. 69  Well-known 
examples of this trope featured in the vid include Harry Potter, Batman, and Frodo from Lord of 
the Rings. A more common and misogynist manpain trope involves harming a female character 
for the sole purpose of providing a motivation for the male character’s storyline. The vidder used 
footage from over thirty different films and television shows, 70 overlaying images from one 
source on top of another source to show the trope in action. The Price ends with dramatic, 
tongue-in-cheek shots of the men crying. Some of the scenes include effects to stylize the tears, 
thereby making the point that, although it is very common in mainstream media, the manpain 
narrative is overdone and blasé. 
 
Creating a work like The Price necessitates making use of the footage from the subject media 
sources. The Price is powerful precisely because it uses visual editing techniques to comment on 
a visual source and parallels nearly identical scenes from a variety of media, demonstrating, for 
example, how common it is for male characters to literally carry around their dead wives and 
girlfriends. Spectators are often shocked to realize how often a male character’s journey is 
motivated by a woman’s death. 
 
To create this vid, Thingswithwings relied on two primary techniques for acquiring footage: (1) 
software tools that are capable of circumventing Content Scrambling System (CSS) encryption; 
and (2) software tools that are capable of circumventing encryption methods for online 
distribution services such as Amazon Instant Video and/or iTunes.
71 Access to high quality 
source material was critical for the vid to function as a convincing counterpoint to the traditional 
mainstream narratives. Without obtaining the source footage as described above, the vidder may 
have been unable to integrate the varied sources having different color palettes and frame sizes 
into a seamless story using effects, transitions, and other editing techniques.  
 
The importance of the underlying source material is underscored by Thingswithwings 
commenting on the creation process and meaning of The Price:
72 “I needed to express the 
frustration I feel both with the ridiculous/terrible nature of these tired tropes AND with the 
entirely predictable (and often problematic) large-scale fannish reactions to those tropes.” The 
vidding community was formed around this type of commentary on popular texts.  
 
Fans use the vids as context for exploring and debating deeper themes within the media source 
material. One vidder notes how rewarding the tradition of creation and commentary in the 
vidding community can be as it provides an audience with tangible responses to her art.
73  “The 
Price” began a heated online discussion about manpain narratives in mainstream media that 
ultimately generated over 280 comments.74  
                                                
69 See F ANLORE, http://fanlore.org/wiki/Manpain (last updated February 6, 2012) (explaining the definition and 
history of the term manpain).  
70 See Thingswithwings, New Vid:  The Price (Multifandom) , DREAMWIDTH (January 16, 2011, 7:40  AM) 
http://thingswithwings.dreamwidth.org/145368.html.  
71 See Email from Thingswithwings dated November 29, 2011 (on file with authors).  
72 Thingswithwings, some thoughts on manpain.um. many though ts on manpain, actually. , DREAMWIDTH (January 
16, 2011, 10:01 AM) http://thingswithwings.dreamwidth.org/145564.html.  
73 See sockkpuppett, New Vid – Women’s Work (Supernatural) , LIVEJOURNAL (August 14, 2007 03:13 PM) 
http://sockkpuppett.livejournal.com/442093.html.  
74 See Thingswithwings, supra (listing 287 comments as of February 26, 2012).  
Appx. 12
[PAGE 40]
 13 
  2. Case Study: Context and Transformativeness in Der Kommissar 
 
A vid initially attacked by opponents of the 2012 exemption as nontransformative75 demonstrates 
the critical meanings that audiences familiar with the medium derive from vids.  As film/literary 
scholar Francesca Coppa notes, “Der Kommissar, like all vids, uses music as an analytical tool to 
guide the spectator's eyes to particular elements in the source footage, here to more lighthearted 
and comical effect. For instance, in the opening moments of the video, [artist] Gianduja Kiss 
shows us a set of near-identical hat tosses (at  :07, :08, and :09) from three different Bond films 
and then creates a montage of paralleled threats, as Bond whirls around to face a gun, an 
alligator, and the woman who would eventually become his wife. . . . [T]he spectator is asked to 
look at scenes across various Bond movies to observe, interpret, and, most of all, enjoy 
similarities in their formal and narrative elements.”
76  Coppa points out that the vid highlights 
and recontextualizes Bond’s conventional heterosexuality by pairing him with men as well as 
women, and by emphasizing “phallic symbols like snakes, lasers, machetes, and flaming 
sausages, as well as items associated with sexual kinkiness like dog-collars and whips.”
77   
(Gianduja Kiss is not alone in identifying the disturbing undercurrents linking sex and violence 
in the Bond films.
78) 
 
Gianduja Kiss herself explained:
79 
 
Contrary to what the opponents say, this vid was intended as a political/cultural 
commentary.  These commenters seem to be unfamiliar with vids, so they aren't 
particularly skilled at reading and understanding them.  Moreover, I’d been 
vidding for less than a year, and so the message doesn't come across as clearly as 
I'd have liked.  I've learned a lot since then and I believe my skills, including my 
skills at communicating my messages, have improved since I made Der 
Kommissar. 
 
. . . [I]n my experience, “promotional” materials, such as trailers for Bond films, 
portray Bond as tough, competent, unbeatable, and sexually irresistible to women.  
In other words, they fetishize his (heterosexual) masculinity.  My vid, by contrast, 
portrays Bond as hapless, vulnerable, bewildered, and often at the (sexual) mercy 
of the people around him.  I don't consider it “promotional” at all.   
 
When I made Der Kommissar, I wanted to illustrate, in a humorous way, sexual 
anxiety in the form of sexualized violence in Bond films, in order to undermine 
some of the portrayals of masculinity in those films.  So, the vid is dominated by 
images of Bond being beaten up and victimized, often in sexualized ways.  Roger 
Moore slides down a banister and gets whacked in the crotch; there's the famous 
scene of Connery's crotch being menaced by a laser, a woman tries to knife 
                                                
75 See http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2012/comments/Steven_J._Metalitz.pdf.  
76 See Statement from Francesca Coppa, February 21, 2012 (on file with authors).  
77 Id. 
78 See also,  e.g., Paul Johnson, Sex, Snobbery, and Sadism , N EW STATESMAN, Apr. 5, 1958, available at 
http://www.newstatesman.com/society/2007/02/1958 -bond-fleming-girl-sex; The Real James Bond, YOUTUBE, 
March 29, 2011, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y1uE5F9EnUA.  
79 Statement of Gianduja Kiss Appx J, 90 -91  
Appx. 13
[PAGE 41]
 14 
Connery's bond in the crotch after two previous scenes of unwanted 
kissing/sexual violence (Bond with a woman, and Bond with a man).  A woman 
tries to kill Bond by wrapping her legs around his waist and crushing him while 
they're both mostly naked.  And of course the vid features the infamous scene 
from Casino Royale in which Bond is tortured with genital whipping. 
 
I played with images of gender and power in the vid.  For example, the opening 
sequence shows James Bond repeatedly tossing his hat, except that in the final 
shot in the sequence, the hat is a frilly pink ladies' bonnet.  He gets trapped in a 
bed by a woman, and in the opening, there's a sequence of shots of someone 
menacing Bond (with guns, with an alligator) that ends with Bond seeing a 
woman (Diana Rigg), to make the point that the woman was the most 
frightening/menacing to him.  There's another sequence with people finding other 
people in their beds.  First, Bond walks in to find women in his bed, then, a 
woman walks in to find Bond in her bed (positioning Bond as the woman), and 
finally, Robert Davi gets in bed with Bond.  The implication of homosexuality is 
meant to undermine the hypermasculinity of Bond's image.  (The vid generally 
uses standard shot-editing techniques to suggest a sexual relationship between 
Dalton's Bond and Robert Davi's villain.)  A shot of Bond leering at a woman 
through binoculars is juxtaposed with a shot of Bond looking at a man through 
binoculars (I actually manipulated the shots there to create a lens view that wasn't 
in the original film).  Bond hits several men and finally knocks a woman down on 
the bed; Bond then gets hit by several men, hit by a woman, and attacked with 
flaming sticks of meat, to illustrate the reversal from masculine power to 
masculine anxiety. 
  
I had several images of a snake menacing Roger Moore, because snakes are a 
common phallic symbol.  One time, women look on and smile while a snake 
drowns him.  Once again, the idea was to show Moore essentially drowning 
in/menaced by male sexuality.  That's why the tag line for the vid is “Why did it 
have to be snakes?": It's a reference to the snake/phallic images in the vid (and a 
jokey reference to the line from Raiders of the Lost Ark). 
  
In a completely obvious pun, on the line “he's got the power” I show a villain 
stroking a cat (a signifier of feminine sexuality), and on the next phrase “and 
you're so weak” I show Bond being knocked out, drugged, falling, several times 
in succession. 
 
Though I will be the first to admit that I wasn't as clear as I'd have liked in getting 
my point across, I know that at least some people who are adept at “reading” vids 
were able to perceive it.  For example, in 2008, Thingswithwings posted an 
incredibly nice commentary on several of my vids.  At the time, I'd had no prior 
contact with her at all, about my vids or anything else.  Nonetheless, she 
accurately described Der Kommissar as “all about sexual violence.”  
 
Appx. 14
[PAGE 42]
 15 
I am submitting this statement to explain that I did intend a commentary and that 
the community that I was trying to reach could understand that commentary, even 
if not everyone would recognize it.  In particular, I want the Copyright Office to 
recognize that protection can't and shouldn't turn on the vidder's skill. 
 
II.  The Need for High Quality in Vidding  
 
A. Testimony from the Remix Community 
 
As many artists will attest, remix works are much more effective if they can match the quality of 
the original works.   
 
Screen resolution is rising, and [low quality] source material that looked all right 
before now looks like pixelated crap. Vidding needs to be able to follow more or 
less the same arc of development as the multimedia it uses as source material . . . 
Like languages, art cultures need the ability to grow and develop and keep pace 
with the times in order to stay alive. If multimedia needs Blu-Ray, then vidders 
need or will need it for the same exact reasons.
80 
 
Further commentary regarding the need to match the quakity of the works upon which one is 
commenting may be found in the Comments. 
 
In addition, remix artists often use a variety of effects to make their point.  Those effects are 
difficulty to create if you do not start with high-quality source material. Francesca Coppa posted 
to the vidding forum on LiveJournal to ask about vids that used these effects and why they were 
necessary.81 Within 24 hours, dozens of respondents had provided particular examples and 
explained the meanings of those effects: 
 
[Blaine Anderson, a Glee vid, contains:] “Colour adjustments to show past vs. 
present. Zooms and extreme close-ups (1:17) to show interiority: Blaine is lost in 
a memory; the surrounding world has been clipped out. Close-up also heightens 
emotion for the same reason: all there is to look at is his sad expression -- no 
distractions of clothing, background, etc. Slow motion adds a dreamy quality in 
certain places in addition to helping the visuals match the beat. . . . [T]he vidder 
bolted it together two days after a large percentage of the footage aired . . .  [I]t's a 
prime example of our need for immediate access to HQ [high quality] source, so 
we can make our commentaries, our visual essays, while they're hot. This was 
right in the middle of all the swirling, raging discussion in the immediate wake of 
a very controversial episode. That hasn't been possible for any of my own 
previous fandoms, but it happens all the time now; it's becoming an increasingly 
sharp tool, and it's amazing to see.  In several places there are masks cropping out 
a second person in the frame, repurposing footage to tell a different story. . . .  
“The past” is indicated by grayscale, but also a distressed film effect. In some 
                                                
80 C omment on Calling all fan video makers! Tell us about your work!, 
https://archiveofourown.org/admin_posts/1358  
81 Vidding Expertise, supra note Error! Bookmark not defined. . 
Appx. 15
[PAGE 43]
 16 
places the corruption of the footage literalizes the corrosive effect of abuse and 
hate speech on Blaine himself. In other places, notably the assault scene, it lends a 
sort of heightened, old school horror movie feel. There are monsters here.  The 
first zoom I mentioned (of Blaine's face) is for emotional impact, but there's a 
second one later, where Blaine is sitting in bed, wearing an eyepatch, and the 
vidder zooms in to focus on where he's holding hands with Kurt. This is similar to 
the vidder's use of masks: she needs us to focus on the information in one corner 
of the frame, so she simply removes the rest.” --Stultiloquentia 
 
I was going for a scrapbook kind of feel, so it needed a lot of really tight cropping 
and the jumbling effect of the overlays. - China Shop 
 
What We Had by cherryice [is a Doctor Who vid that] uses ghosting [an editing 
technique that creates multiple images onscreen] wonderfully, especially at the 
start when Mickey, Martha and Jack are walking away from the Doctor and into 
the battlefield; they're leaving the safety and adventure of their travels and going 
heading out to the abyss, and with that leaving a piece of themselves behind.  
Also at the end, when the Doctor is holding the Master's body and Rose is crying 
at Bad Wolf Beach, Jack and Mickey and Martha are behind them, out of focus 
and in the background, and the vid zooms in, enhances the colours and makes us 
look at them instead. Because for all they've done for the Doctor, for all they've 
given up and suffered through, they're still just blurs in the background to the 
Doctor's great tragedy. –Stardust_rain 
  
“My “Numb” Employs zoom and brightness adjustments. This is a commentary 
on Hutch's stresses and angst, particularly with Starsky at death's door. “Falling 
Slowly” uses sepia, for intimacy, quietness, and familiarity with another person, 
reflecting on times past. “Something to Talk About” using flash transitions to 
support the paparazzi photography theme. “Extreme Ways” using cropping 
closely to cutting parts of the central image off, showing intensity and rawness. ” -
-Laura McEwan  
 
I tend to use many of those effects in all my vids. A recent vid Be With Me is a 
good example. Zooming/cropping is for focusing on a subject/character, speed 
adjustment for pacing and internal motion to fit the music. Colour correction. 
brightness, etc. is necessary on some of the source for clarity and uniformity. I do 
use a shift in saturation (from monochrome to colour) to illustrate a new 
beginning in a character's life. Overlays are used for showing parallels & mood. -
Thedothatgirl 
 
Here's what I can think of off the top of my head!  bendtothesun's here I love you 
(White Collar) employs a series of colour effects throughout to create and amplify 
an emotional narrative - to create the sense of emotional distance, emotional 
epiphany, etc., and effectively creates a queer romance where there isn't one on 
the show. jesuit24's Steady As She Goes (Star Trek; youtube link) uses a glow 
effect of some sort to make Star Trek look more - weird and sweaty, I guess? And 
Appx. 16
[PAGE 44]
 17 
it uses a TON of speed changes, forward-reversed-forward clips in order to get 
motion to repeat, and cropped closeups to give the whole show a feeling that the 
original footage doesn't have. Lots of examples of pretty much every effect you're 
looking for! My vid Here it Goes Back Again (Back to the Future) has a whole 
section where I fake “rewinding” and then “replaying” the video, in order to 
basically fix the crappy ending of the third movie...What's harder to demonstrate, 
and what I wish these folks would understand, is that speed changes/cropping and 
zooming/colour correcting/etc is often invisible after the fact, but necessary in 
order to highlight what you need to highlight in the time available. . . . Also, this 
isn't about ~great art~ or anything, but a lot of people who vid Community or 
Parks and Recreation, myself included, use a lot of zooming in order to cut out the 
(very intrusive) end credits, which play over parts of the show. Without high-
quality footage, this is simply not feasible. If you want people to be looking at 
Troy and Abed being adorable instead of the credits, you need to zoom. Same 
thing when you're trying to cut out the rating labels or advertisements. –
Thingswithwings 
 
[For one vid, e]ach effect has a particular job to do in this vid.   The closeups, 
zooming and cropping -- effects related to movement -- simply generate a sense 
of movement and flow throughout the vid, moving viewers from one section to 
the next fluidly. I also use these effects to emphasize certain aspects of a clip, or 
words.  I used brightness, contrast, saturation, color corrector, and hue adjustment 
to blend the footage from different sources together more fluidly. I used hue 
adjustment for the black and white sections of the vid to provoke a sense of 
“voyeurism/a screen” and emphasize the notion that these characters were being 
viewed, or watched. . . . [For another,] Again, each effect has a job to do.  The 
zooming, closeups and/or cropping again are used to sew the vid together into a 
coherent whole by use of movement. I also use zooms to emphasize important 
elements in a shot.  I used brightness and contrast adjustment, saturation, color 
corrector and hue adjustment to weave disparate sources together and make 
everything seem coherent and like it belonged to the universe of the vid. I used 
time adjustments to fix timing issues at points. …  I used a glowing effect to 
provoke a sense of warmth and comfort about 2/3 of the way through the vid. I 
was trying to convey Byron's particular affection for his half-sister by use of this 
effect, and by tweaking the coloring in that clip (warm, soft colors). – 
Mresundance 
 
Small Blue Thing for incredibly smart and effective color work throughout, 
turning blue objects red … as well as overlays to draw connections between 
moments/people, especially the two in the first 10 seconds.  Lay Me To Sleep … 
for color and saturation, overlays, light effects and other dreamy effects … , 
creating an effective contrast between the bright, surreal feel of the dreamy 
colors/lights and the intensely horrifying events and violence that are actually 
happening.  One of mine maybe, Keepsake for overlays at the section beginning 
around 3:50 to both call back to past moments and highlight the reasons for the 
justified anger when the song and characters finally lose it and get angry. Or 
Appx. 17
[PAGE 45]
 18 
Mercy Street for overlays throughout that connect two people who were often not 
in the same scenes, but shared many narrative parallels/juxtapositions, and to 
create intimacy. – Chaila43 
 
[I]n Here We Come, On The Run! I use overlays in the choruses to link the 
central character with her military opponents in a visual way given they rarely 
appear on screen or on the battlefields themselves. … so say we all ii (It's All Part 
Of A Bigger Plan) … uses overlays constantly to highlight the repeating motifs of 
the show, while also[,] by using still as well as moving footage for the overlays, 
giving a stuttery, technological feel to the vid that fits with its themes about 
religion and technology, like a corrupted cascade of downloaded (divine) 
information. The overlays add to the sense of chaos and incoherency while, on 
closer inspection, [they] are always relevant to the underlying video. – Beccatoria  
 
The White Collar vid Hot Mess uses glitch/distortion effects to underscore beats 
of the music and suggest a system, or person, on the edge of breakdown. Frequent 
zooms, plus a habit of cutting almost exclusively by fading quickly to white and 
then back, dial up the sense of emotional intensity and instability. I'm pretty sure 
the saturation's boosted in most of the vid, making everything that much more 
feverish, and the brief moments of grayscale add to the general chaos. Taken 
together, the effects help convey the idea that Neal Caffrey is, well, a hot mess. 
Luminosity, speaking of her (ahem) rather well-known 300 vid “Vogue” in an 
interview with New York Magazine, says: “I wanted to allude to the graphic 
novel, so I split the screens and tinted them with flat color.” One example of the 
vid's use of saturation effects is the sequence between 4:15 and 4:23, which is in 
black and white except for a bar of full color that moves across the screen in time 
with the music. – Enemyofperfect 
 
Anime music videos (AMV)
82 have the same features.  As one community member explains: 
 
“FOTOGRAPHIA La Soledad”(Sola) . . . required all kinds of effects I had never 
seen collected together before. … The vid may look like a straightforward pairing 
vid, but due to the source it's working with, it's actually engaging in a discussion 
about memory, death, belonging, love, and what is “real". The use of real footage, 
cutout overlays, and the camera+graffiti effect reenforce the idea of longing to be 
“real” and to live a normal life, and also reflect on the nature of how we 
remember or forget the dead much more effectively than the show did . . .  As a 
counter-example, I would say that “Salva Hitomi” (Escaflowne movie) is severely 
hampered by being released in such low quality, especially in the parts where the 
saturation was changed or where there is a particularly light or dark background, 
because it's hard to tell what's happening on the screen. … I had to watch the vid 
3 times to be able to catch what was happening, and I own this source and am 
very familiar with it. There is something to be said for visual clarity having a 
greater emotional and intellectual impact, allowing the message of a vid to come 
across more clearly to its audience. . . .  Arefadedaway's “Fairy Tale” (Princess 
                                                
82 Ito Statement, Appx B, 22 
Appx. 18
[PAGE 46]
 19 
Tutu, Utena). A feminist retelling of fairy tales using two classic feminist 
retellings of shoujo, illustrating why the two series were truly radical in the realm 
of storytelling because of their presentation of women's relationships with each 
other. I think this vid effectively refutes the idea that a simple series of clips is not 
revolutionary, or that it doesn't need clear images to work with. Even simple cuts 
can become visually distracting and reduce the power of a vid if they're done 
using badly encoded, downloaded video, because clear images process quicker in 
the human brain. – Briar_pipe 
 
Another explains that AMVs “typically rely on digital editing more heavily than Western-source 
vids”: 
 
Skittles by Koopiskeva also relies heavily on digital editing . . . : The effects quite 
simply are the whole point of this vid; without them it would have no impact.  
Redona by Oro$hi combines images from multiple series in a single frame, does 
something to change the colors of some series and just generally edits heavily to 
produce a unified feel … An AMV About TV by Re-Evolution Studios combines 
different series into a single frame and uses some kind of editing (I am very much 
a layperson) to give a classic “tv-screen texture” to some scenes. There's a lot of 
editing in here -- the character reading a book had had her blush added and her 
book changed and obviously the scene where someone is watching an AMV on 
youtube is an edit. This is another one of those vids that wouldn't make any sense 
without the edits. . . . Moe Moe Rebellion by Asylum Studios has editing similar 
to that in An AMV About TV, and again that editing is essential to the sense of 
the piece. … Note that both Moe Moe Rebellion and An AMV About TV have 
jokes about series and about anime fandom that may be somewhat 
incomprehensible to non-fans, although the editing skill and transformativity 
should be obvious regardless. . . .-- Undomielregina
83 
 
AMV editors even work frame by frame, changing the original so that, for example, characters 
do a dance from a different series.
84   
  
 B. Case Study: The Need for High Quality in the Vid The Test 
 
Here’s luck’s provided an extended analysis of her need for high quality source material in her 
vid exploring narratives in Star Trek (2009). 
 
 
 
 
                                                
83 Vidding Expertise, supra note 67. Undomielregina’s last point should be re -emphasized: in many cases, the 
meanings of vids won’t be understandable without a background in the original.  That doesn’t make them non -
transformative, any more than The Wind Done Gone  was non-transformative because there are many people who’ve 
never read Gone With the Wind.   
84 Nostromo, AMV-RunningMan, NOSTOMO OFFICIAL WEBCAVE (uploaded March 12, 2011)  
http://www.nostro.fr/?p=642  . 
Appx. 19
[PAGE 47]
 20 
CROPPING 
 
Star Trek (2009) is shot in action-movie widescreen (aspect ratio 2.35:1); the original TV 
series (1960s) is shot in standard NTSC fullscreen (aspect ratio 4:3). In practical terms, 
the movie is 720x304 pixels while the original series is 640x480 pixels. This means that 
every single use of footage from the original series has to be 1) resized up to 720x540 to 
match the width of the movie frame, and then 2) cropped to 720x304 (that's 236 pixels -- 
more than a third of the image) to match the height of the movie frame. Starting from 
high quality source is thus especially important for the TV clips; if the starting image isn't 
absolutely clear, the enlarged image will lose considerable detail, and that detail is critical 
once the frame is cropped or the resulting image may not be recognizable as quickly as 
the vid requires. 
 
COLOR MANIPULATION 
 
The lighting and color palettes for the '60s TV show and 2009 movie are markedly 
different; the colors of the Starfleet uniforms, for example, are much more somber in the 
movie (they're crayon-bright primary colors in the series). In a vid that relies on 
juxtaposing characters from the two texts and representing the two worlds as contiguous, 
the color of the TV series has to be desaturated to match the movie. It's much more 
difficult to do this if the color information of either source has been compromised by 
capture methods that either desaturate the source (screen capture) or exaggerate the 
brightness and contrast (camcording). In addition, several shots from the movie were 
desaturated (to suggest memory) and/or overlaid (to suggest characters communicating 
with or thinking about each other). Desaturation only works by contrast -- if the footage 
is already desaturated, the effect can't happen -- and layering of images requires 
exceptional clarity of both or the result is a muddy mess. 
 
THE “GLITCH” EFFECT 
 
This effect is key to the vid; it's the most obvious one, the one that most of the meaning 
of the vid relies on, and the one that is most consistently cited by viewers in comments as 
a critical part of the vid's effectiveness. Some commenters have assumed that the effect is 
a way to mask quality deficiencies in the TV footage, but in fact the effect relies on 
pristine source: at several points in the vid, the TV footage is presented in its pristine 
form and then “fuzzed": static and glitches that imitate the effect of old VCR tape are 
gradually *added* to the source to create an impression of a once-clear signal losing 
strength and ultimately fading out. The success of this effect relies on the quality of both 
TV and movie footage. The effect relies on contrast: the old footage has to look like it's 
been degraded. But if it's too degraded, the viewer can't actually see what's going on 
(especially since the clips from the series are generally quite short). Thus, the movie 
footage has to be VERY clear -- clear enough that even a relatively minor glitch or fuzz 
effect will be noticeable -- and the TV footage does too, because otherwise the vidder 
can't control the degree of fuzz or quality degradation.  
 
 
Appx. 20
[PAGE 48]
 21 
SPEED MANIPULATION 
 
More than a third of the clips in the vid have had their speed altered (usually slowed 
down). In a few cases, such as when Kirk runs his hands down Spock's arms, the speed 
change is actually quite dramatic. Small changes are required to stretch a short clip a few 
frames longer or to land a particular frame on the beat; dramatic changes usually serve to 
heighten the sensuality of a clip, to draw attention to bodies in contact, which is 
important to the vid's implication of a sexual relationship between characters. That the 
small changes aren't noticeable and the large changes aren't jerky is entirely due to using 
DVD-ripped source, which has enough frames per second to absorb a wide range of 
speed alterations.85 
 
 
 
 
                                                
85 The audience understood how these ef fects mattered to the meaning of the vid, even without access to Here’s 
Luck’s explanations.  Wingstar wrote:  
[O]ne great vid that came to my mind was The Test, by here’s luck, which vidded the trope [in Star Trek: 
XI] where Spock!prime transfers some memo ries of TOS [the original series] Spock/Kirk slash to the 
rebooted Jim. It uses this fantastic  “glitch” static effect to signal the difference between current events and 
memories (starting at 1:00). There ’s also some kind of overlay on top of the TOS clips  that adds to the  
“memory” effect while simultaneously concealing any differences in source quality that might exist. And 
there's definitely some slow -mo and some close ups in the slashy TOS clips that help signal  “ROMANCE” 
to the viewer. Then starting at 1:56 throughout the end of the vid, there are overlays of the TOS clips on top 
of reboot footage so that it appears as though reboot!Jim is re -experiencing those memories throughout the 
rest of the movie.  
Help: Urgent Vidding Expertise Needed , LIVEJOURNAL (February 26, 2012, 9:57 PM), 
http://vidding.livejournal.com/2821305.html [hereinafter Vidding Expertise]. 
Appx. 21
[PAGE 49]
November 22, 2011 
Comment submitted to the Library of Congress in support of the proposal for an 
exemption to prohibition of copyright systems for access control technologies, 
submitted by the Electronic Frontier Foundation 
Submitted by: 
Mizuko Ito 
Professor in Residence 
John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation Chair in Digital Media and Learning 
University of California Humanities Research Institute 
University of California, Irvine 
4000 Humanities Gateway 
Irvine, CA 92697-3350 
mizukoi@uci.edu 
I am a Professor at the Department of Informatics, Department of Anthropology, and the 
University of California Humanities Research Institute at the University of California, 
Irvine and specialize in the ethnographic study of digital media use. One of my areas of 
focus is remix video, and I have been studying amateur remix video communities for the 
past seven years. Between 2005-2008, I was lead researcher on a $3.3 million large-scale 
ethnographic study, funded by the MacArthur Foundation, which is the largest qualitative 
study to date of new media use by U.S. youth. The results of my study of video remix in 
the anime music video (AMV) community can be found at the following URL: 
http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/2968/2528. A 
more extensive treatment will be published in an edited collection, Fandom Unbound, in 
January 2012, by Yale University Press.  
AMVs are videos that involve the remixing of clips from Japanese animation (anime) 
with a soundtrack of the editors choosing, usually a popular song or the audio track from 
an advertisement or trailer. My study of the AMV community included a survey of 227 
participants in animemusicvideos.org, and interviews with 20 AMV creators, conducted 
in 2006-2007. In addition, I co-chaired an event, “24/7: A DIY Video Summit,” in 
February 2008 and a follow up event in April 2011, that involved extensive dialog with 
video remix artists and the curation of videos that were representative of a wide range of 
amateur video.  As part of the curation of these events, I reviewed hundreds of remix 
video in a variety of genres. 
Based on my research and my review of an extensive corpus of remix video, I would like 
to submit factual support and arguments in support of the proposed exemption. 
1. Amateur and non-commercial remix will continue to grow as an everyday form of
expression and communication. 
Appx. 22
Appendix B
[PAGE 50]
As described in the EFF exemption proposal, the practices of video remix are becoming 
much more widespread due to the growing availability of low-cost video editing tools 
and Internet culture that use video in everyday communication. The proposal mentions 
some broad indicators of the growth of remix activity among youth and the growth of 
remix videos on YouTube. In addition, a closer look at one remix community can provide 
some sense of the vector of growth in historical perspective. Although the history of 
AMVs does not date as far back as the live action vidding community, there have been 
remixes of Japanese animation created in the US as far back as the early eighties. AMV 
screenings and competitions started appearing at anime conventions in the early nineties, 
and by the late nineties became an established part of almost all major anime 
conventions. The advent of low-cost video editing tools and widespread Internet access in 
the late nineties catalyzed a growth in AMV creation and the development on online 
communities. AMV organizers began connecting with one another in 1992 through 
Usenet, and then later through mailing lists. In 2000, animemusicvideos.org was founded 
for editors to share their videos, and this site continues to be one of the central sites for 
accessing AMVs.  The growth in the number of videos cataloged on the site is one 
indication of the growth in the practice of AMVs: 
2000: 1037 
2001: 3860 
2002: 7042 
2003: 16443 
2004: 29860 
2005: 37990 
2006: 30180 
2007: 16164 
2008: 9205  
The numbers roughly double each year until 2005, when YouTube was founded. Since 
then, the AMV community has continued to grow, but the center of gravity has shifted 
from animemusicvideos.org to other video sharing sites. To say that the numbers have 
continued to double since 2005 would a conservative estimate given how much visibility 
AMVs have had in Internet culture with the broader publicity afforded by sites like 
YouTube. 
Today, AMVs are well established and thriving part of the everyday creative production 
of anime fans, and they are shared on the Internet as well as in screenings and 
competitions at every major anime convention around the country. They represent a form 
of creative expression that was created by fans in the amateur, non-commercial sector, 
and these works have never been framed as competitive with the commercial anime 
industry. The anime industry has tolerated these forms of fan remixes for decades, and 
has even gone so far as to commission commercial remixes by well-known AMV editors. 
2. AMVs are entirely non-commercial and largely involve non-infringing uses of
video. 
Appx. 23
[PAGE 51]
Almost all AMVs are fundamentally transformative, and are entirely non-commercial, 
except in the handful of cases where the animation industries have commissioned AMVs. 
The process of creating an AMV involves culling through a large corpus of video footage 
for a small number of clips that are edited together into a short video compilation that 
makes a focused creative statement. As one editor described it, he sees his videos as 
“synthesis, 1+1=3. I’m not sure… but you get something new, something different. You 
take two different elements and together they become something greater.” 
3. AMV editors rely overwhelmingly on DVD footage over other video sources for
creative, practical, and ethical reasons. 
In our survey of the AMV community, among 200 who reported that they were AMV 
creators, 75% indicated that commercial DVDs are their first choice for anime source 
material in making their videos.  
One reason for this preference is the desire for high quality video. As one editor put it 
succinctly, “I buy the DVDs you know to get the best quality possible because I love the 
quality.” In this, AMV creators are similar to their live action vidding counterparts. In 
addition, however, there are additional reasons for AMV editors to turn to DVDs for their 
source material. Unlike media that has been created primarily for the U.S. market, only a 
small proportion of anime is released via broadcast in the U.S. For the vast majority of 
anime, editors must turn to online sources or to DVDs, and do not have the option of 
analog capture.  
In addition, the AMV community has historically operated based on a set of social norms 
and ethical guidelines that seek to support the anime industry. AMVs are predominantly 
“fannish” celebrations of anime culture, and editors see themselves as evangelists for 
anime in the English-speaking world. In animemusicvideos.org, this ethic is embedded 
into one of the site rules: “Thou shalt not use downloaded video footage, music, or 
pirated software to make AMVs.” The organizers of the site, by banning the use of 
downloaded video are advocating for the use of DVD footage in order to generate 
revenue for the anime industry. Even as the industry has been transitioning to online 
forms of distribution, we see AMV editors continuing to rely on the highest quality 
source material available. 
4. AMV creators actively support the U.S. DVD market in spirit and practice.
Most AMV creators I interviewed stated that they have large collections of anime DVDs 
for their own viewing and in order to get source material for their AMVs. Fans who 
become interested in AMV creation represent “hardcore” fans who are more likely to 
purchase DVDs than casual anime viewers. Legal barriers to AMV creation are thus 
likely to disproportionately impact the enthusiasm of those anime consumers who are 
among the most likely to purchase DVDs. 
Appx. 24
[PAGE 52]
AMV creators also see themselves as supporters of the anime industry. Describing AMVs 
as “free promotion” was a frequent refrain among the editors I interviewed. One editor 
explains, “I don’t understand how AMVs, which by and large come from personally 
bought items, hinder the [commercial] artists. If anything it magnifies them and spreads 
them far and wide on the web…That’s free and beneficial advertising in my book.” One 
editor describes the informal poling that he does at anime conventions about whether 
AMVs help to promote anime. “I’ve been on a few AMV panels. We often ask people if 
they’ve bought anime based on an AMV they’ve seen. Most hands go up.” These 
experiences reflect the reality that fan communication, including AMVs, act as form of 
advertising for DVD. They also illustrate the stance among creators that they are working 
to support the DVD industry. 
Conclusions 
In summary, AMV editing is an entirely non-commercial practice representing largely 
non-infringing uses of video, and relying predominantly on the use of DVD source 
material. Further, AMV creation and viewing functions to support rather than detract 
from the U.S. DVD market. For these reasons, the case of AMV editing clearly supports 
the DMCA proposal exemption presented by EFF in proposed class 11A. 
Although AMVs represent only one among many video remix genres that make use of 
DVD footage, the dynamics of amateur video editing span different video fan cultures. 
The anime community represents one of the more technically savvy communities that 
took to video remix early in it’s evolution, relying on DVD releases of foreign media. As 
media from other countries increasingly flows into the US via DVDs, we are likely to see 
the dynamics witnessed among AMV creators replicated in among diverse media 
audiences. 
Appx. 25
[PAGE 53]
Interview with Gianduja Kiss 
1. Could you briefly describe what sets the vidding community apart from other clip-based video
creators? Do vidders see themselves as different from many more recent creator communities 
who have been getting attention on sites like YouTube? 
I’m not entirely sure what communities you’re referring to.  Vidders generally consider 
themselves part of remix culture, but we’re a distinctive subset - vids are very different than, 
say, live action films (like fan films), requiring entirely different skills and different aesthetics. 
When you’re talking about the universe of content that involves setting clips from movies or 
television shows to music, trying to define a fanvid as distinct from other types of creations is a 
classic case of “I know it when I see it.”  I’ve engaged in online discussions with vidders about 
how to define fanvids, and those can get rather heated and people have very different opinions 
about it.  My own view is that though some vids can be comedic or poke fun at the source 
material, vidding in general is different than some of the pure parody remixes that you can find 
on Youtube (like, Brokeback to the Future as a famous example) because vids tend to come 
from a place of greater personal engagement with the source material.  And vids are certainly 
very different from pieces that combine clips together but don’t include the music element, or 
only use the music as a kind of background - for a vid, music is an integral part of the piece, and 
an important part of the art is to coordinate the images with the music.  (Although I always have 
to offer caveats, because, as I said, it’s really hard to define “fanvid” as a category, and I’ve 
seen vids set to monologues instead of music or that use music in other unusual ways - but for 
most vids, what vidders generally think of when they think “fanvid,” the mesh of music and 
visuals is critical). 
2. Are most vidders amateurs in video editing? Are their activities generally noncommercial? Are
there also "professional" vidders? 
The vast majority of vidders that I know are amateurs.  Some have formal arts training either at 
the undergraduate or graduate levels.  A lot of them work with computers professionally, which 
probably gives them a leg up on using the software.  Many are students.  I do know a few 
vidders who are also interested in professional editing, but they’re the exception rather than the 
rule.  And even then, the vids themselves aren’t “professional,” in the sense that they don’t earn 
money and aren’t made in conjunction with the producers of the source material; the vids are 
simply a hobby and a chance to use one’s editing skills.  
Vidding itself is almost always noncommercial; there simply isn’t a professional market for it.  
I’ve only ever heard of one instance of vids being used “professionally” - I believe that at one 
point, the creators of a particular television show showed an interest in including one vidder’s 
work on a DVD set, but only vids that were set to music that was composed for the show.  And 
that was an extraordinarily unusual situation; I’ve never heard of anything else like it before or 
since. 
Appx. 26
Appendix C
[PAGE 54]
3. Is the quality of the video source still important to the vidding community? 
 
It’s criti
cal.  Vids are a visual art form; vidders work incredibly hard to get just the right colors, 
timing, movement, and flow - and all of that is disrupted when the source is fuzzy or degraded.  
The impact of the vid is lessened tremendously if you can’t see the images clearly; you might 
just as well ask whether it matters to a photographer whether their shots are in focus.  Like with 
a photograph, the vid isn’t just the literal image that appears in the frame; it’s about the overall 
aesthetics of the piece.  Sometimes photographers might intentionally create a blurry picture, 
but when they do so, it’s under circumstances that the photographers control.  It’s the same with 
vidding.  
 
  
4. Do vidders continue to rip commercially-released DVDs in order to extract clips?  Others rely 
on video capture from analog outputs. Is DVD viewed as superior to these alternatives?   
 
 
DVD rips are generally considered to be the highest-quality source you can get - the picture is 
the clearest and most precise. 
 
I’m actually not certain what you mean by capture from analog outputs.  Certainly taking the 
broadcast footage - however obtained - is vastly inferior to DVDs because it has network logos, 
network ratings (“TV-14,” etc), and these days, advertisements that pop up along the bottom of 
the screen.  That sort of thing can render large swaths of footage unusable. 
 
 
  
5.  What other sources do they/you use? For example, YouTube, Hulu or Amazon UnBox?  
Would they/you choose these sources if the works were available on DVD? 
 
I’ve used Amazon Unbox; I know people who use YouTube as well.  To my knowledge, people 
only use YouTube for sources that are entirely unavailable in any other way - YouTube captures 
aren’t very high quality.  I personally only use Amazon Unbox when the source is not available 
on DVD; I even replace my Amazon Unbox source with DVD footage once the DVD becomes 
available.  In general, I think most vidders would prefer to use DVD footage, and if they’re using 
something else, it’s because DVDs aren’t available to them. 
 
  
6. Could you make a rough order of magnitude estimate of the number of vids you have 
created?  
 
I don’t even have to be that rough - I’ve made 59 vids so far, with one currently in progress. 
 
  
7. Do you think the vidding community has a clear understanding of what the DMCA prohibits? 
 
As a whole?  I doubt it.  Some vidders know more than others, but most vidders have no legal 
training, a lot aren’t in the U.S., and many are high school or college students.  From what I’ve 
seen, people have a vague sense of the concept of fair use under US copyright law - and they 
Appx. 27
[PAGE 55]
may or may not have a good idea of what counts as fair use - but I  don’t think most vidders 
know the ins and outs of how US copyright law functions, including the DMCA. 
  
8. Do you think the 2009 exemption for noncommercial uses has been helpful to the vidding 
community?  How? 
 
I’m not certain how many vidders know about it - there are multiple online “spaces” for vidders to 
talk to each other and I don’t know how widely the exemption was publicized.  Among the 
people who did know about it, I don’t think it changed anyone’s actual practices.  I mean, I’m 
pretty confident no one started ripping DVDs because of the exemption.  Vidders rip DVDs 
because they consider it necessary to make vids; they did that before the exemption and they’re 
going to continue to do it.  But things like the exemption - or news articles that mention vidding, 
or online contests that acknowledge and encourage vidding, or even things like an actor or a 
professional TV critic linking to a favorite fanvid  - I think they generally make vidders feel a bit 
safer about being open about what we do, more willing to talk about it and publicize our work.  
Like, once upon a time, vidding was incredibly undergound and secretive; with the creation of 
YouTube vidding began to come out of the shadows but a lot of vidders still feared publicity, and 
would only make their vids available in password-protected spaces or spaces that were not well 
known.  That’s changed a lot, but at the same time, many vidders are still quite wary.  (When 
the OTW posted seeking comments from vidders, I know there were vidders who were afraid to 
give comments, even anonymously).  I think things like the DMCA exemption help eliminate 
some of the fear.   
 
I don't think most vidders generally have a clear idea of the difference between fair use and the 
DMCA/DRM issues.  And that means that as a practical matter, these issues matter most when 
they get a takedown notice, or when (very often) YT blocks them from uploading their vids in the 
first place.  The ability to challenge those decisions would have the most direct, practical impact 
on how vidders operate on a day to day basis. 
 
Appx. 28
[PAGE 56]
Interview with Elisa Kreisinger 
November 19, 2
011 
 
  
1. Could you briefly describe what sets the political remix community apart from other clip-based 
video creators? Do political remixers see themselves as different from other creator 
communities who have been getting attention on sites like YouTube?  
 
Political remixers create DIY videos using appropriated main stream media texts without the 
permission of the copyright holder, in order to comment on, critique or subvert it’s original intent 
in some way. The result is a transformative piece that seeks to enagage general audiences. 
What sets this community apart from others making online video is that there’s a definitive goal 
to engage with the source material in a critical way; to examine its message and deconstruct its 
meaning to then turn it around and create a new, transformative work.  
 
2. Are most PRV makers amateurs in video editing? Are their activities generally 
noncommercial? Are there also "professional" PRV makers? 
 
PRV makers are pro-sumers: they have a working knowledge of, and access to, the software 
and tools but they probably don’t make money as professional video editors. For political remix 
work to be professional it would be a delicate balance: Who would be willing to pay a remixer to 
dismantle their brand identity which they’ve spent millions on creating?  
 
One example: Green Peace’s OnSlaught(er) video remix1 was created by professionals to draw 
attention to the rainforests destroyed by Dove. The vidoe went viral and forced Dove to make 
the appropriate changes in their practices. However, these were professional video editors 
working for/contracted by Green Peace, not hired remix artists.  
 
From my experiences, remix enables financial compensation in other forms: lectures, visiting 
artist talks, remix workshops and other speaking engagements.  
  
3. Is the quality of the video source still important to the PRV community?  
 
While aesthetics are important to any visual medium, the message behind a PRV is typically 
more important than the quality of the footage.  
  
4. Do PRV makers rip commercially-released DVDs in order to extract clips?  Others rely on 
video capture from analog outputs. Is DVD viewed as superior to these alternatives?   
Is the question analog vs DVD? 
 
I prefer DVD for the high quality of source material; however, I encourage women and girls to 
capture from analog because they usually want to respond to the TV show, movie or news of 
the day quickly and inexpensively without waiting for the DVD box set to be released. 
Whichever method can get the creator the needed source footage quickly and easily is 
preferable.  
                                                
1 Accessible at <h ttp://www.youtube.com/watch?v=odI7pQFyjso>  
Appx. 29
Appendix D
[PAGE 57]
  
5.  What 
other sources do they use? For example, YouTube, Hulu or Amazon UnBox?  Would 
they choose these sources if the works were available on DVD? What about Blu-Ray? 
 
YouTube, vimeo and blip since all three allow for easy download. The quality, of course, suffers 
but again, the goal in PRV is typically to create a subversive message, not a masterpiece.  
 
Many PRV makers take footage from their DVRs. 
 
DVD would be ideal but it’s costly and requires more knowledge of ripping and hacking, skills 
that not every YouTube user has, or wants to have.  
 
I’ve never used Blu Ray and it’s always more expensive. I’ve never seen it at the library either.  
 
6. Do you think the PRV community has a clear understanding of what the DMCA prohibits? 
 
No - I had to look it up.  
 
7. Do you think the 2009 exemption for noncommercial uses has been helpful to the PRV 
community?  How? 
 
Yes - it gave us a legal foothold we didn’t have before. Also, it  illustrated how vital the role of 
remix is to free speech and media literacy, something we all knew but needed some white 
dudes to verify. 
 
Appx. 30
[PAGE 58]
Interview with Eli Horwatt 
November 14, 20
11 
 
1. Could you briefly describe what sets the political remix community apart from other clip-based 
video creators? Do political remixers see themselves as different from other creator 
communities who have been getting attention on sites like YouTube?  
 
The political remix video community engages in transformative editing to work rhetorically with 
video, the way essayists do with words. Political remixers recognize the centrality of moving 
images in contemporary culture and have elected to work with these images, as a medium, in 
an effort to speak through the prism of popular culture. Unlike other video creators online, 
political remix video-makers are invested in using existing video as a form of address to 
interrogate and critique the world we live in.  The spirit in which they work, as thoughtful and 
critical observers of mass culture, exemplifies one of the very best features of artists, as self-
reflexive observers able to make us see in new ways, that which we take for granted everyday.  
  
2. Are most PRV makers amateurs in video editing? Are their activities generally 
noncommercial? Are there also "professional" PRV makers? 
 
“Amateur,” latin for “lover,” refers to someone who does something for no other reason than for 
the love of doing it. In this sense, the word “amateur” represents the activities of PRV makers. 
But insofar as amateur implies dilettantism, it is inappropriate. As a student of all film, PRV 
makers stand in history as some of the most gifted editors the world has ever seen. A defining 
feature of PRVs is their free circulation online, and their use of exclusively free and open 
distribution. I am unaware of any commercial sale of PRVs nor am I aware of any “professional” 
PRV makers. PRV makers are not interested in appropriating copyrighted work for the purposes 
of personal financial gain. They operate well-within the purview of fair use doctrine.  
 
3. Is the quality of the video source important to the PRV community? 
 
One of the most interesting aesthetic qualities of PRVs and a cardinal feature of the humour and 
incisiveness presented by PRV makers, is their capacity to mimic the qualities of commercial 
media. This means that editors are both able to imitate the vernaculars of commercial media 
(whether that be a cartoon, trailer, commercial or television program) but also to make work 
which looks like commercial media, with high quality rips of source material. Using high quality 
video of appropriated materials is instrumental to the success of a PRV.  
 
4. Do PRV makers rip commercially-released DVDs in order to extract clips?  Others rely on 
video capture from analog outputs. Is DVD viewed as superior to these alternatives?   
 
I am unaware of the practices of all PRV makers, but I am mostly aware of individuals ripping 
commercially-released DVDs in order to extract clips. DVD usually offers the highest quality 
materials.  
 
5.  What other sources do they use? For example, YouTube, Hulu or Amazon UnBox?  Would 
they choose these sources if the works were available on DVD? 
 
Appx. 31
Appendix E
[PAGE 59]
The often low-resolution from lossy video files on YouTube or other  sources often makes PRV 
makers wish to use DVD. Still these sources are often used by remixers.  
 
6. Do you think the PRV community has a clear understanding of what the DMCA prohibits? 
 
I think the answer is no. While many may be technically aware of the legal measures that the 
DMCA implies, most PRV makers believe their work falls under the umbrella of fair use, and 
thus trumps those restrictions implied by the DMCA. To speak of these two doctrines in tandem 
is to speak of an enormous contradiction in American copyright law. On the one hand remixers 
are protected by the right to make derivative transformative works and on the other hand are 
legally rebuked for doing so based on the technological requirements involved. This is a 
contradiction that must be resolved by giving non-commerical remixers an exemption from the 
DMCA.  
 
7. Do you think the 2009 exemption for noncommercial uses has been helpful to the PRV 
community?  How? 
 
Yes, it is always important to differentiate artistic works which are clearly protected speech from 
illegal activities done in the name of piracy. There is no debate around whether PRV makers are 
engaged in activities which inhibit, damage or circumvent the sale of copyrighted material. 
Clearly the activities of PRV makers works in the public interest and should be protected with 
legal exemption. Conflating art with piracy poses a clear danger to the continued protection of 
speech in the United States.  
Appx. 32
[PAGE 60]
20 
I THOUGHT I MADE A 
YID, BUT THEN YOU 
TOLD ME THAT I DIDN'T 
Aesthetics and Boundary Work in the 
Fan--Vidding Community 
Katharina Freund 
Holy crap, vids are serious business. 
Anonymous LiveJournal user, on Fail 
Fandom Anon, LiveJournal community, 2010 
After attending VividCon, the holy grail of fan-vidding conventions held in Chicago in 
2009, I returned home to Australia with a grin on my face. I had been enthralled by the 
friendliness and enthusiasm of the vidders I met, and felt like I had become part of a 
unique online community. Exhausted after many hours of vid-watching, panel discus­
sions, dance parties, and interviews, I was shocked to discover that the online commu­
nity of vidders on LiveJournal had erupted into discord during my travels home. 
Arguments and retractions, comments and private messages had flown around discussing 
the changing nature of the vidding community. Due to the egocentric organization of 
Live} ournal, 1 I only had access to sections of this debate: much of it occurred behind 
members-only discussions or in private messages or emails. But the debate swirled around 
the changing aesthetics of vids, and the changing membership of the vidding commu­
nity in an event that later became known on LiveJournal as "Vid Fail 2009."2 
This chapter explores the complex community negotiations which occurred as a result 
of this event. Based on two years of ethnographic research conducted in the online and 
face-to-face spaces of the vidders, it discusses how this community orients itself around 
the perception of a shared history and shared aesthetic traditions. 
Introduction to Vidding Practices 
Technically speaking, a fan video (or vid) is a type of remix that takes footage from film 
or television and edits it to music in order to tell a story about that film or television 
text. Many vids focus on romantic narratives about two characters from a particular text, 
283 
Appx. 33
Appendix F
[PAGE 61]
K. FREUND 
such as Harry and Hermione from Harry Potter or Bella and either Jacob or Edward (or 
both) from Twilight. A common subset of the theme, known as slash, involves homoe­
rotic romances such as Kirk and Spock from Star Trek. Type any of those sets of names 
into YouTube and a bevy of videos will appear, all of which match the above 
description. 
The act of vidding, however, is a lot more complex for the vidders I studied. There is 
a negotiation at play in the vidding community about who gets to be "in" and what types 
of videos fit their understanding of what makes a vid. These boundaries between what 
is and is not a vid, and who is and is not a vidder, reveal the complex social and artistic 
arguments occurring beneath the surface of a productive group of remixers. In the case 
of the vidding community, relying mostly on the social-networking and blogging site 
Livejournal.com, these community boundaries are based along aesthetic, historical, and 
gendered lines. According to my research conducted from 2009 to 2011, more than 90 
percent of vidders on LiveJournal identify as female. 
When I asked long-time vidder and "big name fan" Laura Shapiro to explain how 
anyone becomes a member of the vidding community, she detailed the multiplicity of 
vidding communities: 
First of all, I don't believe there is the vidding community, I believe that there 
are many vidding communities, most of which I probably have no idea about. I 
think it's a big mistake to refer to the vidding community, I think when people 
say that they're speaking from within a vidding community that I am a member 
of that is where vidding began, the community that grew out of vidding's origins 
with Kandy Fong and out of slash fandom. 3 What I'd call the traditional vidding 
community, and its offshoots. But even within this community, that people call 
the vidding community, that I call the traditional vidding community, there are 
many, many communities. And so defining-definitions are hard. 4 
Definitions are indeed difficult: The vidders themselves certainly cannot agree on 
what constitutes the core identity of this group. As noted by Bell, the term "com­
munity" functions as a descriptor, but it is also a normative and ideological term that 
carries a lot of baggage. 5 The early cyber-enthusiast Howard Rheingold is most com­
monly quoted for his definition of online communities as "social aggregations that 
emerge from the Net when enough people carry on those public discussions long 
enough, with sufficient feeling, to form webs of personal relationships in cyber­
space."6 Later critiques of Rheingold often denounced online communities as inau­
thentic, compensatory, and somehow lacking: sure "community" could not be so 
easily applied to digital groups, as they were so vastly different from face-to-face, 
"authentic" communities. 7 
Raymond Williams notes that the term "community" is particularly problematic: 
Unlike other terms for social organization such as "nation" or "society," it is rarely used 
unfavorably and carries "warmly persuasive" connotations. 8 The positive associations are 
noted by Baym who chose to use it precisely for its "warm, emotional resonance." 9 
According to Marshall, "The vagueness of the term is part of its power. It can unify 
because it is imprecise. Different people using the term may have different expectations, 
but they can all appear to be talking similarly."10 As the term "community" represents 
an idea, its use to groups is obvious: It evokes commonality, support, and friendship, and 
it erases difference. The debates among vidders about just what constitutes their 
284 
Appx. 34
[PAGE 62]
I THOUGHT I MADE A YID ... 
community and the powerful arguments supporting different viewpoints take advantage 
of these positive-yet-vague elements of the term. 
For the purpose of this chapter, I am not interested in what "community" may mean, 
but rather what it means to the vidders. Following Marshall again, I believe "it is fruitless 
to search for the essence of community, but it is useful to see what enables a particular 
group to be so classified by its members." 11 
Consider the following quotes from a questionnaire I conducted with the vidders during 
my ethnographic research: 
Q: Please add any comments you'd like to make on the vidding community, 
your online and offline friendships, or anything else you'd like to share here. 
Rl: I have found the best friends of my adult life through vidding and fandom. 
R2: YouTube quality is crap. *pukes* If avid is posted on YouTube, I most 
likely will NOT watch it. I've made great friends online that I could never 
have met offline and those friendships mean the world to me. 
R3: Vidders who care about quality and learning and constantly getting better 
are the only people I care about. The 12 year olds on You Tube are generally 
not in my orbit, and people who just throw crappy clips together and call 
it a vid or steal clips are not part of the vidding community I hang out in. 
I miss the days when it was smaller. 
R4: There's a strong sense of community I don't see elsewhere. 
Several of these respondents (R2, R3) define the vidding community in exclusionary and 
normative ways: by highlighting aspects of other, inferior vidding groups (namely, those on 
You Tube), the superiority of their vidding group is established. You Tubers are derided as young, 
frivolous, and unconcerned with quality, thereby setting up the LiveJoumal (LJ) vidding com­
munity as mature, thoughtful, and serious about aesthetics and narrative standards. 
This tension was obvious to many vidders, such as Australian vidder Boppy: 
These are "centres" for vidding and people that "hang" in any of those places 
are members of the vidding community. However, I find these centres limiting 
as well. The truth is that many, many people vid completely separately-either 
on their own or in other communities online-and to pretend that the vidding 
community has clearly defined boundaries would be a lie. 
After her LiveJournal page became the focal point of an argument about inclusion in 
the vidding community during Yid Fail 2009, Boppy reflected about where the bounda­
ries lie and how she felt her work and the work of many of her friends was excluded by 
more traditional members: 
I had fans who do not have me friended, probably have never even heard of me 
before, show up and throw their weight around about what "is" and "isn't" vid­
ding. I honestly don't think they could see how their behavior came across but 
it's exactly this sort of thing that makes people feel excluded-whether it's 
because they're a guy and people are going on and on about vidding being a 
"female" tradition, or whether it's because they've made avid that is reverential 
rather than "commenting on" the source and here are these famous, long-term 
fans telling them that that is "not vidding." 
285 
Appx. 35
[PAGE 63]
K. FREUND 
Figure 20 .1 "I thought I made a vid, but then you told me I didn't" Internet meme 
While the LiveJournal vidding community claims the term "vidding" as their own, 
Boppy and many of the commenters on her post pointed out that You Tubers and other 
remix artists commonly use the term to describe their own work. The message seen in 
Figure 20.1 was shared privately among many vidders and vid-fans during this debate. 
When I used the terms "remix" and "new media" to define vidding on my Live Journal, 
it caused significant disagreement in the comments. Traditional vidders argued that if 
the definition of the term was expanded to include other types of remixes made by other 
communities, it would constitute an erasure of the female-centered history. One such 
comment read: 
I think that it is not just the traditional/old school vidders who would object to 
"new media form"-you don't have to experience it first-hand to be proud and 
protective of vidding's long history. "Remix" is not only a word not used by vidders, 
it's a word that is going to make vidding seem much younger than its 30+ years.12 
At the vidding conventions I attended, I was approached by several individuals who 
quizzed me on my knowledge of vidding history. I was taken aside, along with several 
other first-time convention attendees, and shown some of the oldest vids that still 
existed, and was taught about the "grandmothers" of vidding in hotel rooms and 
hallways. 
286 
Appx. 36
[PAGE 64]
I THOUGHT I MADE A YID ... 
The Origins of Vidding 
To a large extent, the origins of vidding have become mythologized by the community 
through their own efforts to document the history of their practice. VividCon (VVC), 
the central face-to-face social event of the vidding community, opens every year ritual­
istically with a "Genealogy of Vidding" vid show, which Coppa refers to as "an annual 
recitation of our history" for everyone at the convention. 13 While there are usually two 
tracks of parallel programming at VVC, nothing is scheduled concurrently with the his­
tory vid show so that all the con-goers are able to attend. This event is one of self­
conscious community building, where the vidders come together to recount their origins 
and introduce newer vidders and vid watchers to the mythic origins. 
According to the canonized version of fan-vidding history, vidding was created in 
1975 when a Star Trek fan named Kandy Fong converted footage from her favorite series 
into 35mm slides, and used a slide carousel to click through the images in time to music. 
These proto-vid slideshows were shown live at conventions and in fan club meetings 
around the United States during the course of several years. "Fong began to videotape 
her results, partly because [Star Trek creator Gene] Roddenberry wanted copies and 
partly because Fong herself became interested in creating records of fannish art."H Few 
of these slideshow vids are now accessible, although Fang's very popular vid Both Sides 
Now (first shown in 1980 and recorded in 1986) is often shown at conventions even 
today. It is probably the only slideshow vid that newer vidders are able to view because 
it has been made available online. 15 
These slideshow presentations inspired other fans to make similar works, so they 
turned to the VCR technology of the mid-1980s. As mentioned above, these early vids 
were often heavily influenced by slash fandom (such as Kirk/Spock in this period). This 
early VCR vidding period is covered extensively by Jenkins 16 and Bacon-Smith 17 and 
the vidders profiled in those works are now revered as the founders of contemporary 
vidding aesthetics. The members of the community during this time were mostly women. 
Many vids during the 1980s and 1990s were made by large groups of editors known as 
collectives, due to the high cost of VCR editing decks and the complexity of the tech­
nology. The process was incredibly time-consuming and required several people: stop­
watches and log books were used to keep track of the timing of clips needed in relation 
to the song used, as the VCR numerical counter rarely corresponded to an actual amount 
of time. 
Despite the trouble, VCR vidder Gwyn fondly recalled her experiences vidding 
together with her collective: 
So when you're vidding with VCRs, basically someone would sit in front of the 
TV and the editing decks and push all the buttons, and we would all sit on the 
couch and give thumbs up or thumbs down to the clip choices, and stuff our 
faces full of junk food, drink copious amounts of soda ... It was a group activity, 
and we had these monthly bashes where we would do stuff other than vidding, 
just hang out ... We were all very close-knit. 
The VCR vidders are highly regarded for their tenacity in creating vids using such intri­
cate methods, and these "good ol' days" are also romanticized through such narratives. 
Tales of this camaraderie are often told in the convention spaces where the VCR and 
newer, digital vidders come into contact to highlight the differences between them. 
287 
Appx. 37
[PAGE 65]
K. FREUND 
VCR vidding was a friendly and communal creative practice, totally unlike that of 
modern vidders who work alone on computers that automatically process many of the 
elements that were formerly painstaking processes of manual labor. 
By the time computer-aided vidding arrived in the late 1990s, VCR vidding was an 
established part of fandom culture, and had its own distinct discourse of aesthetics, 
analysis, and criticism (as explained in detail below). Despite the significant advantages 
digital vidding held over analog, the arrival of digital vids was not initially embraced. 
According to Melina, who was an early digital vidder: 
Doing things with computers that you couldn't do with a VCR was seen as 
flashy, and frequently unnecessarily flashy. It didn't serve the vid, you were just 
showing off that you had a computer. Some of this I think was valid, but obvi­
ously lots of it was not. 
Throughout the early and mid-2000s, vidding began to expand as the community shifted 
to communicating primarily through mailing lists on the Web. As vids were now shared 
online and more easily accessible, it became common for people to stumble across avid 
posted on the Internet without already being a member of fandom. More and more vid­
ders from outside the United States began to appear: unable to attend the US-based 
conventions, these "feral" vidders interacted with each other solely online and were 
unaware of the accepted history of the community. It is interesting to consider the use 
of the term "feral": somewhat disparaging, it indicates that these new vidders were seen 
as uncivilized and wild by traditional vidders. Gwyn was, and indeed still is, apprehen­
sive about these "newbie vidders": 
Q: 
Gwyn: 
Who are these newbie vidders, when did they arrive? 
[laughs] Well, it's anyone who started vidding on computer! It was 
YouTube-YouTube really didn't exist four years ago, and now it's taken 
over the world! And then there were all these people who were coming in 
to vidding who had no idea there was this culture, there was this history. 
They thought they had invented it. 
The arrival of You Tube in 2005 popularized and mainstreamed the practice of watching 
streaming video on the Web. 18 New genres of remix, which also appropriated copy­
righted media, appeared quickly throughout this period, such as machinima (films made 
using video game engines), trailer mashups (creating a parody movie trailer by altering 
the genre), political remix videos, and many more. The closest relative of the vid, the 
anime music video (AMY) also migrated on to YouTube while maintaining its own 
domain, animemusicvideos.org. And some of these remix videos looked just like the vids 
made by vidders: new editors were cutting clips of television footage to music and post­
ing it on You Tube, entirely unaware of the existence of a vidding community which 
claimed a 30-year history. Many of these new editors were from different countries, 
backgrounds, and age groups than the traditional vidding community. There were also 
more men now creating remix videos they called "vids," and the vids themselves also 
began to change as the influx brought new music, new aesthetic concerns, and also new 
types of edited imagery. 
A tug-of-war between the established "vidding aesthetic" and these new forms began. 
This tension is played out through vidding reviews and commentary, both online and 
288 
Appx. 38
[PAGE 66]
I THOUGHT I MADE A YID ... 
face-to-face at the vid review sessions during fan conventions. Most of the stylistic traits 
of LiveJournal vidding are flexible to an extent in the name of innovation and play. 
However, if a vid is seen to stray too far from the accepted traits, or includes faux-pas 
elements, then it is often critiqued as a "bad vid" or "not avid." 
The source text is usually, but not always, science-fiction, fantasy, or a cult television 
series: Star Trek, The X-Files, Highlander, Buffy the Vampire Slayer, Supernatural, and 
Doctor Who have all been heavily vidded, for example. Generally speaking, a traditional 
type of vid focuses on a relationship from the text (which can be part of the "canon" of 
the text, or constructed by fans) or on a particular character and their motivations and 
back story; these are the shipper vid and character study, respectively. Many vidders see 
this focus on characters and relationships as a particularly female way of understanding 
media texts, and as part of what makes vidding different from other types of remix vid­
eos. While some effects can be used, they should generally be in service of the story the 
vid is telling rather than just demonstrating a new visual technique. 
There are certain traits, which vidders agree are important to a good vid, such as 
"going somewhere" with the story or telling a narrative, saying something new about a 
character, relationship, or storyline from the television show, or recontextualizing a 
well-known song through interesting juxtaposition with the televisual source. 
The vid Displaced by Canadian vidder Milly is a good example of a classic type of vid. 
Using footage from Heroes, 19 the vid explores the actions and motivations of the char­
acter Claire, and alludes to self-harm in Claire's ability to heal from any wound. The 
vidder uses sparing special effects such as those shown in the frames represented by 
Figure 20.2, and the emphasis is on the character's development throughout the series. 
The traits of a "bad vid" are much more concrete, but also less well-known, particu­
larly by newer vidders. For example, including black screen in the vid or showing the 
characters lips moving without dialog (known as "talky-face") are agreed to be the 
hallmarks of a "bad vid." Including too many flashy special effects, such as tinting the 
footage with a monochrome hue like orange or purple, are seen as unnecessary. This 
particular stylistic concern hearkens back to the earliest days of digital vidding, where 
VCR vidders were skeptical of effects that could not be accomplished via the VCR, and 
were thus not part of the accepted aesthetic style of vidding at the time. 
The vidder jescaflowne, who came to vidding from the closely related AMV com­
munity, took these gaffes to the limit in the vid Another Sunday (Figures 20.3 and 20.4 ). 
Using footage from Stargate: Atlantis20 set to Jefferson Starship, jescaflowne uses every 
filter, cheesy effect, and slow-motion trick available. The vid was a surprise hit on the 
convention circuits for its over-the-top take on the source material. 
Figure 20.2 Screenshots of Displaced by Milly (courtesy of Milly) 
289 
Appx. 39
[PAGE 67]
Figure 20.3 Ronan Dex (Jason Momoa) sparkles in this screenshot from Another Sunday 
by jescaflowne (courtesy of jescaflowne) 
Figure 20 .4 The original shot of Teyla Emmagan (Rachel Luttrell) in Another Sunday is 
overlaid with a green color wash (courtesy of jescaflowne) 
Appx. 40
[PAGE 68]
I THOUGHT I MADE A VID ... 
Interestingly, the fan-written wiki, Fanlore, points to the vidder's origins in AMY 
editing as part of the reason as to why it is different from traditional vids: 
Another Sunday is also representative of the anime music video [amv] aesthetic 
as applied to live action vidding; ... J escaflowne comes to live action by way of 
amvs, and brings a fast-cutting, highly spectacular, colorful and almost cartoon­
ish style to live action footage.21 
While the vid was wildly popular when it premiered, it is remembered for toeing the line 
between what is acceptable for vids and what is more common in other remix video 
communities. 
Many newer vidders expressed confusion at the feedback they received in reviews, as 
the aesthetic rules they were breaking were not clear to them. For example, Keerawa 
premiered one of her first vids at Vivid Con in Chicago, and was surprised at the negative 
reaction to the inclusion of a voiceover she had recorded at the beginning and end of 
the vid: "I think I'm breaking some really big rule that I didn't even know existed." This 
was echoed by several other vidders, including Vinny who similarly felt like she was 
violating a rule that she had never heard of when she used the black screen in her first 
vid premiere at VividCon: 
I'm still struggling to get to know more about the genre, about the history of it. 
During the critique, one of the mentions was that apparently using lots of black 
footage is like breaking wind in an elevator! [laughs] Before this I had no idea 
that was a faux pas, I mean I'd read stuff in comments [on LJ] saying you 
shouldn't use lots of white flashes but I guess this is just telling me I still have a 
ton to learn. 
One vidder known for pushing the boundaries of what is acceptable commented, "It's 
been said that I'm fearless, which is kind of true. But it's more that I don't realize when 
I should be fearful or resist." 22 
A long-time vidder, who had previously worked in the AMY community, pointed out 
that the vids that get roundly panned at the vid review panel at the conventions tend 
to be those that include aesthetic elements that the community is not familiar with: 
Chloe: I wouldn't say it's reluctant to change, because I don't think it is at all, 
it changes all the time, but it's a community that's very wide in ages, so you have 
those really young people who are probably exploring more and trying new 
things, and the community that's in a really safe place, where it doesn't really 
want to-I mean, it knows what it wants to do and it's willing to evolve in that 
line, but it takes a little probing to send them exploring. 
This is also at work in the vidding community: I heard much discussion as to the differ­
ences between LiveJournal and You Tube vidders, and between LiveJournal vidders and 
AMY editors as well. In these discussions, vidding was said to be older, more critical, 
thoughtful, and less focused on special effects. In his work on the free software move­
ment, David Berry analyzed the specific discourses that were being employed by different 
groups.25 The use of terms such as "we" and "they" help the different software groups 
define their boundaries between the in-group and the out-group. When reading the 
291 
Appx. 41
[PAGE 69]
K. FREUND 
material published by these groups, he notes, "These subject positions are treated as a 
dichotomy and the reader is assumed to be supportive of the FSF [Free Software 
Foundation] objectives, a friend and colleague-or if not, an enemy." 2 ·~ He also points 
out that these groups spend a great deal of time explaining how they are different from 
other open source advocacy groups, even though they are quite similar and overlap in 
their membership. By defining themselves as the "first" remix video community, particu­
larly as the first female remix video community, vidders are able to legitimize themselves 
as the most authentic, and therefore best type, of video remix in the face of newer, male­
dominated ones. 
With the rise of other forms of remix on You Tube in the beginning of the twenty-first 
century, vidding practices that had existed since 197 5 found themselves in danger of 
"being written out of the history of remix," according to Francesca Coppa in her pres­
entation at the DIY Video Summit in 2008. 25 She continued: "[The popular conception 
is] that guys have been remixing mass media since 1994, or 1991 if you're talking about 
machinima, so we really want to say, no, women have been remixing mass media since 
1975."26 This history of vidding is explicitly gendered. It is extremely important to the 
identity of this community to identify their origins as older than the other forms of 
remix, and specifically to point out that this is a women's practice. 
As Gwyn explains: 
We [women] don't get to see the stories we want to see. Most TV and certainly 
movies are done for a male audience, eighteen to thirty-four ... and they are 
not making the entertainments we necessarily want to see. We see all these 
other texts inside these things. So we have to take what is given to us and 
instead show the world how we see it; I'm going to make what I want to see. 
Vidders resisted making broad generalizations about "women's vidding" and "men's vid­
ding" and were quick to explain that vidding doesn't mean that the participants are only 
interested in romance. Gwyn herself pointed out that she likes making violent, action 
vids. But the emphasis on characters and relationships in vids, prominent vidder Laura 
Shapiro explained to me at VividCon, "are values associated with femaleness." In inter­
views, vidders commonly described their practices as a method of writing back, or 
against, the televisual source material as a way to critique or rewrite the text against the 
intentions of the (male) creators and writers. An increase in the number of male partici­
pants in the community has also led to fears that the women's space of fan-vidding 
conventions and LiveJournal circles may be changing. 
Conclusion 
There have been several calls out to the community to encourage more inclusivity in 
defining the anatomy of a vid, and characteristics of a vidder. In response to a conven­
tion panel entitled What Do We Want From Vids Now? one vidder wrote: 
The discussion had such a subtext of anxiety at certain points, a sense that we 
were in danger of losing something or losing control of something as vids 
become less an orphan art and expand out to meet a world of new media that 
is also rushing in to meet us. At least two people said, and said sincerely, that 
they were "not interested in policing the boundary between what is and isn't a 
292 
Appx. 42
[PAGE 70]
I THOUGHT I MADE A YID ... 
vid," but I felt that there was a lot of repressed desire in the room to do so ... I 
really wanted to ask: What is it we are anxious about? ... Because change is 
coming to us whether or not we go out to meet it. 
So what is it that vids that push the envelope make us fear? Loss of definition 
as an artform, as a community, when we can no longer clearly say what is avid 
and what isn't? Invasion by hostile forces that don't understand (boys!) or that 
simply outnumber us, so that we get swamped and lost, when the boundaries 
between fanvidder and other new media artist blur?27 
Most of the comments on this post were supportive of other new media forms of remix, 
but simultaneously protective of their particular community as a female-dominated and 
critical response to media texts. Or, as Australian vidder Boppy put it, "The LiveJournal­
slash-female-dominated vidding community does not have a monopoly on vidding and 
the sooner they realize that the better." 
Vidders are now more visible as they communicate online, and media participation 
through remix and editing has become a much more common practice. The appropria­
tive elements of fan culture have spread with the development and dissemination of 
interactive, Web 2.0 technologies and platforms. 28 The community has also moved more 
into the open, and begun sharing vids using more public platforms such as YouTube, 
Tumblr, and Vimeo. These new spaces bring them into more and more contact with new 
types of vids. Despite many efforts to preserve traditional vidding styles, the genre 
changes every day and many contemporary vids would be unrecognizable to the early 
VCR vidders. 
While vidding is a comparatively small fan practice, this study of amateur video pro­
ducers has provided historical and cultural context of a community engaged in practices 
that are currently at the forefront of public attention in light of recent copyright battles 
between governments, media industries, users, and Web 2.0 service providers. 
Vidders provide valuable insight into the historical origins of remix culture, and dem­
onstrate that there has not been a paradigm shift in the role of the audience with the 
advent of digital media and participatory culture. Rather, new media formats, such as 
the remix video, did not arise unbidden, but represent the long-standing desire for audi­
ences to participate in and personalize their media. 
Notes 
danah boyd, "Friends, Friendsters, and Top 8: Writing Community into Being on Social Network Sites," 
First Monday 11, no. 12 (2006). 
2 The event changed from a straightforward debate about these topics to a "fail" after the debate turned to 
argument, and often became personal attacks which left the community in turmoil. 
3 Kandy Fong and the origins of vidding in slash fandom will be discussed further below. 
4 Unless otherwise indicated, all quotations from vidders or other communities members are based on 
personal interviews with the author conducted during ethnographic fieldwork. 
5 David Bell, An Introduction to Cybercultures (London: Routledge, 2001), 93. 
6 Howard Rheingold, The Virtual Community: Homesteading on the Electronic Frontier (Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 1993), 5. 
7 Kevin Robins, "Cyberspace and the World We Live In," in The Cybercultures Reader, ed. David Bell and 
Barbara M. Kennedy (London: Routledge, 2000). 
8 Raymond Williams, Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1976). 
9 Nancy K. Baym, Tune In, Log On: Soaps, Fandom, and Online Community (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications, 2000), 2. 
293 
Appx. 43
[PAGE 71]
K. FREUND 
IO John Paul Marshall, Living on Cybermind: Categories, Communication, and Control, vol. 24, New Literacies 
and Digital Epistemologies (New York: Peter Lang, 2007), 214. 
11 Marshall, Living on Cybermind, 275 
12 This comment was collected anonymously during online ethnographic data collection. 
13 USC School of Cinematic Arts, "Genealogy of Vidding with Francesca Coppa-'24/7 a DIY Video 
Summit"' (University of Southern California, 2009). 
14 Francesca Coppa, "Women, Star Trek, and the Early Development of Fannish Vidding," Transformative 
Works and Cultures 1 (2008): para. 3.3. 
IS Francesca Coppa, "Celebrating Kandy Fong: Founder of the Fannish Music Video," in In Media Res, 2007, 
http://mediacommons.futureofthebook.org/imr/2007 /11/19 /celebrating-kandy-fong-founder-of-fannish­
music-video. 
16 Henry Jenkins, Textual Poachers: Television Fans and Participatory Culture (New York: Routledge, 1992). 
17 Camille Bacon-Smith, Enterprising Women: Television Fandom and the Creation of Popular Myth 
(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1992). 
18 Jean Burgess and Joshua Green, YouTube: Online Video and Participatory Culture (Cambridge, MA: Polity 
Press, 2009). 
19 Heroes, created by Tim Kring. NBC, 2006-10. 
20 Stargate: Atlantis, created by Robert C. Cooper and Brad Wright, Sci-Fi Channel, 2004-09. 
21 Fanlore, Another Sunday, http://fanlore.org/wiki/Another_Sunday. 
22 This individual preferred to remain anonymous. 
23 David M. Berry, Copy, Rip, Burn: The Politics of Copyleft and Open Source (London: Pluto Press, 2008). 
24 Ibid., 167. 
25 As a point of interest, Coppa is also a founding board member of the Organization for Transformative 
Works. 
26 USC School of Cinematic Arts. "Genealogy of Vidding with Francesca Coppa-'24/7 a DIY Video 
Summit."' University of Southern California, 2009. 
27 The location of this post has been kept anonymous to protect the identity of the poster. 
28 Henry Jenkins, Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide (New York: New York University 
Press, 2006). 
Bacon-Smith, Camille. Enterprising Women: Television Fandom and the Creation of Popular Myth. 
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1992. 
Baym, Nancy K. Tune In, Log On: Soaps, Fandom, and Online Community. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications, 2000. 
Bell, David. An Introduction to Cybercultures. London: Routledge, 2001. 
Berry, David M. Copy, Rip, Burn: The Politics of Copyleft and Open Source. London: Pluto Press, 2008. 
boyd, danah. "Friends, Friendsters, and Top 8: Writing Community into Being on Social Network 
Sites." First Monday 11, no. 12 (2006). 
Burgess, Jean, and Joshua Green. YouTube: Online Video and Participatory Culture. Cambridge, MA: 
Polity Press, 2009. 
Coppa, Francesca. "Celebrating Kandy Fong: Founder of the Fannish Music Video." In In Media Res, 
2007, http://mediacommons.futureofthebook.org/imr/2007 /11/19/celebrating-kandy-fong-founder­
of-fannish-music-video (accessed August 10, 2014). 
---. "Women, Star Trek, and the Early Development of Fannish Vidding." Transformative Works 
and Cultures 1 (2008). 
Fanlore. "Another Sunday." http://fanlore.org/wiki/Another_Sunday (accessed May l, 2014). 
Jenkins, Henry. Textual Poachers: Television Fans and Participatory Culture. New York: Routledge, 1992. 
---.Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide. New York: New York University Press, 
2006. 
Marshall, John Paul. Living on Cybermind: Categories, Communication, and Control. Vol. 24, 
New Literacies and Digital Epistemologies. New York: Peter Lang, 2007. 
294 
Appx. 44
[PAGE 72]
I THOUGHT I MADE A YID ... 
Rheingold, Howard. The Virtual Community: Homesteading on the Electronic Frontier. Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 1993. 
Robins, Kevin. "Cyberspace and the World We Live In." In The Cybercultures Reader, edited by David 
Bell and Barbara M. Kennedy, 77-95. London: Routledge, 2000. 
USC School of Cinematic Arts. "Genealogy of Vidding with Francesca Coppa-'24/7 a DIY Video 
Summit."' University of Southern California, 2009. YouTube video. http://www.youtube.com/ 
watch?v=a YdllH7jZxg (accessed August 8, 2014 ). 
Williams, Raymond. Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1976. 
295 
Appx. 45
[PAGE 73]
Interview with Professor Francesca Coppa 
Muhlenberg College / Organization for Transformative Works 
November 18, 2011 
Professor Francesca Coppa is the founding Director of Film Studies at Muhlenberg College as 
well as a founder and current board member of the Organization for Transformative Works 
(OTW), a nonprofit organization dedicated to celebrating and preserving fanworks and fan 
practices, including vidding.  
She has written and lectured extensively on vidding and directed a series of short films 
explaining vidding to middle and high schoolers for MIT's New Media Literacy project. 1 She is 
also the director of the OTW's “Vidding History” project, which is documenting the oral history 
of some of the first vidders. She is currently at work on a book called Vidding: A History of Fan 
Music Video. Her lectures and publications on vidding include: 
"Pop culture, fans, and social media," in Routledge Handbook of Social Media (edited by 
Theresa Senft and Jeremy Hunsinger; forthcoming, 2012) 
"An Editing Room of One's Own: Vidding as Women's Work" p. 123-130 and "How To 
Suppress Women's Remix" (co-written with Rebecca Tushnet) p. 131-138 in Camera 
Obscura, Duke University Press, Volume 26, 2011. 
"A Fannish Taxonomy Of Hotness." Cinema Journal, 48:4 Summer, 2009, p. 107 - 113. 
“Vidding,” for Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy:  An Encyclopedia, ed. Robin Reid 
(North Carolina: Greenwood, 2008) 
“Women, Star Trek and the Early Development of Fannish Vidding,” for Transformative 
Works and Cultures. Issue 1, September 15, 2008.
2  
“A Brief History of Media Fandom,” in Fan Fiction and Fan Communities in the Age of 
the Internet, ed. Hellekson & Busse, (MacFarland, 2006) p. 41-59. 
Curator, In Media Res, an experiment in collaborative, multi-modal scholarship 
sponsored by Media Commons. 
Public Talk, "Fair Use and Remix Culture: Transforming Consumers into Makers of 
Culture," Yale Law Tech Speakers Series, Yale University, September 21, 2011. 
3 
Panelist, Transmedia, Hollywood 2: Visual Culture and Design, April 8, 2011. UCLA.4 
Public Talk, University of Pennsylvania Cinema Studies Faculty Colloquium, Dec 1, 
2010. Talk: "Remix Before YouTube: Analog Remix."  
1 Available at <http://techtv.mit.edu/tags/2522- otw/videos>. 
2  Available at <http://journal.transformativeworks.org/index.php/twc/article/view /44>.
3  Available at <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yVzKgxhGdUc>.  
4  Available at <http://vimeo.com/25691436>.  
Appx. 46
Appendix G
[PAGE 74]
Public Talk, “Fan Art as Counternarrative: Responding to Popular Culture.” Cooper 
Union's Interdisciplinary Seminar, November 9, 2010. 
Panelist, "Theory of Remix: Part I," at Open Video Conference, October 1, 2010. 
Curator, with Elisa Kreisinger, Vidding Exhibition for Open Video Conference, October 
1-2 2010. 
Public Talk, Bard College: "Minority Report: Fan Works and Multicultural Voices." 
March 4, 2010. 
Panelist, "Musical Literacy," in "Participatory Cultures: From Wikipedia to Vidding," 
Digital Media and Learning, MacArthur Foundation, Feb 19, 2010. 
Public Talk, "Things We Don't Have in the Future...And How Fan Arts Can Help!" 
ReMix, ReWrite, ReAct, University of the Arts, September 23, 2009.5
Panelist, "Who Owns Pop Culture? Remix and Fair-Use in the Age of Corporate Mass 
Media," Open Video Conference, NYU Law School, June 20, 2009. 
Co-organizer and presenter, IP/Gender interdisciplinary Spring 2009 conference, 
American University School of Law, April 23-24, 2009. Presentation: ’Swap Audio?’ 
Theorizing Music in Fan Vidding." Moderator: "Is There A Text In This Work? 
Transformation Beyond the Written Word." 
Panelist, "Women's Work" (with Rebecca Tushnet). Gender on the Frontiers: Confronting 
Intersectionalities. Columbia Journal of Gender and Law Triennial Symposium: April 10, 
2009. 
Invited Speaker, "Opening Roundtable on Mashup, User-Generated Content, and the 
Future of Cultural Production," and "Mashup as Political and Social Expression" at 
Mashup: The Future of Cultural Production and Ownership. March 12-13, 2009. The 
Ohio State University Moritz College of Law. 
Panelist, "Media Cannibals: A History of Vidding Women," IP/Gender: Mapping the 
Connections (American University School of Law, April 4, 2008). 
Speaker, “Media Fetish: The Vidshow,” Beyond Queer: The Spectacle of the Performing 
Body (Brown University, April 6, 2008). 
Panelist, “From Number One to First Lady: Trek's Christine Chapel and the Development 
of Fannish Music Video,” Slash 3: The Final Cut (Leicester, UK; Feb 25, 2008). 
Presenter, "Genealogy of Vidding," 24/7: A DIY Video Summit (February 8-10, 2008; 
School of Cinematic Arts, University of Southern California)6. 
Panelist, “‘We are controlling transmission’: Female Video Editors and the Literary 
Music Video,” “Creative Transformation: Specificity and Continuity in Unofficial 
5  Available at <http://blip.tv/francesca -coppa/things-we-don-t-have-in-the-future-and-how-fan-arts-can-help-
3118672>. 
6 Available at <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aYdllH7jZxg>  
Appx. 47
[PAGE 75]
Creative Authorship,” MIT5:  Creativity, Ownership, and Collaboration in the Digital 
Age (MIT, April 27-29, 2007). 
Panelist, “Media Cannibals: A History of Vidding Women,” Inside/Outside: The Gaze 
and PsychoAnalysis. Feminism(s): Film, Video, and Politics Symposium. (University of 
Hartford, April 21, 2007). 
1. Could you briefly describe what sets the vidding community apart from other clip-based
video creators? Do vidders see themselves as different from many more recent creator 
communities who have been getting attention on sites like YouTube? 
Vidders, who are overwhelmingly female, differ from many other DIY video communities in 
their aesthetics and purpose. Many vidders create vids to analyze or supplement their mainstream 
film and television viewing, to draw out their preferred subtextual readings or otherwise reframe 
visual and narrative elements of mass media storytelling.  
Vids are visual essays that respond to a visual source. Many vidders use music to create, 
extrapolate, or analyze the relationships between television and film characters, or to articulate a 
character's otherwise opaque interiority. (One of the first VCR vids ever made, in 1980, set the 
Who's “Behind Blue Eyes” to a single, wavering frame of Starsky from Starsky and Hutch--the 
best she could do—thereby imputing an interiority and emotional subjectivity to the Starsky 
character that the show never gave him.) 
Vidders were making “user-generated content” long before the internet and the rise of digital 
culture. The organized vidding community dates their art form from the slideshows that Kandy 
Fong made in 1975, and there was a twenty-five year period where VCRs were the dominant 
technology. Many of the aesthetic and technical problems vidders face existed before the web 
and digital video. For example, vidders have always wanted the cleanest, sharpest source, to 
isolate the most beautiful frames, to be able to tint footage or otherwise create emotionally 
meaningful color palettes. They're now artists working with digital tools, but they're trying to 
solve technical problems and work to aesthetic standards that predate the digital world. 
2. Are most vidders amateurs in video editing? Are their activities generally noncommercial?
Are there also "professional" vidders? 
Most vidders are amateurs, though in the years since the exemption I have seen more vidders 
studying filmmaking or digital film editing at school and who aspire to become, or do become, 
professionals. This reflects a change in high school and college curricula to include digital 
literacies; my college, Muhlenberg, added a film studies major with a production component to 
its offerings in 2006, when digital tools made video production affordable. It is also more and 
more common for people to know digital art programs like Photoshop and After Effects, which 
are both often used in vidding. That being said, historically many of the best vidders had art 
training (drawing, painting, graphic design), and others have, or also have, technical or computer 
backgrounds. This latter point is important: vidding women, then and now, tend to be women 
who are not afraid of technology, and they tend to see vidding as a series of technical and 
aesthetic challenges without being particularly aware of the legal issues associated with those 
technologies. The vidding community continues to be a great source of technical and aesthetic 
mentoring; it is also increasingly trying to help vidders navigate legal questions, though this is 
Appx. 48
[PAGE 76]
still within a relatively small circle compared to the exponentially growing number of vidders 
and other remix artists in the post-YouTube era. 
Vidding is, at the moment, still entirely noncommercial. Most vidders just want to share their 
work with like-minded fans, and so will stream their vids online, offer them for download, or 
give DVDs away at conventions.  Some vidders charge for the cost of the DVD discs or for 
shipping. (I saw my first vids on VHS, on a tape that was mailed to me at cost.) This 
noncommerciality is both due to fandom’s “gift culture," which is a culture of creative exchange, 
but also because historically, many vidders were convinced that their work was illegal.  
That being said, noncommercial does not mean “not serious.” Vidders take their art seriously, 
and there is a culture of public review and criticism modeled on the art review of art schools.  
There is a community that makes "Vidder Profiles" - documentary films that interview notable 
vidders and examine their artistic careers and preoccupations 7 – and a community devoted to 
doing "DVD Commentaries" of notable vids8 as a form of analysis. 
Moreover, vids are also being recognized as “art” outside the community.  I have published my 
own work on vidding in film and media journals like Cinema Journal and Camera Obscura. 
Vids have appeared in gallery exhibitions (Lim's vid “Us” appeared in an exhibition entitled 
“Mediated” at the California Museum of Photography January 24, 2009 - April 4, 2009
9) and 
been profiled by major national news outlets, including New York Magazine 10, Reason 
Magazine11, and National Public Radio.12  
3. Do vidders frequently rip commercially-released DVDs in order to extract clips? It sounds
like some vidders use .avis downloaded from unauthorized BitTorrent sources (are all the 
source materials available that way? obscure shows?). Others rely on video capture from 
analog outputs. Is DVD viewed as superior to these alternatives? What about Blu-Ray? 
Vidders want the best-looking footage available, and will rate “crisp source” highly when 
discussing a vid’s merits. While there are some folks who still capture, capturing is more 
expensive, requires more technical expertise, and typically looks less good. Ripping from DVDs 
tends to get you better source than downloaded .avis, which are frequently recorded off broadcast 
television, and may be low-resolution or have bugs or other visual artifacts. Downloading is 
enabled by file compression, but vidders don't want compressed files, which can't withstand the 
processing that is now common with digital tools without breaking up or getting muddy.  
So vidders typically want the cleanest, biggest clips their systems can handle, because they want 
to transform/rework the footage in various ways—changing speed or color, adding effects, 
creating manipulations, masking out elements, only using a portion of the frame—and the better 
the footage you start with, the more you can do with it. Vis a vis Blu Ray, my own sense is that, 
7 See their YouTube channel at http://www.youtube.com/user/vidderprofile.  
8 Vid Commentary community at <http://vid -commentary.livejournal.com/>.  
9  See the exhibition catalog at <http://www.forger.com/pdfs/MEDIATED- Catalog.pdf> 
10 Logan Hill, The Vidder, New York Magazine, Nov. 12, 2007, available at
<http://nymag.com/movies/features/videos/40622/>.  
11  Jesse Walker, Remixing Television, Reason Magazine. August/September 2008.
12  Neda Ulaby, Vidders Talk Back To Their Pop Culture Muses, NPR, February 25, 2009.
<http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=101154811>  
Appx. 49
[PAGE 77]
at the moment, most vidders – who are, as I said, amateurs – simply don't have the computer 
processing power to handle Blu-Ray footage yet, though the few vidders who do are admired for 
the "shininess" of their source.  I suspect, however, that this is only a matter of time: as 
computers get more powerful, vidders will inevitably begin to use Blu Ray because it is simply 
best to start any artistic manipulation with the largest, least compressed image available. 
Vidders have always sought the best source available, even before DVDs. First generation 
broadcast tapes (VHS taped off television) were prized; in the days before everything was on 
DVD, you might only have seen an old show because someone had double-taped their tapes for 
you, so most vidders were working from tapes of tapes of tapes. Vidders raced to buy the first 
professional VHS sets of popular fannish shows like Star Trek and Highlander when they 
became available, though few TV shows made it to professional VHS. Vidders then bought the 
DVDs of those same shows when they became available, and are likely customers for anything 
with bonus footage or extended editions. (For example, the blooper clip version/easter egg clip of 
Yoda dancing that appeared on the Star Wars extended edition was featured in a vid; more 
recently, a first, unaired version of the pilot episode of the BBC's Sherlock which was on the 
DVD set has been used by vidders to extend the amount of available footage.) It is also worth 
noting that vidders tend to keep every version of a beloved source, so many Star Wars vidders 
are holding onto their VHS cassettes of Star Wars to vid with since Lucas changed the source in 
subsequent editions.) 
4. What other sources do they use? For example, YouTube, Hulu or Amazon UnBox?  Would
they choose these sources if the works were available on DVD? 
Vidders also use YouTube and Unbox (I don't personally know of any who use Hulu but then 
again, most vidders don't advertise what sources they use in their blurbs, so I only have 
knowledge of a relatively small sample of vidders whose work I've had the chance to discuss 
with them; I presume that some vidders have used Hulu.)  I know that all of these are considered 
inferior to DVD in quality and would only be used 1) if nothing better was available, and it was 
important to make the vid sooner rather than later so as to be part of a critical conversation of the 
moment or 2) if "YouTube video" was itself the effect.  An example of the first kind of vid is 
Giandjua Kiss's vid "It Depends On What You Pay," which uses Amazon Unbox footage of Joss 
Whedon's short-lived television Dollhouse to argue that the show's central conceit – of a woman 
with no memory who you can rent – is akin to rape. The show was soon cancelled, and so the 
vid's timeliness was an issue.  An example of the second kind of vid is Obsessive 24's "Piece of 
Me,
13 which argues that Britney Spears is the victim of exploitation by the industry, her family, 
and the camera itself. Obsessive 24, one of the best vidders working, and one who typically 
produces vids with very high-quality visuals, chose in this video to contrast the glossy self-
promotional DVD footage of Spears (she bought a DVD of Britney's Greatest Hits specifically to 
make this vid) with tabloid photography and pixellated YouTube videos, including user-
generated videos by others ("Leave Britney Alone!" the tearful plea of internet celebrity Chris 
Crocker) and gossip show footage covering her various scandals and breakdowns.  
13 For more about "Piece of Me," see Coppa, Francesca. "An Editing Room of One's Own: Vidding as Women's
Work"  in Camera Obscura, Volume 26, 2011 p. 123 -130. 
Appx. 50
[PAGE 78]
5. Could you make a rough order of magnitude estimate of the number of vids that have been
created by self-identified vidders? 
By self-identified vidders, tens of thousands easily. That number goes into the millions if you 
look at YouTube and what organized vidders sometimes call the “feral” vidders—vidders who 
have been inspired by vids they've seen, or have just invented some version of the idea for 
themselves without becoming involved in an organized community of self-identified vidders.  
6. Is the quality of the video source important to members of the vidding community?
Yes, very much so, see question four, above. I want to reiterate again that vidders are visual 
artists. They are deeply invested in aesthetics. They want to make smart vids that are also 
beautiful. And the better the source footage you start with, the more you can do to it, the 
"shinier" it looks. All vidders value aesthetics, though there are other factors involved in when 
and how the work is created.  While some vidders might make a vid quickly, almost urgently, as 
part of a current cultural conversation about a television show or film, others can spend easily 
half a year working on a single video, often working on it frame by frame like a painting. 
7. Do you think the vidding community has a clear understanding of what the DMCA
prohibits? 
The organization I helped found, The Organization For Transformative Works, has tried hard 
over the last two years to disseminate information about the DMCA exemption for 
noncommercial remixers, and we have had some success in the sphere of self-identified, 
organized vidders. However, we are a small nonprofit and there are many vidders out there; i t is 
inevitable that our blog posts and outreach efforts have limited reach, especially when many are 
still receiving automated takedowns from YouTube and other sites. For most vidders, the big 
legal (and ethical) line remains between "paying" and "not paying" for source footage; vidders 
tend to feel that if they've paid for the DVDs, they have the moral right to make art out of them. 
8. Do you think the 2009 exemption for noncommercial uses has been helpful to the vidding
community?  How? 
Absolutely. We at the OTW have been cheered by blog comments and emails from vidders and 
other noncommercial remixers who have told us that the exemption emboldened them to 
counternotify in the face of a YouTube takedown and that their work has subsequently been 
restored. The DMCA is a large part of that confidence: many vidders now understand that their 
use of the cultural material was fair and that they didn't break any laws by ripping their DVDs 
either. It is so crucial for vidders to have confidence in the legitimacy of their work and the 
validity of their speech, and I do believe that the DMCA exemption has given that to vidders. 
Appx. 51
[PAGE 79]
Interview with Jonathan McIntosh 
November 17, 20
11 
1. Could you briefly describe what sets the political remix community apart from other clip-based
video creators? Do political remixers see themselves as different from other creator 
communities who have been getting attention on sites like YouTube?  
Political remix is a broad category of transformative works that focus on topics ranging from 
government policy and political elections to issues of race, sexuality and gender representations 
in mass media productions. Political remix makers may or may not overlap with other clip-based 
video communities. Certainly there exists a small subsection of dedicated video creators who 
see themselves primarily as political video remix creators but I would venture to say that the 
majority are simply simply feel strongly about a particular issue and are compelled to make an 
audiovisual statement about it. One thing that distinguishes political remix works is the tendency 
to be highly critical of and/or very unsympathetic towards the source media.  
2. Are most PRV makers amateurs in video editing? Are their activities generally
noncommercial? Are there also "professional" PRV makers? 
Many political remixers start out as video editing amateurs inspired to create a remix because of 
their passion for an issue and a desire to engage in a public, media-based debate on that issue. 
They may learn the technology specifically to make their audiovisual commentary. That said, 
many quickly become experts in video making as they continue to make remix videos. While the 
majority of political remix video is noncommercial, some remixers do go on to create remix video 
works for companies, non-profits or political campaigns. More recently, non-profit organizations 
in particular have become interested in using fair use remix videos in their campaign strategies, 
which has increased the number and variety of politically-orientated transformative works being 
created. 
3. Is the quality of the video source important to the PRV community?
Yes the quality of the video source is important for a number of reasons. First, because higher 
resolution sources, like HD and Blu-ray, allow for cropping, zooming and other video effects 
which can be essential to the audiovisual argument being made. The ability to crop or zoom in 
on the media source (without the distortion, blurring or pixelization that comes with lower quality 
web video sources) is a critical tool for remixers who wish to highlight or focus on one figure or 
element in a piece of video footage. These techniques are employed in a wide variety of ways 
by remixers, including:  zooming in on a figure's lips as he or she speaks, cropping out other 
figures in the frame, focusing on one person in a group, highlighting reactions, gestures, actions 
or facial expressions, etc. Second, because of the standards set by Hollywood and professional 
media organizations, the use of high quality footage is important because it tends to add a 
sense of legitimacy to a audiovisual argument; for better or worse, higher quality video footage 
tends to be taken more seriously by the public. Third, if the remixed video work needs to be 
screened outside of a small web-based video box - for example, on larger tv screens or via 
video projection - higher resolution source media will make those transitions much better.  
4. Do PRV makers rip commercially-released DVDs in order to extract clips?  Others rely on
video capture from analog outputs. Is DVD viewed as superior to these alternatives? 
Appx. 52
[PAGE 80]
Political rem
ixers collect clips from a wide variety of sources including from ripped DVD (and 
increasingly from HD/Blu-ray discs). The discs are superior because the remixer can  get the 
original and best quality footage directly from the source. Discs allow remixers to pull or rip only 
the portions of the source footage they intend to use in their remix rather then download the 
entire film or series to their computer first. Disc ripping also allows remixers to control the 
quality, aspect ratio, frame-rate and codex used to import the footage into their video project 
(which can be important for matching other source footage from other sources). Additionally 
many remixers also make extensive used of DVD/Blu-ray disc extras in their mash-up video 
projects - these extras include deleted scenes, interviews, making of videos and trailers - many 
of which can only found on the actual commercially-released discs. 
5. What other sources do they/you use? For example, YouTube, Hulu or Amazon UnBox?
Would they/you choose these sources if the works were available on DVD? 
Political remixers often rely on the fair use of news footage, TV show and Hollywood films clips 
as well as documentary films clips for much of their source media (in addition to the 24 hour 
news channels, shows like PBS’s Frontline and Comedy Central’s The Daily Show are popular 
sources).  I and other remixers tend to use the best footage that is readily available: this 
includes downloading video source from YouTube, Hulu or iTunes-style services as well as 
stream-capturing/recording from Netflix or Amazon style streaming services.  As a last resort, 
remixers will use screen-capturing tools but the results can be unreliable depending on video 
buffering and/or end user bandwidth speeds.  
Online streaming/downloading can be the only option to gather footage if the physical DVDs are 
difficult to find locally or have gone out of print (as is often the case especially with older, 
independent or small scale documentary productions). Even when commercial DVDs are 
available for purchase, the creation and publishing of a remix video may be extremely time-
sensitive if it focuses on a current issue in the news cycle. In these time-sensitive cases waiting 
for the physical disc to arrive via snail mail would mean the remixer might miss the window of 
public debate on the topic they wish the address in their remix so the ability to quickly acquire 
high quality footage directly from the Internet is critical. Examples of time-sensitive remixes 
might include responding to statements by a celebrity or public figure, discussing a political 
campaign, or commenting on piece of legislation while its being debated.  
A great many of the popular news and commentary TV programs are simply not available on 
DVD and most likely never will be and so remixers can either try to record TV live which is 
expensive, time consuming and does not guarantee capturing the exact media moments they 
may want to comment on - or they can get search and gather the specific footage they need 
from online sources.  
6. Could you make a rough order of magnitude estimate of the number of vids you have
created? 
Appx. 53
[PAGE 81]
Personally I have made about 25 transformative remix videos of various lengths and levels of 
complexity. Some have been ad or trailer spoofs while others are more in-depth narrative short 
film remixing projects. My remix videos have commented on issues of gender, foreign policy, 
race, economics, corporate power, elections, and mass media. 
7. Do you think the PRV community has a clear understanding of what the DMCA prohibits?
My sense is that it varies from creator to creator. Certainly those of us who have been making 
critical remix videos for a number of years and have formed a small community around the 
practice are more familiar with the DMCA. Most often makers are simply interested in creating a 
video to add to the larger public debate on important or contentious topics of the day and only 
become aware of the DMCA after a takedown notice or other run ins with IP concerns. 
8. Do you think the 2009 exemption for noncommercial uses has been helpful to the PRV
community?  How? 
Critically important. Before the exemptions many remixers would be afraid of making a fair use 
video commentary with DVD footage even if they owned the disc(s). Some remixers, including 
myself, would resort to using the bit torrent file sharing protocol to download DVDs ripped by 
others rather than decrypting the DVDs from our own home collections. 
Appx. 54
[PAGE 82]
Statement	  from	  Killa	  
November	  17,	  2011	  
Last	  year's	  decision	  regarding	  the	  DMCA's	  provision	  on	  copyright	  was	  extremely	  
meaningful	  to	  me	  as	  a	  vidder	  and	  creator	  of	  remix	  art.	  I	  feel	  that	  our	  particular	  form	  
of	  remix	  art	  is	  part	  of	  a	  vibrant	  and	  important	  conversation	  about	  mass	  media	  and	  
mass	  entertainment.	  More	  than	  that,	  I	  think	  TV	  and	  movies	  are	  our	  popular	  
literature,	  and	  that	  vidding	  is	  a	  form	  of	  artistic	  discussion	  that	  enriches	  my	  life,	  
helps	  me	  create	  friendships,	  and	  gives	  me	  things	  to	  spend	  money	  on.	  I	  have	  
purchased	  thousands	  of	  dollars	  in	  commercial	  DVDs	  that	  I	  would	  not	  have	  bought	  if	  
I	  were	  not	  a	  vidder—sometimes	  for	  shows	  I've	  never	  even	  watched	  before,	  because	  
the	  conversation	  of	  vidding	  means	  that	  I	  learn	  about	  new	  shows	  and	  movies	  and	  
want	  to	  make	  them	  a	  part	  of	  my	  fannish	  experience.	  (I	  recently	  bought	  a	  four-­‐season	  
set	  of	  DVDs	  for	  the	  show	  Blake's	  7,	  which	  aired	  when	  I	  was	  eight	  years	  old.	  I	  would	  
never	  have	  heard	  of	  this	  show	  or	  had	  any	  interest	  in	  buying	  these	  DVDs	  if	  it	  were	  
not	  for	  seeing	  vids	  made	  with	  them,	  and	  wanting	  to	  incorporate	  them	  in	  a	  vid	  I'm	  
currently	  working	  on.)	  
At	  the	  present,	  I	  vid	  almost	  exclusively	  with	  DVD	  and	  Blu-­‐Ray	  source.	  I	  have	  
attempted	  to	  use	  screen	  capture	  to	  vid	  with	  source	  from	  Hulu.com,	  but	  without	  
success.	  The	  quality	  was	  not	  sufficient	  for	  vidding	  purposes.	  Specifically,	  I	  was	  
trying	  to	  capture	  the	  TV	  show	  The	  Invisible	  Man,	  which	  never	  had	  a	  season	  2	  DVD	  
release.	  Because	  vidding	  is	  a	  largely	  visual	  medium,	  the	  quality	  and	  sharpness	  of	  the	  
images	  are	  powerful	  tools	  in	  communicating	  my	  ideas	  to	  an	  audience.	  Color,	  motion,	  
composition,	  and	  facial	  expressions,	  as	  well	  as	  other	  details,	  are	  all	  part	  of	  the	  piece.	  
I	  have	  a	  Bachelor's	  in	  Fine	  Arts	  and	  am	  a	  professional	  graphic	  designer,	  so	  visual	  
precision	  is	  extremely	  important	  to	  me	  in	  communicating	  ideas.	  (Incidentally,	  I	  
purchased	  a	  membership	  to	  Hulu	  Plus	  in	  the	  course	  of	  attempting	  to	  capture	  the	  
images	  I	  wanted.	  If	  the	  capture	  had	  worked,	  I	  would	  have	  remained	  a	  subscriber	  for	  
the	  chance	  to	  obtain	  other	  source	  in	  the	  same	  way.	  This	  is	  another	  example	  of	  how	  
vidding	  is	  an	  art	  form	  I	  am	  more	  than	  willing	  to	  invest	  money	  in,	  and	  how	  I	  am	  
happy	  to	  support	  the	  content	  creators	  in	  any	  way	  I	  can	  in	  the	  pursuit	  of	  that	  art.)	  
In	  one	  case	  last	  year,	  I	  did	  use	  HD	  (high	  definition)	  source	  from	  iTunes.	  I	  was	  
making	  a	  vid	  for	  a	  show	  that	  was	  currently	  airing.	  I	  owned	  the	  DVDs	  for	  the	  previous	  
four	  seasons	  of	  the	  show,	  but	  needed	  clips	  from	  a	  recent	  episode.	  The	  vid	  was	  
timely,	  and	  had	  to	  be	  presented	  immediately	  to	  have	  relevance	  to	  its	  audience,	  so	  I	  
couldn't	  wait	  for	  the	  DVDs	  to	  be	  released	  if	  I	  wanted	  to	  make	  the	  artistic	  statement	  I	  
envisioned.	  The	  vid	  was	  extremely	  well-­‐received,	  thanks	  to	  that	  timeliness.	  I	  don't	  
feel	  the	  vid	  would	  have	  been	  nearly	  as	  strong,	  or	  artistically	  sound,	  if	  it	  had	  had	  TV	  
network	  logos	  on	  it,	  or	  the	  image	  had	  been	  small	  and	  pixelated. 
Like	  many	  vidders,	  when	  DVDs	  for	  shows	  I	  use	  to	  vid	  become	  available,	  I	  purchase	  
them	  to	  support	  the	  show's	  creator,	  and	  because	  I	  know	  that	  if	  I	  want	  to	  make	  
future	  vids,	  the	  quality	  of	  the	  image	  would	  be	  vital	  and	  I	  would	  want	  to	  have	  the	  best	  
Appx. 55
Appendix I
[PAGE 83]
possible	  source.	  
My	  story	  is	  a	  small	  one,	  but	  very	  typical	  of	  those	  I've	  met	  in	  the	  vidding	  community.	  I	  
hope	  that	  the	  provisions	  which	  protect	  the	  use	  of	  DVD	  source	  will	  be	  upheld,	  and	  
that	  one	  day,	  content	  providers	  will	  understand	  that	  by	  trying	  to	  stifle	  all	  creative	  
art,	  they	  are	  silencing	  their	  best	  customers	  and	  blocking	  their	  work	  from	  becoming	  
part	  of	  a	  larger	  cultural	  conversation.	  
Appx. 56
[PAGE 84]
REPLY COMMENT OF 
THE ORGANI
ZATION FOR TRANSFORMATIVE WORKS 
 
This reply comment is submitted by Rebecca Tushnet and Rachael Vaughn on behalf of 
the Organization for Transformative Works (OTW) in support of the exemption proposal by the 
Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) for the following two proposed classes: 
Proposed Class #7B: Audiovisual works on DVDs that are lawfully made and 
acquired and that are protected by the Content Scrambling System, where 
circumvention is undertaken for the purpose of extracting clips for inclusion in 
primarily noncommercial videos that do not infringe copyright, and the person 
engaging in the circumvention believes and has reasonable grounds for believing 
that circumvention is necessary to fulfill the purpose of the use.. 
Proposed Class #7C: Audiovisual works that are lawfully made and acquired via 
online distribution services, where circumvention is undertaken for the purpose of 
extracting clips for inclusion in primarily noncommercial videos that do not 
infringe copyright, and the person engaging in the circumvention believes and has 
reasonable grounds for believing that circumvention is necessary to fulfill the 
purpose of the use, and the works in question are not readily available on DVD. 
I. Summary of Argument 
The OTW supports Class 7B because the present exemption granted in 2010 has worked, and 
Class 7C because it is necessary to build on the success of Class 7B for works that are not 
presently available on DVD, which are equally subject to fair use.  
The opponents of these exemptions1 do not allege, much less provide evidence, that the 
present exemption has increased infringement. DVDs remain widely available, as do methods for 
                                                
1 Comments of the Advanced Access Content System Licensing Administrator (“AACS LA”) in 
RM 2011-7, Rulemaking on Exemptions from Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright 
Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, February 10, 2012, available at 
http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2012/comments/Bruce_H._Turnbull.pdf [hereinafter AACS LA 
Appx. 57
Appendix J
[PAGE 85]
 2 
copying them wholesale; the exemption affects neither.  Nor, in deed, do the opponents provide 
any evidence that the DMCA’s prohibitions are well understood enough to affect the practices of 
the vast majority of noncommercial remixers unless and until they need to defend their work as 
fair use.  The experience of DVDs, which includes the wide availability of circumvention 
technologies as conceded by the opponents in 2009 and again in this rulemaking proceeding, 
demonstrates that a robust market can and will form even in the presence of easy circumvention.  
Ripping DVDs or creating large, high-quality clips of an Amazon Instant Video are complicated 
endeavors compared to the alternatives, including the alternatives advocated by the opponents.  
Circumvention is useful to creators who have specific needs for high-quality footage, and largely 
irrelevant to people interested in acquiring full, good-enough-to-watch copies who can take 
advantage of the simpler alternatives.  As a result, the marginal effect of the proposed 
exemptions will continue the current experience under the existing exemption. 
II. Statement of Interest 
OTW is a nonprofit organization established by media fans in 2007 to promote the 
acceptance of fanworks as a legitimate creative activity, to preserve the history of fan culture, 
and to protect and defend fanworks from commercial exploitation and legal challenge. OTW 
believes that these noncommercial works that make creative use of existing copyrighted material 
are transformative, and that transformative works are legitimate under US copyright law. OTW 
provides free services to fans who need assistance when faced with related legal issues or media 
attention. This comment supports the proposed exemptions for noncommercial remix videos that 
do not infringe copyright. In filing this comment, OTW represents the interests of a large number 
of the creators of these videos. Fan-created videos, or vids, that include clips from popular 
television shows or film rework these clips in such a way that comments on or critiques the 
original source. As the Office found during the last proceedings, a substantial number of these 
                                                                                                                                                       
Comments];  Joint Comments of AAP, ASMP, BSA, ESA, MPAA, PA CA, RIAA in RM 2011-
7, Rulemaking on Exemptions from Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection 
Systems for Access Control Technologies, February 10, 2012, available at 
http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2012/comments/Steven_J._Metalitz.pdf [hereinafter Joint 
Comments].  
Appx. 58
[PAGE 86]
 3 
noncommercial remix videos have strong claims to fair use.2  Nor do the opponents contest that 
the representative examples provided by the EFF for the current exemption are highly 
transformative, fair, and otherwise further copyright’s objective of promoting progress.  
Accordingly, OTW supports EFF’s proposed exemptions that would allow the extraction of clips 
from a DVD or online distribution services for inclusion in noncommercial remix videos that are 
found to be fair use. 
The DMCA’s contours are, to put it mildly, complex and not widely known by 
nonprofessionals.  Without an exemption, the main effect of the anticircumvention prohibitions 
on remixers was to surprise them when they received a takedown notice, believed they had a 
valid fair use defense, and discovered that the DMCA made that fair use defense irrelevant 
because of how they had acquired the footage they used.  The OTW’s experience under the 2009 
exemptions indicates that such remixers are now able to contest notices, asserting their fair use 
arguments, and that they have been able to successfully use counternotifications under the 
DMCA as well as other dispute resolution mechanisms such as those provided by YouTube.  
Rejecting the exemptions would subject users to unanticipated and unfair liability for uses that 
are otherwise fair under the Copyright Act. 
III. Overview of Vidding Culture and Illustrative Example of Vidding Practice 
Vids are fan-made videos that involve the re-cutting and remixing of footage from 
television shows or films, creating a video montage set to a new soundtrack. Vids are usually 
rapidly cut, preserving little or none of the narrative structure of the underlying source. The 
purpose of vidding is to remix the source material in such a way as to provide a new narrative, 
often commenting on or critiquing that source.  
                                                
2 Recomme ndation of the Register of Copyrights in RM 2008-8, Rulemaking on Exemptions 
from Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, June 11, 2010 at 66-68, available at 
http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2010/initialed-registers-recommendation-june-11-2010.pdf 
[hereinafter 2010 Recommendations]. 
Appx. 59
[PAGE 87]
 4 
For example, vidder Thingswithwings created The Price,3 a  carefully edited critique of 
standard media narratives of “manpain,” in which a main character—typically a white male—
undergoes trauma and often reacts by exhibiting stereotypically masculine behaviors and 
attitudes.4  Well-known examples of this trope featured in the vid include Harry Potter, Batman, 
and Frodo from Lord of the Rings. A more common and misogynist manpain trope involves 
harming a female character for the sole purpose of providing a motivation for the male 
character’s storyline. The vidder used footage from over thirty different films and television 
shows,5 overlaying images from one source on top of another source to show the trope in action. 
The Price ends with dramatic, tongue-in-cheek shots of the men crying. Some of the scenes 
include effects to stylize the tears, thereby making the point that, although it is very common in 
mainstream media, the manpain narrative is overdone and blasé. 
Creating a work like The Price necessitates making use of the footage from the subject 
media sources. Although Thingswithwings theoretically could have expressed her message in the 
form of a written essay, The Price is powerful precisely because it uses visual editing techniques 
to comment on a visual source. To create this vid, Thingswithwings relied on two primary 
techniques for acquiring footage: (1) software tools that are capable of circumventing Content 
Scrambling System (CSS) encryption; and (2) software tools that are capable of circumventing 
encryption methods for online distribution services such as Amazon Instant Video and/or 
iTunes.6 Access to high quality source material was critical for the vid to function as a 
convincing counterpoint to the traditional mainstream narratives. Without obtaining the source 
footage as described above, the vidder may have been unable to integrate the varied sources 
                                                
3 See Test S uite for Fair Use Fanvids, ORGANIZATION FOR TRANSFORMATIVE WORKS, 
http://transformativeworks.org/node/552 (last updated December 1, 2011) (presenting a 
collection of several vids discussed in this reply comment including The Price) [hereinafter Test 
Suite].  
4 See FANLORE, http://fanlore.org/wiki/Manpain (last updated February 6, 2012) (explaining the 
definition and history of the term manpain). 
5 Thingswithwings, New Vid: The Price (Multifandom), DREAMWIDTH (January 16, 2011, 7:40  
AM) http://thingswithwings.dreamwidth.org/145368.html. 
6 Email from Thingswithwings dated November 29, 2011 (on file with authors). 
Appx. 60
[PAGE 88]
 5 
having different color palettes and frame sizes into a seamless story using effects, transitions, and 
other editing techniques. 
IV. Vidding is a Legitimate Artistic and Culturally Valuable Pursuit that Represents 
an Established and Growing Community 
The vidding community is a longstanding community with a history of interacting with 
their favorite television shows, movies, and other visual media for over three decades.7  MIT 
professor and media scholar Henry Jenkins wrote about the community in his 1992 book about 
participatory culture, Textual Poachers.8 He described the art of vidding not only as an important 
form of cultural creation, but as a way of solidifying and maintaining the fan community, 
creating a source of pride and a means of articulating the commonalities of the group.9  
Although existence of the vidding community predates digital video technology, vidders 
have successfully influenced and integrated into modern remix culture. With the tools for digital 
editing now accessible to the average computer user and means of wide dissemination at a 
creator’s fingertips, the vidding community has seen the same growth as other, more visible 
forms of remix culture. This growth is largely due to the younger generation’s familiarity with 
digital media, and it will only continue. Approximately 64 percent of online teens in the US have 
created content on the Internet and one in four young people have remixed content into their own 
artistic creations.10   
Anthropologist Michael Wesch’s research has suggested that there may be as many as 
15,000 remix videos uploaded to YouTube each day, and academic Francesca Coppa estimates 
that there are already tens of thousands created by self-identified vidders elsewhere on the Web, 
a number that may climb into the millions when taking into account those who are not a part of 
                                                
7 Neda Ula by, Vidders Talk Back to Their Pop-Culture Muses, NPR NEWS (February 25, 2009), 
http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=101154811 [hereinafter Vidders Talk 
Back]. 
8 HENRY JENKINS, TEXTUAL POACHERS, 223-249 (1992) [hereinafter TEXTUAL POACHERS]. 
9 Id. 
10 JOHN PALFRY & URS GASSER, BORN DIGITAL: UNDERSTANDING THE FIRST GENERATION OF 
DIGITAL NATIVES, 112-113 (2008) [hereinafter BORN DIGITAL]. 
Appx. 61
[PAGE 89]
 6 
any organized community.11  As Pr ofessor Wesch has explained,12 the use of remix remains at 
least as popular now as in 2009.  New vidders thus emerge every day, many of them “inventing” 
the form for themselves without first being connected to the broader vidding community, just as 
in previous generations budding writers and artists emerged from a variety of backgrounds. 
Many vidders eschew sites like YouTube due to the low resolution and overall digital 
quality of the videos in favor of distributing via high-quality downloads of individual vids. There 
is also a yearly convention held in Chicago, Vividcon, where vidders converge to share and 
discuss their work in the tradition of the pre-Internet fan gatherings.13 Vidding is a recognized 
form of remix culture, and has been subject to increasing artistic and scholarly attention.14  In 
addition, many newcomers are adopting cultural aspects from the traditional vidding community 
while simultaneously developing practices enabled by new technologies such as connection 
through online communities, social media interaction, and collaboration on long distance multi-
editor projects.15 Mainstream appreciation of vidding as an expressive art form has been 
recognized by content owners who have sponsored remixing of their footage.16  
                                                
11 Fred von  Lohmann & Jennifer S. Granick, Comment of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, In 
the matter of exemption on circumvention of copyright protection systems for access control 
technologies, 29, 34 (2008). 
12 Comments of the Electronic Frontier Foundation in RM 2011-07, Rulemaking on Exemptions 
from Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, December 1, 2011 at 39, available at 
http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2011/initial/eff.pdf  [hereinafter EFF Comments]. 
13 Vividcon web site, http://vividcon.com/ (last visited February 25, 2012). 
14 See, e.g., http://transformativeworks.org/projects/fan-video-bibliographies (listing substantial 
and growing body of scholarly work on vids); University of South Carolina Institute for 
Multimedia Literary, http://www.video24-7.org/overview/ (last visited February 25, 2012) 
(including vidding as one significant remix genre). 
15 See, e.g., Anime Music Videos, http://www.animemusicvideos.org/home/home.php (last 
visited February 25, 2012);  I’m Vidding It Message Boards, http://imviddingit.withme.us/forum  
(last visited February 25, 2012); Vidders Unite Twitter, https://twitter.com/#!/ViddersThings 
(last visited February 25, 2012). 
Appx. 62
[PAGE 90]
 7 
The community may seem smaller than it actually is because it  is less visible than other 
communities, and its artistic innovations may not be obvious to people unfamiliar with the 
original sources or with watching heavily edited footage, but that does not make the creators of 
these works any less worthy of fair treatment under copyright law.  Moreover, many newcomers 
to vidding, especially younger fans, are not necessarily a part of the self-identified community of 
vidders.  They are entitled to the same legal protection for their creative, transformative work, 
like any artists inventing for themselves a new language of reaction to the world around them. 
V. Vidding is a Valuable Educational Tool 
Communities of participatory culture have long since been recognized as potential 
environments for learning. Education Professor James Paul Gee calls these informal learning 
cultures “affinity spaces,” and includes fan communities as an example along with scientific 
colleagues and networked teams of businesspeople.17 Affinity spaces are sustained by common 
endeavors that cut across demographics, bringing participants together regardless of age, class, 
race, gender, or educational level. Unlike classrooms where students rarely teach each other, 
these communities encourage distributed knowledge, each member’s skill set becoming a 
potential resource for others.18  
The vidding community is a perfect example of this phenomenon. Even in the pre-
Internet days of the art, fans held workshops to help teach techniques, and encouraged 
apprentice-like relationships where a new fan would learn tricks by working alongside a more 
experienced vidder.19 Today, vidding technology has changed substantially, but it still involves 
learning complicated software and editing techniques. The Internet has also made it easier for 
vidders to maintain a community of practice and bring in new members. For example, on just 
one blogging community, Livejournal, the “Vidding Discussion” group has over 2200 members, 
                                                                                                                                                       
16 See, e.g. , Candance Jackson, Pixar-Sanctioned “Upular” Remix Lifts Spirits, WALL STREET 
JOURNAL BLOG, http://blogs.wsj.com/speakeasy/2010/01/07/pixar-sanctioned-upular-remix-lifts-
spirits/, January 7, 2010 (describing sponsorship of the work of remix artist Pogo). 
17 JAMES PAUL GEE, SITUATED LANGUAGE AND LEARNING, 87 (2004). 
18 Id. at 89. 
19 TEXTUAL POACHERS, supra note 8, at 247. 
Appx. 63
[PAGE 91]
 8 
and there are also groups specifically for teaching and learning such  as “Vidding Newbies.”20 
Additionally, experienced vidders often post walkthroughs of their process and explanations of 
techniques for specific vids so that others can learn by example. In fact, the vidding community 
has been particularly valuable as a “female training ground,” in that it has been valuable for 
teaching technical skills to women: web design, coding, video and image editing, and 
filmmaking.21  
It is vital to recognize that it is the transformative nature of vids that undergirds these 
communities—it is interest in commenting on and reacting to the underlying source material that 
makes people excited to work on and help each other with vids. The importance of the 
underlying source material is underscored by Thingswithwings commenting on the creation 
process and meaning of The Price:22 “I needed to express the frustration I feel both with the 
ridiculous/terrible nature of these tired tropes AND with the entirely predictable (and often 
problematic) large-scale fannish reactions to those tropes.” Footage shot in a public park of 
people who are not the actors in the featured television shows and movies would not be a 
sufficient substitute because the video is a critique of the source material and the fan 
community’s interaction with the source material. The vidding community was formed around 
this type of commentary on popular texts.  
As noted above, remix culture is growing, and the technical savvy of those who have 
grown up with the Internet is a large part of that. The twenty-five percent of young people who 
remix content are exposed to a unique opportunity for learning, personal expression, and 
individual autonomy.23  Participation in communities that foster shared interests, trust, mutual 
                                                
20 See Vidding C ommunity Profile, LIVEJOURNAL,  
http://community.livejournal.com/vidding/profile (last visited February 26, 2012) (listing 2212 
members on March 2, 2012); Vidding Newbies, LIVEJOURNAL, 
http://community.livejournal.com/viddingnewbies (last visited February 26, 2012). 
21 Jesse Walker, Remixing Television, REASON MAGAZINE, August/September 2008. 
22 Thingswithwings, some thoughts on manpain.um. many thoughts on manpain, actually., 
DREAMWIDTH (January 16, 2011, 10:01 AM) 
http://thingswithwings.dreamwidth.org/145564.html. 
23 BORN DIGITAL, supra note 10. 
Appx. 64
[PAGE 92]
 9 
support, and public narratives benefits both the participants and the  resulting creative works.24 
Common interest in the underlying source provides new creators with an audience that shares 
their enthusiasm; the audience responds by helping the new creators learn how to do better. 
Transformation of existing material is the glue that creates the community—audience members 
volunteer to help creators improve because they want more commentary on their favorite 
sources.25 Remixing video cultivates cultural literacy in regards to popular media, while also 
promoting technical literacy. 
Fans use the vids as context for exploring and debating deeper themes within the media 
source material. One vidder notes how rewarding the tradition of creation and commentary in the 
vidding community can be as it provides an audience with tangible responses to her art.26  “The 
Price” began a heated online discussion about manpain narratives in mainstream media that 
ultimately generated over 280 comments.27 In addition to online discussion, creators and 
consumers in the vidding community also engage in facilitated discussion at conventions 
covering topics such as race and representation in media culture,28 music theory and 
composition,29 how hip-hop can inspire vidding,30 comparing vidding to writing,31  and video 
editing in Soviet Russia.32  
                                                
24 Gareth Schott & Darrin Hodgetts, Health and Digital Gaming: The Benefits of a Community of 
Practice, 11 J. HEALTH PSYCHOL. 309, 314 (2006). 
25 Rebecca W. Black, Access and Affiliation: The Literacy and Composition Practices of English 
Language Learners in an Online Fanfiction Community, 49 J. ADOLESCENT & ADULT LITERACY 
118, 123-24 (2005). 
26 sockkpuppett, New Vid – Women’s Work (Supernatural), LIVEJOURNAL (August 14, 2007 
03:13 PM) http://sockkpuppett.livejournal.com/442093.html. 
27 See Thingswithwings, supra (listing 287 comments as of February 26, 2012). 
28 See VividCon 2010 Fanlore Page, FANLORE (last updated December 7, 2011) 
http://fanlore.org/wiki/Vividcon/Vividcon_2010#Con_reports.2C_Convention_Posts.2C_Panel_
Notes_and_Vid_Recs (describing talith78 and Deepa D.’s panel “Race and Representation in 
Vidding”) [hereinafter VividCon 2010 Fanlore Page]. 
29 See VividCon 2008 Fanlore Page, FANLORE (last updated February 1, 2012) 
http://fanlore.org/wiki/Vividcon/Vividcon_2008 (describing nestra’s “Music and Composition” 
Appx. 65
[PAGE 93]
 10 
The creation and dissemination of vids also stimulates discussion  about these topics 
outside the vidding community. For example, Fall of Man, by obsessive24 mixes footage from 
the television show Supernatural with clips from other apocalyptic media sources and iconic 
religious imagery including Michelangelo's "Creation of Adam."33 Using imagery that is both 
haunting and divine, the vid examines an angel’s changing attitude towards humans and god, as 
the apocalypse looms. The vid was used as a central discussion point in an article discussing the 
attitudes of young people in the millennial generation about religion and theology.34 
VI. Vids Propose Alternative Readings and Realities 
In addition to providing fuel for discussion about media studies and popular culture, 
vidding also encourages alternative readings and interpretations of mainstream narratives. 
Alongside the religious themes discussed above, Fall of Man contemplates a romantic 
relationship between the angel featured in the video (Castiel) and one of the show’s main 
characters (Dean Winchester). The vid’s portrayal urges the audience to challenge 
Supernatural’s portrayal of Dean Winchester as a hypermasculine heterosexual and to explore 
alternative interpretations of the characters. 
                                                                                                                                                       
panel) [hereinafter VividCon  2008 Fanlore Page]. 
30 See VividCon 2007 Fanlore Page, FANLORE (last updated November 27, 2011) 
http://fanlore.org/wiki/Vividcon/Vividcon_2007 (describing Anna Tree’s “Hip Hop Vidding” 
panel). 
31 See VividCon 2008 Fanlore Page, supra note 29 (describing a panel moderated 
by Blacksquirrel, KK, and Kat A. on the comparison between vidding and writing). 
32 See VividCon 2010 Fanlore Page, supra note 28 (describing hollywoodgrrl’s panel “In Soviet 
Russia Vid Edits You”). 
33 Obsessive24, new vid - "Fall of Man" - Supernatural - Castiel/Dean, LIVEJOURNAL (May 18, 
2009, 11:42  PM) http://obsessive24.livejournal.com/261525.html. 
34 Louisa Ellen Stein, What you don't know: Supernatural fan vids and millennial 
theology, TRANSFORMATIVE WORKS AND CULTURES, no. 4 (2010) available at 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3983/twc.2010.0158. 
Appx. 66
[PAGE 94]
 11 
Lawyers, in general, should not be in the business of evaluatin g or interpreting art; the 
copyright laws are not designed to protect only that which lawyers think is worthwhile 
expression.  Nonetheless, the Joint Commenters, apparently conceding the highly transformative 
nature of works like Gianduja Kiss’s It Depends on What You Pay35 (and her numerous other 
highly regarded vids), instead reach out to attack a different remix video by the same artist.  The 
Joint Commenters assert that Der Kommissar is “nothing more than four minutes of clips from 
James Bond films, with a soundtrack provided by popular recording artists After The Fire.”36  In 
actuality, the vid provides an alternative reading and critique of the James Bond character.   
Of course, even if a single vid were not fair use, that would not rebut the EFF’s showing 
that substantial numbers of noncommercial remix videos are fair uses, the standard the Office 
has adopted.37  But the Joint Commenters are wrong about Der Kommissar as well. The artist has 
responded to this critique in an appended statement;38 the OTW wishes to put the artist’s 
response in its appropriate legal context.  As film/literary scholar Francesca Coppa notes, “Der 
Kommissar, like all vids, uses music as an analytical tool to guide the spectator's eyes to 
particular elements in the source footage, here to more lighthearted and comical effect. For 
instance, in the opening moments of the video, Gianduja Kiss shows us a set of near-identical hat 
tosses (at  :07, :08, and :09) from three different Bond films and then creates a montage of 
paralleled threats, as Bond whirls around to face a gun, an alligator, and the woman who would 
eventually become his wife.… [T]he spectator is asked to look at scenes across various Bond 
movies to observe, interpret, and, most of all, enjoy similarities in their formal and narrative 
elements.”39  Coppa points out that the vid highlights and recontextualizes Bond’s conventional 
heterosexuality by pairing him with men as well as women, and by emphasizing “phallic 
symbols like snakes, lasers, machetes, and flaming sausages, as well as items associated with 
                                                
35 EFF Com ments, supra note 12, at 58-60. 
36 Joint Comments, supra note 1, at 39. 
37 2010 Recommendation, supra note 2, at 66-68. 
38 Statement from Gianduja Kiss, February 21, 2012, attached as Appendix I. 
39 Statement from Francesca Coppa, February 21, 2012 (on file with authors). 
Appx. 67
[PAGE 95]
 12 
sexual kinkiness like dog-collars and whips.”40   (Gia nduja Kiss is not alone in identifying the 
disturbing undercurrents linking sex and violence in the Bond films.41) 
In other words, even though the Joint Commenters did not understand the commentary, 
Gianduja Kiss had a message and the intended audience perceived that message.  Courts 
routinely find fair use when there are multiple interpretations of the meaning of a use.42  
Moreover, fair use is not reserved for those whose commentaries succeed or match the fact 
finder’s own opinions.43  
Indeed, the fact that the Joint Commenters had to reach back to an early work of a 
developing artist to find an allegedly “nontransformative” work by her highlights the ways in 
which artistic development depends on freedom to experiment.  One key reason that fair use 
doesn’t require complete success in communicating its message to every viewer is that most art 
is not completely successful.  In particular, punishing or suppressing early work would prevent 
artistic evolution and maturation.  The highly transformative work Gianduja Kiss produces 
                                                
40 Id. 
41 The R
eal James Bond, YOUTUBE, March 29, 2011, 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y1uE5F9EnUA. 
42 See Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 582 (1994) (framing the fair use 
analysis in terms of whether parodic or critical element can reasonably be perceived, and lawyers 
should not be the final judges of worth) [hereinafter Campbell]; SunTrust Bank v. Houghton 
Mifflin Co., 268 F.3d 1257, 1266-1276 (11th Cir. 2001) (finding fair use where the commentary 
aspects of the work had numerous interpretations); Blanch v. Koons, 467 F.3d 244, 252-258  
(2nd. Cir. 2006) ( rejecting the lower court’s characterization of the work as “banal rather than 
creative”). 
43 See Campbell, 510 U.S. at 582 (refusing to evaluate the quality of a transformative use; 
quoting Yankee Publ'g, Inc. v. News Am. Publ'g, Inc., 809 F.Supp. 267, 280 (S.D.N.Y.1992) 
(“First Amendment protections do not apply only to those who speak clearly, whose jokes are 
funny, and whose parodies succeed.”)); Mattel Inc. v. Walking Mountain Prods., 353 F.3d 792, 
801 (9th Cir. 2003) (“While individuals may disagree on the success or extent of a parody, 
parodic elements in a work will often justify fair use protection.”). 
Appx. 68
[PAGE 96]
 13 
couldn’t exist if she had never been allowed to practice her art, a nd it couldn’t exist without a 
community of practice that supported her experimentation.   
In addition, of course, the proposed exemptions do not change the underlying substance 
of copyright law, including the contours of fair use.  They only make those contours possible to 
determine, rather than cutting off any inquiry because of the separate anticircumvention 
prohibition.  Thus, to the extent that individual remixes are not fair uses, copyright owners would 
retain the ability to take action against them—as they accept is sufficient for uses of footage 
captured without circumvention. 
VII. Vids Are Legitimate Forms of Cultural Criticism 
Whether articulating a critique of a character trope common to many sources as in The 
Price or exploring a single character as in Der Kommissar, vids are a way to pull layers of 
meaning out of a media text, to comment on it in a nonconventional yet extremely effective way. 
There is no question that the role of media in society is changing, and that the current media 
environment encourages interaction on the part of viewers, blurring the line even more between 
consumer and producer. Vidding is an important extension of this shift because it demonstrates 
that these consumer/producers actually have something important to say about what they are 
watching. And fanvids allow them to do it most effectively: let me show you what I see, not tell 
you what I see. 
An example of a vid that effectively demonstrates the value of showing versus telling is 
Gianduja Kiss’s Dollhouse vid It Depends on What You Pay,44 which was highlighted in the 
comments submitted by the EFF in support of proposed class 7C.45 As explained in EFF’s 
Comment, the vid poses intriguing questions about sexuality and personal autonomy by inquiring 
as to whether foundational concepts in Dollhouse can be equated to rape.  Because many fans 
were not satisfied with the show’s ability to address this issue, the vid served as an important 
centerpiece for a critical discussion. 
                                                
44 Gianduja  Kiss, It Depends on What You Pay, MONSTERS FROM THE VIDS (uploaded April 25, 
2009) 
http://www.giandujakiss.com/index.php?set=videos&category=Dollhouse. 
45 EFF Comments, supra note 12, at 58-60. 
Appx. 69
[PAGE 97]
 14 
Another illustrative example is the multi-fandom vid On the Pro wl created jointly by 
vidders Sisabet and Sweetestdrain.46 On the Prowl utilizes images from over sixty different 
sources (e.g., Star Trek, Twilight, Dexter, Supernatural) to present a self-portrait of female fans 
who enjoy watching their favorite male characters suffer, both physically and emotionally. As 
the intensity of the music progresses, the pain that the male characters in the vid are enduring 
becomes more extreme. By featuring increasingly disturbing, rapidly cut images, the vidders 
invite the viewer to determine the point at which the suffering becomes “too much.” In response 
to “On the Prowl,” the vidding community examined whether fetishizing male pain—by the 
media and by vidders—can be problematic. The vid has been recognized in the community as a 
particularly thoughtful and evocative form of cultural critique.47 
VIII. Most Vids Constitute Fair Use Under Copyright Law 
The fair use provision of the Copyright Act has long since been considered as a means of 
protecting transformative uses of copyrighted content.48 In the Copyright Office’s 2010 
Recommendations, numerous examples of vids featuring “extensive editing” were discussed.49 
Although the Office declined to engage in the exhaustive task of deciding whether the use of 
each individual clip in the named vids constituted fair use, the Office did highlight the value of 
providing such commentary on audiovisuals and authorized the proposed exemption.50 
If one were to apply the four-factor statutory analysis to use of the copyrighted footage in 
fan vids, it is likely that such use would qualify as a fair use.51 The first factor favors 
                                                
46 Sisabet , New Vid!! VVC Challenge: Self Portrait, LIVEJOURNAL (August 10, 2010, 2:35 PM) 
http://sisabet.livejournal.com/400014.html. 
47 See “On the Prowl” Fanlore Page, FANLORE (last updated November 26, 2011) 
http://fanlore.org/wiki/On_the_Prowl (describing “On the Prowl” as “an important vid that you 
need to watch even though it will be uncomfortable”). 
48 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 569. 
49 2010 Recommendations, supra note 2, at 66-68. 
50 Id. 
51 See Sarah Trombley, Visions and Revisions: Fanvids and Fair Use, 25 CARDOZO ARTS & ENT. 
L.J. 647, 672 (2007) (applying the four factor test to conclude that fan vids constitute fair use) 
Appx. 70
[PAGE 98]
 15 
noncommercial and transformative use,52 both o f which vids clearly are. As detailed in Part 
II(D), vids are regularly created for purposes of commentary or criticism, which is the same 
favorable use found in Campbell v. Acuff-Rose. Vidders generally do not sell their creations.53  
Moreover, the proposed exemption only applies to noncommercial videos, favoring fair use.  
The second factor refers to the creative nature of the underlying work and whether the 
underlying work has been previously published; if the copyright owner has already disseminated 
the work widely, fair use is more readily found.54 Courts do not weigh the creative nature of a 
work heavily against fair use in regards to transformative works such as parodies.55 Because vids 
by their nature are based on work that is widely disseminated, the application of the second 
factor analysis also supports a finding of fair use. 
The third factor considers the amount of the original work taken, which also favors vids. 
In the vast majority of vids, not only is each clip used very short (rarely longer than a couple of 
seconds), the amalgam of the clips for a single vid comprises an extremely small fraction of the 
entirety of the source material. For example, The Price, as a multi-fandom vid includes clips 
from over thirty sources, some of which are only a few seconds in length. Exemplary mono-
fandom videos illustrating this point include Fall of Man, which is a several minute long creation 
based on four seasons of Supernatural, and Handlebars, which contains only three minutes and 
                                                                                                                                                       
[hereinafter Tromble y]. 
52 Id.; see also Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City Studios, Inc., 464 U.S. 417 (1984) 
(finding fair use for noncommercial time-shifting). 
53 Trombley, supra note 51, at 662. 
54 Arica Inst. v. Palmer, 970 F.2d 1067, 1078 (2d Cir. 1992). 
55 Campbell, 510 U.S.at 586 (creative works are usually the subject of transformative uses); 
Kelly v. Arriba Soft Corp., 336 F.3 811, 820 (9th Cir. 2003) (published works are more likely to 
be subjects of fair use because “the first appearance of the artist’s expression has already 
occurred”); Arica Inst., Inc. v. Palmer, 970 F.2 1067, 1078 (2d Cir. 1992) (fact that copied work 
was “published work available to the general public” weighed in favor of defendant on second 
factor). 
Appx. 71
[PAGE 99]
 16 
twenty-seven seconds of material extracted from three entire s easons of the Doctor Who series 
(over thirty hours of content).56 
The fourth factor in the fair use analysis considers any potential market harm of the new 
use. It is highly unlikely that a vid could be considered any kind of substitute for the underlying 
work.57 Not only does it contain such a small fraction, but as explained above, the point of a vid 
is not to tell the same story as the original work, but to comment on it or to reinterpret it. It is 
well-established that copyright owners are unlikely to license critical or parodic works; there is 
and should be no market for authorizing critical commentary, whether in video form or in 
academic articles. Moreover, vids often make little sense to someone unfamiliar with the source 
material, or contain many different sources. For example, when watching The Price or On the 
Prowl, someone not intimately familiar with the cited shows may find it nearly impossible to 
even identify each of the sources. If anything, vids may actually help the market for the original 
by sparking a viewer’s interest in the source material or encouraging vidders to purchase DVDs 
or access to online source material for the purpose of making vids. 
It is not necessary for the Office to decide whether any individual vid is fair use. This 
exemption only applies to remix videos that are found not to be infringing, so it is sufficient to 
say that there are strong fair use arguments. In order for a court to be able to even address this 
claim, however, it is necessary for the proposed exemptions to be implemented.    
Opponents to the proposed exemptions argue that they would permit “circumvention of 
DVD and online access controls for use of clips in virtually any audio-visual production, 
including infomercials, brand awareness efforts, and mainstream film releases.”58 OTW 
reiterates that the proposed exemptions apply only to videos that do not infringe copyright.59 
                                                
56 See Test S uite, supra note 3. 
57 Trombley supra note 51, at 669. 
58 Joint Comments, supra note 1, at 39. 
59 Although vids are not sold, the OTW also notes that the opponents misstate the scope of the 
proposed exemptions, which cover only noncommercial uses.  Under the First Amendment, 
newspapers, movies, and other forms of non-advertising communication are fully protected—
something the Joint Commenters strongly advocate for in every other forum and situation.  See, 
Appx. 72
[PAGE 100]
 17 
Accordingly, if a vid were found to constitute fair use, the tech niques the vidder used to obtain 
the footage to make the vid would fall under the exemption. Alternatively, if another vid were 
not found to constitute fair use, then the vidder would not be exempt from § 1201 liability. Thus, 
the proposed exemptions will only serve to protect those who are making legal use of the 
copyrighted material. 
IX. Without the Proposed Exemptions, the DMCA Has a Negative Impact on 
Vidders Who Make Legitimate Fair Use of Source Material 
A popular art form among fans for three decades, vidding has existed without significant 
resistance from copyright holders, in much the same way as other fanworks such as fan fiction. 
However, in some cases, overzealous protection has blurred the line between wholesale copying 
and copying to create user-generated content (such as remix). Frequently the efforts of content 
owners aimed at preventing piracy have a chilling effect on fair uses.  Since vidders and other 
remixers are not copyright lawyers, they do not distinguish between ways of creating digital 
files, unless and until they face takedown notices and wish to claim fair use; without an 
exemption, they then cannot assert even valid fair use defenses.60  The Office’s decision to grant 
                                                                                                                                                       
e.g., Brief of Motion Pic ture Ass’n of America as Amici Curiae Supporting Respondents, Brown 
v. Entertainment Merchants Ass', 132 S.Ct. 81 (2011) (No. 08-1448).  While infomercials and 
other forms of advertising are commercial speech, standard movies are not.  Lakewood v. Plain 
Dealer Publishing Co., 486 U.S. 750, 756 n. 5 (1988) (“Of course, the degree of First 
Amendment protection is not diminished merely because the newspaper or speech is sold, rather 
than given away.”); Cardtoons, L.C., v. Major League Baseball Players Association, 95 F.3d 
959, 970 (1996) (“The fact that expressive materials are sold neither renders the speech 
unprotected, nor alters the level of protection under the First Amendment. [Plaintiff] need not 
give away its trading cards in order to bring them within the ambit of the First Amendment.”) 
(citations omitted); cf. Campbell, 510 U.S.at 584 (noting that most fair uses involve speech with 
an economic incentive). 
60 As much as we might like to believe that the DMCA exemption proceedings are matters of 
national import, they are not well known.  Thus, the opponents’ fears of “misunderstanding,” 
AAP at 39, are simply misguided.  They have not produced any evidence that the 2009 
exemptions led to an increase in infringement, which should have resulted by their theory, and 
Appx. 73
[PAGE 101]
 18 
the exemption proposed during the last rulemaking session for non-c ommercial videos helped to 
reverse such an effect.61  It is important that copyright law continue to protect legitimate fair 
users.  
X. Alternative Methods for Procuring Media Footage Are Not Available or Suitable 
for Vidders 
As explained above in Part II, most vidders prefer to obtain footage by: (1) using 
software to rip DVDs that they own; or (2) using software to circumvent access controls for 
content that they have purchased.  Some people do have access to other methods for obtaining 
television and film clips.  For example, during the 2009 hearings, the MPAA demonstrated a 
process for obtaining film clips by pointing a camera at a flat screen television (known as 
“camcording”).   This requires a large-screen TV, a perfectly dark room, and a high-quality 
digital video camera—often out of reach for noncommercial videomakers.  In addition to 
camcording, it is possible obtain footage without circumventing access controls by using legacy 
hardware for analog video capture (which is also expensive and often unavailable) or digital 
screen capture software such as CamStudio (PC)62 and CamTasia (Mac).63  These methods are 
not suitable for the majority of vidders for a variety of reasons, including expense, 
counterintuitiveness, and lowered quality. 
a. Alternative Methods Do Not Provide the Quality Needed for Vidding 
                                                                                                                                                       
the reason is that the existing exemption is neither understood nor misunderstood by most online 
creators: it is simply unknown. 
61 As noted in the introduction, the OTW’s experience under the existing exemption is that it has 
enabled vidders to exercise their fair use rights when overbroad DMCA takedowns or other 
forms of content filtering wrongly identify their work as infringing.  None of the vidders with 
whom the OTW has had contact who have counternotified or contested a YouTube Content ID 
match have faced further action from copyright owners. 
62 CamStudio Website, http://camstudio.org/ (last visited February 26, 2012). 
63 CamTasia Website, http://www.techsmith.com/camtasia.html (last visited February 26, 2012). 
Appx. 74
[PAGE 102]
 19 
In 2010 the Office recognized that “certain uses require high quality i n order for the 
purpose of the use to be sufficiently expressed and communicated.”64 For vids, the visuals are 
extremely important. For example, multi-fandom vids like “The Price” and “On the Prowl” 
require mixing dozens of different sources to create a seamless story. Without a high quality 
source, the cropping, zooming, and color correction to make the final product appear uniform 
can be impossible.  But both screen capture and recording off of a screen produce distortions in 
frame rate, color, and other key features that interfere with editing, even if they may be able to 
produce watchable copies under certain specific circumstances.65   
The opponents claim that alternatives to circumvention are sufficient for the purposes of 
noncommercial remixers, but fail to recognize the distinction between consumption (watching) 
and editing.  As the Office recognized in 2010,66 a lower-quality digital file such as that 
produced by digital screen capture or filming a screen may sometimes be watchable.  However, 
both screen capture and camcording distort color and contrast.  Moreover, each round of 
editing—applying effects, filters, time changes, or even simply editing different clips together in 
a montage and then producing a final output file—degrades quality further.67  As a result, a 
remix made with that same low-quality digital file could easily lose important details or become 
unwatchable.  Or, as scholar and vidder Tisha Turk succinctly noted in her 2009 commentary, 
“Garbage in, garbage out.”68  It is for this reason that an exemption is necessary, and also 
unlikely to interfere with any legitimate interest of copyright owners, since those interested in 
pure copying do not need circumvention tools to make or procure watchable copies for pure 
consumption. 
                                                
64 2010 Recomm endations, supra note 2, at 66. 
65 See, e.g., Appendix II (Statement of Akemi42) (discussing difficulties with color, clarity, and 
flicker due to frame rate disparity). 
66 2010 Recommendations, supra note 2, at 66. 
67 Statement of Akemi42, February 28, 2012, attached as Appendix II. 
68 Library of Congress Rulemaking Hearing Section 1202, Testimony of Tisha Turk, May 7, 
2009, available at http://www.copyright.gov/1201/hearings/2009/transcripts/ [hereinafter 
Testimony of Tisha Turk]. 
Appx. 75
[PAGE 103]
 20 
Before introducing the perspectives of the vidders themselves, we wa nt to be clear that 
it’s a profound mistake, contrary to the very heart of copyright, to require artists to justify their 
artistic choices, especially to people unfamiliar with the artform.  Bleistein v. Donaldson 
Lithographing Co., 188 U.S. 239, 251 (1903) (“It would be a dangerous undertaking for persons 
trained only to the law to constitute themselves final judges of the worth of [a work], outside of 
the narrowest and most obvious limits. At the one extreme, some works of genius would be sure 
to miss appreciation. Their very novelty would make them repulsive until the public had learned 
the new language in which their author spoke.”), quoted in Campbell, 510 U.S. at 582 (applying 
nondiscrimination principle to fair use).  The very reason an exemption is needed is to prevent 
the suppression or alteration of the artistic evolution of this popular artform.   Screen-captured or 
externally recorded source, which has not yet gone through the extensive editing engaged in by 
vidders, may look acceptable to people who don’t follow the art form. But that’s no more 
relevant than the fact that people who aren’t fans of popular music may think that an acoustic 
guitar is basically the same as an electric guitar.  However, to avoid any confusion, we also want 
to explain why the high-quality source produced by circumvention makes a difference to the 
results of video editing. 
Vidders routinely apply the following effects to source footage, all of which inherently 
suffer from lower-quality source: 
 Zooming in and out (to add internal motion to static footage, as well as to create the 
effect of intimacy and/or distance) 
 Extreme close-ups and/or cropping (to draw the spectator’s attention to elements in the 
background; to reprioritize the hierarchy of images in the frame; to eliminate some 
unwanted visual piece) 
 Brightness and contrast adjustment (to make certain elements easier to see; change the 
emotional tone of a scene; to blend footage from disparate sour ces) 
 Saturation and hue adjustment (same as above)  
 Color correction (same as above, but also to create specific associations with or among 
images using color, where the color becomes symbolic or themati c.) 
 Time adjustments (speeding up and slowing down) (to change the rhythm of footage, to 
create urgency or draw attention to certain acts of internal motion, to score footage to the 
fixed beat of music or otherwise synopate image and sound) 
 Overlays (to create narrative and visual depth; to layer images associatively, to juxtapose 
elements within the frame)  
 
Here’s L
uck has provided an extended analysis of her vid The Test to illuminate some of 
Appx. 76
[PAGE 104]
 21 
the technical choices involved:  
CROPPING 
 
Star Trek (2009) is shot in action-movie widescreen (aspect ratio 2.35:1); the original TV 
series (1960s) is shot in standard NTSC fullscreen (aspect ratio 4: 3). In practical terms, 
the movie is 720x304 pixels while the original series is 640x480 pixels. This means that 
every single use of footage from the original series has to be 1) resized up to 720x540 to 
match the width of the movie frame, and then 2) cropped to 720x304 (that' s 236 pixels -- 
more than a third of the image) to match the height of the movi e frame. Starting from 
high quality source is thus especially important for the TV clips;  if the starting image isn't 
absolutely clear, the enlarged image will lose considerable detail, and that detail is critical 
once the frame is cropped or the resulting image may not be recogni zable as quickly as 
the vid requires. 
 
COLOR MANIPULATION 
 
The lighting and color palettes for the '60s TV show and 2009 movie ar e markedly 
different; the colors of the Starfleet uniforms, for example,  are much more somber in the 
movie (they're crayon-bright primary colors in the series). I n a vid that relies on 
juxtaposing characters from the two texts and representing the t wo worlds as contiguous, 
the color of the TV series has to be desaturated to match the movie. It's much more 
difficult to do this if the color information of either source has been compromised by 
capture methods that either desaturate the source (screen capture) or exaggerate the 
brightness and contrast (camcording). In addition, several shots  from the movie were 
desaturated (to suggest memory) and/or overlaid (to suggest characters c ommunicating 
with or thinking about each other). Desaturation only works by cont rast -- if the footage 
is already desaturated, the effect can't happen -- and layering of  images requires 
exceptional clarity of both or the result is a muddy mess. 
 
THE "GLITCH" EFFECT 
 
This effect is key to the vid; it's the most obvious one, the on e that most of the meaning 
of the vid relies on, and the one that is most consistently ci ted by viewers in comments as 
a critical part of the vid's effectiveness. Some commenters ha ve assumed that the effect is 
a way to mask quality deficiencies in the TV footage, but in fact the effect relies on 
pristine source: at several points in the vid, the TV footage is presented in its pristine 
form and then "fuzzed": static and glitches that imitate the ef fect of old VCR tape are 
gradually *added* to the source to create an impression of a once-cl ear signal losing 
strength and ultimately fading out. The success of this effect rel ies on the quality of both 
TV and movie footage. The effect relies on contrast: the old foot age has to look like it's 
been degraded. But if it's too degraded, the viewer can't actually see w hat's going on 
(especially since the clips from the series are generally quite short). Thus, the movie 
footage has to be VERY clear -- clear enough that even a relat ively minor glitch or fuzz 
effect will be noticeable -- and the TV footage does too, because otherwise the vidder 
can't control the degree of fuzz or quality degradation.  
 
Appx. 77
[PAGE 105]
 22 
SPEED MANIPULATION 
 
More than a third of the clips in the vid have had their speed alte red (usually slowed 
down). In a few cases, such as when Kirk runs his hands down Spock's  arms, the speed 
change is actually quite dramatic. Small changes are required to stretch a short clip a few 
frames longer or to land a particular frame on the beat; dramatic  changes usually serve to 
heighten the sensuality of a clip, to draw attention to bodies in contact, which is 
important to the vid's implication of a sexual relationship betw een characters. That the 
small changes aren't noticeable and the large changes aren't jerky i s entirely due to using 
DVD-ripped source, which has enough frames per second to absorb a w ide range of 
speed alterations.69 
 
 As Thin
gswithwings notes below, these effects are “often invisible after the fact, but 
necessary in order to highlight what you need to highlight.”70   It’s hard to explain in words why 
one image is worse than another; a person unfamiliar with the form might think that the first 
image has a slightly fuzzier background than the second, but that matters a great deal if the fuzzy 
                                                
69 The audi ence understood how these effects mattered to the meaning of the vid, even without 
access to Here’s Luck’s explanations.  Wingstar wrote: 
[O]ne great vid that came to my mind was The Test, by here’s luck, which vidded the 
trope [in Star Trek: XI] where Spock!prime transfers some memories of TOS [the 
original series] Spock/Kirk slash to the rebooted Jim. It uses this fantastic "glitch" static 
effect to signal the difference between current events and memories (starting at 1:00). 
There's also some kind of overlay on top of the TOS clips that adds to the "memory" 
effect while simultaneously concealing any differences in source quality that might exist. 
And there's definitely some slow-mo and some close ups in the slashy TOS clips that help 
signal "ROMANCE" to the viewer. Then starting at 1:56 throughout the end of the vid, 
there are overlays of the TOS clips on top of reboot footage so that it appears as though 
reboot!Jim is re-experiencing those memories throughout the rest of the movie.  
 
Help: Urgent Vidding Expertise Needed, LIVEJOURNAL (February 26, 2012, 9:57 PM), 
http://vidding.livejournal.com/2821305.html [hereinafter Vidding Expertise]. 
70 Laura Shapiro’s Hurricane, for example, uses multiple techniques –zooms, cropping to 
remove other characters, masking, contrast adjustment, saturation adjustment, time adjustment, 
and a substantial amount of color correction—to combine footage from two shows to create a 
new, constructed narrative about two female characters.  Because the color palettes of different 
shows and movies differ substantially, color manipulation is vital to create the impression that 
the two shows actually take place in the same world. 
Appx. 78
[PAGE 106]
 23 
background is what you’re working to bring into focus.71  Editin g also matters as an artistic 
statement: the color correction and multiple effects found in many vidders’ work serves as a 
signature and an instant indicator that the viewer is watching a vid, rather than an unaltered 
portion of a show or movie.72  Again, the OTW emphasizes that the Office should not override 
vidders’ judgments about the necessary quality of their materials, any more than it should 
determine that a certain size of canvas is big enough for a painter. 
 Francesca Coppa posted to the vidding forum on LiveJournal to ask ab out vids that used 
these effects and why they were necessary.73  Within  24 hours, dozens of respondents had 
provided particular examples and explained the meanings of those effec ts: 
 [Blaine Anderson, a Glee vid, contains:] “Colour adjustments to show past vs. present. 
Zooms and extreme close-ups (1:17) to show interiority: Blaine is lost in a memory; the 
surrounding world has been clipped out. Close-up also heightens emotion  for the same 
reason: all there is to look at is his sad expression -- no dis tractions of clothing, 
background, etc. Slow motion adds a dreamy quality in certain places  in addition to 
helping the visuals match the beat. …. [T]he vidder bolted it toget her two days after a 
large percentage of the footage aired …. [I]t's a prime example of our need for immediate 
access to HQ [high quality] source, so we can make our commenta ries, our visual essays, 
while they're hot. This was right in the middle of all the swi rling, raging discussion in the 
immediate wake of a very controversial episode. That hasn't be en possible for any of my 
own previous fandoms, but it happens all the time now; it's becoming an increasingly 
sharp tool, and it's amazing to see.  In several places there are masks cropping out a 
second person in the frame, repurposing footage to tell a different  story.… "The past" is 
indicated by grayscale, but also a distressed film effect. In some  places the corruption of 
the footage literalizes the corrosive effect of abuse and hate  speech on Blaine himself. In 
other places, notably the assault scene, it lends a sort of hei ghtened, old school horror 
movie feel. There are monsters here.  The first zoom I mentione d (of Blaine's face) is for 
emotional impact, but there's a second one later, where Blaine is sitting in bed, wearing 
an eyepatch, and the vidder zooms in to focus on where he's holdi ng hands with Kurt. 
                                                
71 See 2010 Recom mendations, supra note 2, at 66 (“One particular example of ‘bringing the 
background to the foreground’ was demonstrated in the vid, How Much Is That Geisha In The 
Window, by Lierdumoa.) Likewise, in Jonathan McIntosh’s Buffy vs. Edward, which critiques 
the gender narrative of the Twilight series, McIntosh had to cut out significant portions of the 
frame to put Edward and Buffy in the same scene, which required higher-quality source. 
72 See, e.g., dazzlme89 Channel, YOUTUBE, http://www.youtube.com/user/dazzleme7 (using 
color correction to sharpen footage and increase saturation as a baseline effect). 
73 Vidding Expertise, supra note 69. 
Appx. 79
[PAGE 107]
 24 
This is similar to the vidder's use of masks: she needs us to focus on the information in 
one corner of the frame, so she simply removes the rest.” - -Stultiloquentia 
 
I was going for a scrapbook kind of feel, so it needed a lot of really tight cropping and the 
jumbling effect of the overlays. - China Shop 
 
What We Had by cherryice [is a Doctor Who vid that] uses ghosting [an editing 
technique that creates multiple images onscreen] wonderfully, especially at the start when 
Mickey, Martha and Jack are walking away from the Doctor and into the battlefield; 
they're leaving the safety and adventure of their travels and going heading out to the 
abyss, and with that leaving a piece of themselves behind.  Also at the end, when the 
Doctor is holding the Master's body and Rose is crying at Bad Wolf Beach, Jack and 
Mickey and Martha are behind them, out of focus and in the background, and the vid 
zooms in, enhances the colours and makes us look at them instead. Because for all 
they've done for the Doctor, for all they've given up and suffered through, they're still just 
blurs in the background to the Doctor's great tragedy. –Stardust_rain 
  
“My "Numb" Employs zoom and brightness adjustments. This is a co mmentary on 
Hutch's stresses and angst, particularly with Starsky at death's door. "Falling Slowly" 
uses sepia, for intimacy, quietness, and familiarity with anoth er person, reflecting on 
times past. "Something to Talk About" using flash transitions to support  the paparazzi 
photography theme."Extreme Ways" using cropping closely to cutting parts  of the central 
image off, showing intensity and rawness.” --Laura McEwan  
 
I tend to use many of those effects in all my vids. A recent vid Be With Me is a good 
example. Zooming/cropping is for focusing on a subject/character, spee d adjustment for 
pacing and internal motion to fit the music. Colour correction. br ightness etc is necessary 
on some of the source for clarity and uniformity. I do use a shift  in saturation (from 
monochrome to colour) to illustrate a new beginning in a charact er's life. Overlays are 
used for showing parallels & mood. -Thedothatgirl 
 
Here's what I can think of off the top of my head!  bendtothesun's here I love you (White 
Collar) employs a series of colour effects throughout to create and amplify an emotional 
narrative - to create the sense of emotional distance, emoti onal epiphany, etc., and 
effectively creates a queer romance where there isn't one on the  show. jesuit24's Steady 
As She Goes (Star Trek; youtube link) uses a glow effect of some sort to make Star Trek 
look more - weird and sweaty, I guess? And it uses a TON of speed ch anges, forward-
reversed-forward clips in order to get motion to repeat, and cropped c loseups to give the 
whole show a feeling that the original footage doesn't have. Lots o f examples of pretty 
much every effect you're looking for! My vid Here it Goes Back Agai n (Back to the 
Future) has a whole section where I fake "rewinding" and then "rep laying" the video, in 
order to basically fix the crappy ending of the third movie...What's harder to demonstrate, 
and what I wish these folks would understand, is that speed changes /cropping and 
zooming/colour correcting/etc is often invisible after the fact, but  necessary in order to 
highlight what you need to highlight in the time available... Also, this isn't about ~great 
art~ or anything, but a lot of people who vid Community or Parks and Re creation, myself 
Appx. 80
[PAGE 108]
 25 
included, use a lot of zooming in order to cut out the (very intrusi ve) end credits, which 
play over parts of the show. Without high-quality footage, this is s imply not feasible. If 
you want people to be looking at Troy and Abed being adorable instead of  the credits, 
you need to zoom. Same thing when you're trying to cut out the rating l abels or 
advertisements. –Thingswithwings 
 
[For one vid, e]ach effect has a particular job to do in this vid.   The closeups, zooming 
and cropping -- effects related to movement -- simply generate a sense of movement and 
flow throughout the vid, moving viewers from one section to the nex t fluidly. I also use 
these effects to emphasize certain aspects of a clip, or words.  I used brightness, contrast, 
saturation, color corrector, and hue adjustment to blend the foota ge from different sources 
together more fluidly. I used hue adjustment for the black and white  sections of the vid to 
provoke a sense of "voyeurism/a screen" and emphasize the notion  that these characters 
were being viewed, or watched…. [For another,] Again, each effect has a job to do.  The 
zooming, closeups and/or cropping again are used to sew the vid together in to a coherent 
whole by use of movement. I also use zooms to emphasize important elements in a shot.  
I used brightness and contrast adjustment, saturation, color cor rector and hue adjustment 
to weave disparate sources together and make everything seem coheren t and like it 
belonged to the universe of the vid. I used time adjustments to fix ti ming issues at points. 
…  I used a glowing effect to provoke a sense of warmth and comfort  about 2/3 of the 
way through the vid. I was trying to convey Byron's particular affe ction for his half-sister 
by use of this effect, and by tweaking the coloring in that clip (w arm, soft colors). – 
Mresundance 
 
Small Bl
ue Thing for incredibly smart and effective color work throughout, turning blue 
objects red … as well as overlays to draw connections between moments/people, 
especially the two in the first 10 seconds.  Lay Me To Sleep … for color and saturation, 
overlays, light effects and other dreamy effects … , creating an effective contrast between 
the bright, surreal feel of the dreamy colors/lights and the intensely horrifying events and 
violence that are actually happening.  One of mine maybe, Keepsake for overlays at the 
section beginning around 3:50 to both call back to past moments and highlight the 
reasons for the justified anger when the song and characters finally lose it and get angry. 
Or Mercy Street for overlays throughout that connect two people who were often not in 
the same scenes, but shared many narrative parallels/juxtapositions, and to create 
intimacy. – Chaila43 
 
[I]n Here We Come, On The Run! I use overlays in the choruses to link the central 
character with her military opponents in a visual way given they rarely appear on screen 
or on the battlefields themselves. … so say we all ii (It's All Part Of A Bigger Plan) … 
uses overlays constantly to highlight the repeating motifs of the show, while also[,] by 
using still as well as moving footage for the overlays, giving a stuttery, technological feel 
to the vid that fits with its themes about religion and technology, like a corrupted cascade 
of downloaded (divine) information. The overlays add to the sense of chaos and 
incoherency while, on closer inspection, [they] are always relevant to the underlying 
video. – Beccatoria  
 
Appx. 81
[PAGE 109]
 26 
The White Collar vid Hot Mess uses glitch/distortion effects to underscore beats of the 
music and suggest a system, or person, on the edge of breakdown. Frequent zooms, plus a 
habit of cutting almost exclusively by fading quickly to white and then back, dial up the 
sense of emotional intensity and instability. I'm pretty sure the saturation's boosted in 
most of the vid, making everything that much more feverish, and the brief moments of 
grayscale add to the general chaos. Taken together, the effects help convey the idea that 
Neal Caffrey is, well, a hot mess. Luminosity, speaking of her (ahem) rather well-known 
300 vid "Vogue" in an interview with New York Magazine, says: "I wanted to allude to 
the graphic novel, so I split the screens and tinted them with flat color." One example of 
the vid's use of saturation effects is the sequence between 4:15 and 4:23, which is in 
black and white except for a bar of full color that moves across the screen in time withthe 
music. – Enemyofperfect 
 
Anime music videos (AMV)74 have the same features.  As one community member explains: 
"FOTOGRAPHIA La Soledad" (Sola) … required all kinds of effects I had never seen 
collected together before. … The vid may look like a straightforward pairing vid, but due 
to the source it's working with, it's actually engaging in a discussion about memory, 
death, belonging, love, and what is "real". The use of real footage, cutout overlays, and 
the camera+graffiti effect reenforce the idea of longing to be "real" and to live a normal 
life, and also reflect on the nature of how we remember or forget the dead much more 
effectively than the show did ….  As a counter-example, I would say that "Salva Hitomi" 
(Escaflowne movie) is severely hampered by being released in such low quality, 
especially in the parts where the saturation was changed or where there is a particularly 
light or dark background, because it's hard to tell what's happening on the screen. … I 
had to watch the vid 3 times to be able to catch what was happening, and I own this 
source and am very familiar with it. There is something to be said for visual clarity 
having a greater emotional and intellectual impact, allowing the message of a vid to come 
across more clearly to its audience. … Arefadedaway's "Fairy Tale" (Princess Tutu, 
Utena). A feminist retelling of fairy tales using two classic feminist retellings of shoujo, 
illustrating why the two series were truly radical in the realm of storytelling because of 
their presentation of women's relationships with each other. I think this vid effectively 
refutes the idea that a simple series of clips is not revolutionary, or that it doesn't need 
clear images to work with. Even simple cuts can become visually distracting and reduce 
the power of a vid if they're done using badly encoded, downloaded video, because clear 
images process quicker in the human brain. – Briar_pipe 
 
Another explains that AMVs “typically rely on digital editing more heavily than Western-source 
vids”: 
Skittles by Koopiskeva also relies heavily on digital editing … : The effects quite simply 
are the whole point of this vid; without them it would have no impact.  Redona by Oro$hi 
                                                
74 Stateme nt from Mizuki Ito, November 22, 2011, attached as Appendix H in EFF Comments, 
supra note 12. 
Appx. 82
[PAGE 110]
 27 
combines images from multiple series in a single frame, does som ething to change the 
colors of some series and just generally edits heavily to produce a unified feel … An 
AMV About TV by Re-Evolution Studios combines different series into a single frame 
and uses some kind of editing (I am very much a layperson) to give a classic "tv-screen 
texture" to some scenes. There's a lot of editing in here -- the character reading a book 
had had her blush added and her book changed and obviously the scene where someone 
is watching an AMV on youtube is an edit. This is another one of those vids that wouldn't 
make any sense without the edits …. Moe Moe Rebellion by Asylum Studios has editing 
similar to that in An AMV About TV, and again that editing is essential to the sense of 
the piece. … Note that both Moe Moe Rebellion and An AMV About TV have jokes 
about series and about anime fandom that may be somewhat incomprehensible to non-
fans, although the editing skill and transformativity should be obvious regardless …. -- 
Undomielregina75 
 
AMV editors even work frame by frame, changing the original so that, for example, characters 
do a dance from a different series.76   
 Quality is also important to other remix communities, such as that of political remix 
artists.  As artists like Jonathan McIntosh, Elisa Kreisinger, and Joe Sabia explained,77 they are 
attempting to reach mainstream audiences and encourage them to rethink the meaning of popular 
culture.  But, as they know from their own work, many in those audiences will ignore messages 
that seem crude and amateurish.  Quality is therefore a political tool as well as an artistic one, 
enabling remix artists to communicate on the same level as political campaigns and mainstream 
media productions. 
b. Alternative Methods Do Not Allow for Timely Commentary 
 As described in Part III(D), an important function of vids is to provide critical 
commentary about the source material featured in the vid or about media culture in general. 
Often, the timing for expressing such commentary is critical. Although most vidders prefer DVD 
as source, some turn to extracting clips from online distribution services when DVDs are not 
                                                
75 Vidding Ex pertise, supra note 67. Undomielregina’s last point should be re-emphasized: in 
many cases, the meanings of vids won’t be understandable without a background in the original.  
That doesn’t make them non-transformative, any more than The Wind Done Gone was non-
transformative because there are many people who’ve never read Gone With the Wind.   
76 Nostromo, AMV-RunningMan, NOSTOMO OFFICIAL WEBCAVE (uploaded March 12, 2011) 
http://www.nostro.fr/?p=642 . 
77 EFF Comments supra note 12. 
Appx. 83
[PAGE 111]
 28 
available. For example, It Depends on What You Pay incorporates material from both seasons 1 
and 2 of Dollhouse. At the time of the video’s release in April 2009, Dollhouse was only 
legitimately available through online distribution services, not on DVD.  Season 1 was later 
released on DVD in July 2009, and season 2 was not released on DVD until November 2010. 
The use of clips obtained through circumventing access to online episodes of Dollhouse enabled 
her to comment on the show when it was on the air, participating in an ongoing conversation, 
rather than requiring her to wait months for the DVD release (at which point the show had been 
cancelled).  
 Timing is also critical to a vidder when the vid serves as commentary concerning recent 
developments in the source material, as with the Glee example discussed above. Likewise, 
Akemi42 produced God’s Love as a reaction to Supernatural Season 7 episode 2, which aired on 
September 30, 2011, and revealed the apparent death of a beloved character on the show.78 The 
vidder relied on technology for circumventing encryption on Amazon Instant video to obtain the 
clips she needed to produce and release the work by October 1, 2011 in immediate reaction to 
revelation on the show. As of the date of this reply comment, Supernatural Season 7 is not 
available on DVD. Therefore without relying on the proposed exemptions, the vidder would be 
unable to express her views about the source material in visual form.  
c. Alternative Methods Require Expensive Equipment and Software 
Creating a clip via a smartphone, as suggested by the opponents, does not create a high 
enough quality file to allow editing, even assuming a creator knew that there was a legal 
difference between ripping and recording.  Moreover, the proposed smartphone solution requires 
spending several hundred dollars on a phone, excluding 2/3 of Americans at the present time.79  
Recording via a separate device requires a high-end digital camera (whether separate or included 
in a smartphone) and a large flat-screen TV, all in a large, completely darkened room of the 
                                                
78 Akemi42, God’ s Love, AKEMI42 EXPERIMENTS IN VIDEO EDITING (October 1, 2011) 
http://www.akemi42.com/2011/10/01/gods-love/. 
79 See Christopher MacManus, Pew: One-third of U.S. adults own smartphones, 
http://news.cnet.com/8301-1035_3-20078528-94/pew-one-third-of-u.s-adults-own-smartpho nes/, 
July 11, 2011 2:15 PM PDT. 
Appx. 84
[PAGE 112]
 29 
proper size to focus the camera on the TV output.  Further, some  of the screen capture programs 
with better functionality are prohibitively expensive.80 
However, the noncommercial artists who make vids are often pink-collar workers.  Even 
if they had the necessary space and darkness to get the recording reasonably well-focused, they 
could not afford such equipment.  As Tisha Turk testified, “Camcording . . . . has adverse effects 
in that I can’t do it.”81 She characterized using a camcorder as counterintuitive, impractical, and 
expensive, representing two months of her mortgage for the camera alone, and she was at the 
high-income end of creators. Though prices on cameras or smartphones may now be $300 
instead of $900, that still represents a significant expense unavailable to many. 
All these alternatives prove is that there is no prospect of harm from an exemption. 
Screen capture, smartphones, and other alternatives concededly produce results good enough to 
watch, meaning that camcording is the mode someone who simply wanted to copy—especially 
for commercial purposes—could easily use.  The transformative uses described here, in contrast, 
uniquely depend upon the exemptions. 
d. Alternative Methods Are Counterintuitive and Thus Won’t Be Used 
Even if a vidder is willing to sacrifice significant quality, does not have timing 
constraints that will impact the content of her vid, and has access to the necessary equipment, it 
is unlikely that she will appreciate that the methods discussed by the opponents are legally 
preferable to extracting footage from a DVD they own or an online source to which they have 
access. The result is a digital literacy test, that, like the classic literacy test, will discourage 
participation—here, participation in making meaning from and as part of culture.   
Historically, the literacy test required prospective voters to interpret an often arcane 
provision of the law.82  Under the DMCA, the test proposed is that fair users understand that a 
                                                
80 See CamTas ia Website, supra note Error! Bookmark not defined. (listing an exemplary 
screen capture program for a license fee of $299). 
81 Testimony of Tisha Turk, supra note 68, at 0130.20-0130.22 . 
82  See, e.g., Bobby M. Rubarts, Comment, The Crown Jewel of American Liberty: The  
Right to Vote; What Does It Mean Under the Amended Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act?, 37  
BAYLOR L. REV. 1015, 1018 n.12 (1985) (discussing the irrelevance of the questions asked in 
Appx. 85
[PAGE 113]
 30 
digital file created in one way is illegal, while a nearly iden tical digital file created in another 
way is legal. The technologies at issue here are important because they are readily available to 
individuals.  Furthermore, to laypeople, especially the artists who are inventing remix culture on 
the fly, and they are indistinguishable from other readily available technologies.  The opponents’ 
proposed regime is a trap for the unwary.   
As Francesca Coppa has pointed out, this legal regime has particularly damaging effects 
on members of marginalized groups who are already likely to be nervous about expressing 
themselves.83  Female vidders have historically been reluctant to step up and claim cultural 
legitimacy, and uncertainty hinders both production of transformative works and vidders‘ ability 
to achieve mainstream recognition.84 
Paying for content and then using widely available software to capture clips seems fair 
and reasonable. In fact, the most obvious solution for avoiding § 1201 liability is to download a 
copy of the footage needed from an unauthorized source. The anticircumvention regime, absent 
the proposed exemptions, is completely counterintuitive to those who are not deeply familiar 
with the DMCA: how could it be better to download something illegally than to use footage that 
was legally purchased? These are amateur artists, not copyright lawyers; it is not unreasonable 
that they would be unfamiliar with a rule that seems contrary to a basic understanding of 
copyright law.  Without an exemption, vidders—especially the tens of thousands of young 
people who are inventing and reinventing the form for themselves, without an established 
connection to a larger community—risk becoming liable or having their fair uses suppressed 
simply because they did what seemed like the fairest thing for the copyright owner and paid for a 
copy from which they could clip. 
e. Alternative Methods May Not Exist in the Future 
                                                                                                                                                       
literacy tests to the substance of political participation). 
83   L
ibrary of Congress Rulemaking Hearing Section 1202, Testimony of Francesca Coppa 
0119.4-0120.4, May 7, 2009, available at 
http://www.copyright.gov/1201/hearings/2009/transcripts. 
84 Id. at 0120.5-0120.17. 
Appx. 86
[PAGE 114]
 31 
Although the tools for camcording and digital screen capture may be  available today, this 
may not always be the case. To prevent piracy, many content owners are utilizing secure 
methods to restrict delivery of streams to video players.85 Unfortunately, such methods also 
restrict access to consumers such as vidders who wish to extract screen captures of the content 
for the purpose of fair use. Further, as focus shifts from delivery of content on physical media 
toward streaming content (often delivered via portable devices), the demand for DVDs and other 
consumer-controlled media systems is decreasing. If the quality of footage recorded using a 
camera pointed at large flat screen television is not sufficient for editing vids, the quality of 
footage recorded from a camera pointed at a laptop or an iPhone will certainly prohibit the type 
of use contemplated by vidders.  
f. Authorized Sources for Clips Are Unavailable 
First, it should be noted that licensing is not a substitute for fair use as a matter of law: 
copyright owners cannot deprive transformative users of the right to make unauthorized uses by 
expressing a willingness to license.86   
In any event, licensing is not an option for noncommercial remixers: the opponents do 
not offer evidence that there is any mechanism by which a noncommercial user, as opposed to a 
commercial entity, could select and receive high-quality clips of a range of television shows and 
movies (since remixers comment on many different sources) suitable for editing.87  Studios 
                                                
85 See e.g., P rotect video content (Flash Media Server), Adobe Support, 
http://kb2.adobe.com/cps/405/kb405456.html (last updated May 24, 2010) (detailing the utility 
of Real-Time Messaging Protocol and SWF Verification for preventing screen capture). 
86 See, e.g., Castle Rock Entertainment, Inc. v. Carol Publishing Group, Inc., 150 F.3d 132, 145 
n. 11 (2d Cir.1998) (“by developing or licensing a market for parody, news reporting, 
educational or other transformative uses of its own creative work, a copyright owner plainly 
cannot prevent others from entering those fair use markets”). 
87 Compare Reply Comments of the DVD CCA in RM 2008-8, Rulemaking on Exemptions from 
Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, at 16 available at http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2008/responses/dvd-cca-inc-
38.pdf , to Reply Comments of the MPAA in RM 2008-8, Rulemaking on Exemptions from 
Appx. 87
[PAGE 115]
 32 
occasionally offer selected clips for fans to embed on their ow n sites or otherwise promote the 
optical version, but that does not enable remix or commentary.88  Indeed, in the most widely 
discussed example of such authorized fan activity, the rebooted Battlestar Galactica franchise 
offered clips of ships fighting space battles for fan uses, but no clips featuring any characters.89  
Anyone interested in illustrating or discussing the show’s treatment of race, gender, torture, or 
politics (just to take the most obvious examples) would have been unable to do so using these 
clips.   
                                                                                                                                                       
Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems fo r Access Control 
Technologies, available at http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2008/responses/mpaa-46.pdf at 16 
(referring to the studios’ then-stated plans to create an online clip service for film professors), 
and, at 10-11 (asserting that an exemption was not needed because, within three years, the 
MPAA expected that it would launch a clips server for media and film professors, though it 
acknowledged the major movie studios had not agreed on parameters and clearances had not yet 
been obtained).  These promises for some indefinite future “fix” have changed, but still do not 
offer any recourse for ordinary, noncommercial creators. See AACS LA Comments, supra note 
1, at 2-4. As testimony in the 2009 hearings indicated, many if not all studios have agreements 
with actors that generally prevent the grant of free or low lost licenses, which is why the best 
they can offer to professors is a letter promising not to assert their own claims – which, notably, 
does not enable the recipients to circumvent. See, e.g., Library of Congress Rulemaking Hearing 
Section 1202, Testimony of Peter DeCherney, May 6, 2009, available at 
http://www.copyright.gov/1201/hearings/2009/transcripts/ 
88 See AACS LA, supra note 1, at 8-9. What the DVD-CCA describes as “certain other limits” 
on use of unedited, embedded clips or playlists actually allow revocation of a license for any 
reason, including disagreement with the message being conveyed. 
89 Julie Levin Russo, User-Penetrated Content: Fan Video in the Age of Convergence, 48 
CINEMA J. 125, 126 (2009) (“[U]ser-generated advertising typically features a top-down 
arrangement that attempts, through its interface and conditions, to contain excessive fan 
productivity within proprietary commercial spaces. . . . [The Battlestar Galactica contest‘s] 
conception of sanctioned derivative filmmaking is extremely narrow, notably excluding the 
character-based dramatic scenes that make up the majority of the show.”). 
Appx. 88
[PAGE 116]
 33 
In addition, licenses always reserve the right to control crit icism or uses that the 
copyright owner does not think reflect well on its image—precisely the uses that are most highly 
critical and transformative, such as It Depends on What You Pay.  The copyright owners of 24 
and Law & Order wouldn’t let the Lear Center use them as centerpieces of an analysis of how 
popular media portray terrorism in Prime Time Terror, and they certainly wouldn’t let individual 
artists create lesbian love stories (a popular Law & Order genre) or critiques of the American use 
of torture.90 
XI. Conclusion 
 The vidding community is one example of a group of artists harmed by the 
absence of EFF’s proposed exemptions. Vids that comment on and critique popular media 
represent legitimate cultural contributions. Without the proposed exemptions, vidders have no 
appropriate alternatives available for extracting footage for use in their expressions. In the spirit 
of copyright law’s dedication to promoting creative work, the OTW supports the proposed 
exemptions for non-infringing, noncommercial videos.
                                                
90 Cf. AACS LA Comment supra note 1, at 9 (“the studio reviews the request and, if the studio 
agrees to the license, responds with a link to the desired clip”) (emphasis added). 
Appx. 89
[PAGE 117]
Appendix I: Statement of Gianduja Kiss (Vidder) 
February 
21, 2012 
 
In the comments of Steven J. Metalitz et al., 
http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2012/comments/Steven_J._Metalitz.pdf, the opponents of the 
EFF’s proposed exemptions identify an earlier vid of mine, Der Kommissar, as 
nontransformative.   Contrary to what the opponents say, this vid was intended as a 
political/cultural commentary.  These commenters seem to be unfamiliar with vids, so they aren't 
particularly skilled at reading and understanding them.  Moreover, I’d been vidding for less than 
a year, and so the message doesn't come across as clearly as I'd have liked.  I've learned a lot 
since then and I believe my skills, including my skills at communicating my messages, have 
improved since I made Der Kommissar. 
 
The opponents describe Der Kommissar as "promotional."  But, at least in my experience, 
"promotional" materials, such as trailers for Bond films, portray Bond as tough, competent, 
unbeatable, and sexually irresistible to women.  In other words, they fetishize his (heterosexual) 
masculinity.  My vid, by contrast, portrays Bond as hapless, vulnerable, bewildered, and often at 
the (sexual) mercy of the people around him.  I don't consider it "promotional" at all.   
 
When I made Der Kommissar, I wanted to illustrate, in a humorous way, sexual anxiety in the 
form of sexualized violence in Bond films, in order to undermine some of the portrayals of 
masculinity in those films.  So, the vid is dominated by images of Bond being beaten up and 
victimized, often in sexualized ways.  Roger Moore slides down a banister and gets whacked in 
the crotch; there's the famous scene of Connery's crotch being menaced by a laser, a woman tries 
to knife Connery's bond in the crotch after two previous scenes of unwanted kissing/sexual 
violence (Bond with a woman, and Bond with a man).  A woman tries to kill Bond by wrapping 
her legs around his waist and crushing him while they're both mostly naked.  And of course the 
vid features the infamous scene from Casino Royale in which Bond is tortured with genital 
whipping. 
 
I played with images of gender and power in the vid.  For example, the opening sequence shows 
James Bond repeatedly tossing his hat, except that in the final shot in the sequence, the hat is a 
frilly pink ladies' bonnet.  He gets trapped in a bed by a woman, and in the opening, there's a 
sequence of shots of someone menacing Bond (with guns, with an alligator) that ends with Bond 
seeing a woman (Diana Rigg), to make the point that the woman was the most 
frightening/menacing to him.  There's another sequence with people finding other people in their 
beds.  First, Bond walks in to find women in his bed, then, a woman walks in to find Bond in her 
bed (positioning Bond as the woman), and finally, Robert Davi gets in bed with Bond.  The 
implication of homosexuality is meant to undermine the hypermasculinity of Bond's image.  
(The vid generally uses standard shot-editing techniques to suggest a sexual relationship between 
Dalton's Bond and Robert Davi's villain.)  A shot of Bond leering at a woman through binoculars 
is juxtaposed with a shot of Bond looking at a man through binoculars (I actually manipulated 
the shots there to create a lens view that wasn't in the original film).  Bond hits several men and 
finally knocks a woman down on the bed; Bond then gets hit by several men, hit by a woman, 
and attacked with flaming sticks of meat, to illustrate the reversal from masculine power to 
masculine anxiety. 
Appx. 90
[PAGE 118]
 35 
  
I had seve
ral images of a snake menacing Roger Moore, because snakes are a common phallic 
symbol.  One time, women look on and smile while a snake drowns him.  Once again, the idea 
was to show Moore essentially drowning in/menaced by male sexuality.  That's why the tag line 
for the vid is "Why did it have to be snakes?": It's a reference to the snake/phallic images in the 
vid (and a jokey reference to the line from Raiders of the Lost Ark). 
  
In a completely obvious pun, on the line "he's got the power” I show a villain stroking a cat (a 
signifier of feminine sexuality), and on the next phrase “and you're so weak" I show Bond being 
knocked out, drugged, falling, several times in succession. 
 
Though I will be the first to admit that I wasn't as clear as I'd have liked in getting my point 
across, I know that at least some people who are adept at "reading" vids were able to perceive it.  
For example, in 2008, Thingswithwings posted an incredibly nice commentary on several of my 
vids.  At the time, I'd had no prior contact with her at all, about my vids or anything else.  
Nonetheless, she accurately described Der Kommissar as "all about sexual violence." 
http://thingswithwings.livejournal.com/23647.html. 
 
I am submitting this statement to explain that I did intend a commentary and that the community 
that I was trying to reach could understand that commentary, even if not everyone would 
recognize it.  In particular, I want the Copyright Office to recognize that protection can't and 
shouldn't turn on the vidder's skill. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appx. 91
[PAGE 119]
 36 
Appendix II: Statement of Akemi42 (Vidder) 
February 
28, 2012 
 
An illustrative example of the practical differences associated with various methods for obtaining 
vidding footage involves my experience with the film Watchmen. I have used four different 
methods to extract clips in order to make my non-commercial fan videos. 
 
Method 1: Using software to circumvent CSS encryption on a DVD copy that I purchased 
 DVD Decrypter (free) 
 Mac the Ripper (free) 
 
Method 2: Using digital image capture software to capture images on the screen of my computer 
as they played on Amazon Instant video (also purchased) 
 CamStudio (free) 
 Hyperionics (free) 
 CamTasia (free trial, $299 list price) 
 
Method 3: Using a video camera to capture images on a television screen playing the Blue Ray 
disc according to the method suggested by the MPAA 
 40 inch flat screen television in my home 
 Playstation 3 with Blu-Ray player (about $240) 
 Canon VIXIA HF R20 Full HD Camcorder (about $350) 
 
Notes on Logistics 
Method 1 is relatively straightforward process that utilizes rea dily available software. I used both 
DVD Decrypter for the Watchmen footage, but I have also used Mac the Ripper for other vids. 
The whole process generally takes less than one hour. 
 
I attempted Method 2 on a Windows-based PC using CamStudio and Hyperionics, but both 
programs stopped recording several times while the video was playing. At one point, I received 
an error message from Amazon indicating that I was attempting to play the film on more than 
two devices at the same time. Frustrated with these technical obstacles, I switched to a Mac 
running CamTasia, which was ultimately successfully in outputting a video file. 
 
Method 3 required the most substantial amount of equipment including the television, video 
camera, a tripod, and a table to position the camera. In addition, I had to wait until night time to 
make the recording because the room in which my television is housed has large windows with 
no coverings. Once the equipment was set up, I did not experience any logistical errors. 
 
Notes on Quality 
Generally Method 1 provided the best quality clips for vidding purposes (e .g., enabling zooming, 
adjusting frame sizes, color changes). The clips that Method 2 produced were very difficult to 
manipulate in terms of zooming and crops. They also generally appeared less polished and clear. 
Due to the presence of the television in the picture, Method 3 required substantial editing on the 
front end. The brightness of the television also made any sort of color adjustment nearly 
impossible. In addition, the flicker of the images made the editing process very unpleasant. 
Appx. 92
[PAGE 120]
Statement from Jackie Kjono 
November 21, 201
1 
 
I was a late adopter of ripped source and was still using capture devices up until three 
years ago when we got the exemption. (Not quite as bad as the suggested method but 
problematic enough.) 
 
Images are blurry and bright colors end up too bright while dark colors end up too dark. It 
is very hard to adjust them to get them to look anything like good what they should when 
you use capturing. 
 
One of my biggest heartbreaks is a vid I made back in 2002 called "If You Were in My 
Movie." I spent six months putting it together. Part of the problem was that After Effects 
was ridiculously expensive back in the day and I was quite broke so I did the masking 
effects in Photoshop - frame by frame. Success was limited. 
 
The captured source was another problem. The colors - especially reds - bled all over the 
place. This was a particular problem with the Lois & Clark/Spiderman sequence. Capturing 
tends to darken images so when I was capturing darker source (e.g. Silence of the Lambs), 
it was more difficult to tell what was happening in the clip. Brightening it would screw up 
the contrast and since I was putting my Silence of the Lambs footage against a hot pink 
Daria background, well, ick. I tried muting back the Daria colors which had ended up 
significantly harsher on the captured version than they had been on the television but, I 
was only moderately successful with that. 
 
I will grant that I probably would have had serious color problems anyway, working from 
49 different sources but, ripping would have given me a lot more flexibility when it came to 
fixing the problems than I had access to at the time. 
 
The vid is available at www.triptychvids.com. I've been thinking of uploading some of my 
old vids to vimeo but, haven't gotten around to it yet. I'm still really proud of this vid as a 
vid concept and I really regret the the execution holds up poorly over time. 
 
I have actually experienced vids made by the process suggested by the MPAA (setting up a 
separate camera to record your screen as it plays the source.) 
 
Years ago, some British fans wanted to let their American friends know about a really great 
show called the Professionals. British PAL VHS couldn't easily be converted to American 
NTCS VHS and the producers of the show weren't interested in making it available to 
Americans so the die-hard Brit fans would get an American camcorder and hold it in front 
of their televisions creating what were known as "flicker copies" for their American friends. 
Some of those American fans used their VCRs to make vids from those flicker copies. 
 
I have seen some of those vids. They seem to be about the adventures of two migraine-
inducing smudges, one of whom is slightly taller than the other. 
Appx. 93
Appendix K
[PAGE 121]
Interview with Joe Sabia 
Digital Artist,
 Video Editor, Creative Consultant 
  
1.     Please write a biography describing your work including the types of 
projects you work on both commercially and personally. It might also be useful to 
include links to some exemplary videos. 
  
I am a NYC based digital remix artist, video director, speaker, panelist, and creative 
consultant. I create conceptual videos that communicate unique and compelling stories. 
I have a heavy slant towards socially important videos which include a direct and honest 
message of making a difference. 
 
Commercially, I’ve counted Google, Interscope Records, NOKIA, BBC America, AirBnb, 
HBO, and YouTube as corporate clients, as well as a dozen ad agencies I pitch and 
consult for. 
 
Pro bono-wise, I am also the Chief Creative Officer for African-focused non-profit, 
Mama Hope. And I am the co-curator and co-host of Boing Boing Video on Virgin 
America Airlines. 
 
Examples of videos include: 
 
Seven Minute Sopranos - A first of it’s kind video recap of the entire Sopranos series. 
Was the inspiration for Lost, Battlestar Galactica, and The Wire recaps,  and cited as the 
reason for launch of CBS’s Eyelab. 
 
Tupac in Kazakhstan - A music video that sought to depict the culture of Kazakhstan by 
including 40 of its natives singing Tupac Shakur’s “Changes”. 
 
Alex Present
s Commando - A Tanzanian boy recaps the 1985 Schwarzenegger film 
“Commando”. Kicked off the launch of the “Stop the pity. Unlock the Pot ential” 
campaign for Mama Hope. 
 
Google Wave Fiction - The first “Infotainment Demo” created to feature at the time a 
new Google Product - Google Wave - by sound tracking its functionality to a famous 
scene from Pulp Fiction.  
 
Obama Raps Kanye - Over 90 speeches given by Barack Obama, finding lyrics that 
match Kanye West’s hit, “Stronger”. 
 
  
Appx. 94
Appendix L
[PAGE 122]
2.     Can you explain how making Prime Time Terror helped co nvey the message 
of the academic research in the Lear Center’s study? How did the video function 
differently than the written report in communicating the same information? 
 
Primetime Terror sought to convey academic research in an engaging and entertaining 
way in the form of a video which effectively served as a Hollywood movie trailer for the 
research. 
 
Why? Well, per tradition, the report was published in written format. Despite being open 
to the general public’s consumption, this research most likely finds itself trapped in the 
realm of peer-reviewed academia. Not surprisingly, it doesn’t break out into the public. 
 
Typically, the only other life a written research will have is in the form of a panel 
presentation or keynote speech. But there’s not much excitement in a 45-minute, single-
take, grainy conference video. If that were uploaded on YouTube it might get a couple 
hundred hits, tops.  
 
But by creating a remix video, you’re creating art on top of the research. And with new 
art, you can control the pace, the mood, the tenor of the experience. It ends up injecting 
color into this normally drab research paper existence. 
 
3.     How did you obtain all of the different types of footage used in the Prime 
Time Terror video? Generally how do you obtain source material for other remix 
videos that you make? Do you view any particular type of source as useful or 
superior? If so, why? 
 
For Primetime Terror, assets were derived from a flurry of apps, DVDs, and subscription 
based media services. The DVDs were ripped onto my hard drive using the free 
application HANDBRAKE for Mac. Once the episodes became files on my laptop, I 
dragged them into my editing software, Final Cut Pro. 
 
The most useful type of extraction is always DVD ripping. Because DVDs allow for little 
to no loss of quality.  
 
4.     In producing remix videos, is the quality of your source footage important? If 
so, why? 
 
The quality of the source footage is incredibly important. There’s an innate prejudice in 
all of us to equate the integrity of the creation with the integrity of the footage. How 
would Lord of the Rings be received if it were shot with a flip phone? What would Two 
and a Half Men look like without proper stage lighting? 
 
As a remixer, there’s nothing more heartbreaking than realizing there are NO better 
alternatives to that one, down-rezzed, grainy YouTube video that is crucial to your 
Appx. 95
[PAGE 123]
project. That’s why when DVDs are available for executing the remix idea, it’s a no-
brainer.  
 
5.     Do you think that you could have created the Prime Time Terror video 
without the clips from the various shows that were the subject of the report? 
 
Sure I could have! I could have commissioned a cartoonist to animate Dr. House. I 
could have used animated lego figures to act out a crucial scene from “24”. I could have 
filmed my friends doing theatrical NCIS interrogations in my basement. 
 
But let’s be real. These options are absurd. If the only focus of this research is on the 
television shows themselves, doesn’t it make sense to use the television shows as the 
only visual accompaniment? When a weatherman is talking about where rain will fall 
over the next 5 days, he shows a map with moving precipitation. If the Lear Center is 
citing how there were fourteen forced entries during Primetime TV, then we show the 
scenes of forced entry. There’s nothing more elegant and logical about the situation. 
 
Primetime Terror - as an entertaining take on research - proves the importance in 
capturing the largest audience possible, if not for the health of public discourse and 
intellect, than for the purpose of shattering the often stodgy stereotypes of academia. 
Because reading is dead. No one can sit through an article in the Economist anymore, 
let alone most children’s books. Our attention doesn’t warrant the ability to process 
stolid, insipid and unmoving black words in plain white background. It mandates the 
presence of moving imagery. Fast clips. Exciting music. Don’t just consume the data. 
Experience the data. 
 
Academics are good at focusing. The general public isn’t. Acquiring the public’s 
attention requires creativity in doing much more than publishing a hundred pages of 
text. 
 
6.     Do you think the remix artist community has a clear understanding of what 
the DMCA prohibits? How do you think intellectual property constraints are 
impacting the community? 
 
It’d be naive to say the remix artist community knows the tenets of the DMCA inside and 
out. Artists are artists. There’s a tendency to pay more attention to art than to laws. 
 
But artists are creators. And to create means to not copy. The absolute least artistic 
thing an artist can do is upload a whole, unedited chunk of CSI: Miami. That person is a 
pirate with zero regard for creativity. 
 
Appx. 96
[PAGE 124]
It’s not so much an issue of how the artist community is affected by int ellectual property 
constraints, but the fear I have is how society itself is impacted by constraints. This transmedia 
culture we live in requires a new, adopted literacy that most people over the age of 40 simply 
don’t understand. This sharing, this mashing, provides a collaborative and essential form of 
communication that just doesn’t warrant the luxury of time and resources to ask for usage 
permission that will ultimately be denied by unsympathetic Hollywood rights holders. 
 
Constraints on fair use will simply stifle art and stifle a digital language of criticism, commentary 
crucial for a digital society. And the effects are broad. The fair-use friendly internet  that allows 
me to screen record episodes for non-commercial research uses like in Primetime Terror is the 
same fair-use friendly internet that allowed a kid in his Harvard dorm to create the most 
impactful social networking site on the planet. Any chipping away at fair use is a slippery slope. 
Let’s just leave the thing alone. 
 
7.     Why couldn’t the Lear Center do this itself? Why hire you? Why didn’t you do it for 
free? 
 
The Lear Center didn’t create this itself because it was out of the scope of what they’re really 
good at. They did the research, I communicated it in a fun way. Toyota is good at making cars. 
Its the ad agency that communicates the brand to its audience. There’s not much of a 
difference.   
 
I didn’t do this for free because it took over 30 personal hours editing, alongside the efforts of a 
graphic animator, a musician, an audio engineer, and Steve Zirnkilton, the voice of Law & 
Order. All of this requires a budget to get people paid for their time. As with everything, there’s 
an opportunity cost. And like the above ad agency analogy, time is paid for. 
 
I chose not to do this for free because the Lear Center was able to muster up a budget, and that 
was hard to refuse. Was it a budget that I’d normally get from most clients? No. But because of 
the socially important aspect of the nature of the video, me and my colleagues undertook the 
project at a discounted rate. It’s kinda like an artist-patron relationship. I like it a lot. 
 
 
Appx. 97
[PAGE 125]
Cinema Studies
 Program 
209A Fisher-Bennett Hall 
3340 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, PA 19104 
Tel 215.898.8782    Fax 215.573.0262 
cinemastudies.sas.upenn.edu 
UNIVERSITY  of  PENNSYLVANIA 
August	  2,	  2012	  
David	  O.	  Carson	  
General	  Counsel	  
U.S.	  Copyright
	  Office	  
P.O.	  Box	  70400	  
Washington,	  DC	  20024	  
Re:	  Docket	  No.	  RM	  2011-­‐7	  
Exemptions	  to	  Prohibition	  on	  Circumvention	  of	  Technological	  Measures	  that	  
Control	  Access	  to	  Copyrighted	  Works	  
Proposed	  Classes	  7	  and	  8	  
Dear	  Mr.	  Carson,	  
I have reviewed the screen captured Star Trek clip prepared by the DVD-CCA. I 
have also used the program Aiseesoft to “rip” that section of the Blu-ray version of the 
film. I have enclosed a copy of the ripped clip for your examination as well as a few 
frame grams. Below I compare the screen capture and ripped clips, and then I offer some 
reasons why the high quality clip is important for education.   
1. Screen Capture v. Blu-Ray Rip
a. First, the DDV-CCA co-counsel made a number of mistakes while preparing the screen
captured Star Trek clip. He played the film using the wrong aspect ratio, so all of the 
horizontal lines are compressed. The captain, for example, seems to have a long thin face 
in the screen captured version, when in fact he has a round face in the film (see figures 1 
and 2). The fish bowl effect created by the anamorphic image makes the scene very 
difficult to analyze, since it is quite far from the look of the original film. The DVD-CCA 
co-counsel also left a news program playing on his computer while he made the clip, so 
we hear bleed through throughout. This is especially noticeable when the film soundtrack 
goes silent to capture the experience of an astronaut in space, and in place of the silence 
of empty space we hear news commentary saying, “domestic sales of just over 22 
million…” But these are errors that could be corrected by a more experienced technician.  
Appx. 98
Appendix M
[PAGE 126]
UNIVERSITY  of  PENNSYLVANIA 
b. This example, however, also reveals a number of limitations of screen capture
technology that cannot yet be overcome by any level of technical skill or equipment. The 
screen captured clip is much fuzzier and muddier. There is a significant decrease in the 
level of detail. Compare figures 5 and 6. In figure 5, we see the time traveling Romulan 
ship absorb the U.S.S. Enterprise. In the screen captured clip, the Enterprise enters a 
barely legible black mass.  There is a cryptic, spooky feeling to the shot, which has its 
own series of connotations. But when we look at the ripped clip, we realize that that is 
not what the filmmakers intended. In fact, careful modeling of light reveals tremendous 
detail in the Romulan ship. It isn’t the mystical black mass of the screen captured clip but 
a technological wonder with detailed mechanical parts and lights that suggest alien 
activity inside. 
Similarly, if you look at images 3 and 4, you can see the discrepancy between the screen 
captured and ripped images. Focusing on the detail of the captain’s eye, we can see how 
much more information is revealed in the ripped version. Among other details, we can 
see the light reflected in the captain’s eye. Filmmakers place lights below main characters 
to achieve this effect, which is entirely lost in the screen captured version. The gleam in 
the captain’s eye makes him appear alert and alive, and we respond to him. The washed 
out captain of the screen captured version, on the other hand, is passive, stunned by the 
experience rather than reacting to it, and our identification with him is hindered. 
c. The fuzziness of the screen captured version also flattens the image. We loose the
sense of space (more technically the depth of field) that is created by the light and detail 
apparent only in the ripped version. Compare figures 1 and 2 again. In the screen 
captured version, the captain and the background merge together, appearing almost on the 
same plane. In the ripped version, we realize that shot was taken using a camera setting 
designed to create a shallow depth of field. In the ripped version, the captain appears in 
crisp definition, making him pop out f
rom the fuzzy background. This sense of depth is 
not only important because it is what the filmmakers intended us to see. It also helps 
create an immersive experience for the viewer, who feels the camera move through the 
deep space of the ripped clip rather than the flat space of the screen-captured clip.  
2. So what? Why would students and professors need the high quality images for study
and analysis? Aren’t the muddy screen captured images good enough for teaching and 
learning? 
a. We have discussed this many times, but the level of analysis rises and falls with the
fidelity of the example. As I demonstrated above, the screen captured clip and the ripped 
clip are different representations of the same scene. The varying presentations of light, 
space, and detail will result in different interpretations of the scene. A student writing an 
essay on the screen captured version will not arrive at the same conclusions as a student 
watching the ripped version. They are different objects of study with very different 
properties. More practically, a student who relies on the unreliable screen captured 
version is in danger of getting it wrong, like an art history student who refuses to take off 
his dark sunglasses in the museum. 
Appx. 99
[PAGE 127]
UNIVERSITY  of  PENNSYLVANIA 
b. But what about a student who isn’t engaged in aesthetic analysis? What about a student
who is watching a clip in a history lecture or discussing a clip in a religion seminar? Does 
the diminished depth of field or the washed out light make a difference to her? The 
answer is yes, and there are two reasons why. First, the connotations created by the image 
affect our interpretation. Without the glint his eye, we read the captain’s response to the 
situation differently. Without the detail in the Romulan ship, we mistake science for 
magic. God is in the details. And when the details are altered, as they are in the screen 
captured version, all analysis that follows is built on a shaky foundation. 
Second, and equally important, is the affective response of the clip. I keep coming back 
to Mr. Carson’s comments during the hearing. He said that his daughters are happy to 
watch movies on their phones. Well, most phones are capable of playing high definition 
video. Without an exemption to rip high definition images, professors and students are 
being asked to study images of far less quality than the ones they are accustomed to 
seeing in their living rooms or, indeed, on their phones. As my students have attested 
many times, showing historical events or important figures in high quality images brings 
the subjects to life. When video is shown in an educational context with the same quality 
as video shown for entertainment, the experience can erase the barriers of history or 
obscurity. And learning can take place. 
Please let me know if you have any problems accessing the enclosed video clip and still 
images. And feel free to contact me with any additional questions.  
Sincerely,  
Peter	  Decherney	  
Associate	  Professor	  and	  Director,	  Cinema	  Studies	  Program	  
Appx. 100
[PAGE 128]
 
 1 
Statement of Prof. Tisha Turk 
Associate Professor of English 
University of Minnesota Morris 
February 6, 2015 
Overview 
For a remix artist, video source, whether ripped or captured, must be usable within the nonlinear 
editing programs (Adobe Premiere, Final Cut, Ulead, Vegas, iMovie, Windows Movie Maker) needed 
to create remixes. Usable video is video that the artist can import, edit, manipulate, and export using 
that editing software. Screen-capture software is not designed to output footage for extensive editing, 
and in many cases it is incompatible with standard settings for nonlinear editing programs. 
Ripping a DVD or Blu-Ray copies all the data from the disc onto the computer: every pixel, every 
frame. It’s like attaching an image to an email: the recipient gets an exact copy of the original file. 
Ripped video source requires conversion and cleanup in order to be imported and edited, but the 
conversion-and-cleanup process is minimal and predictable, and the original file being converted and 
cleaned up has encoded the most possible information and is the closest to existing broadcast standards.  
Other methods of capturing source produce inexact copies; the degree of inexactness depends on the 
method and the settings. It’s like printing a digital image and mailing the printout to someone who has 
to scan the page to her own computer to have a digital copy. The content (mostly) reaches the recipient, 
but quality degradation is inevitable and the transfer process introduces a lot of points at which things 
can go wrong: what’s the quality of the sender’s printer? is one of the ink cartridges low? did the 
envelope get folded or otherwise damaged in the mail? how good is the recipient’s scanner? Captured 
source is particularly susceptible to problems with aspect ratio, frame size, frame rate, interlacing, and 
dropped frames: it is harder to control these variables when dealing with an inexact copy than when 
dealing a file that has all the original information because an inexact copy is less predictable.  
Technical and aesthetic problems do not necessarily make a video file unwatchable for normal viewing 
purposes, but they do compromise image quality and can make editing that file and exporting a remix 
video difficult or even impossible. Whether a remix artist can import, edit, manipulate, and export 
video depends primarily on three factors: 
1. whether the video source complies with NTSC/ATSC distribution standards; 
2. how the video source is encoded; 
3. how much of the original visual information is preserved in the video source. 
These three factors do not operate independently; for example, frame size and interlacing have 
implications for all three. It is possible, however, to make some distinctions. Importing and exporting 
are technical procedures affected mainly by standards compliance and encoding. Editing and 
manipulating are both technical and aesthetic procedures; they are affected indrectly by standards 
compliance and encoding (you cannot edit video that your software cannot import) and directly by the 
amount of visual information present in the source. 
NTSC/ATSC distribution standards are reflected in editing software project presets, which are designed 
to ensure that an exported video can be correctly interpreted by a variety of screen devices, and in the 
default settings of video streaming sites. Correctly encoded video loads and exports without issue and 
can be edited with frame-level accuracy; incorrectly encoded video can crash the editing software when 
imported, prevent the artist from editing (or allow editing but prevent the artist from seeing what’s 
she’s doing, which is no better), and/or crash the editing software when she attempts to export the 
Appx. 101
Appendix N
[PAGE 129]
 
 2 
remix she has created. Video with more visual information is subject to more manipulation. Some of 
the simplest and most common effects, such as crops, zooms, and slow-motion, are particularly 
unforgiving of quality problems. When cropped or zoomed, source that lacks fidelity to the original 
video quickly loses fine detail and becomes pixellated; when slowed down, it loses smooth motion and 
becomes jerky. 
Technical Information 
Aspect ratio and resolution 
Aspect ratio is the proportion of width to height, expressed as w:h. The traditional almost-square-TV 
aspect ratio is 4:3; the new widescreen TV aspect ratio is 16:9; U.S. widescreen cinema aspect ratios 
are 1.85:1 (older) and 2.39:1 (current). Standard definition resolution for NTSC is 640x480 (4:3 aspect 
ratio) or 720x480 (16:9 widescreen aspect ratio). Standard resolutions for ATSC are 640x480 (4:3 
standard), 704x480 (16:9 widescreen), 1280x720 (HD), or 1920x1080 (1080 HD). 
DVDs are typically encoded anamorphically, meaning that a comparatively wide image is horizontally 
compressed to fit into a storage medium with a narrower aspect ratio; the video includes a digital “flag” 
that tells the player which aspect ratio to use when displaying the image. TV shows with a 4:3 aspect 
ratio are usually encoded to DVD at 720x480 resolution rather than 640x480 (which would leave black 
pillar boxes on each side of the screen) in order to maximize the number of pixels being used (and thus 
the amount of visual data included in the image). The resolution of Blu-ray video is high enough that it 
is not encoded anamorphically. 
Because video ripped from DVDs and BDs has been encoded according to NTSC/ATSC standards, any 
encoding—anamorphic or not—is predictable: it is consistent from disc to disc. Resolution and aspect 
ratio conform to project presets available in most video editing software and can be correctly imported 
and interpreted by that software. In some cases, the artist needs to adjust the aspect ratio herself, 
especially when she is using multiple video sources that have different aspect ratios; for example, a 
remix video using source from both the original Star Trek TV series (4:3 aspect ratio) and the 2009 
Star Trek reboot movie (2.39:1 aspect ratio) may, depending on the software used, require resizing both 
sources before import to account for anamorphic encoding, pixel aspect ratio (see below), and 
differences in aspect ratio. Other situations that might call for adjusting the aspect ratio prior to editing: 
older software that cannot adjust display resolution and pixel aspect ratio (see below); older hardware 
that does not have the processor power required to adjust aspect ratios on the fly. When video source is 
consistent and predictable, an artist can make these adjustments herself doing basic math. It’s not fun, 
and it’s not always simple, but it can be done. 
Aspect ratio and resolution present the first of many potential problems with screen capture: Not all 
playback software respects anamorphic encoding flags (by default or at all), which means that it is easy 
to capture footage at the wrong aspect ratio—and, especially in combination with the other factors 
listed below, it may be wrong in a way that is not predictable and cannot be corrected by the remix 
artist without meaningful loss of quality. 
Frame size 
Frame size of digital video, including analog video (such as film) that has been digitized, is measured 
in pixels. A pixel is a small block of color information, the smallest controllable element of a picture 
represented on the screen. The more pixels are used to represent an image, the more detail that image 
can have. 
Like aspect ratio, the frame size of video ripped from DVDs and BDs conforms to NTSC/ATSC 
Appx. 102
[PAGE 130]
 
 3 
standards and is therefore predictable and consistent across discs: ripped DVDs have a frame size of 
720x480, period. (Feature film, however, is wider and shorter than widescreen TV, and thus DVD 
versions of feature films are typically encoded with letterboxing, black borders at the top and bottom, 
in order to reconcile DVD frame size with feature film aspect ratio.) 
The frame size of captured video, by contrast, is not necessarily consistent. First, most playback 
software allows users to adjust the frame size: to make the video twice as big or half as big, to re-size it 
in idiosyncratic ways using the corner handles of the display window, or to display it using the entire 
screen. If a player window has been resized in any of these ways, the frame size will be non-standard. 
Second, selecting the capture area presents problems. Even if the capture software can be set to capture 
a particular window, it may capture not only the video but the software frame: the border around the 
edges, the control panel at the bottom of the window. And even if the artist adjusts the capture area 
very carefully, it is still not only possible but likely that she will end up capturing video with a non-
standard frame size of, say, 718x481. It is even more likely that, when capturing source from multiple 
discs (as she would if capturing from, for example, multiple episodes of a single TV show), she will 
end up with captured video at multiple slightly different frame sizes: some 718x481, some 721x482, 
some 722x479, and so on. 
Non-standard frame size presents both technical and aesthetic problems for the remix artist. Video 
source with non-standard frame size may not import correctly into editing software—or, worse, it may 
produce export errors, meaning that everything seems fine right up until the very end of the process. 
Some software will import incorrect frame sizes but will either crop or scale the video to match the 
project settings; scaling, in particular, can compromise video quality because the artist often can’t 
control what scaling algorithm the software uses, and different algorithms offer quite different trade-
offs between efficiency, smoothness, and sharpness. (See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Image_scaling 
for details and examples.) 
Pixel aspect ratio (PAR) 
Aspect ratio is further complicated by differences among pixels. The normal pixel aspect ratio is 1:1 
(square pixels); this is the standard aspect ratio on computer monitors, for example. However, 
traditional NTSC TV screens have non-square (rectangular) pixels: the PAR is 10:11, usually expressed 
as .90. Displaying an image created with one pixel aspect ratio on a device with a different pixel aspect 
ratio results in an image that is unnaturally stretched or squashed either horizontally or vertically. This 
distortion, along with any anamorphic encoding, must be accounted for when preparing DVD source 
for editing. (Blu-ray source is generally encoded for square rather than rectangular pixels, though many 
Blu-ray extras are encoded at 720x480 with rectangular pixels, just like DVDs, and flagged so that the 
BD player will adjust the display.) 
Frame rate 
Frame rate, expressed as frames per second (fps), is the frequency with which a playback device 
displays consecutive still video images (frames) to produce the illusion of motion. Current standards in 
the U.S. are 24 FPS (for progressive, non-interlaced video) and 29.97 FPS (for NTSC TV), which is 
sometimes simplified as 30 FPS (even though it isn’t really). However, DVDs are generally telecined 
(interlaced—see below) for viewing on standard TVs; after inverse telecining for editing purposes, 
DVDs are actually 23.976 FPS. Newer editing software is often able to treat 24 FPS and 23.796 FPS as 
interchangeable, but in general software works best when a) all video source files are the same frame 
rate, and b) the frame rate in the project settings exactly matches that of the video source. When frame 
rates don’t match each other or don’t match the project settings, jerky motion (because of dropped or 
repeated frames) is almost inevitable. 
Appx. 103
[PAGE 131]
 
 4 
Screen capture software typically allows users to capture video at a wide range of frame rates, from 15 
FPS (common, and perfectly acceptable, for video tutorials showing which buttons to click in 
unfamiliar software) to 30 FPS and sometimes above. This flexibility introduces unpredictability and 
further degrades quality when capturing video for remix purposes. First of all, it may not be at all clear 
what settings the artist should use. Is the video player playing back the raw video at 29.97 FPS? Is it 
deinterlacing the video but leaving it at 29.97 FPS? Is it inverse telecining the video so that it’s 23.976 
FPS? Is it altering playback slightly to the film rate of 24 FPS? Without knowing, the artist can’t set the 
screen capture software to capture the same number of frames per second that the player is displaying. 
A mismatch between playback speed and capture speed can result in dropped frames, repeated frames, 
or blended frames (“ghosting”). Furthermore, if the artist chooses a frame rate like 25, which looks like 
a nice sensible multiple of five and is standard for PAL (used in the UK along with different standards 
frame size and resolution) but not NTSC, the frame rate can’t match the video’s original frame rate; the 
captured video will inevitably have quality problems and, importantly, won’t match the NTSC presets 
in her editing software. 
Dropped and repeated frames 
Ripped source, by definition, does not drop frames: all the frames on the disc are transferred to the 
computer. 
Screen capture of video, however, is prone to drop frames. Video playback is affected by anything else 
the computer is doing. If a computer starts a scheduled backup or virus scan, if Apple’s automated 
update check for iTunes begins running, if the computer slows down for any reason, playback can 
glitch (skip frames) or hang (remain on a single frame for more time than it should). Even if new 
windows don’t overlap with the video playback window being captured, the background processes can 
cause video playback to stutter—and the screen capture software will capture that stutter. Any frames 
dropped in playback will be missing from the captured video. 
Compression 
Raw, uncompressed digital video requires enormous amounts of data and thus enormous file sizes. 
Uncompressed 720x480 video requires 20-30 MB per second of video; uncompressed 1920x1080 
video requires 119-158 MB per second of video (meaning that a single minute of video at Blu-Ray 
resolution requires 7.14-98.48 GB of storage space). To keep file sizes manageable, video is 
compressed: the video information is encoded using fewer bits than the original representation used. 
Video that has been compressed (encoded) for storage must be decompressed (decoded) for viewing; 
the appropriate codec (coder/decoder) must be present in a program or device in order for it to encode 
or decode digital information correctly. Different codecs have different features; for example, they can 
emphasize color quality, motion quality, or small file size. 
Compression can be either lossless or lossy. Lossless compression preserves more information; it 
leaves the original data intact but represents it more concisely. The resulting file is smaller than 
uncompressed video but still quite large. (See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_compression#Lossless 
for details.) Lossy compression achieves much smaller file sizes by discarding data during the encoding 
process. Once that data has been discarded, it cannot be recovered. 
Video on DVD and BD has been encoded using lossy compression, meaning that some of the original 
data has been sacrificed to decrease file size. It is therefore especially important for remix artists to be 
able to maintain video quality rather than losing any more of it to additional lossy compression: every 
time video is encoded using a lossy codec (even the same codec that has already been used), more data 
is lost. In any video editing project, including remix, the goal is to use a lossy codec only once: at the 
Appx. 104
[PAGE 132]
 
 5 
very end of the process, when compressing the completed video for distribution. 
Ripping DVDs and BDs allows remix artists to minimize data loss by copying data directly from disc 
to drive. Screen capture software works by decoding a disc and then re-encoding it. Most software does 
not make clear which codec is being used for this re-encoding, but the resulting image quality and file 
sizes suggest that the codecs are generally lossy codecs—which makes sense, given that the main 
purpose of screen-capture software is to create videos with small file sizes for online distribution. 
Interlacing 
From the point of view of remix artists, interlacing—or, for those who don’t know the technical term, 
“that weird comb effect”—is a problem that can completely destroy a video on an artistic level. Here’s 
the technical explanation:  
Progressive (non-interlaced) video is transmitted line by line, in order. Interlaced video is transmitted 
line by line in two passes (called fields): the first pass displays all the odd-numbered lines, and the 
second pass displays all the even-numbered lines. Interlacing doubles the perceived frame rate of a 
video display without requiring any additional bandwidth. As of February 2015, U.S. over-the-air 
broadcast video is still interlaced, though satellite services transmit pay-per-view movies as progressive 
video. Blu-ray video is typically encoded as progressive, non-interlaced video, and some recent DVDs 
are as well, but some current and nearly all older DVD video is interlaced. 
Interlaced video cannot be resized vertically without blending scanlines and producing a hideous mess. 
In addition, the interlacing itself is far more noticeable on computer monitors than it is on TV monitors, 
which are designed to account for it. 
Film isn’t originally interlaced at all—it’s an analog medium. But when converted for DVD encoding, 
some film gets interlaced via a process called 3:2 pulldown, or telecining: an extra frame is inserted 
every four frames to shift the frame rate from 24 FPS to 30 FPS; two of those frames have the dreaded 
“comb effect,” in which two frames’ fields are stretched out over extra frames. For examples of 
interlacing, see the series of images submitted under separate cover as EFF Class 7A Appx N Exh. 1-5 
and 10-14. To obtain these images I loaded the raw VOB file (what you get when you rip a DVD) into 
VirtualDubMod, copied individual frames to clipboard and loaded into Photoshop for saving as still 
images. (Which, incidentally, involved losing some color quality.) 
Video source ripped from a DVD—an exact copy with all file information fully intact—can be inverse 
telecined. Inverse telecining reconstructs the original 4 frames, removes the comb effect, and deletes 
the extra frame to turn the source back into progressive video that can be cropped, resized, and zoomed 
without horrific results. To see the previous examples of interlaced video inverse telecined and 
reconstructed see the series of images submitted under separate cover as EFF Class 7A Appx N 6-9 and 
15-18. To obtain these images I indexed the raw VOB file and wrapped it in an AVS script container. 
The AVS script lets editing software read the VOB (which it normally can't), but it doesn't change the 
VOB itself in any way: there's no converting or compressing, just interpreting; the VOB remains on the 
drive as a reference point, and the script won't work if the VOB is removed. Then I added the inverse 
telecine command to the script so it would reconstruct the original frames from the combed frames. 
Captured footage cannot be inverse telecined. Depending on how the footage was played back for 
capture, the player may have removed the interlacing, but it may have done so by deinterlacing rather 
than inverse telecining. Deinterlacing doesn’t actually remove the scanlines or the extra frames; it just 
attempts to disguise them by interpolating the pixels in between scanlines in the same field. This 
process takes quite a lot of processing power (which can cause jerky playback, pixelation, or other 
quality loss) and is inherently error-prone. 
Appx. 105
[PAGE 133]
 
 6 
Notes on screen-capture software 
Compatibility 
Relatively few screen-capture programs offer cross-platform compatibility; most work on either 
Windows or Mac, not both. 
Purpose 
Most screen-capture software is designed and marketed for screencasting (creating tutorials and 
walkthroughs), not video capture; descriptions emphasize such features as “follow mouse” and “record 
keystrokes.” While screen-capture software can capture the gist of a video, it is neither intended nor 
optimized to provide detailed visual fidelity or to enable more than minimal post-capture editing, such 
as adding captions or other text. Indeed, some software descriptions emphasize features that eliminate 
the need for post-capture editing. Such emphasis makes sense in context: many screencasts are not 
edited at all—the tutorial is recorded and uploaded, and that’s it. But for a remix artist, video source 
that can’t be edited is unusable. 
Problems 
Because it’s intended for screencasting, most screen-capture software is optimized for small file sizes; 
programs achieve these small sizes through lossy compression and low frame rates. Lossy compression 
can result in, among other things, “grainy” video (see user comments on ScreenFlow, below); low 
frame rates require programs to discard whole frames of information—in some cases as many as half 
the original frames. 
Some screen capture software also requires a great deal of processing power. Tim Schmoyer, the YT-
certified video expert behind the Video Creators YT channel, explains this problem in his discussion of 
Quicktime in “The Best Free Screen Capture Recording Program” (http://youtu.be/CQedvNM-vRI): 
“It's simple, it's free, it's easy to use.... But I stopped using it because the problem I ran into with it is 
that it actually uses a lot of processing power on my computer, which makes it run really laggy. So if 
I'm doing even something basic like trying to screen-capture something that has a video, like on 
YouTube, running in it, then all of a sudden the video becomes really choppy and my computer just 
slows down. And I have a pretty decent computer—I edit on a Macbook Pro.” While Schmoyer is 
discussing Quicktime specifically, this problem is common to screen-capture software generally. 
Software notes 
AShampoo Snap 7  
https://www.ashampoo.com/ 
Windows only. Produces screencast-quality images meant for trimming and posting, not substantive 
editing. The PC Magazine review emphasizes its intended uses: “Snap 7 also has watermark options 
and video-capture capabilities, with numerous resolution and WMV/AVI options, that make creating 
tutorials and walkthrough clips a breeze.” Having “numerous resolution options” is presented as a good 
thing—a sure sign that the intent is not to produce video that conforms to NTSC/ATSC standards and 
that therefore is suitable for importing, substantive editing, and exporting in true video editing 
programs. 
CamStudio  
http://camstudio.org/ 
Windows only. Free; widely reviled for its packaging of unwanted extras with the program: the 
Appx. 106
[PAGE 134]
 
 7 
unprepared end up with all kinds of undisclosed software on their systems, including destructive 
malware. (Many user comments testifying to this problem can be found in the comments on to this 
effect on Tim Schmoyer’s review video linked above.) 
Camtasia Studio 8 
http://www.techsmith.com/camtasia.html  
Mac and Windows. Widely regarded as the best screen-capture software (and, at $299 for PC—though 
only $99 for Mac—priced out of the range of many students and other nonprofessionals); can be used 
for capture and basic cutting and cropping, though not sophisticated editing. I've used Camtasia for a 
video project: an academic project for which I needed to capture some animated .gifs on Tumblr. 
Capturing was deceptively easy; it's not at all clear how one ought to capture in order to be able to 
include the results in a standards-compliant video project, and so everything went fine until I tried to 
export the video... at which point the video would hang on export every time. Eventually I had to re-
capture the three gifs in a different format, which was annoying but manageable. Recpaturing 200 clips 
for a vid would have been impossible. It's excellent software, but it's just not meant for what remix 
artists do. 
Fraps  
http://www.fraps.com/ 
Windows only. Bills itself as “real-time video capture & benchmarking” for people who want to “join 
the Machinima revolution.” Fraps is intended for games and does not work for desktop recording. 
iShowU HD  
http://www.shinywhitebox.com/ishowu-hd-pro 
Mac only. Recommended by Tim Schmoyer (see above), but it’s not an option for PC users. The 
program is clearly meant for screencasting, not video capture: features include things like “follow 
mouse” and “record keystrokes.” Description notes that the Pro version “includes built-in presets for 
Final Cut,” but it is marketed to people who want to avoid using editing programs: “HD lets you 
specify your own capture area. Say goodbye to ‘post cropping’ of video.” 
Open Broadcaster Software 
https://obsproject.com/ 
Mac and Windows. “Free, open source software for live streaming and recording.” Captures for 
streaming, not exporting and editing; the overview guide doesn’t even mention exporting. 
Quicktime  
Mac only. As noted by Tim Schmoyer (above), Quicktime’s merits are offset by the demands it makes 
on the computer’s processor, which make it unpredictable and inappropriate for extensive clipping. 
ScreenFlow 
http://origin.telestream.net/screenflow/  
Mac only. Captures and edits for purposes of screencasting, not for export and editing: “ScreenFlow 
provides all the elements you need to create professional-looking App previews or software 
demonstrations. Record your iOS screen or computer screen, highlight areas of interest, add text, then 
edit the whole thing and save it as a video ready to be shared with the world.” JaCGaming notes in a 
Appx. 107
[PAGE 135]
 
 8 
comment on Tim Schmoyer’s review of screen-capture software, “I have ScreenFlow and it works 
GREATLY! The only downside is for some reason, the video export is a little grainy... but other than 
that the features in it are awesome, and it functions really well.” “A little grainy” is fine for many 
purposes, including, clearly, this user’s, but it’s not an acceptable compromise for remix video artists.  
SnagIt  
http://www.techsmith.com/snagit.html 
Mac and Windows. From the same company that makes Camtasia. Similar to AShampoo Snap 7, 
though a bit more powerful. Another good-at-what-it’s-meant-for program that produces screencast-
quality images meant for trimming and posting, not substantive editing. 
Appx. 108
[PAGE 136]
DEPARTMENT OF GENDER STUDIES  
Mackintosh-Corry Hall 
Kingston, Ontario, Canada K7L 3N6  
Tel  613 533-6318   
Fax 613 533-2824 
www.queensu.ca/gnds  
PREPARING LEADERS AND CITIZENS FOR A GLOBAL SOCIETY
Dear Librarian of Congress, 
I write in support of a circumvention mechanism for access to copyrighted material in the 
specific case of remixes and related forms of popular critique, including fan-vidding.  
Juxtaposition and close-reading are exceptional tools for political critique, and in my 
professional view as a professor of gender and cultural studies at a major research university, 
practices such as vidding are forms of creative expression with high educational value. They do 
not represent financial threats nor do they restrict the freedoms of other creative artists. Quite 
the contrary, they are forms of productive dialogue both around and within popular culture. 
Perhaps some specific examples from my own teaching may be of assistance here. The current 
generation of undergraduate, and even graduate, students has been continuously exposed to 
visual media from birth. The ability to form and express critical opinions via visual media is 
thus an essential skill. Exposure to vids has been of immense value in teaching this skill, in 
particular in my 250-student lecture on gender, race and popular culture. Exposure to a 
particular fanvid based on Joss Whedon’s Firefly series taught the class about the unreflexive 
white privilege involved in producing a show in which the main characters all speak Chinese 
but there are no Asian actors.  Exposure to a fanvid on the rebooted Star Trek franchise taught 
the students that the action movie, no matter how ‘futuristic,’ is still considered primarily a 
theatre for men. These lessons were all the more effective for being delivered as miniature and 
coherent visual spectacles, with the scenes and actions of the shows themselves being deployed 
to convey the key lessons. The fanvidding community, in my experience, is unusually sensitive 
to issues of gender-based prejudice, ableism, racism and other forms of disenfranchisement 
broadly evident in popular media.  
Timely, legal and high-quality access to copyrighted materials is necessary to the production of 
this sort of work, and I urge that it be considered what it is, a valid and legitimate mode of 
critical analysis. Academic criticism is becoming increasingly aware of this mode of critical 
analysis, with recent academic papers on this subject appearing in journals such as Studies in 
Culture and Communication.   
Sincerely, 
Jane Tolmie, Ph.D. Harvard, D.Phil.Oxon, Rhodes Scholar ‘98 
Associate Professor of Gender and Cultural Studies, Cross-Appointed to English 
Appx. 109
Appendix O
[PAGE 137]
Replay Video Capture is Ready For Some (Super Bowl) Football! 
Applian Technologies News Alerts cs@applian.zendesk.com via mail176.atl21.rsgsv.net 
to me • 
View this email in your browser. 
Applian Technologies develops easy-to-use apps that let you capture audio and video from just about anywhere. 
You are receiving this because you signed up to receive our newsletter. Go here to unsubscribe at any time or here to change your email address. 
SUPER BOWL 
XLIX 
Get Out of the Box 
Go Ahead, Just Stream Everyt hing 
With services like HBOGo, Netflix 
Streaming, Amazon Prime and Google 
Chromecast there is no better time 
than now t o let go o f your basic cable 
and move towards the futur e. Of 
course, we are here to help with your 
media recording needs. 
Read More 
Are You Ready For 
Some (Super Bowl) 
Football?! 
Use Replay Video Capture 7 To Catch 
It 
Whether you're a Patriot at h eart or a 
" 12th Man" Seahawk, tun ing in for the 
4.5 million dollar commercials or 
simply to see halftime with Katy 
Perry; this 2015 Super Bowl is 
gearing up to be a fun spectacle. And 
this year NBC is streaming t he live 
feed online, which means you can 
record the event with 
Replay Video Capture 7. 
Not sure if you h ave the latest 
version of Replay Video Capture? Go 
here to find out if you qualify for an 
upgrade. 
Kickoff Time 
the 
Thanks for being a great customer 
We're always happily surprised at h ow wonderfu l our customers are -- yes, 
that m eans you! Even when you're contacting support about an issue, we find 
ourselves happy to talk to those who make our company what it is. 
So thank you, sincerely, for sticking with us and being awesome. We can't wait 
to tell you about all the next -big-things for this year! 
. - . 
Happy Capturing! 
- RiKi & The Applian Team 
• • 
• = ·= 
• • • • We also belie ve strongl y in Fair 
Use. The laws are simple: When recording or converting media, please do not redistribute it to 
Click here to learn more . 
Spam Policy: You are receiving this email because you opted in to recei ve occasional emails 
from Applian Technologies . If you'd rather not recei ve any future emails from us click here to 
Applian Technologies - 20 Vineyard Ave. San Anselmo CA, 94960 
Jan 31 (1 day ago) 
n - •..i 
- "' "" 
Appx. 110
Appendix P
[PAGE 138]
DARK
MATTER
Appx. 111
Appendix Q
[PAGE 139]
THE HEAVINESS OF LIGHT 
I
In the closing scene of the 1961 film The 
Misfits, Marilyn Monroe sits beside Clark 
Gable on the bench-seat of a pickup truck. 
Monroe doesn’t know it yet but she is about 
to speak the final line of the last film she 
will ever complete. Gable doesn’t know it 
but two days after filming he will have a 
fatal heart attack. With the rear projection 
rolling behind them, the moment stretches 
out silently like the road. 
With fear discernible in her voice, Monroe 
asks Gable: “How do you find your way back 
in the dark?”  “ Just head for that big star 
straight on,” he says. “The highway’s under 
it. It’ll take us right home.”
II
The night sky is not only a compass, but 
also a time machine. This is a cliché 
of the indie film: two characters on the 
cusp of becoming romantically involved 
philosophise about the starry night. One 
character tells the other that the light from 
a particular star has travelled hundreds of 
years to reach them. In fact it is possible, 
they say, that the star they are viewing 
has already been extinguished and they 
wouldn’t even know it. 
It’s almost as though the actors are 
inexplicably drawn to this dialogue because 
they sense that they are the stars that 
they speak of. The light reflecting off their 
flesh, and into the camera lens, has already 
begun a journey toward a future in which 
they no longer exist. 
The Phoenix Portal, 2005
Appx. 112
[PAGE 140]
III
Jan Oort first postulated the existence 
of dark matter in 1932 to account for the 
orbital velocities of stars in the Milky 
Way. While it is not possible to perceive 
dark matter directly, its presence can 
be inferred through the gravitational 
forces that it exerts on visible matter . 
Since 2005 we have been pursuing the 
speculative hypothesis that a form of 
dark matter pervades the star systems 
of screen culture. Beyond these familiar 
constellations of light is an oblique event 
horizon that weighs heavy on the spacetime 
of the screen encounter . 
Jean Cocteau understood this. Cinema, he 
said, films death at work.
IV
It is no coincidence that the spiritualist 
movement of the late 1800s emerged 
concurrently with the development of 
recorded-media technologies. Like 
a spiritual medium channeling the 
supernatural through a séance, the 
recorded medium acts as a conduit for 
apparitions of the deceased. 
V
By transcoding light into data, digital 
video short-circuits cinema’s indexical 
connection to the past. Instead of 
embalming time, the digital image offers 
itself as an open source cipher that is 
hybrid, polymorphous and plastic. But 
this does not negate the past’s relentless 
claims on the present. Digital media 
inherits the ever-expanding crypt of 
After the Rainbow, 2009
Appx. 113
[PAGE 141]
recorded dead accumulated over a century 
of light years. 
What is required of a cinematics of 
dark matter is to reconcile the quantum 
indeterminacy of the digital image and the 
spectral hauntology of the recording. 
VI
Since its inception, recorded media has 
acted as a mutagen for the dispersal of 
self. Which is to say that the recordings 
we consume also take a record of us. Each 
time we watch a film the singularity of the 
encounter is encrypted into the recording 
– creating a dormant collapsar between a 
past and future self.
VII
Until recently the skin of the screen 
star remained anchored to a sense of 
chronology. But with their surgically taut 
exteriors, the contemporary actor has 
become further unstuck from time. The 
body clock of this new morphology is less 
about youth than an agelessness that is 
indeterminate and set adrift. 
And perhaps everything that we now 
consider definitive of classical cinema 
will one day be eclipsed by an unforeseen 
historical significance: wrinkles in time. 
Viewers in a distant future will turn to the 
cinema of last century to once again look 
upon the inscriptions of age. 
VIII
In 
A Brief History of Time Stephen Hawking 
writes that “spacetime is not flat as had 
been previously assumed: it is curved or 
The Time that Remains, 2012
Appx. 114
[PAGE 142]
warped by the distribution of mass and 
energy in it.” The Dark Matter series is 
a postulation of this principal within the 
matrix of screen culture. Resisting the 
flattening topography of ahistoricism, 
this research seeks a means of rendering 
virtual proximities between the past and 
preset that do not erase the weighty 
contours of personal and historical 
experiences of time.
IX
The phrase “I died” is an impossible 
utterance, yet this is precisely what the 
image of a deceased screen star says. This 
is why we shudder as we watch Marilyn, 
intuiting a future present to which we are 
ourselves anterior .
Soda_Jerk, 2013
ARTIST BIOGRAPHY
Soda_Jerk is a two-person art collective 
that works with found material to trouble 
formulations of cultural history. Taking the 
form of video installations, cut-up texts 
and lecture performances, their archival 
image practice is situated at the interzone 
of research, documentary and speculative 
fiction.
SODAJERK.COM.AU
The Time that Remains, 2012
Appx. 115
[PAGE 143]
WORK DETAILS
Dark Matter is an ongoing series of video 
works that are informed by research into 
the intersection of cinema and cultural 
theories of hauntology. Begun in 2005, 
each work in this cycle takes the form of 
a séance fiction where encounters are 
staged between the past and future selves 
of a deceased screen star . In the exhibition 
Dark Matter, all three works to date are 
exhibited together for the first time. 
1. THE PHOENIX PORTAL (2005)
Single channel digital video
Dur: 4.56 mins
Colour, sound, 16:9
Materials: 
Donnie Darko (2001), Explorers 
(1985), Hackers (1995), My Own Private 
Idaho (1991), Tron Legacy VFX concept 
test (2009), Videodrome (1983), Buffalo 
Daughter - 303 Live, Cornelius - Magoo 
Opening, Michael Andrews - Manipulated 
Living, Michael Andrews - Ensurance Trap, 
Trent Reznor - Videodrones; Questions.
A young River Phoenix from the film 
Explorers (1985) opens a wormhole to 
contact his older self in My Own Private 
Idaho (1991). Irrevocably haunted by 
the death of Phoenix in 1993, this work 
summons the paranormal power of 
recorded media to reanimate the dead.
2. AFTER THE RAINBOW (2009)
2-channel digital video
Dur: 5.42 mins
Colour, sound, 4:3
Materials: 
Donnie Darko (2001), Easter 
Parade (1948), Judy, Frank and Dean: Once 
in a Lifetime (1962), The Manson Family 
(2003), Meet Me in St. Louis (1944), Twin 
Peaks: Fire Walk with Me (1992), Planet 
Terror (2007), Vertigo (1958), The Wizard of 
Oz (1939).
Through a re-imagining of the initial 
sequence of 
The Wizard of Oz (1939), the 
fantasy world of cinema and the reality of 
Judy Garland’s sad life collide. Instead of 
taking Dorothy to Oz, the twister transports 
a young, hopeful Garland into the future 
where she encounters her disillusioned 
adult self.
3. THE TIME THAT REMAINS (2012)
2-channel digital video
Dur: 11.56 mins
Black & white, sound, 4:3
Materials: 
Humoresque (1946), Hush… 
Hush, Sweet Charlotte (1964), Jezebel 
(1934), Possessed (1947), Strait-Jacket 
(1964), The Letter (1940), What Ever 
Happened to Baby Jane? (1962), Frédéric 
Chopin - Nocturnes Op.9 No.2, Overlook 
Hotel - As Time Goes By, Thomas Newman 
- Mental Boy.
Joan Crawford and Bette Davis perpetually 
wake to find themselves haunted by their 
own apparitions and terrorized by markers 
of time. Isolated in their own screen space, 
each woman must struggle to reclaim time 
from the gendered discourses of aging that 
mark her as fading and ‘past her prime’.
Appx. 116
[PAGE 144]
UTS GALLERY
Lvl 4, Peter Johnson Bldg 
702 Harris Street, Ultimo 
NSW 2007 Australia
Open Mon-Fri 12-6pm
art.uts.edu.au/gallery  
facebook.com/utsart  
Soda_Jerk acknowledges the generous expertise 
and friendship of Maija Howe, Christopher Hanrahan, 
Michael Moran, Sam Smith and Darren Tofts.
Soda_Jerk also warmly acknowledges the staff at 
UTS Gallery and the support of the NSW Government 
through Arts NSW and the Helen Lempriere Bequest, 
managed by Perpetual.
DARK MATTER
Soda_Jerk
30 July - 30 August 2013
After the Rainbow, 2009
ISBN: 978-0-9874811-2-2
Cover image: Research Document #4 (Body Bag)
Appx. 117
[PAGE 145]
Appx. 118
