[PAGE 1]
As a long-time user of jailbroken software, I want to speak out firmly against the 
idea of outlawing it. Jailbreaking was never about piracy or using a device for illegal 
purposes - it's about freedom. Freedom to change a device that I have purchased and 
owned as I see fit, to customize it to be both more visually appealing and functional. 
From my understanding of the law in question, outlawing jailbreaking is merely a side-
effect, and not the main intention of the law. If this is the case, then criminalizing a 
perfectly acceptable use of personal property is not logical, and the exemption should 
be granted. 
I use jailbroken software to extend the functionality of iOS, and add features 
that it is missing. With this modification, I can do anything from change the color of UI 
elements to make the phone easier to use at night, to enable haptic feedback on key 
presses, to so much more - all features that iOS was lacking before. This limitless 
customization is why I have always used jailbroken phones. While I could switch to 
another platform (e.g. Android), I choose not to for reasons including a long-standing 
history with Apple and their other products, as well as iOS being the closest product to 
the experience that I want. I like having iOS-unique functions such as iMessage that 
simply aren't present on Android/Windows/etc devices. 
Jailbreaking also allows me to write my own code and run it on my device, which 
not only allows me to improve functionality of my device, but also gives me an 
incredible learning experience - this exposure to software and coding was a major part 
of my decision to learn more about Computer Science and Engineering, and ultimately 
to choose it as a career path. Without the learning experience that I had from exploring 
the technology that made my phone work, I don't think I would have kindled the same 
interest in programming and development. 
So please, grant the exception for jailbreaking. Jailbreaking is not and never will 
be about piracy, stealing or anything illegal. Jailbreaking is about the freedom to 
explore, customize and improve the technology that I own, and hopefully learn some 
useful skills along the way. 
