[PAGE 1]
 
 
Short Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption 
Under 17 U.S.C. 1201 
  
Item 1. Commenter Information  
 
Dr. Salvatore J. Stolfo, Professor of Computer Science, Columbia University 
 
Item 2.  Proposed Class Addressed 
 
Proposed Class 25: Software—Security Research  
 
Item 3. Statement Regarding Proposed Exemption 
 
As a computer security academic researcher and professor, I urge the Copyright Office 
in the strongest possible terms to grant the exemption request of the Security 
Researchers under Proposed Class 25.  The DMCA without this exemption damages 
national security interests by creating material obstacles and even potentially prohibiting 
critical security research.   For example, my concern that the DMCA may outlaw 
portions of my research has caused me to alter and, in my opinion, methodologically 
weaken the proposals that I have submitted to government funding agencies in 
response to their calls for security research. 
 
Similarly, I currently wish to pursue more research in the areas of insecure embedded 
devices, such as the insecure routers that constitute the communication substrate of the 
internet and government networks, however, I have been advised by attorneys that 
some of this research may run afoul of DMCA Section 1201.  As such, I have not yet 
pursued this research, despite its necessity and its potential to improve information 
security of components and systems, which is clearly in the best interests of the nation 
to secure its critical infrastructure. The DMCA is actively hurting security research and 
making our country less safe.  It is also damaging classroom teaching of future 
generations of students about the mechanics of computer security.  
 
In response to the Copyright Office’s query regarding possible negative repercussions, 
no negative repercussions will arise with respect to the safety or security of software 
from granting this exemption.  Indeed, to the contrary, if the exemption is granted, 
security researchers will be better able to defend the national security interests, critical 
infrastructure, and economy of the United States. Security researchers already work as 
part of teams inside the most sophisticated companies, as well as in academia and as 
sole-proprietors/entrepreneurs.  Important security research arises from each of these 
three settings.  
 
With respect to the use of ISO 29147 and ISO 30111, the international standards 
referenced in the Security Researchers’ proposed exemption provide a floor of 
corporate conduct that embodies security practices already implemented at responsible 
corporate entities. Hinging an exemption on these standards assists in creating a logical 
balance between information security and intellectual property protection of responsible 
corporate entities. 
