[PAGE 1]
Note: Please submit a separate comment for each proposed class. 
This is a Word document that allows users to type into the spaces below. The comment should be no more than one 
page in length (which may be single-spaced but should be in at least 12-point type). The italicized instructions on 
this template may be deleted.  
PRIVACY ACT ADVISORY STATEMENT Required by the Privacy Act of 1974 (P.L. 93-579) 
The authority for requesting this information is 17 U.S.C. §§ 1201(a)(1) and 705. Furnishing the requested information is voluntary. 
The principal use of the requested information is publication on the Copyright Office website and use by Copyright Office staff for 
purposes of the rulemaking proceeding conducted under 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1). NOTE: No other advisory statement will be given 
in connection with this submission. Please keep this statement and refer to it if we communicate with you regarding this submission. 
Short Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption 
Under 17 U.S.C. 1201 
  
Item 1. Commenter Information  
Identify the commenting party and, if desired, provide a means for others to contact the commenter or an 
authorized representative of the commenter by email and/or telephone.  (Please keep in mind that any 
private, confidential, or personally identifiable information in this document will be accessible to the public.) 
 
My name is Robert Ross and my Email is: (rross@kkcj.org) 
 
 
Item 2.  Proposed Class Addressed 
Identify the proposed exemption that the comment addresses by the number and name of the class set 
forth in the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (e.g., “Proposed Class 7: Audiovisual works – derivative uses 
– noncommercial remix videos”). 
 
Proposed Class 16: Jailbreaking–Wireless Telephone Handsets 
Proposed Class 17: Jailbreaking–All-Purpose Mobile Computing Devices 
 
I am submitting my request to the Librarian of Congress and Copyright Office to extend and 
expand the exemption that allows for the “jailbreak” of one’s phone or digital device from those 
restrictions.  At the same time I desire to keep in alignment with the Digital Millennium 
Copyright Act (DMCA). 
 
 
Item 3. Statement Regarding Proposed Exemption 
Explain why you support or oppose the relevant proposed exemption.   
 
I enjoy the opportunity of being able to customize and personalize the items that I have bought. 
The term ‘jailbreak,’ as defined in the Apple Computer Dictionary is as follows: 
Jailbreak (computer science) – a jargon expression for (the act of) overcoming limitations in a 
computer system or device that were deliberately placed there for security, administrative, or 
marketing reasons. 
I, along with millions of other consumers enjoy that freedom of custom personalization. 
 
Thank you in advance for your kind consideration of allowing for the extension and expansion of 
the exemption.
 
