[PAGE 1]
  
1 
 
Long Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption 
Under 17 U.S.C. 1201 
  
[  ]   Check here if multimedia evidence is being provided in connection with this 
comment 
Please note that such evidence must be separately submitted on a disc or flash drive.  See the Notice of 
Proposed Rulemaking for detailed instructions.  
  
Item 1. Commenter Information  
Identify the commenting party and, if desired, provide a means for others to contact the commenter or an 
authorized representative of the commenter by email and/or telephone.  (Please keep in mind that any 
private, confidential, or personally identifiable information in this document will be accessible to the 
public.) 
 
Commenting Party: Competitive Carriers Association (“CCA”)  
 
CCA is the nation’s leading association for competitive wireless providers and 
stakeholders across the United States. CCA’s membership includes more than 100 competitive 
wireless providers ranging from small, rural carriers serving fewer than 5,000 customers to 
regional and national providers serving millions of customers. The licensed service area of 
CCA’s carrier members covers more than 95 percent of the nation. CCA also represents 
approximately 200 associate members consisting of small businesses, vendors (including 
manufacturers and distributors) and suppliers that serve carriers of all sizes.  
 
Contact:  Rebecca Murphy Thompson, General Counsel  
  C. Sean Spivey, Assistant General Counsel 
Email:   sean.spivey@competitivecarriers.org  
Telephone: (800) 722-1872 
 
Item 2.  Proposed Class Addressed 
Identify the proposed exemption that your comment addresses by the number and name of the class set 
forth in the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (e.g., “Proposed Class 7: Audiovisual works – derivative uses  
– noncommercial remix videos”).  
 
 Proposed Class 13: Unlocking—Mobile Connectivity Devices.1  As noted in the 
NPRM, these devices allow users “to connect to a mobile data network through either a direct 
connection or the creation of a local Wi-Fi network created by the device. The category includes 
                                                 
1 CCA originally sought four separate exemptions addressing the following categories: (i) 
wireless handsets; (ii) all-purpose tablet computers; (iii) mobile hotspots and MiFi devices; and 
(iv) connected wearables and consumer machines (the Internet of Things).  For consistency and 
efficiency, however, CCA reiterates its request that these exemptions, and other similar 
exemptions, should be consolidated into a single “wireless device” exemption, as they all involve 
computer programs used in devices that connect to a telecommunications and/or broadband 
network.  Consumers do not distinguish among categories of connected devices, and having an 
exemption only applicable to a subset of wireless devices is likely to cause consumer confusion 
and frustration.  
[PAGE 2]
 2 
 
mobile hotspots and removable wireless broadband modems.”2  For simplicity, these devices will 
be referred to throughout these comments as “mobile hotspots.” 
 
 CCA has proposed the following exemption for Proposed Class 13:3 
 
Computer programs, in the form of firmware, software, or data used 
by firmware  or software, that enable mobile hotspots and MiFi 
devices to connect to a wireless network that offers  
telecommunications and/or information services, when 
circumvention is initiated by the owner of the device, or by another 
person at the direction of the owner of the device, in order to connect 
to a wireless network that offers telecommunications and/or 
information services, and access to the network is authorized by the 
operator of the network. 
 
 CCA believes that this exemption properly enables users to take control over the use of 
their mobile hotspots, and permits them the choice of which network they will be connected to.  
Rather than relying on the presumed goodwill of wireless carriers, or the availability of 
unlocking codes from manufacturers, with this exemption consumers will be empowered to 
retain their current mobile hotspots when selecting the wireless service provider of their choice. 
 
 Given the growing importance of data as a form of wireless communication among 
consumers, CCA believes that the most appropriate exemption language is for devices that 
connect to “telecommunications and/or information services.”  At present, very few wireless 
providers offer significant numbers of voice-only plans, and the ever-increasing demand by 
consumers for data weighs in favor of the Copyright Office clarifying the exemption in this 
proceeding to confirm that consumers have the right to unlock their devices for the purpose of 
connecting to wireless networks for both telecommunications and information service uses. 
 
Item 3. Overview 
Provide a brief summary of the circumvention activity sought to be exempted or opposed and why. 
 
CCA proposes to circumvent software or firmware locks on a mobile hotspot that prevent 
the mobile hotspot from accessing the wireless network of the owner’s choosing. 
 
The exemption is being sought because mobile hotspot owners have a clear ownership 
interest in the mobile hotspot itself, as well as the underlying operating system software, and 
should be afforded the ability to make non-infringing uses of these products.  Absent an 
exemption, mobile hotspot owners may be forced to purchase a new wireless device in order to 
change service providers and connect to the wireless network of their choice.  This may result in 
substantial and unnecessary costs to the consumer. 
                                                 
2 Exemption to Prohibition of Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, Docket No. 2014-07, 79 FR 73856, 73865 (Dec. 
12, 2014) (“NPRM”). 
3 NPRM at 73865, fn. 46; see also CCA Mobile Hotspot and MiFi Device Unlocking Pet. at 1-2. 
[PAGE 3]
 3 
 
 
CCA’s proposed exemption is not only consistent with the Copyright Office’s mandate to 
allow circumvention where the public interest is served by permitting non-infringing use of the 
copyrighted material, but also will promote competition and consumer choice in an increasingly 
consolidated wireless industry.4 
 
Item 4. Technological Protection Measure(s) and Method(s) of 
Circumvention 
Describe the TPM(s) that control access to the work and the relevant method(s) of circumvention. The 
description should provide sufficient information to allow the Office to understand the nature of the 
relevant technologies, as well as how they are disabled or bypassed. 
 
Mobile hotspots can be hardware or software-locked using a using a variety of methods, 
including service provider code locking, system operator code locking, band order locking and 
Subscriber Identity Module locking or Universal Integrated Circuit Card locking. These locking 
mechanisms bind the device to specific wireless networks and prevent consumers from accessing 
the wireless network of their choice. Only by circumventing these various TPMs can a mobile 
hotspot owner transfer the use of the mobile hotspot to a network and provider of one’s 
choosing. 
 
While software locks can, in some instances, serve legitimate, non-copyright related 
purposes like preventing customers from accidentally damaging the firmware on the mobile 
hotspot, these locks are most often used to inappropriately prevent a mobile hotspot from being 
moved from one network to another. 
 
Mobile hotspots are unlocked using a variety of methods, typically by changing the 
variables in certain memory locations and updating the preferred roaming list (“PRL”) to make 
the mobile hotspot compatible with a new network.  These variables are effectively a “blank 
slate” when the mobile hotspot comes off the assembly line, and then are updated to make them 
compatible with the network with which the mobile hotspot is intended to be used.  Thus, these 
variables are intended by the copyright owner to be changed based on which network a particular 
mobile hotspot will be connected to.  In this respect, no unusual or unexpected alterations are 
being made to the underlying operating system code – instead, anticipated changes are being 
made that will permit the mobile hotspot to operate. 
 
Item 5. Asserted Noninfringing Use(s)  
Explain the asserted noninfringing use(s) of copyrighted works said to be facilitated by the proposed 
exemption, including all legal (statutory or doctrinal) bases for the claim that the uses are or are likely 
                                                 
4 The Federal Communications Commission’s recently-released Seventeenth Report on mobile 
wireless competition found that the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (“HHI”), a measure of market 
concentration, averaged 3,027 across the country—more than 20% above the level at which a 
market is considered “highly concentrated.”  The HHI numbers for the wireless industry have 
consistently been on the rise over the last five years or more.  See Annual Report and Analysis of 
Competitive Market Conditions With Respect to Mobile Wireless, Including Commercial Mobile 
Services, Seventeenth Report, WT Docket No. 13-135, DA 14-1862, ¶¶ 32-33 (rel. Dec. 18, 
2014). 
[PAGE 4]
 4 
 
noninfringing. Commenters should provide an evidentiary basis to support their contentions, including 
discussion or refutation of specific examples of such uses and, if available, documentary and/or 
separately submitted multimedia evidence.  
 
Consumers who unlock mobile hotspots may engage in one or more of several 
noninfringing uses of the copyrighted software or firmware that resides on their mobile hotspot 
and permits it to connect to networks.  Typically, the circumvention of the TPM allows an 
owner, who has fulfilled all obligations to the original provider, to operate the device on the 
network of a new, compatible wireless provider of one’s choosing.  Noninfringing use of these 
copyrighted works is supported under multiple legal theories, three of which are explained here. 
 
Unlocking Constitutes “Fair Use” Under 17 U.S.C. Section 107 
 
Mobile hotspot unlocking constitutes “fair use” under Section 107 of the Title 17 of the 
United States Code.  When most mobile hotspots are unlocked, the device owner is simply 
changing the variables in certain memory locations and updating the PRL to make the mobile 
hotspot useable on a new network.  Carriers regularly update the PRL on their customers’ mobile 
hotspots, so the original author of the copyrighted work intended these variables to be changed 
without constituting a copyright violation.  Further, unlocking a mobile hotspot meets all four 
factors of the “fair use” test set forth in Section 107: (1) the purpose of the use is to allow the 
lawful owner of the mobile hotspot to connect to a wireless network of their choice, a reasonable 
and noninfringing use; (2) the copyrighted work is intended to be changed in this manner and is 
necessary for the mobile hotspot owner to derive any continued value from the copyrighted 
work; (3) the amount of the code used in an altered state is extremely small compared to the 
mobile hotspot operating system as a whole; and (4) the market for and value of the copyrighted 
work actually increases, as it allows the mobile hotspot to be transferred on the secondary market 
more easily and to a broader array of buyers. 
 
Unlocking a Mobile hotspot Does Not Create an Infringing Derivative Work 
 
Unlocking a mobile hotspot does not create an infringing “derivative work.”  This is 
because, in most instances, unlocking a mobile hotspot does not change the underlying mobile 
hotspot software, but rather it merely changes underlying variables accessed by the program.  As 
discussed above, these variables are intended by the software designer to be changed, and their 
change, therefore, does not create an infringing derivative work. Instead, the software is merely 
being operated by the mobile hotspot owners as intended. 
 
Any Derivative Work Created is Protected Under 17 U.S.C. Section 117(a)(1) 
 
If, however, a derivative work is, in fact, created, it falls within the exception set forth in 
17 U.S.C. Section 117(a)(1).  This subsection states that a derivative work may be created by the 
owner of a copyrighted work if the “new copy or adaptation is created as an essential step in the 
utilization of the computer program in conjunction with a machine and that it is used in no other 
manner.”  Since the changes being made to the copyrighted work are the same ones that need to 
be made by the underlying carrier in order for the mobile hotspot to operate properly on its 
wireless network, such adaptations are inherently “essential step[s] in the utilization of the 
computer program in conjunction with [the device].”  Indeed, in 2012, the Register agreed that 
[PAGE 5]
 5 
 
unlocking was an “essential step” in the utilization of the device, finding again that 
“[m]odifications to the firmware or software on the [device] may be necessary to make the 
device functional with another service and better serve the legitimate needs of the consumer.”5 
 
Relevant Case Law Demonstrates That Mobile hotspot Owners are Owners of the 
Underlying Operating System Software for Section 117(a)(1) Exemption Purposes 
 
In order to fall within the exception set forth in 17 U.S.C. Section 117(a)(1), the party 
creating the derivative work must also be the owner of the software – that is, if a device owner is 
a mere licensee of the software, Section 117(a)(1) protections are unavailable to him or her.6  
Although the Supreme Court has not articulated a national framework on this issue, the two 
leading cases on licensing vs. ownership are Krause v. Titleserv, Inc., 402 F.3d 119 (2d Cir. 
2005) and Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc., 621 F.3d 1102 (9th Cir. 2010).  In the 2012 
Recommendation, the Register concluded that the state of the law was sufficiently unclear as to 
make it impossible to determine whether all device owners were licensees or owners of the 
software.7  Despite this determination, the current state of the market and the terms on which 
much of the operating system software is provided to consumers in connection with a mobile 
hotspot purchase make it clear that mobile hotspot owners are the also the owners of the 
operating system software under either the Krause or the Vernor tests. 
 
In Krause, the Second Circuit held that ownership of a copyrighted work, as opposed to a 
license, is indicated by balancing seven factors:  
 
(1) whether substantial considerat ion was paid for the copy; (2) whether the copy 
was created for the sole benefit of the purchaser; (3) whether the copy was 
customized to serve the purchaser’s use; (4) whether the copy was stored on 
property owned by the purchaser; (5) whether the creator  reserved the right to 
repossess the copy; (6) whether the creator agreed that the purchaser had the right 
to possess and use the programs forever regardless of whether the relationship 
between the parties terminated; and (7) whether the purchaser was free  to discard 
or destroy the copy anytime it wished.8   
 
                                                 
5 2012 Recommendation at 93. 
6 Contrary to the arguments raised by CTIA in the 2012 proceeding, simply stating that a piece of 
software is being provided under “license” does not make it so.  See Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc., 
621 F.3d 1102, 1180 (9th Cir. 2010) (holding that simply labeling a software agreement as a 
license is not “dispositive”). 
7 2012 Recommendation at 92 (“The Register concludes that the state of the law remains unclear. 
Although Vernor and Krause are useful guideposts in considering the status of software 
ownership, they are controlling precedent in only two circuits and are inconsistent in their 
approach; whether and how those standards would be applied in other circuits is unknown.”) 
8 Krause, 402 F.3d at 124. 
[PAGE 6]
 6 
 
With respect to mobile hotspots, owners pay substantial consideration for the copy of the 
software as part of the mobile hotspot price.9  The copy of the software is stored on property 
owned, namely the physical mobile hotspot, and the software creator permits the underlying 
operating system software to be used by the mobile hotspot owner indefinitely (and in some 
cases, even longer due to transfer rights).  Further, the mobile hotspot owner is free to discard or 
destroy the copy (along with the physical mobile hotspot) anytime that he or she wishes.  On 
balance, these Krause factors strongly favor a finding of ownership of the copyrighted operating 
system software by the wireless device owner. 
 
In Vernor, the Ninth Circuit held that “a software user is a licensee rather than an owner 
of a copy where the copyright owner (1) specifies that the user is granted a license; (2) 
significantly restricts the user’s ability to transfer the software; and (3) imposes notable use 
restrictions.”10  These factors can be seen as more stringent, and it has been argued by some that 
they favor the view that the device owner is a licensee.  Nevertheless, the test for ownership of a 
mobile hotspot’s underlying operating system is met under the Vernor test as well.  Importantly, 
the Vernor test is a conjunctive test, and therefore demands that all three elements be met if a 
software user is to be considered a licensee, rather than an owner.11 
 
As applied to the facts at hand, mobile hotspots do not have “notable use restrictions.”  
Customers are permitted to use their mobile hotspots for any lawful purpose, and as the Register 
stated in the 2012 Recommendation, “no wireless provider has taken the position that customers 
are unable to sell devices that they no longer use, or transfer them to a spouse, child or friend.”12  
Accordingly, mobile hotspot operating system software fails one factor of the Vernor test, and on 
this basis alone one could conclude that the owner of a mobile hotspot is also an owner of the 
copy of the operating system software. 
 
Given the evidence above, it is clear that mobile hotspot owners should be considered 
owners of a copy of the operating system software, and therefore entitled to the protections of 
Section 117(a)(1), and be permitted to create a derivative work in order to allow the mobile 
hotspot to connect to a wireless network of the mobile hotspot owners choice. 
 
Item 6. Asserted Adverse Effects  
Explain whether the inability to circumvent the TPM(s) at issue has or is likely to have adverse effects on 
the asserted noninfringing use(s), including any relevant legal (statutory or doctrinal) considerations. 
Commenters should also address any potential alternatives that permit the asserted noninfringing use(s) 
                                                 
9 For example, the price for an unlocked AT&T Unite Pro mobile hotspot is $199.99, with the 
hardware components of the mobile hotspot combining to form only a small portion of the cost 
of the device.  See http://www.att.com/devices/netgear/unite-pro.html#sku=sku6910270.   
10 Vernor, 621 F.3d at 1111.   
11 See YULE KIM, CONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH SERVICE, STATUTORY INTERPRETATION: GENERAL 
PRINCIPLES AND RECENT TRENDS, Order Code 97-589 at 8 (updated Aug. 31, 2008) (“Ordinarily, 
as in everyday English, use of the conjunctive ‘and’ in a list means that all of the listed 
requirements must be satisfied . . . .”). 
12 2012 Recommendation at 92 (quoting MetroPCS Comments at 17). 
[PAGE 7]
 7 
 
without the need for circumvention. Commenters should provide an evidentiary basis to support their 
contentions, including discussion or refutation of specific examples of such uses and, if avail able, 
documentary and/or separately submitted multimedia evidence.  
 
The most clear, and most immediate, adverse effect that the TPMs that lock mobile 
hotspots have is to prevent consumers from easily switching their mobile hotspots to the 
competing network of their choice.  Although carriers may unlock under certain circumstances, 
owners should not be beholden to the carrier after completion of service agreement 
commitments.  As the Senate has noted, there are also “circumstances in which additional 
avenues for unlocking may be preferable over attempting to unlock through the carrier.”13  
Absent an exemption, TPMs used to lock mobile hotspots to a particular network will foreclose 
the ability to exercise preferable, and in some cases, the only, avenues to unlock devices.  Since 
circumvention to connect to an alternative network would be a noninfringing use of the 
copyrighted work, consumers should have the freedom to unlock their mobile hotspots on their 
own or through an agent of their choosing. 
 
Mobile Hotspots are Not Subject to the Current CTIA “Voluntary” Unlocking Agreement, 
and Individual Carrier Policies are Insufficient to Protect Consumer Interests 
 
Millions of Americans use their mobile hotspots, USB dongles and MiFi pucks to 
connect single or multiple devices to the Internet while on the go. These devices allow users to 
connect any device that is WiFi-capable for maximum productivity, and have become a hugely 
important part of doing business while mobile.  Unfortunately for consumers, the ability to be 
mobile may stop when switching carriers.  And, carriers are indeed locking mobile hotspots.  
AT&T, one of the largest wireless carriers in the nation, makes their locking policy for all 
devices clear, explicitly stating that they place software locks on mobile hotspots, and in fact the 
that company “locks all devices, as of November 11, 2004.”14   
 
Critically, the CTIA “voluntary” agreement currently in place to unlock certain wireless 
devices does not include mobile hotspots, but instead only “phones and tablets . . . that are 
locked by or at the direction of the carrier.”15  While carriers may provide unlock codes at their 
own discretion, there is presently nothing preventing them from refusing to unlock these 
important devices. This lack of commitment presents a significant problem for consumers. 
 
Even if a carrier were to have a “voluntary” unlocking policy for mobile hotspots, the 
exemption would remain necessary.  As NTIA noted in the last triennial review, oftentimes 
                                                 
13 Senate Report 113-212, available at http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CRPT-
113srpt212/html/CRPT-113srpt212.htm.  
14 See 
http://www.att.com/media/att/2014/support/pdf/ATTMobilityDeviceUnlockCodeInstructions.pdf
. AT&T’s unlocking instructions – nearly all of which require approval from the carrier – list a 
number of mobile hotspots as locked to AT&T, including mobile hotspots from Netgear, Novatel 
and others. 
15 CTIA Consumer Code for Wireless Service, Section 12, available at 
http://www.ctia.org/policy-initiatives/voluntary-guidelines/consumer-code-for-wireless-service.  
[PAGE 8]
 8 
 
carriers must have the necessary code or the ability to reasonably obtain it to unlock a device.16  
Where a voluntary agreement only requires that a carrier “initiate a request to the OEM to unlock 
the eligible device” it is possible for the carrier to comply with a voluntary agreement in a 
manner that does not ultimately result in the consumer’s device being unlocked.   
 
This also highlights the fact that OEMs (or third-party software developers) often 
consider themselves to be the owners of the copyrighted software, which is provided under a 
purported license to carriers.  So, there remains the possibility an OEM or software developer 
may refuse to allow carriers to alter their software in any respect, which would eliminate the 
ability of carriers to implement their voluntary unlocking promises.  In such a circumstance, a 
consumer unlocking exemption granted in this proceeding would be the only path to allowing 
customers to switch wireless providers with their devices in hand.  And, this circumstance is not 
farfetched or theoretical.  Indeed, in a recent discussion of the company’s post-sale transition 
plan, Cincinnati Bell Wireless (“CBW”) stated that it would only be allowing customers to 
unlock their handsets to move to another carrier if the handsets were “one year old or newer.”17  
Even with this significant restriction, CBW would only permit customers to “transition to 
another provider by providing unlock codes (if available),” suggesting that there are a sufficient 
number of circumstances in which unlock codes are not available to warrant a specific 
disclosure.18  Although this was in the context of wireless handsets, it is not a significant leap to 
assume that the same is or would be the case for similarly-situated mobile hotspot customers. 
 
Thus there is clear evidence that these voluntary unlocking policies do not obviate the 
need for an exemption.  As a result, customers must have the option and the right to unlock their 
mobile hotspots to realize their full utility, and without unwarranted interference from their 
original wireless provider.   
 
The Availability of Unlocked Mobile hotspot Options Does Not Obviate the Need for an 
Exemption 
 
Further, the availability of unlocked mobile hotspot options in the marketplace does not 
displace the need for a mobile hotspot unlocking exemption.  Although some, but by no means 
all, mobile hotspots are available in an unlocked form, a consumer may not find her desired 
mobile hotspot as one of the unlocked options.  At least one carrier currently locks mobile 
hotspots.  But perhaps more importantly, a consumer may simply wish to keep his current 
familiar mobile hotspot, or that is, for example, particularly well-suited to his needs.  Where 
owners are unable to unlock their current mobile hotspot to connect to their network of choice, 
they are effectively forced to purchase a new mobile hotspot, despite having no desire to do so. 
                                                 
16 NTIA Reply Comments at 16, available at 
http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2012/2012_NTIA_Letter.pdf; CTIA Consumer Code of Conduct 
§ 12. 
17 Phil Goldstein, “Cincinnati Bell customers frustrated by transition amid network shutdown,” 
FierceWireless (Jan. 12, 2015), available at http://www.fiercewireless.com/story/cincinnati-bell-
customers-frustrated-transition-amid-network-shutdown/2015-01-12.  
18 Id. 
[PAGE 9]
 9 
 
 
Substantial Evidence of Adverse Effects Exists, and Consumers Have No Reasonable 
Alternatives to Circumvention 
 
After the previous unlocking exemption was allowed to expire, Congress saw sufficient 
current adverse effects, as well as the potential for adverse effects, to immediately reinstate and 
expand the exemption in the “Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act.” 
Even with other voluntary unlocking policies in place, Congress saw sufficient harm in the 
marketplace to adopt legislation.  And, in this respect, Congress was performing the will of the 
people.  A White House petition garnered more than 114,000 signatures from concerned 
consumers who demonstrated the likely adverse effects of the rejection of the unlocking 
exemption.19  Indeed, this consumer outcry extended not only to the original exemption or 
wireless handsets, but also to other wireless devices as well.  As part of the “Unlocking 
Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act,” Congress directed the Copyright Office to 
expand its inquiry into other wireless devices, such as mobile hotspots, to ensure that anti-
competitive locking policies were not harming the market for these important consumer products 
as well.  Even with voluntary unlocking policies for handsets and tablets already in place, 
Congress saw sufficient harm in the marketplace to adopt legislation directing the Copyright 
Office to undertake this new examination. 
 
Additionally, NTIA petitioned the FCC to commence a rulemaking to require carriers to 
unlock devices upon request.20  NTIA stated that a rule would “increase competition in the 
mobile services market and enhance consumer welfare.”21  While the enactment of the 
Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act foreclosed the need for rulemaking, 
not extending an exemption would have the adverse effects of decreased competition and 
consumer welfare. 
 
Even the Obama Administration, in a statement applauding Congress for passing the 
Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act, referenced steps “to ensure 
copyright law does not undermine wireless competition,” including fixes “that make it clear: 
neither criminal law nor technological locks should prevent customers from switching carriers 
when they are no longer bound by a service agreement or other obligation.”22 Failure to grant an 
exemption would reinstate criminal penalties that may prevent consumers from switching 
carriers, a clear and immediate adverse effect. 
                                                 
19 See R. David Edelman, “It’s Time to Legalize Cell Phone Unlocking,” Official White House 
Response to Make Unlocking Cell Phones Legal, available at 
https://petitions.whitehouse.gov/response/its-time-legalize-cell-phone-unlocking (“White House 
Unlocking Response”).  
20 NTIA, Petition for Rulemaking of the National Telecommunications and Information 
Administration (filed Sept. 17, 2013), available at 
http://www.ntia.doc.gov/files/ntia/publications/ntia_mobile_devices_unlocking_petition_091720
13.pdf.   
21 Id. at 1. 
22 See White House Unlocking Response. 
[PAGE 10]
 10 
 
 
No viable alternatives to circumvention have emerged over the last three years, nor is 
CCA aware of any on the horizon.  As a result, the Copyright Office remains consumers’ best 
hope for a continued ability to lawfully unlock their mobile hotspots.  The Copyright Office 
should heed the outcry from consumers, Congress and the Administration about the current and 
potential anti-consumer harms that failing to adopt a mobile hotspot unlocking exemption would 
bring, and adopt CCA’s proposed exemption. 
 
Item 7. Statutory Factors  
Evaluate the proposed exemption in light of each of the statutory factors set forth in 17 U.S.C. 
1201(a)(1)(C): 
(i) the availability for use of copyrighted works;  
Without question, locks on mobile hotspots reduce the availability for use and usability of 
the copyrighted software operating system.  A customer who would otherwise be technically able 
to use his or her device on a competing network is prevented from doing so by artificial locks.  
Thus, the ability to use the copyrighted operating system software that powers the mobile hotspot 
is substantially limited; if a customer switches networks and has a mobile hotspot that cannot be 
unlocked, he or she is no longer able to use the copyright operating system. 
 
Importantly, as the Register found during the prior proceeding: 
 
There is no indication that mobile . . .  firmware is sold in any way other 
than with the [device] for which it is developed, and no indication that there 
are alternative “formats” available that would not require circumvention – 
that is, there is no evidence that users of locked legacy [devices] can simply 
install an alternative operating system that does not include carrier locks. 
Accordingly, the first factor favors an exemption.23 
 
 These facts remain as true today as they did in 2012.  CCA is unaware of mobile hotspot 
firmware being sold in any other way than bundled with the mobile hotspot for which it was 
developed, and is aware of no other formats of such operating system software available that 
would not require circumvention.  As such, the Register should make the same finding in this 
proceeding that the first statutory favor favors an exemption. 
 
(ii) the availability for use of works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational purposes;  
An exemption permitting the unlocking of mobile hotspots increase the availability of the 
copyrighted operating system works for use for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational 
purposes.  As an initial matter, a significant number of nonprofit organizations fund their 
operations through the collection, unlocking and resale of wireless devices.  In addition, artificial 
locks on mobile hotspot software may prevent those operating systems from being studied in the 
classroom or archived for future study.  An exemption to the prohibition on circumvention of 
mobile hotspot locks certainly will not negatively impact, and may in fact promote, the use of 
these works for such purposes. 
                                                 
23 2012 Recommendation at 97. 
[PAGE 11]
 11 
 
 
(iii) the impact that the prohibition on the circumvention of technological measures applied to 
copyrighted works has on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or 
research;  
Similar to the use of the works for nonprofit and educational purposes, there should be no 
concern that a mobile hotspot unlocking exemption will have any negative impact on criticism, 
comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship or research.  In fact, there may be positive 
benefits for these fields that flow from an unlocking exemption.  For example, journalists can 
improve consumer awareness by writing about the behavior of an unlocked device moving from 
one network to another.  Similarly, this would allow industry commenters to review the 
performance of a single mobile hotspot on multiple wireless networks. 
 
(iv) the effect of circumvention of technological measures on the market for or value of 
copyrighted works; and  
If anything, the circumvention of mobile hotspot locks actually improves the market 
value of the copyrighted work.  Since the operating system conveys with the wireless device, the 
creator of the copyrighted work is actually benefited by being able to reach the widest possible 
audience.  If a mobile hotspot is locked to a particular network, it inherently has a smaller base of 
customers on the secondary market, and is therefore worth less to the original purchaser.  The 
operating system is a large part of the value of the fully operational mobile hotspot, and 
customers will be willing to pay more for a mobile hotspot (and the underlying operating system) 
that is worth more, and can be transferred more easily, on the secondary market. 
 
Although the Register found that the market for mobile device operating system software 
was “unlikely to be affected by enabling consumers to alter that software for the purpose of using 
the handset on another carrier,” this was coupled with the finding that “[t]here is nothing in the 
record to suggest that the market for firmware has declined in the six years following the first 
granting of an unlocking exemption.”24  CCA agrees with the Register’s prior determination.  In 
fact, the market for firmware (and the mobile hotspots with which it is sold) has only increased 
since the Register made that determination in 2012.  A recent CTIA survey cited by the Federal 
Communications Commission found that “the number of connections grew . . . from 326.5 
million at the end of 2012, to 335.7 million at the end of 2013[or 3 percent].”25  Thus, it can be 
demonstrated that the market for firmware (and the wireless devices with which it is sold) has 
only increased since the Register made its determination in 2012.  Accordingly, the Register 
should again draw the same conclusion, based on the same or stronger current evidence, that “the 
fourth factor . . . favors an exemption.”26 
 
 
 
                                                 
24 2012 Recommendation at 98. 
25 Seventeenth Report at ¶ 20 (citing CTIA Wireless Industry Indices at 7). 
26 2012 Recommendation at 98. 
[PAGE 12]
 12 
 
(v) any other factor that may be appropriate for the Librarian to consider in evaluating the 
proposed exemption. 
 
The Librarian should consider the positive impact that an unlocking exemption will have 
on consumer choice and competition in the wireless industry.  By allowing customers to have 
control over their own wireless devices, and to put them on the network of their choosing, the 
Librarian is conferring a significant social benefit.  The Librarian should empower consumers to 
make informed choices about wireless services. 
 
Item 8. Documentary Evidence  
Commenters are encouraged to submit documentary evidence to support their arguments or illustrate 
pertinent points concerning the proposed exemption. Any such documentary evidence should be attached 
to the comment and uploaded through the Office’s website (though it does not count toward the 25-page 
limit).   
None submitted. 
