[PAGE 1]
 
 
Short Comment Regarding a Proposed Section 1201 Exemption 
  
Item 1. Commenter Information  
 
As the principal national trade association of the U.S. book publishing industry, AAP represents 
some 400 member companies and organizations that include most of the major commercial book 
and journal publishers in the United States, as well as many small and non-profit publishers, 
university presses and scholarly societies. AAP members publish hardcover and paperback books 
and journals in every field of human interest. In addition to publishing print materials, many 
AAP members are producing e-books as well as computer programs, databases, Web sites and a 
variety of multimedia works for use in online and other digital formats. 
 
Item 2.  Proposed Class Addressed 
 
 Proposed Class 9: Literary Works Distributed Electronically – Assistive Technologies 
 
“This proposed class would allow circumvention of access controls on lawfully made and 
acquired literary works distributed electronically for purposes of accessibility for persons who 
are print disabled. This exemption has been requested for literary works distributed electronically, 
including e-books, digital textbooks, and PDF articles.” 
 
Item 3. Statement Regarding Proposed Exemption 
 
In prior proceedings, the Register of Copyrights and/or the Librarian of Congress have been 
notably flexible and generous in applying the rules on proponents’ evidentiary burdens in order 
to grant and renew successively broader versions of exemptions that authorize circumvention of 
access controls which restrict the use of assistive technologies to make non-infringing uses of 
literary works distributed electronically.  In particular, they have granted the renewal requests 
notwithstanding the absence of evidence demonstrating that a previously-granted exemption for 
this class of works has actually been used to provide a remedy for the identified problems it was 
supposed to address.  However, AAP acknowledges that these determinations were also based 
upon the consideration of changing market conditions which, despite the proliferation of mobile 
devices used to read such works, do not yet offer inherent accessibility across such platforms or 
in the commercially-available versions of such works for consumers with print disabilities. 
 
Insofar as the pending Class 9 proposal seeks to renew the current exemption (adopted in 2012) 
without revision, AAP does not object to granting that proposal, despite our disagreement with 
the 2012 rulemaking decision to eliminate the requirement in previous versions of the exemption 
that circumvention was permitted only if all existing e-book editions of the work (including 
digital text editions made available by authorized entities under Section 121 of the Copyright Act) 
contained restrictive access controls. AAP urges the Register and the Librarian to ensure that any 
continued relaxation of the evidentiary rules deemed necessary to reach this result doesn’t extend 
beyond their consideration of this proposed class, and to remain open to narrowing or rejecting 
such an exemption in the future as market conditions – including the implementation of ePub3 
and HTML5 standards – limit the variability of accessibility capabilities across such devices and 
increase the commercial availability of accessible versions of such works in the marketplace.   
