[PAGE 1]
February 6, 2015 
 
Music Library Association 
8551 Research Way 
Suite 180 
Middleton, WI 53562 
Ph. 608-836-5825 
 
The Music Library Association (MLA) respectfully submits the following comment in 
response to the call for comments, "Section 1201 Exemptions to Prohibition Against 
Circumvention of Technological Measures Protecting Copyrighted Works,” 
(http://copyright.gov/1201/).  The MLA is the professional association for music libraries 
and librarianship in the United States.  Founded in 1931, MLA has an international 
membership of over 800 librarians, musicians, scholars, educators, and members of the 
book and music trades.  Complementing the Association's national and international 
activities are eleven regional chapters that carry out its programs on the local level.  The 
Music Library Association provides a professional forum for librarians, archivists, and 
others who support and preserve the world's musical heritage. 
 
This comment addresses the fourth proposed class of exemptions out of 27 created by the 
Copyright Office in December 2014: 
 
4. Audiovisual works – educational uses – educational programs operated by 
museums, libraries, or nonprofits
 
This proposed class would allow educators and learners in libraries, museums, 
and nonprofit organizations to circumvent access controls on lawfully made and 
acquired motion pictures and other audiovisual works for educational purposes.
 
This exemption has been requested for audiovisual material made available in all 
formats, including DVDs protected by CSS, Blu-ray discs protected by AACS, and 
TPM-protected online distribution services. 
 
Music librarians frequently need to excerpt motion pictures and other audiovisual works 
for purposes of library and faculty classroom instruction. The subjects of music theory, 
music history, and performance practice are virtually impossible to teach without the 
ability to provide sound and/or video examples in classrooms. Many works are only 
available on DVD, Blu-ray, or other digital formats that cannot be excerpted without 
circumvention of technological protection measures.  These works frequently provide the 
best available audio and video quality, and include features such as closed captioning that 
are not available on other formats. 
 
 
  
 
	
