[PAGE 1]
Note: Please submit a separate comment for each proposed class. 
This is a Word document that allows users to type into the spaces below. The comment should be no more than one 
page in length (which may be single-spaced but should be in at least 12-point type). The italicized instructions on 
this template may be deleted.  
PRIVACY ACT ADVISORY STATEMENT Required by the Privacy Act of 1974 (P.L. 93-579) 
The authority for requesting this information is 17 U.S.C. §§ 1201(a)(1) and 705. Furnishing the requested information is voluntary. 
The principal use of the requested information is publication on the Copyright Office website and use by Copyright Office staff for 
purposes of the rulemaking proceeding conducted under 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1). NOTE: No other advisory statement will be given 
in connection with this submission. Please keep this statement and refer to it if we communicate with you regarding this submission. 
Short Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption 
Under 17 U.S.C. 1201 
  
Item 1. Commenter Information  
Identify the commenting party and, if desired, provide a means for others to contact the commenter or an 
authorized representative of the commenter by email and/or telephone.  (Please keep in mind that any 
private, confidential, or personally identifiable information in this document will be accessible to the public.) 
 
AK Wong 
 
Item 2.  Proposed Class Addressed 
Identify the proposed exemption that the comment addresses by the number and name of the class set 
forth in the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (e.g., “Proposed Class 7: Audiovisual works – derivative uses 
– noncommercial remix videos”). 
 
The Digital Millenium Copyright Act and DMCA exception for jailbreaking devices
 
 
Item 3. Statement Regarding Proposed Exemption 
Explain why you support or oppose the relevant proposed exemption.   
 
I support the DMCA exception for jailbreaking devices.  As an avid Apple products user (I’ve had an 
iPhone since the introduction of the device in 2007, and also own several iPads) I have spent thousands 
of dollars on the products and hundreds of dollars on taxes for these devices.  Since I use and own these 
devices, I should be able to use the device the way I see fit, and no be bound by the ways Apple locks the 
devices.  Jailbreaking creates an access to features that Apple does have, yet over the years as Apple 
updates their iOS system, all the popular jailbreaks are now included into their operating system.   
 
Their developers takes the program, tweak, or modification and incorporates it into their own system 
which shows that the features developed by the general public is valuable to improve the user’s 
experience on their iDevice. 
 
Although Apple is against jailbreaking, there is a huge jailbreaking community that has a passion for 
modify and programing new tweaks to iDevices.  I feel these developers will help improve technology and 
may be inspired to create new innovations that will change the world. 
 
 
