[PAGE 1]
Long Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption
Under 17 U.S.C. 1201
For Software Freedom Conservancy
Proposed Class: 20 – Smart TVs
No multimedia evidence is being provided in connection with this comment
Item 1. Commenter Information 
The Petition submitter is Software Freedom Conservancy (“Conservancy”), a 501(c)(3) 
not-for-profit organization that helps promote, improve, develop, and defend Free, Libre, and 
Open Source Software (“FLOSS”)—software developed by volunteer communities and licensed 
for the benefit of everyone. Conservancy is the nonprofit home for dozens of FLOSS projects  
representing well over a thousand volunteer contributors. Conservancy's communities maintain 
some of the most fundamental utilities in computing today, and introduce innovations that will 
shape how software will be created in the future.
Among the projects for which Conservancy provides logistical, administrative, and legal 
support are BusyBox and Samba, both of which are commonly installed on “smart” or computer-
embedded consumer electronics devices. BusyBox provides a number of key system utilities that 
enable such devices to run applications, interact with files, access network services, and more.1 It 
is also used by community projects focused on unlocking and improving Samsung-2 and LG-
manufactured Smart TVs.3 Samba permits devices to interact with files stored on other networked 
devices.4 Conservancy also represents the interests of several contributors to the Linux kernel, 
the core component of the operating system of most Smart TVs.
Conservancy may be contacted through its authorized representatives and pro bono 
counsel at Tor Ekeland, P.C., 195 Plymouth Street, Brooklyn, New York 11201: 
Aaron Williamson
(718) 285-9349
aaron@torekeland.com
Frederic Jennings
(718) 514-2075
fred@torekeland.com
Item 2. Proposed Class Addressed
The proposed class addressed is Class 20: “Jailbreaking – smart TVs.”
1 See BusyBox - The Swiss Army Knife of Embedded Linux,  
http://www.busybox.net/downloads/BusyBox.html (last visited Feb. 5, 2015).2 See SamyGO wiki, How to enable Advanced mode startup script,  
http://wiki.samygo.tv/index.php?title=How_to_enable_Advanced_mode_startup_script (as of 
Nov. 11, 2011, 12:09).3 See OpenLGTV wiki, OpenLGTV BCM, 
http://openlgtv.org.ru/wiki/index.php/OpenLGTV_BCM (as of  Jul. 4, 2012, 11:20).4 See Wikipedia, Samba (software), https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Samba_(software) (as of Jan. 
23, 2015, 13:39 GMT); For a Smart TV application, see Exhibit A, Sony package list section.
1
[PAGE 2]
Item 3. Overview
The software produced by Conservancy's member projects has, in conjunction with other 
FLOSS tools, served as the functional foundation for hundreds of Smart TVs—Internet-enabled 
TVs containing embedded computer systems5—produced in recent years. The overwhelming 
majority of Smart TVs run FLOSS operating systems based on Linux, an operating system 
kernel (developed in part by volunteer contributors to Conservancy member projects), system 
utilities such as BusyBox and Samba (produced and maintained by Conservancy member 
projects), and multimedia applications such as FFmpeg that support their most critical functions.6
Neither Conservancy nor the developers who contributed to this software received a dime 
in licensing revenue from the sales of these products, and they never intended to. They licensed 
their work freely under FLOSS licenses that gave everyone—individual enthusiasts and billion-
dollar electronics companies alike—the freedom to use, modify, share, and profit from it.7 In 
doing so, they sought to deliver these freedoms to all who received the software, directly or 
indirectly, and licensed their work under terms that guaranteed these freedoms.8
Not every television manufacturer who benefits from Conservancy projects' software 
shares their ideals, nor are they required to—many use encryption and other technological 
protection measures (“TPMs”) to limit access to the proprietary software running on their Smart 
TVs. They have the right to do so, but their customers also have the right to access, modify, and 
share the software produced by Conservancy member projects and other FLOSS developers, and 
to use their TVs for whatever non-infringing purpose they wish.
Conservancy seeks an exemption permitting Smart TV owners to circumvent TPMs that 
control access to the software on their TVs and that prevent the installation of user-supplied 
software. Most importantly, this exemption will enable Smart TV owners to access the FLOSS 
applications pre-installed on their TVs—including those produced by Conservancy's member 
projects—and to exercise their corresponding rights to study, modify, and share these 
applications.  It will also enable Smart TV owners to produce and share new applications for 
their TVs and thereby expand their access to copyrighted works. And it will allow users to make 
fair use of the manufacturers' proprietary applications, making their TVs more useful and 
accessible.
Item 4. Technological Protection Measures and Methods of Circumvention
Smart TV manufacturers restrict access to the TVs' operating systems using two types of 
TPM: firmware encryption and administrative access controls. 
5 See Wikipedia, Smart TV, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smart_TV (as of Feb. 4, 2015, 01:09 
GMT).6 See Exhibit A, which lists the dozens of FLOSS applications contained in just a few Smart TV 
models produced by prominent manufacturers. These lists are representative of the pervasiveness 
of FLOSS industry-wide.7 See Exhibit B, GNU General Public License, version 2, also available at: 
https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html (“GPLv2”) (GPLv2 is the license for BusyBox, Linux, 
and several other applications commonly embedded in Smart TVs).8 See Exhibit B, GPLv2, Preamble (“[T]he GNU General Public License is intended to guarantee 
your freedom to share and change free software—to make sure the software is free for all its 
users.”).
2
[PAGE 3]
Firmware Encryption
Firmware is software embedded in a device's semipermanent memory.9 A Smart TV's 
firmware contains a filesystem (a directory structure containing application files and data) which 
in turn contains the operating system and other applications installed on the TV .10 Users typically 
download firmware updates from the manufacturer's website, or receive them on a thumb drive 
mailed by the manufacturer.11 Often, a firmware update will contain the complete Smart TV OS, 
as well as applications to be run by the OS.12
If a firmware update is encrypted, a Smart TV owner cannot view or modify its contents 
without circumventing the encryption by decrypting the update file. Different encryption 
schemes are used by different manufacturers (and on different TVs produced by a single 
manufacturer), but most involve the application of a well-known encryption algorithm such as 
Advanced Encryption System (AES), in conjunction with a secret key selected by the 
manufacturer.13 In several cases, Smart TV modification enthusiasts have discovered the “secret 
key” by “brute force,” i.e. by using a program to guess every possible key until the correct key is 
found, yielding the ability to decrypt the contents of updates.14
When firmware encryption is used, the only way for a TV's owner to produce a valid 
update file is to decrypt an update provided by the manufacturer, make any desired 
modifications, and then encrypt the entire update contents according to the manufacturer's 
chosen scheme. Using this decrypt-modify-encrypt process, a TV owner can place new or 
updated applications in the filesystem contained in the manufacturer-provided firmware update, 
so that when the update is installed, those applications are available to the TV operating system. 
Administrative Access Controls
Smart TVs also limit access to the contents of their firmware using the types of 
administrative access controls commonly employed by computer operating systems. For 
example, the OS's access rules might prevent any user other than the administrator or “root” user 
9 See generally IT Law Wiki, Firmware, http://itlaw.wikia.com/wiki/Firmware (as of Jan. 3, 
2014, 16:39).10 See generally IT Law Wiki, Filesystem, http://itlaw.wikia.com/wiki/File_system (as of Sept. 
16, 2011, 04:49).11 See, e.g. [How-to Guides] How to upgrade firmware of Samsung SMART TV through USB 
Drive ?, http://skp.samsungcsportal.com/integrated/popup/HtgDetailGuide3.jsp?
seq=8641&cdsite=in (last visited Feb. 6, 2015).12 See Christian E. Legare, How to evaluate an embedded flash-based file system, IAR Systems, 
Aug. 12, 2011, http://www.iar.com/Global/Resources/Viewpoints/How%20to%20evaluate%20an
%20embedded%20flash-based%20file%20system.pdf, p. 2.13 Some also involve more rudimentary encryption, such as “XOR” encryption, which involves 
performing a simple mathematic transformation on each byte of data in a file. And some 
manufacturers use both techniques in combination. See, e.g., SamyGo Wiki, Extracting the ES-
series firmware, http://wiki.samygo.tv/index.php5/Extracting_the_ES-series_firmware (as of 
Feb. 9, 2013, 15:56).14 See N. Sidiropoulos & P. Stefopoulos, Smart TV Hacking, University of Amsterdam, January 
13, 2013, http://dare.uva.nl/cgi/arno/show.cgi?fid=495678  .
3
[PAGE 4]
from installing or executing applications. For Smart TVs on which it is impossible to install an 
entirely new firmware, the owner can sometimes install new or modified applications by 
circumventing the OS's access controls to enable root access.
To bypass administrative access controls, it is often necessary to identify and exploit a 
security vulnerability exposed by an application installed on the TV . This is the same type of 
technique used to jailbreak many smartphones, an activity for which an exemption has been 
granted in previous rulemakings.15 For example, the administrative access controls employed by 
certain models of Sony Bravia Smart TVs can be circumvented by causing the TV to run a 
program that exploits a memory error to give the user administrative access, and then installs a 
program enabling the owner to connect to the TV from a personal computer.16
Item 5. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
By accessing the firmware running on their Smart TVs, users can make several important 
non-infringing uses of applications (FLOSS and otherwise) pre-installed on the TV , other 
applications that the user installs on the TV , and the users' own digital media.
Licensed use and modification of FLOSS hardware-specific
Conservancy is primarily concerned with facilitating the use of FLOSS applications 
produced by its member projects and other FLOSS community members. These applications are 
licensed according to terms that permit and encourage users to copy, modify, and share them 
freely. As stated above, some of these applications, such as BusyBox and Samba, are commonly 
embedded in Smart TVs by manufacturers and subsequently distributed to every person who 
purchases these TVs. Conservancy also represents several individual developers who own 
copyright in Linux, the operating system kernel upon which the majority of Smart TV operating 
systems are built.
The specific FLOSS license used by the BusyBox and Linux kernel projects is the GNU 
General Public License version 2 (GPLv2), attached as Exhibit B. Samba uses version 3 of the 
same license, attached as Exhibit C. As stated in the license text, GPLv2 permits every recipient 
of the software to exercise the “four freedoms” common to all FLOSS: “the freedom to run, 
copy, distribute, study, change and improve the software.”17 When a Smart TV manufacturer 
distributes GPLv2-licensed software embedded in the TV's firmware, it is required to notify the 
purchaser of the TV of these rights.18
Because these rights are granted by the licenses of FLOSS applications contained in 
15 See Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights in RM 2005-1, Rulemaking on 
Exemptions from Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access 
Control Technologies (U.S. Copyright Office Nov. 17, 2006) (“2006 Recommendations”), p. 53; 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights in RM 2008-8, Rulemaking on Exemptions from 
Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies 
(U.S. Copyright Office Jun. 11, 2010) (“2008 Recommendations”), p. 104.16 Brian Benchoff, Getting root on a Sony Bravia, Hackaday, Jun. 20, 2012, 
http://hackaday.com/2012/06/20/getting-root-on-a-sony-tv/.17 See GNU Operating System, What is free software?, https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-
sw.html (last visited Feb. 5, 2015).18 A photograph of a Samsung TV's on-screen GPL compliance notice is attached as Exhibit D.
4
[PAGE 5]
Smart TV firmwares, the owners of these TVs are explicitly permitted to access these 
applications, modify their functionality, and install new or modified versions of the applications 
onto their TVs. They should be permitted to circumvent TPMs that prevent them from exercising 
these rights.
Installation of new, licensed applications
Where enthusiast communities like the SamyGo project have successfully circumvented 
TPMs to access the software on their Smart TVs, the result has been a torrent of grassroots 
innovation. Users have developed new software to modify the behavior of their TVs in dozens of 
useful ways, including to:
1. modify subtitles to be larger, brighter, or outlined to enhance readability;
2. display extended channel information;
3. enable or expand the TV's compatibility with peripheral hardware, such as mice, 
keyboards, and external storage devices;
4. change the aspect ratio, resolution, or scale of the TV's display;
5. enable interaction with other devices over the owner's home network, including laptops 
and mobile devices, for example to display incoming SMS messages and other useful 
information provided by those devices or allow remote control of the TV from those 
devices.19
Some of these applications make the TVs more accessible to people with disabilities, 
where the manufacturer has opted not to support accessibility features.20 Applications to make 
subtitles larger, brighter,21 and more pronounced22 improve accessibility for hearing-impaired 
viewers. Users have also worked to adapt FLOSS text-to-speech applications to read subtitles 
aloud to sight-impaired users.23 Similarly, on-screen notifications could be used to alert hearing-
19 See SamyGO Wiki, Content Library applications list, 
http://wiki.samygo.tv/index.php5/Content_Library_applications_list (listing applications 
developed for unlocked Samsung Smart TVs) (as of May 30, 2013, 09:28); SamyGO Wiki, 
Desktop applications list, http://wiki.samygo.tv/index.php5/Desktop_applications_list (listing 
desktop-OS applications that operate with unlocked Samsung Smart Tvs) (as of Dec. 7, 2013, 
13:09); SamyGO Wiki, Android applications list,  
http://wiki.samygo.tv/index.php5/Android_applications_list (listing Android-OS applications 
that operate with unlocked Samsung Smart Tvs) (as of Nov. 25, 2012, 11:14); SamyGO Wiki, 
IOS [sic] applications list, http://wiki.samygo.tv/index.php5/IOS_applications_list  (listing iOS 
applications that operate with unlocked Samsung Smart TVs) (as of October 21, 2011, 14:40).20 See, e.g., vocal guide for visual impaired on ue40h6400aw, SamyGo Forum, 
http://forum.samygo.tv/viewtopic.php?f=74&t=8206.21 See, e.g. Bigger Yellow Font, SamyGO forum thread at http://forum.samygo.tv/viewtopic.php?
f=2&t=40#p182 (last accessed February 3, 2015).22 See, e.g. Outliner, SamyGO forum thread at: http://forum.samygo.tv/viewtopic.php?
f=2&t=585&start=20#p15993 (last accessed February 3, 2015).23 See Posting of meinsource, Re: Audio description, http://forum.samygo.tv/viewtopic.php?
f=6&t=1090#p9728 (December 9, 2010, 9:29 pm) (discussing the “espeak” text-to-speech 
program as a possible candidate).
5
[PAGE 6]
impaired users to incoming calls and other messages. And by improving Smart TV 
interoperability with more external hardware, users could enable Smart TVs to work with 
accessibility products such as headphones, powered neckloop devices,24 or Bluetooth signalers 
that would alert hearing-impaired users to incoming calls or messages.25
 Licensed and fair use of proprietary software installed on TVs
Smart TV owners should also be permitted to circumvent their TVs' TPMs to make 
modifications and improvements to the non-FLOSS applications installed on them. The rightful 
possessor of software copies may make modifications to them“designed to improve their 
functionality in serving the [use] for which they were created.”26 This protection is rooted in 17 
U.S.C. § 117, which creates fair use for a user's “adaptation … created as an essential step in the 
utilization of the computer program in conjunction with a machine.”27 Courts read this provision 
broadly, to permit the lawful owner of a copy of software to add features that were not included 
by the manufacturer and to facilitate compatibility with different hardware.28 This protection is at 
the heart of previous rulings exempting device unlocking, such as the exemption for smartphones 
first granted in 2006.29 Likewise, when a Smart TV owner modifies the proprietary software 
running on a television to better suit his or her purposes, the modification is authorized by § 117.
Item 6. Asserted Adverse Effects 
When someone purchases a Smart TV embedded with FLOSS applications produced by 
Conservancy member projects, they receive at the same time the right to copy, modify, and 
reinstall that software.30 However, most will be prevented from exercising these rights by 
manufacturer-imposed TPMs. The DMCA's anti-circumvention provisions are intended to give 
copyright holders control over the use of their works; in this case, the TPMs imposed by 
manufacturers take that control away from FLOSS developers and users.
The TPMs also adversely affect TV owners' ability to make fair use of the manufacturer's 
software by enabling it (and the TV itself) to interoperate with other software, devices,31 and 
24 See, e.g. Clearsounds Quattro Amplified Bluetooth Neckloop,  
https://www.clearsounds.com/product/clearsounds-quattro-amplified-bluetooth-neckloop-a2dp 
(last visited Feb. 4, 2015).25   See generally Phone Ringers/Signallers,  http://www.hearmore.com/categories/105/Phone-
Ringers/Signalers.html (last visited Feb. 4, 2015).26 Krause v. Titleserv, 402 F.3d 119, 121 (2nd Cir. 2005) (finding that the owner of a copy of 
software was entitled to use and modify that program under 17 U.S.C. §117(a)(1)).27 17 U.S.C. §117(a)(1).28 Foresight Resources Corp. v. Pfortmiller, 719 F. Supp. 1006, 1009 (D. Kan. 1989); Krause v. 
Titleserv, Inc., 402 F.3d 119, 127 (2d Cir. 2005) (highlighting the ambiguity of the term 
“essential,” and finding a broad reading most appropriate).29 See 2006 Recommendation at p. 50.30 Exhibit A demonstrates the huge number of FLOSS applications installed in modern smart TVs 
that carry these rights.31 See, e.g. SamyGO forum thread, Email notifier, to http://forum.samygo.tv/viewtopic.php?
f=5&t=1876 (Jun. 1, 2011 2:28 pm) (a desktop PC application that pushes email notifications to 
the Smart TV); SamyGO forum thread, TVCallNotify, to http://forum.samygo.tv/viewtopic.php?
6
[PAGE 7]
hardware.32 It is fair use for a device owner to enable greater interoperability.33 Copyright law 
recognizes that an owner's access to and modification of software to allow interoperability is fair 
use,34 but when the owner cannot access the software because it is encrypted or accessible only to 
the manufacturer, they cannot make fair use of it. Limitations on the interoperability of these 
TVs with new software limits creativity and the production of new copyrighted works, such as 
those produced by the SamyGo and OpenLGTV communities.35
If a Smart TV's manufacturer chooses not to provide access to particular functionality, 
applications, or external hardware that the TV's owner needs, that person has only two choices: 
circumvent the TPMs and enable the functionality, or buy a new TV (with its own built-in 
limitations) and discard the old one. Conservancy does not regard the latter as a true alternative, 
since it does not enable the owner to make use of FLOSS applications, or other software they are 
entitled to fair use of, on the TV they already own.
Item 7. Statutory Factors
The proposed exemption is supported by each of the statutory factors set forth in 17 
U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C).
A) The availability for use of copyrighted works
Permitting circumvention of the TPMs controlling access to Smart TV firmware would 
increase the availability of the FLOSS applications on them, as well as the availability of new 
user-produced applications. It would have no effect on the availability of the proprietary software 
installed on the TVs.
Circumvention is necessary to make licensed use of the FLOSS application running on 
Smart TVs. There is no other way to access the firmware and filesystem on which they are 
installed. If the TPMs can be circumvented and the FLOSS tools modified to add new 
functionality to TVs, these modifications will themselves become available to other users—and 
to manufacturers—under the applicable FLOSS license, making more software available.
Circumvention will also increase the availability of third-party applications, such as those 
produced by the SamyGo and OpenLGTV projects, that are designed to run on Smart TVs and 
enhance their functionality. In turn, these applications (and existing FLOSS applications like 
Samba), will enable access to a wider range of digital media, by providing access to and 
f=12&t=1512 (Feb. 20, 2011, 6:33 pm) (a notification-pushing application for Android OS, to 
send call and SMS notifications to the Smart TV); Posting of Saad3000, Tifi Remote first App for 
Iphones, to http://forum.samygo.tv/viewtopic.php?f=5&t=2339 (Sept. 19, 2011, 9:17 am) (a 
Smart TV remote control application for iOS); 32 See, e.g. SamyGO forum thread, Autobright (sh), to http://forum.samygo.tv/viewtopic.php?
f=8&t=2068 (Jul. 28, 2011, 6:34 pm) (a script to enable automatic brightness adjustment on 
unlocked Samsung Smart TVs through interoperability with an external light sensor)33 Sega, LTD. v. Accolade, Inc., 977 F.2d 1510, 1528 (9th Cir. 1992) (finding fair use for 
Accolade's reverse engineering of the Sega’s video game console to create new games.)34 Lexmark Int'l, Inc. v. Static Control Components, Inc., 387 F.3d 522, 550-51 (6th Cir. 2004)35 Id. (Permitting circumvention to enable interoperability with new software “is consistent with 
'the ultimate aim [of the Copyright Act], to stimulate artistic creativity for the general public 
good.'”)
7
[PAGE 8]
interoperability with media formats, external storage, and networked devices the TVs were not 
able to access in their manufacturer-supplied configurations.36
The availability of Smart TV firmware does not depend on the TPMs that control 
firmware or filesystem access. There is no market for Smart TV firmware sold separately from 
the TVs themselves—such firmware must be heavily customized for each device by 
manufacturers, because of the rapid pace of development of new TV hardware. Moreover, the 
proprietary software on Smart TVs would be useless if separated from the TV it is intended to 
run on. It exists on the TV in compiled, object-code form, making even trivial modifications 
extremely difficult or impossible. And it is compiled for the specific hardware architecture and 
software environment of the TV it runs on. Divorced from that environment, it cannot be used.
B) The availability for use of works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and 
educational purposes
 One of the fundamental purposes of the GPLv2 and other FLOSS licenses is to give users 
the freedom to study and learn from the software they use.37 This freedom has given rise to 
widespread use of FLOSS in computer science education. For example, students commonly learn 
about the design and function of operating systems by studying the source code of the Linux 
kernel.38 Permitting circumvention of the TPMs controlling access to the FLOSS operating 
systems on Smart TVs will enable individuals to study the design of those operating systems and 
learn about the development of software for embedded computing devices.
C) The impact the prohibition on circumvention of TPMs has on criticism, comment, 
news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research
 Permitting circumvention of these TPMs would enable researchers to find and expose 
security and privacy issues in Smart TVs. This will not only help TV manufacturers make their 
devices more secure, by fixing any issues exposed, but will also promote criticism and 
commentary on the privacy implications of placing Internet-enabled audio and video recording 
devices (which many of these TVs are) in every living room.39 Smart TVs often have broader 
functionality than one traditionally expects of TVs, including the ability to be used for 
surveillance.
36 See Mike Szczys, Samsung TV Firmware Hacking, Hackaday, October 18, 2009, 
http://hackaday.com/2009/10/18/samsung-tv-firmware-hacking/ (describing the use of telnet, a 
remote access service, to enable access to networked devices)37 See GNU mission statement, http://www.gnu.org/ (“Our mission is to preserve, protect and 
promote the freedom to use, study, copy, modify, and redistribute computer software, and to 
defend the rights of Free Software users.”)38 See, e.g., Columbia University, Dept. of Computer Science—Operating Systems I, 
http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~nieh/teaching/w4118/ (last accessed Feb. 6, 2015).39 Matt Oh, How I learned to hack my TV (and started worrying about the future), HP Security 
Research Blog, February 21, 2014, http://h30499.www3.hp.com/t5/HP-Security-Research-
Blog/How-I-learned-to-hack-my-TV-and-started-worrying-about-the/ba-p/6383829 (specific 
example of an EX-Link hack, and general discussion of IoT security issues)
8
[PAGE 9]
Smart TVs have been shown to contain security vulnerabilities that can be exploited by 
malicious hackers to access them remotely and run harmful code.40 Some of these also make use 
of a Smart TVs' built-in microphone and camera.41 In sum, research on the security of the Smart 
TVs on the market strongly suggests that manufacturers do not build sufficient privacy or 
security safeguards into their TVs.42 
Though 17 U.S.C. § 1201(j) contains a limited exception to the anticircumvention 
provision for security research, its limitations could discourage researchers from exploring the 
concerns raised by these devices. For example, the exemption favors private disclosure, 
potentially giving courts discretion to withhold it from researchers who publish information 
about security vulnerabilities in Smart TVs.43 These devices often have persistent Internet 
connections, built-in microphones, and video cameras (sometimes even with facial-recognition 
software), making the privacy issues they raise matters of public concern. But researchers who 
go public with information about vulnerabilities, even after first alerting the manufacturer, could 
reasonably fear that they will risk losing the 1201(j) exemption. An exemption authorizing 
circumvention of these TPMs would remove this specter of liability.
D) The effect of TPM circumvention on the market for or value of copyrighted works
Circumvention has already created an entirely new market for user-developed Smart TV 
software, and created new uses for existing FLOSS applications. Like most software, the value 
of these works is in large part derived from the size and support of their user communities, and 
explicitly allowing circumvention will expand their use. When Smart TV owners adapt and 
customize FLOSS software for use on these devices, they are not the only ones who benefit; 
manufacturers will also have the right under the applicable FLOSS licenses to use these 
modifications in their products.
As discussed above, the copyrighted works protected by the TPMs (the Smart TV OS and 
related applications) do not have an independent end-user market, or any usefulness when 
separated from the TV . To the extent circumvention will have any impact on the Smart TV 
40 See, e.g. N. Sidiropoulos & P. Stefopoulos, Smart TV Hacking, University of Amsterdam, 
January 13, 2013, http://dare.uva.nl/cgi/arno/show.cgi?fid=495678  .41  See, e.g. Cameras in Your Cable Box..., supra at 3042 See, e.g. Matt Smith, 3 Real Security Risks Threatening Your Smart TV Entertainment, 
Makeuseof.com, Jul. 3, 2014, http://www.makeuseof.com/tag/3-real-security-risks-threatening-
your-smart-tv-entertainment/ (outlining several security vulnerabilities in existing Smart TVs); 
Lisa Vaas, Samsung Smart TV security hole allows hackers to watch you, change channels or 
plug in malware, NakedSecurity.com, Dec. 12, 2012, 
https://nakedsecurity.sophos.com/2012/12/12/samsung-tv-vulnerability/ (outlining a root 
vulnerability found in a Samsung Smart TV); Y . Oren & A. Keromystis, From the Aether to the 
Ethernet - Attacking the Internet using Broadcast Digital Television, iss.oy.ne.ro, May 2014, 
http://iss.oy.ne.ro/Aether   (showing an RF-frequency attack on Smart TVs that would allow mass 
hijacking within range of the RF signal); Robert Lemos, Weaknesses in Webkit becoming 
problematic, threatpost.com, Aug. 28, 2011, http://threatpost.com/weaknesses-webkit-becoming-
problematic-082811/75586 (explaining core vulnerabilities in WebKit, an application that 
underlies the browser in Samsung Smart TVs).43 17 U.S.C. § 1201(j)(3)(A).
9
[PAGE 10]
market more broadly (and by extension the software embedded within), enabling interoperability 
and innovative uses of Smart TVs may increase demand for more customizable devices. 
An example of this effect can be seen in the market for the Linksys WRT54G router, 
which consumers favored for its customizability and kept on the market longer than nearly any 
other consumer router.44 This router's success and longevity was largely the result of FLOSS 
community firmware development, which unlocked latent capabilities that the manufacturer did 
not provide.45 The success of the WRT54G has prompted Linksys and other router manufacturers 
to market later routers specifically for their compatibility with FLOSS operating systems. An 
exemption for unlocking Smart TVs could produce the same mutual benefit.
Finally, circumvention of these TPMs would neither impact the availability of 
copyrighted media or works displayed or played on Smart TVs nor encourage infringement of 
them. Access to this content is controlled by separate TPMs, and this request for exemption is 
unrelated to any circumvention of Digital Restrictions Management or other TPMs for that 
purpose.
E) Any other factor that may be appropriate for the Librarian to consider in 
evaluating the proposed exemption
As with any unlocking exemption, this exemption would give users a means to extend the 
effective lifespan of their Smart TVs. If users can add features to their TVs rather than purchase a 
new one, both they and the environment will benefit. Like other electronic devices, Smart TV 
components contain toxic chemicals such as antimony, beryllium, cadmium, copper, lead, and 
zinc. When discarded, these chemicals are released either when burned at an incineration facility 
or through ground-leaching in a landfill. While some progress is being made with fledgling e-
waste recycling efforts, the vast majority of e-waste ends up in landfills, often overseas.46 User 
modification can work side-by-side with manufacturers' nascent impact-reduction efforts,47 to 
reduce the volume of electronic waste disposed of every year.
More fundamentally, an exemption is the only fair result for the thousands of people, 
many of them volunteers, who developed the FLOSS applications so widely used by Smart TV 
manufacturers and so fundamental to the success of these products. By adopting the GPL as the 
license for their software, the developers of BusyBox, Samba, and Linux allowed manufacturers 
to use and adapt their software freely, and save millions of dollars in development time and 
licensing fees. The only compensation they demanded was that the manufacturers extend those 
rights to their own users, and even then only with respect to the FLOSS components they use. 
44 See Sebastian Anthony, 11 years on: Linksys cashes in on WRT54G popularity with overpriced 
WRT1900AC router, ExtremeTech, Jan. 16, 2014, 
http://www.extremetech.com/computing/174875-11-years-later-linksys-cashes-in-on-wrt54gs-
popularity-with-overpriced-wrt-1900ac-router45 See, e.g. Adam Pash, Turn your $60 router into a $600 router, Lifehacker.com, Jun. 6, 2006, 
http://lifehacker.com/178132/hack-attack-turn-your-60-router-into-a-600-router (outlining the 
installation and uses of the DD-WRT firmware with the Linksys WRT54G).46 See Michael Malakata, West Africa turns into dumping ground for e-waste, PC World, Jan. 30, 
2015, http://www.pcworld.com/article/2878492/west-africa-turns-into-dumping-ground-for-
ewaste.html.47 See Christina Caldwell, Samsung Combats E-Waste with Smart TV Upgrade Kit, Earth 911, 
http://www.earth911.com/eco-tech/samsung-evolution-kit/ (last visited Feb. 5, 2015). 
10
[PAGE 11]
The proposed exemption will give effect to those rights and duly recognize the contributions of 
FLOSS developers.
Item 8. Documentary Evidence
See attached: 
Exhibit A, List of FLOSS software components used by major Smart TV manufacturers
Exhibit B, GNU General Public License Version 2
Exhibit C, GNU General Public License Version 3
Exhibit D, Samsung Smart TV GPL Compliance Notice
11
[PAGE 12]
EXHIBIT A
List of FLOSS Software Components Used by Major Smart TV Manufacturers
12
[PAGE 13]
This exhibit lists the FLOSS components contained in representative Smart TV models 
produced by several major manufacturers, as stated in the manufacturers' online compliance 
materials. Conservancy member projects, and projects (such as the Linux kernel) in which 
Conservancy members hold substantial copyrights, are bold for emphasis.
LG:
Many recent LG television models48 are built on webOS, a Linux-based operating system 
originally developed by HP. As of version 3.0.5,49 webOS contained the following FLOSS 
packages:
acct 
alsa-lib 
alsa-plugins 
alsa-utils 
baemuk-batang font 
base-passwd 
binutils 
boost 
bootchart 
brctl 
bridge driver 
busybox 
camsrc-omap36xx 
cifs 
cryptofs 
cryptsetup 
dhd kernel module 
dnsmasq 
documentserver 
dosfstools 
e2fsprogs 
e2fsprogs-libs 
expat 
faac 
gstreamer 
gzip 
ipkg 
imaccountvalidator 
imlibpurpleservice 
imlibpurpletransport 
iproute2 
iptables 
iputils 
javascriptcore 
jpeg 
libexif 
libgcrypt 
libgdbus 
libgpg-error 
libgpod 
libnetbridge 
liboil 
libpng 
libsamplerate0 
libsdl 
libsdl-image 
libsdl-mixer 
libsdl-net 
mjson 
mkimage 
mtools 
mupdf 
ncurses 
oprofile 
palmadpcmdecoder 
parted (libparted) 
pmeloop 
ppp 
procps 
psmisc 
pulseaudio 
qt4 
readline 
screen 
setserial 
sgxddk 
sp-smaps 
sysfsutils 
sysstat 
sysvinit 
tisgxgfx 
u-boot 
48LG lists dozens of webOS-based models on its OpenSource Code Distribution site, 
http://opensource.lge.com (last visited Feb. 5, 2015).49HP—HP webOS open source compliance, 
http://www.openwebosproject.org/opensource/3.0.5/index.html. LG's current distribution of 
source code for FLOSS components within its various models of television can be found at 
http://opensource.lge.com (last visited Feb. 5, 2015).
13
[PAGE 14]
fbset 
ffmpeg 
foundations.xml 
freetype 
fuse 
gdbm 
glib-2.0-2.16.6 
glibmm 
goodfork 
gst-ffmpeg 
gst-plugins-bad 
gst-plugins-base 
gst-plugins-good
libsdl-ttf 
libsigcpp-2.0 
libsndfile1 
libsoup 
libspeex 
linux kernel 
linux-hotplug 
LVM2 
netbase 
netcat 
net-tools 
OpenAL 
makedevs 
udev 
update-modules 
update-rc.d 
upstart 
upstart-initscripts 
usbmon 
util-linux-ng 
vpnc 
webcore 
webkit 
wireless-tools 
zlib 
Samsung:
According to Samsung's Opensource Release Center, dozens of recent models of Samsung TV 
contain the following FLOSS components:50
linux kernel
busybox
binutils
ath6kl_usb.ko
batman
batctl
binder kernel driver
BRCM bluetooth driver
bridge
bridge-utils
cfg80211.ko
compat.ko
dosfstools
e2fsprogs
elfutils
exfat
ext4
pppd plugins
rtnet5572sta
rtutil5572sta
smack
snapmesh
udhcpc
usb-modeswitch
uvc
v4l2
wireless_tools
mali.ko
glibc
alsa
atk
atspi
cairo
enchant
lame
libiconv
libintl
libgcrypt
libgpg-error
libmms
libnl
libptp
libsecret
libsigc++
libsoup
libswtsm.so
LIBTASN1
libthai
libusb
libwbxml
libxml++
50Samsung—Opensource Resource Center, Model 14_DTV_X14H, Announcement,  
http://opensource.samsung.com/reception/receptionSub.do?
method=sub&sub=T&menu_item=tv_n_video&classification1=tv&classification2=dtv&classific
ation3=LED (last visited Feb. 5, 2015).
14
[PAGE 15]
fuse
gloox
GnuPG
gSoap
intltool
iptables
iw
jquery
KNBD Module
llc
netfilter
nfs
nfs-utils
nspr 
FFmpeg
fluidsynth
GAIL
GDBus
gdkpixbuf
getopt
GIO
glib
glibmm
GNUTLS
gtk
gtkprinter
JavaScriptCore
mesa
MIME
nettle
pango
PEAR
PHPExcel
RTSP
SDL
soundtouch
webkit
xml2json
wvdial
wvstreams
Sony: 
According to Sony's Opensource Release Center, dozens of recent models of Sony TV contain 
the following FLOSS components:51
DirectFB
SaWMan
alsa-driver
busybox
e2fsprogs
ffmpeg
fuse
gcc
glibc
libiconv
libmtp
libusb
libusb
linux
linux-fusion
liveMedia
ntfs-3g_ntfs
ntfsprogs
qrencode
samba
squashfs
sysvinit
u-boot
zvbi
51 These include KDL-32R303B, KDL-32R410B, KDL-32R413B, KDL-32R415B, KDL-
32R430B, KDL-32R433B, KDL-32R435B, KDL-40R353B, KDL-40R450B, KDL-40R453B, 
KDL-40R455B, KDL-40R480B, KDL-40R483B, KDL-40R485B, and KDL-48R483B; Sony 
Global – Source Code Distribution Service, http://oss.sony.net/Products/Linux/TV/KDL-
40R483B.html (last visited Feb. 6, 2015).
15
[PAGE 16]
EXHIBIT B
GNU General Public License Version 2
16
[PAGE 17]
GNU General Public License Version 2  52
GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
Version 2, June 1991 
Copyright (C) 1989, 1991 Free Software Foundation, Inc.  
51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA  02110-1301, USA
Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.
Preamble
The licenses for most software are designed to take away your freedom to share and change it. 
By contrast, the GNU General Public License is intended to guarantee your freedom to share and 
change free software--to make sure the software is free for all its users. This General Public 
License applies to most of the Free Software Foundation's software and to any other program 
whose authors commit to using it. (Some other Free Software Foundation software is covered by 
the GNU Lesser General Public License instead.) You can apply it to your programs, too. 
When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom, not price. Our General Public 
Licenses are designed to make sure that you have the freedom to distribute copies of free 
software (and charge for this service if you wish), that you receive source code or can get it if 
you want it, that you can change the software or use pieces of it in new free programs; and that 
you know you can do these things. 
To protect your rights, we need to make restrictions that forbid anyone to deny you these rights 
or to ask you to surrender the rights. These restrictions translate to certain responsibilities for you 
if you distribute copies of the software, or if you modify it. 
For example, if you distribute copies of such a program, whether gratis or for a fee, you must 
give the recipients all the rights that you have. You must make sure that they, too, receive or can 
get the source code. And you must show them these terms so they know their rights. 
We protect your rights with two steps: (1) copyright the software, and (2) offer you this license 
which gives you legal permission to copy, distribute and/or modify the software. 
52 GNU General Public License, Version 2, http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html (last visited 
Feb. 6, 2015).
17
[PAGE 18]
Also, for each author's protection and ours, we want to make certain that everyone understands 
that there is no warranty for this free software. If the software is modified by someone else and 
passed on, we want its recipients to know that what they have is not the original, so that any 
problems introduced by others will not reflect on the original authors' reputations. 
Finally, any free program is threatened constantly by software patents. We wish to avoid the 
danger that redistributors of a free program will individually obtain patent licenses, in effect 
making the program proprietary. To prevent this, we have made it clear that any patent must be 
licensed for everyone's free use or not licensed at all. 
The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and modification follow. 
TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR COPYING, DISTRIBUTION AND 
MODIFICATION
0. This License applies to any program or other work which contains a notice placed by the 
copyright holder saying it may be distributed under the terms of this General Public License. The 
"Program", below, refers to any such program or work, and a "work based on the Program" 
means either the Program or any derivative work under copyright law: that is to say, a work 
containing the Program or a portion of it, either verbatim or with modifications and/or translated 
into another language. (Hereinafter, translation is included without limitation in the term 
"modification".) Each licensee is addressed as "you". 
Activities other than copying, distribution and modification are not covered by this License; they 
are outside its scope. The act of running the Program is not restricted, and the output from the 
Program is covered only if its contents constitute a work based on the Program (independent of 
having been made by running the Program). Whether that is true depends on what the Program 
does. 
1. You may copy and distribute verbatim copies of the Program's source code as you receive it, in 
any medium, provided that you conspicuously and appropriately publish on each copy an 
appropriate copyright notice and disclaimer of warranty; keep intact all the notices that refer to 
this License and to the absence of any warranty; and give any other recipients of the Program a 
copy of this License along with the Program. 
You may charge a fee for the physical act of transferring a copy, and you may at your option 
offer warranty protection in exchange for a fee. 
2. You may modify your copy or copies of the Program or any portion of it, thus forming a work 
based on the Program, and copy and distribute such modifications or work under the terms of 
Section 1 above, provided that you also meet all of these conditions: 
18
[PAGE 19]
a) You must cause the modified files to carry prominent notices stating that you changed 
the files and the date of any change. 
b) You must cause any work that you distribute or publish, that in whole or in part contains 
or is derived from the Program or any part thereof, to be licensed as a whole at no charge to 
all third parties under the terms of this License. 
c) If the modified program normally reads commands interactively when run, you must 
cause it, when started running for such interactive use in the most ordinary way, to print or 
display an announcement including an appropriate copyright notice and a notice that there 
is no warranty (or else, saying that you provide a warranty) and that users may redistribute 
the program under these conditions, and telling the user how to view a copy of this 
License. (Exception: if the Program itself is interactive but does not normally print such an 
announcement, your work based on the Program is not required to print an announcement.) 
These requirements apply to the modified work as a whole. If identifiable sections of that work 
are not derived from the Program, and can be reasonably considered independent and separate 
works in themselves, then this License, and its terms, do not apply to those sections when you 
distribute them as separate works. But when you distribute the same sections as part of a whole 
which is a work based on the Program, the distribution of the whole must be on the terms of this 
License, whose permissions for other licensees extend to the entire whole, and thus to each and 
every part regardless of who wrote it. 
Thus, it is not the intent of this section to claim rights or contest your rights to work written 
entirely by you; rather, the intent is to exercise the right to control the distribution of derivative 
or collective works based on the Program. 
In addition, mere aggregation of another work not based on the Program with the Program (or 
with a work based on the Program) on a volume of a storage or distribution medium does not 
bring the other work under the scope of this License. 
3. You may copy and distribute the Program (or a work based on it, under Section 2) in object 
code or executable form under the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above provided that you also do one 
of the following: 
19
[PAGE 20]
a) Accompany it with the complete corresponding machine-readable source code, which 
must be distributed under the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above on a medium customarily 
used for software interchange; or, 
b) Accompany it with a written offer, valid for at least three years, to give any third party, 
for a charge no more than your cost of physically performing source distribution, a 
complete machine-readable copy of the corresponding source code, to be distributed under 
the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above on a medium customarily used for software 
interchange; or, 
c) Accompany it with the information you received as to the offer to distribute 
corresponding source code. (This alternative is allowed only for noncommercial 
distribution and only if you received the program in object code or executable form with 
such an offer, in accord with Subsection b above.) 
The source code for a work means the preferred form of the work for making modifications to it. 
For an executable work, complete source code means all the source code for all modules it 
contains, plus any associated interface definition files, plus the scripts used to control 
compilation and installation of the executable. However, as a special exception, the source code 
distributed need not include anything that is normally distributed (in either source or binary 
form) with the major components (compiler, kernel, and so on) of the operating system on which 
the executable runs, unless that component itself accompanies the executable. 
If distribution of executable or object code is made by offering access to copy from a designated 
place, then offering equivalent access to copy the source code from the same place counts as 
distribution of the source code, even though third parties are not compelled to copy the source 
along with the object code. 
4. You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Program except as expressly provided 
under this License. Any attempt otherwise to copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Program 
is void, and will automatically terminate your rights under this License. However, parties who 
have received copies, or rights, from you under this License will not have their licenses 
terminated so long as such parties remain in full compliance. 
20
[PAGE 21]
5. You are not required to accept this License, since you have not signed it. However, nothing 
else grants you permission to modify or distribute the Program or its derivative works. These 
actions are prohibited by law if you do not accept this License. Therefore, by modifying or 
distributing the Program (or any work based on the Program), you indicate your acceptance of 
this License to do so, and all its terms and conditions for copying, distributing or modifying the 
Program or works based on it. 
6. Each time you redistribute the Program (or any work based on the Program), the recipient 
automatically receives a license from the original licensor to copy, distribute or modify the 
Program subject to these terms and conditions. You may not impose any further restrictions on 
the recipients' exercise of the rights granted herein. You are not responsible for enforcing 
compliance by third parties to this License. 
7. If, as a consequence of a court judgment or allegation of patent infringement or for any other 
reason (not limited to patent issues), conditions are imposed on you (whether by court order, 
agreement or otherwise) that contradict the conditions of this License, they do not excuse you 
from the conditions of this License. If you cannot distribute so as to satisfy simultaneously your 
obligations under this License and any other pertinent obligations, then as a consequence you 
may not distribute the Program at all. For example, if a patent license would not permit royalty-
free redistribution of the Program by all those who receive copies directly or indirectly through 
you, then the only way you could satisfy both it and this License would be to refrain entirely 
from distribution of the Program. 
If any portion of this section is held invalid or unenforceable under any particular circumstance, 
the balance of the section is intended to apply and the section as a whole is intended to apply in 
other circumstances. 
It is not the purpose of this section to induce you to infringe any patents or other property right 
claims or to contest validity of any such claims; this section has the sole purpose of protecting 
the integrity of the free software distribution system, which is implemented by public license 
practices. Many people have made generous contributions to the wide range of software 
distributed through that system in reliance on consistent application of that system; it is up to the 
author/donor to decide if he or she is willing to distribute software through any other system and 
a licensee cannot impose that choice. 
This section is intended to make thoroughly clear what is believed to be a consequence of the 
rest of this License. 
8. If the distribution and/or use of the Program is restricted in certain countries either by patents 
or by copyrighted interfaces, the original copyright holder who places the Program under this 
License may add an explicit geographical distribution limitation excluding those countries, so 
21
[PAGE 22]
that distribution is permitted only in or among countries not thus excluded. In such case, this 
License incorporates the limitation as if written in the body of this License. 
9. The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new versions of the General Public 
License from time to time. Such new versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but 
may differ in detail to address new problems or concerns. 
Each version is given a distinguishing version number. If the Program specifies a version number 
of this License which applies to it and "any later version", you have the option of following the 
terms and conditions either of that version or of any later version published by the Free Software 
Foundation. If the Program does not specify a version number of this License, you may choose 
any version ever published by the Free Software Foundation. 
10. If you wish to incorporate parts of the Program into other free programs whose distribution 
conditions are different, write to the author to ask for permission. For software which is 
copyrighted by the Free Software Foundation, write to the Free Software Foundation; we 
sometimes make exceptions for this. Our decision will be guided by the two goals of preserving 
the free status of all derivatives of our free software and of promoting the sharing and reuse of 
software generally. 
NO WARRANTY
11. BECAUSE THE PROGRAM IS LICENSED FREE OF CHARGE, THERE IS NO 
WARRANTY FOR THE PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE 
LAW. EXCEPT WHEN OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS 
AND/OR OTHER PARTIES PROVIDE THE PROGRAM "AS IS" WITHOUT WARRANTY 
OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED 
TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A 
PARTICULAR PURPOSE. THE ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND 
PERFORMANCE OF THE PROGRAM IS WITH YOU. SHOULD THE PROGRAM PROVE 
DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE COST OF ALL NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR 
CORRECTION. 
12. IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN 
WRITING WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MAY 
MODIFY AND/OR REDISTRIBUTE THE PROGRAM AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE 
LIABLE TO YOU FOR DAMAGES, INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, 
INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE USE OR 
INABILITY TO USE THE PROGRAM (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO LOSS OF 
DATA OR DATA BEING RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED BY YOU 
OR THIRD PARTIES OR A FAILURE OF THE PROGRAM TO OPERATE WITH ANY 
22
[PAGE 23]
OTHER PROGRAMS), EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN 
ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES. 
END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS
23
[PAGE 24]
EXHIBIT C
GNU General Public License Version 3
24
[PAGE 25]
GNU General Public License Version 3  53
GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
Version 3, 29 June 2007
Copyright © 2007 Free Software Foundation, Inc. <http://fsf.org/>
Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this license document, but 
changing it is not allowed.
Preamble
The GNU General Public License is a free, copyleft license for software and other kinds of 
works.
The licenses for most software and other practical works are designed to take away your freedom 
to share and change the works. By contrast, the GNU General Public License is intended to 
guarantee your freedom to share and change all versions of a program--to make sure it remains 
free software for all its users. We, the Free Software Foundation, use the GNU General Public 
License for most of our software; it applies also to any other work released this way by its 
authors. You can apply it to your programs, too.
When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom, not price. Our General Public 
Licenses are designed to make sure that you have the freedom to distribute copies of free 
software (and charge for them if you wish), that you receive source code or can get it if you want 
it, that you can change the software or use pieces of it in new free programs, and that you know 
you can do these things.
To protect your rights, we need to prevent others from denying you these rights or asking you to 
surrender the rights. Therefore, you have certain responsibilities if you distribute copies of the 
software, or if you modify it: responsibilities to respect the freedom of others.
For example, if you distribute copies of such a program, whether gratis or for a fee, you must 
pass on to the recipients the same freedoms that you received. You must make sure that they, too, 
receive or can get the source code. And you must show them these terms so they know their 
rights.
Developers that use the GNU GPL protect your rights with two steps: (1) assert copyright on the 
software, and (2) offer you this License giving you legal permission to copy, distribute and/or 
modify it.
53 GNU General Public License, http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html (last visited Feb. 6, 2015).
25
[PAGE 26]
For the developers' and authors' protection, the GPL clearly explains that there is no warranty for 
this free software. For both users' and authors' sake, the GPL requires that modified versions be 
marked as changed, so that their problems will not be attributed erroneously to authors of 
previous versions.
Some devices are designed to deny users access to install or run modified versions of the 
software inside them, although the manufacturer can do so. This is fundamentally incompatible 
with the aim of protecting users' freedom to change the software. The systematic pattern of such 
abuse occurs in the area of products for individuals to use, which is precisely where it is most 
unacceptable. Therefore, we have designed this version of the GPL to prohibit the practice for 
those products. If such problems arise substantially in other domains, we stand ready to extend 
this provision to those domains in future versions of the GPL, as needed to protect the freedom 
of users.
Finally, every program is threatened constantly by software patents. States should not allow 
patents to restrict development and use of software on general-purpose computers, but in those 
that do, we wish to avoid the special danger that patents applied to a free program could make it 
effectively proprietary. To prevent this, the GPL assures that patents cannot be used to render the 
program non-free.
The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and modification follow.
TERMS AND CONDITIONS
0. Definitions.
“This License” refers to version 3 of the GNU General Public License.
“Copyright” also means copyright-like laws that apply to other kinds of works, such as 
semiconductor masks.
“The Program” refers to any copyrightable work licensed under this License. Each licensee is 
addressed as “you”. “Licensees” and “recipients” may be individuals or organizations.
To “modify” a work means to copy from or adapt all or part of the work in a fashion requiring 
copyright permission, other than the making of an exact copy. The resulting work is called a 
“modified version” of the earlier work or a work “based on” the earlier work.
A “covered work” means either the unmodified Program or a work based on the Program.
To “propagate” a work means to do anything with it that, without permission, would make you 
directly or secondarily liable for infringement under applicable copyright law, except executing it 
on a computer or modifying a private copy. Propagation includes copying, distribution (with or 
26
[PAGE 27]
without modification), making available to the public, and in some countries other activities as 
well.
To “convey” a work means any kind of propagation that enables other parties to make or receive 
copies. Mere interaction with a user through a computer network, with no transfer of a copy, is 
not conveying.
An interactive user interface displays “Appropriate Legal Notices” to the extent that it includes a 
convenient and prominently visible feature that (1) displays an appropriate copyright notice, and 
(2) tells the user that there is no warranty for the work (except to the extent that warranties are 
provided), that licensees may convey the work under this License, and how to view a copy of 
this License. If the interface presents a list of user commands or options, such as a menu, a 
prominent item in the list meets this criterion.
1. Source Code.
The “source code” for a work means the preferred form of the work for making modifications to 
it. “Object code” means any non-source form of a work.
A “Standard Interface” means an interface that either is an official standard defined by a 
recognized standards body, or, in the case of interfaces specified for a particular programming 
language, one that is widely used among developers working in that language.
The “System Libraries” of an executable work include anything, other than the work as a whole, 
that (a) is included in the normal form of packaging a Major Component, but which is not part of 
that Major Component, and (b) serves only to enable use of the work with that Major 
Component, or to implement a Standard Interface for which an implementation is available to the 
public in source code form. A “Major Component”, in this context, means a major essential 
component (kernel, window system, and so on) of the specific operating system (if any) on 
which the executable work runs, or a compiler used to produce the work, or an object code 
interpreter used to run it.
The “Corresponding Source” for a work in object code form means all the source code needed to 
generate, install, and (for an executable work) run the object code and to modify the work, 
including scripts to control those activities. However, it does not include the work's System 
Libraries, or general-purpose tools or generally available free programs which are used 
unmodified in performing those activities but which are not part of the work. For example, 
Corresponding Source includes interface definition files associated with source files for the 
work, and the source code for shared libraries and dynamically linked subprograms that the work 
is specifically designed to require, such as by intimate data communication or control flow 
between those subprograms and other parts of the work.
27
[PAGE 28]
The Corresponding Source need not include anything that users can regenerate automatically 
from other parts of the Corresponding Source.
The Corresponding Source for a work in source code form is that same work.
2. Basic Permissions.
All rights granted under this License are granted for the term of copyright on the Program, and 
are irrevocable provided the stated conditions are met. This License explicitly affirms your 
unlimited permission to run the unmodified Program. The output from running a covered work is 
covered by this License only if the output, given its content, constitutes a covered work. This 
License acknowledges your rights of fair use or other equivalent, as provided by copyright law.
You may make, run and propagate covered works that you do not convey, without conditions so 
long as your license otherwise remains in force. You may convey covered works to others for the 
sole purpose of having them make modifications exclusively for you, or provide you with 
facilities for running those works, provided that you comply with the terms of this License in 
conveying all material for which you do not control copyright. Those thus making or running the 
covered works for you must do so exclusively on your behalf, under your direction and control, 
on terms that prohibit them from making any copies of your copyrighted material outside their 
relationship with you.
Conveying under any other circumstances is permitted solely under the conditions stated below. 
Sublicensing is not allowed; section 10 makes it unnecessary.
3. Protecting Users' Legal Rights From Anti-Circumvention Law.
No covered work shall be deemed part of an effective technological measure under any 
applicable law fulfilling obligations under article 11 of the WIPO copyright treaty adopted on 20 
December 1996, or similar laws prohibiting or restricting circumvention of such measures.
When you convey a covered work, you waive any legal power to forbid circumvention of 
technological measures to the extent such circumvention is effected by exercising rights under 
this License with respect to the covered work, and you disclaim any intention to limit operation 
or modification of the work as a means of enforcing, against the work's users, your or third 
parties' legal rights to forbid circumvention of technological measures.
4. Conveying Verbatim Copies.
You may convey verbatim copies of the Program's source code as you receive it, in any medium, 
provided that you conspicuously and appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate 
copyright notice; keep intact all notices stating that this License and any non-permissive terms 
28
[PAGE 29]
added in accord with section 7 apply to the code; keep intact all notices of the absence of any 
warranty; and give all recipients a copy of this License along with the Program.
You may charge any price or no price for each copy that you convey, and you may offer support 
or warranty protection for a fee.
5. Conveying Modified Source Versions.
You may convey a work based on the Program, or the modifications to produce it from the 
Program, in the form of source code under the terms of section 4, provided that you also meet all 
of these conditions:
• a) The work must carry prominent notices stating that you modified it, and giving a 
relevant date. 
• b) The work must carry prominent notices stating that it is released under this License and 
any conditions added under section 7. This requirement modifies the requirement in 
section 4 to “keep intact all notices”. 
• c) You must license the entire work, as a whole, under this License to anyone who comes 
into possession of a copy. This License will therefore apply, along with any applicable 
section 7 additional terms, to the whole of the work, and all its parts, regardless of how 
they are packaged. This License gives no permission to license the work in any other way, 
but it does not invalidate such permission if you have separately received it. 
• d) If the work has interactive user interfaces, each must display Appropriate Legal 
Notices; however, if the Program has interactive interfaces that do not display 
Appropriate Legal Notices, your work need not make them do so. 
A compilation of a covered work with other separate and independent works, which are not by 
their nature extensions of the covered work, and which are not combined with it such as to form 
a larger program, in or on a volume of a storage or distribution medium, is called an “aggregate” 
if the compilation and its resulting copyright are not used to limit the access or legal rights of the 
compilation's users beyond what the individual works permit. Inclusion of a covered work in an 
aggregate does not cause this License to apply to the other parts of the aggregate.
6. Conveying Non-Source Forms.
You may convey a covered work in object code form under the terms of sections 4 and 5, 
provided that you also convey the machine-readable Corresponding Source under the terms of 
this License, in one of these ways:
• a) Convey the object code in, or embodied in, a physical product (including a physical 
distribution medium), accompanied by the Corresponding Source fixed on a durable 
physical medium customarily used for software interchange. 
29
[PAGE 30]
• b) Convey the object code in, or embodied in, a physical product (including a physical 
distribution medium), accompanied by a written offer, valid for at least three years and 
valid for as long as you offer spare parts or customer support for that product model, to 
give anyone who possesses the object code either (1) a copy of the Corresponding Source 
for all the software in the product that is covered by this License, on a durable physical 
medium customarily used for software interchange, for a price no more than your 
reasonable cost of physically performing this conveying of source, or (2) access to copy 
the Corresponding Source from a network server at no charge. 
• c) Convey individual copies of the object code with a copy of the written offer to provide 
the Corresponding Source. This alternative is allowed only occasionally and 
noncommercially, and only if you received the object code with such an offer, in accord 
with subsection 6b. 
• d) Convey the object code by offering access from a designated place (gratis or for a 
charge), and offer equivalent access to the Corresponding Source in the same way 
through the same place at no further charge. You need not require recipients to copy the 
Corresponding Source along with the object code. If the place to copy the object code is a 
network server, the Corresponding Source may be on a different server (operated by you 
or a third party) that supports equivalent copying facilities, provided you maintain clear 
directions next to the object code saying where to find the Corresponding Source. 
Regardless of what server hosts the Corresponding Source, you remain obligated to 
ensure that it is available for as long as needed to satisfy these requirements. 
• e) Convey the object code using peer-to-peer transmission, provided you inform other 
peers where the object code and Corresponding Source of the work are being offered to 
the general public at no charge under subsection 6d. 
A separable portion of the object code, whose source code is excluded from the Corresponding 
Source as a System Library, need not be included in conveying the object code work.
A “User Product” is either (1) a “consumer product”, which means any tangible personal 
property which is normally used for personal, family, or household purposes, or (2) anything 
designed or sold for incorporation into a dwelling. In determining whether a product is a 
consumer product, doubtful cases shall be resolved in favor of coverage. For a particular product 
received by a particular user, “normally used” refers to a typical or common use of that class of 
product, regardless of the status of the particular user or of the way in which the particular user 
actually uses, or expects or is expected to use, the product. A product is a consumer product 
regardless of whether the product has substantial commercial, industrial or non-consumer uses, 
unless such uses represent the only significant mode of use of the product.
“Installation Information” for a User Product means any methods, procedures, authorization 
keys, or other information required to install and execute modified versions of a covered work in 
30
[PAGE 31]
that User Product from a modified version of its Corresponding Source. The information must 
suffice to ensure that the continued functioning of the modified object code is in no case 
prevented or interfered with solely because modification has been made.
If you convey an object code work under this section in, or with, or specifically for use in, a User 
Product, and the conveying occurs as part of a transaction in which the right of possession and 
use of the User Product is transferred to the recipient in perpetuity or for a fixed term (regardless 
of how the transaction is characterized), the Corresponding Source conveyed under this section 
must be accompanied by the Installation Information. But this requirement does not apply if 
neither you nor any third party retains the ability to install modified object code on the User 
Product (for example, the work has been installed in ROM).
The requirement to provide Installation Information does not include a requirement to continue 
to provide support service, warranty, or updates for a work that has been modified or installed by 
the recipient, or for the User Product in which it has been modified or installed. Access to a 
network may be denied when the modification itself materially and adversely affects the 
operation of the network or violates the rules and protocols for communication across the 
network.
Corresponding Source conveyed, and Installation Information provided, in accord with this 
section must be in a format that is publicly documented (and with an implementation available to 
the public in source code form), and must require no special password or key for unpacking, 
reading or copying.
7. Additional Terms.
“Additional permissions” are terms that supplement the terms of this License by making 
exceptions from one or more of its conditions. Additional permissions that are applicable to the 
entire Program shall be treated as though they were included in this License, to the extent that 
they are valid under applicable law. If additional permissions apply only to part of the Program, 
that part may be used separately under those permissions, but the entire Program remains 
governed by this License without regard to the additional permissions.
When you convey a copy of a covered work, you may at your option remove any additional 
permissions from that copy, or from any part of it. (Additional permissions may be written to 
require their own removal in certain cases when you modify the work.) You may place additional 
permissions on material, added by you to a covered work, for which you have or can give 
appropriate copyright permission.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this License, for material you add to a covered work, you 
may (if authorized by the copyright holders of that material) supplement the terms of this 
License with terms:
31
[PAGE 32]
• a) Disclaiming warranty or limiting liability differently from the terms of sections 15 and 
16 of this License; or 
• b) Requiring preservation of specified reasonable legal notices or author attributions in 
that material or in the Appropriate Legal Notices displayed by works containing it; or 
• c) Prohibiting misrepresentation of the origin of that material, or requiring that modified 
versions of such material be marked in reasonable ways as different from the original 
version; or 
• d) Limiting the use for publicity purposes of names of licensors or authors of the 
material; or 
• e) Declining to grant rights under trademark law for use of some trade names, trademarks, 
or service marks; or 
• f) Requiring indemnification of licensors and authors of that material by anyone who 
conveys the material (or modified versions of it) with contractual assumptions of liability 
to the recipient, for any liability that these contractual assumptions directly impose on 
those licensors and authors. 
All other non-permissive additional terms are considered “further restrictions” within the 
meaning of section 10. If the Program as you received it, or any part of it, contains a notice 
stating that it is governed by this License along with a term that is a further restriction, you may 
remove that term. If a license document contains a further restriction but permits relicensing or 
conveying under this License, you may add to a covered work material governed by the terms of 
that license document, provided that the further restriction does not survive such relicensing or 
conveying.
If you add terms to a covered work in accord with this section, you must place, in the relevant 
source files, a statement of the additional terms that apply to those files, or a notice indicating 
where to find the applicable terms.
Additional terms, permissive or non-permissive, may be stated in the form of a separately written 
license, or stated as exceptions; the above requirements apply either way.
8. Termination.
You may not propagate or modify a covered work except as expressly provided under this 
License. Any attempt otherwise to propagate or modify it is void, and will automatically 
terminate your rights under this License (including any patent licenses granted under the third 
paragraph of section 11).
However, if you cease all violation of this License, then your license from a particular copyright 
holder is reinstated (a) provisionally, unless and until the copyright holder explicitly and finally 
32
[PAGE 33]
terminates your license, and (b) permanently, if the copyright holder fails to notify you of the 
violation by some reasonable means prior to 60 days after the cessation.
Moreover, your license from a particular copyright holder is reinstated permanently if the 
copyright holder notifies you of the violation by some reasonable means, this is the first time you 
have received notice of violation of this License (for any work) from that copyright holder, and 
you cure the violation prior to 30 days after your receipt of the notice.
Termination of your rights under this section does not terminate the licenses of parties who have 
received copies or rights from you under this License. If your rights have been terminated and 
not permanently reinstated, you do not qualify to receive new licenses for the same material 
under section 10.
9. Acceptance Not Required for Having Copies.
You are not required to accept this License in order to receive or run a copy of the Program. 
Ancillary propagation of a covered work occurring solely as a consequence of using peer-to-peer 
transmission to receive a copy likewise does not require acceptance. However, nothing other than 
this License grants you permission to propagate or modify any covered work. These actions 
infringe copyright if you do not accept this License. Therefore, by modifying or propagating a 
covered work, you indicate your acceptance of this License to do so.
10. Automatic Licensing of Downstream Recipients.
Each time you convey a covered work, the recipient automatically receives a license from the 
original licensors, to run, modify and propagate that work, subject to this License. You are not 
responsible for enforcing compliance by third parties with this License.
An “entity transaction” is a transaction transferring control of an organization, or substantially all 
assets of one, or subdividing an organization, or merging organizations. If propagation of a 
covered work results from an entity transaction, each party to that transaction who receives a 
copy of the work also receives whatever licenses to the work the party's predecessor in interest 
had or could give under the previous paragraph, plus a right to possession of the Corresponding 
Source of the work from the predecessor in interest, if the predecessor has it or can get it with 
reasonable efforts.
You may not impose any further restrictions on the exercise of the rights granted or affirmed 
under this License. For example, you may not impose a license fee, royalty, or other charge for 
exercise of rights granted under this License, and you may not initiate litigation (including a 
cross-claim or counterclaim in a lawsuit) alleging that any patent claim is infringed by making, 
using, selling, offering for sale, or importing the Program or any portion of it.
33
[PAGE 34]
11. Patents.
A “contributor” is a copyright holder who authorizes use under this License of the Program or a 
work on which the Program is based. The work thus licensed is called the contributor's 
“contributor version”.
A contributor's “essential patent claims” are all patent claims owned or controlled by the 
contributor, whether already acquired or hereafter acquired, that would be infringed by some 
manner, permitted by this License, of making, using, or selling its contributor version, but do not 
include claims that would be infringed only as a consequence of further modification of the 
contributor version. For purposes of this definition, “control” includes the right to grant patent 
sublicenses in a manner consistent with the requirements of this License.
Each contributor grants you a non-exclusive, worldwide, royalty-free patent license under the 
contributor's essential patent claims, to make, use, sell, offer for sale, import and otherwise run, 
modify and propagate the contents of its contributor version.
In the following three paragraphs, a “patent license” is any express agreement or commitment, 
however denominated, not to enforce a patent (such as an express permission to practice a patent 
or covenant not to sue for patent infringement). To “grant” such a patent license to a party means 
to make such an agreement or commitment not to enforce a patent against the party.
If you convey a covered work, knowingly relying on a patent license, and the Corresponding 
Source of the work is not available for anyone to copy, free of charge and under the terms of this 
License, through a publicly available network server or other readily accessible means, then you 
must either (1) cause the Corresponding Source to be so available, or (2) arrange to deprive 
yourself of the benefit of the patent license for this particular work, or (3) arrange, in a manner 
consistent with the requirements of this License, to extend the patent license to downstream 
recipients. “Knowingly relying” means you have actual knowledge that, but for the patent 
license, your conveying the covered work in a country, or your recipient's use of the covered 
work in a country, would infringe one or more identifiable patents in that country that you have 
reason to believe are valid.
If, pursuant to or in connection with a single transaction or arrangement, you convey, or 
propagate by procuring conveyance of, a covered work, and grant a patent license to some of the 
parties receiving the covered work authorizing them to use, propagate, modify or convey a 
specific copy of the covered work, then the patent license you grant is automatically extended to 
all recipients of the covered work and works based on it.
A patent license is “discriminatory” if it does not include within the scope of its coverage, 
prohibits the exercise of, or is conditioned on the non-exercise of one or more of the rights that 
are specifically granted under this License. You may not convey a covered work if you are a 
34
[PAGE 35]
party to an arrangement with a third party that is in the business of distributing software, under 
which you make payment to the third party based on the extent of your activity of conveying the 
work, and under which the third party grants, to any of the parties who would receive the 
covered work from you, a discriminatory patent license (a) in connection with copies of the 
covered work conveyed by you (or copies made from those copies), or (b) primarily for and in 
connection with specific products or compilations that contain the covered work, unless you 
entered into that arrangement, or that patent license was granted, prior to 28 March 2007.
Nothing in this License shall be construed as excluding or limiting any implied license or other 
defenses to infringement that may otherwise be available to you under applicable patent law.
12. No Surrender of Others' Freedom.
If conditions are imposed on you (whether by court order, agreement or otherwise) that 
contradict the conditions of this License, they do not excuse you from the conditions of this 
License. If you cannot convey a covered work so as to satisfy simultaneously your obligations 
under this License and any other pertinent obligations, then as a consequence you may not 
convey it at all. For example, if you agree to terms that obligate you to collect a royalty for 
further conveying from those to whom you convey the Program, the only way you could satisfy 
both those terms and this License would be to refrain entirely from conveying the Program.
13. Use with the GNU Affero General Public License.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this License, you have permission to link or combine any 
covered work with a work licensed under version 3 of the GNU Affero General Public License 
into a single combined work, and to convey the resulting work. The terms of this License will 
continue to apply to the part which is the covered work, but the special requirements of the GNU 
Affero General Public License, section 13, concerning interaction through a network will apply 
to the combination as such.
14. Revised Versions of this License.
The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new versions of the GNU General 
Public License from time to time. Such new versions will be similar in spirit to the present 
version, but may differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.
Each version is given a distinguishing version number. If the Program specifies that a certain 
numbered version of the GNU General Public License “or any later version” applies to it, you 
have the option of following the terms and conditions either of that numbered version or of any 
later version published by the Free Software Foundation. If the Program does not specify a 
version number of the GNU General Public License, you may choose any version ever published 
by the Free Software Foundation.
35
[PAGE 36]
If the Program specifies that a proxy can decide which future versions of the GNU General 
Public License can be used, that proxy's public statement of acceptance of a version permanently 
authorizes you to choose that version for the Program.
Later license versions may give you additional or different permissions. However, no additional 
obligations are imposed on any author or copyright holder as a result of your choosing to follow 
a later version.
15. Disclaimer of Warranty.
THERE IS NO WARRANTY FOR THE PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY 
APPLICABLE LAW. EXCEPT WHEN OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE 
COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER PARTIES PROVIDE THE PROGRAM “AS IS” 
WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, 
INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. THE ENTIRE RISK 
AS TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE PROGRAM IS WITH YOU. 
SHOULD THE PROGRAM PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE COST OF ALL 
NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION.
16. Limitation of Liability.
IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN 
WRITING WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MODIFIES 
AND/OR CONVEYS THE PROGRAM AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR 
DAMAGES, INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR 
CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE 
PROGRAM (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO LOSS OF DATA OR DATA BEING 
RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED BY YOU OR THIRD PARTIES OR A 
FAILURE OF THE PROGRAM TO OPERATE WITH ANY OTHER PROGRAMS), EVEN IF 
SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF 
SUCH DAMAGES.
17. Interpretation of Sections 15 and 16.
If the disclaimer of warranty and limitation of liability provided above cannot be given local 
legal effect according to their terms, reviewing courts shall apply local law that most closely 
approximates an absolute waiver of all civil liability in connection with the Program, unless a 
warranty or assumption of liability accompanies a copy of the Program in return for a fee.
END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS
36
[PAGE 37]
EXHIBIT D
Samsung Smart TV GPL Compliance Notice
37
[PAGE 38]
54
54 Photograph of the GPL notification popup on a Samsung PN58C8000 Smart TV , 
http://princessleia.com/images/journalpics/012011/samsung_tv_osl.jpg (last visited Feb. 6, 2015) 
(from: Linux kernel on my TV and Nook, earthquake, Caligula and Ubuntu-Debian meetup, 
PLEAI2's Blog, Jan. 18, 2011, http://princessleia.com/journal/?p=3931).
38
