[PAGE 1]
Before the 
U.S. Copyright Office 
Library of Congress 
Washington, D.C. 
In the Matter of 
Exemption to Prohibition on ) 
Circumvention of Copyright                             )           Docket No. 2014-7          
Protection Systems for Access ) 
Control Technologies ) 
PRIVACY ACT ADVISORY STATEMENT Required by the Privacy Act of 1974 (P.L. 93-579) 
The authority for requesting this information is 17 U.S.C. §§ 1201(a)(1) and 705. Furnishing the requested information is voluntary. 
The principal use of the requested information is publication on the Copyright Office website and use by Copyright Office staff for 
purposes of the rulemaking proceeding conducted under 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1). NOTE: No other advisory statement will be given 
in connection with this submission. Please keep this statement and refer to it if we communicate with you regarding this submission. 
 
Short Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption 
Under 17 U.S.C. 1201 
  
Item 1. Commenter Information  
Commenting Party:  SAE International on behalf of the SAE International Dedicated Short 
Range Communication (DSRC) Standards Committee.  
Contact:  S. William Gouse, Director, Federal Program Development, SAE International.   
wgouse@sae.org ; Telephone: 1-202-434-8944 
 
Item 2.  Proposed Class Addressed:   
Proposed Class 21:  Vehicle Software-diagnosis, repair, or modification 
 
Item 3. Statement Regarding Proposed Exemption 
SAE International, formerly the Society of Automotive Engineers (hereinafter “SAE” or “SAE 
International”) is a global society of more than 145,000 engineers and related technical experts in 
the aerospace, automotive and commercial-vehicle industries.  SAE’s core competency is 
voluntary consensus standards development, where it plays the central role in developing 
automotive standards used in product development globally.  We would like to share pertinent 
information about this proposal. 
 
Specifically, the SAE Dedicated Short Range Communication (DSRC) Technical Committee’s 
scope pertains to developing and maintaining SAE Message Set Standards, Recommended 
Practices, and Information Reports for use with short-to-medium range wireless communication 
protocols specifically designed for road vehicle use.  The Committee also helps identify and 
maintains a common data dictionary as well as established initial safety-related ‘use-cases’ for the 
safe operation of this DSRC technology.  Participants in this committee include OEMs, suppliers, 
academia, consulting firms, government entities, and other interested parties, but no government 
entity participated in the generation of this response.  As per SAE’s policy, all SAE meetings are 
public. 
 
The SAE DSRC Technical Committee stands ready to assist the Copyright Office in providing and 
sharing its technical expertise with respect to any future issue discussed within Proposed Class 21. 
 
.  
