[PAGE 1]
 
 
Short Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption 
Under 17 U.S.C. 1201 
  
Item 1.Commenter Information  
 
The Internet Association http://internetassociation.org/our-members/   
 
Item 2.  Proposed Class Addressed  
 
Proposed Class 25: Software—Security Research  
 
Item 3.Statement Regarding Proposed Exemption 
 
The corporate members of the Internet Association support the proposal of Professors Bellovin, Blaze, 
Felten, Halderman, and Heninger (the “Security Researchers”) to establish a security research 
exemption to Section 1201 of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act. 
All computer code that is embedded in devices and components is likely to suffer from malfunctions, 
security flaws or vulnerabilities.  While companies strive to write error-free code, code is written by 
humans, and all humans make errors.  However, as responsible corporate citizens, we seek to constantly 
improve the quality of our code and the information security of our services and products.  Our internal 
corporate security teams regularly engage in security testing not only of our own code, but also the code 
embedded in the products of other companies with which our products must sometimes interoperate.  
 
The DMCA currently suffers from ambiguities regarding the legality of this type of necessary and every-
day security testing performed by or at the request of responsible companies such as ours. Our business 
planning is meaningfully damaged by legal ambiguities such as those in the DMCA.  The DMCA 
exposes us and our employees to additional legal risk as we strive to protect our customers’ safety and 
our own intellectual property assets and goodwill.   
 
We have a legitimate and essential business need for defending our corporate assets and our customers’ 
data through security testing.  This interest should be protected by the Copyright Office.  We would 
expect no negative repercussions to arise with respect to the safety or security of software from granting 
this exemption.  Indeed, to the contrary, if the exemption is granted, security researchers inside 
companies will be better able to defend corporate intellectual property assets, as well as the data of the 
consumers who trust us with their information. Similarly, external security researchers would more 
readily report any malfunctions, flaws or vulnerabilities to us in order to assist us in improving our 
offerings – a practice we support and financially reward through bug bounty programs. In brief, 
granting this exemption would be a significant step toward improving information security in the 
economy. 
 
ISO 29147 and ISO 30111, the standards referenced in the proposed exemption, provide a floor of 
corporate conduct that embodies security practices already implemented at responsible corporate 
entities. Hinging an exemption on these standards assists in creating a logical balance between 
information security and intellectual property protection for responsible corporate entities such as ours. 
