[PAGE 1]
  
Short Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption 
Under 17 U.S.C. 1201 
  
Item 1. Commenter Information  
Identify the commenting party and, if desired, provide a means for others to contact the commenter or an 
authorized representative of the commenter by email and/or telephone.  (Please keep in mind that any 
private, confidential, or personally identifiable information in this document will be accessible to the public.) 
 
Scott McGibbon, Project Specialist, USC Norman Lear Center 
mcgibbon@usc.edu       323-782-3318 
 
Item 2.  Proposed Class Addressed 
Identify the proposed exemption that the comment addresses by the number and name of the class set 
forth in the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (e.g., “Proposed Class 7: Audiovisual works – derivative uses 
– noncommercial remix videos”). 
 
Proposed Class 7: Audiovisual works – derivative uses – noncommercial remix videos 
 
Item 3. Statement Regarding Proposed Exemption 
Explain why you support or oppose the relevant proposed exemption.   
 
The USC Annenberg Norman Lear Center strongly supports the renewal and expansion 
of the 1201 exemptions for noncommercial remix use to include Blu-Ray.  
 
We have studied and celebrated remix culture in several of our projects, but most 
importantly have utilized remix artists’ skills and creative gifts by asking them to create 
exciting, trenchant and captivating video works based on our academic research. 
Without the resulting viral videos (most notably Joe Sabia’s work Prime Time Terror) our 
research and the discussions it might provoke would remain known only to a small 
group of academics. As a tool for expanding the reach of our non-profit work, the remix 
artist community is invaluable and limiting their noncommercial use of video surely 
violates the idea of fair use. 
 
 
PRIVACY ACT ADVISORY STATEMENT Required by the Privacy Act of 1974 (P.L. 93-579) 
The authority for requesting this information is 17 U.S.C. §§ 1201(a)(1) and 705. Furnishing the requested information is voluntary. 
The principal use of the requested information is publication on the Copyright Office website and use by Copyright Office staff for 
purposes of the rulemaking proceeding conducted under 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1). NOTE: No other advisory statement will be given 
in connection with this submission. Please keep this statement and refer to it if we communicate with you regarding this submission. 
