[PAGE 1]
Note: Please submit a separate comment for each proposed   class.
This is a Word document that allows users to type into the spaces below. The comment should be no more than one 
page in length (which may be single-spaced but should be in at least 12-point type). The italicized instructions on 
this template may be deleted. 
Short Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption
Under 17 U.S.C. 1201
Item 1. Commenter Information 
Scott Rogers
scottr66@gmail.com
Item 2. Proposed Class Addressed
Proposed Class 21: Vehicle software 
–diagnosis, repair, or modification
Item 3. Statement Regarding Proposed Exemption
I support this exemption, because modifying a vehicle's software can:
1. Repair a vehicle, and therefore prevent the need to buy another one, which in turn is saving money, as well 
as preventing another vehicle added to the road
2. Allow research and development for all vehicles which could help to improve them in the following ways:
- reduce emissions
- improve performance
- increase longevity
- increase gas mileage
- increase owner satisfaction
3. Give consumer confidence, knowing that we are not being forced into a police state, which prevents us from
using our purchased products, as we desire to. What's next, being told how we have to vote, based on the 
biggest company's wishes?
This law needs to be taken into reality, and given the freedom we enjoy living in America. 
PRIV ACY ACT ADVISORY STA TEMENT Required by the Privacy Act of 1974 (P.L. 93-579)
The authority for requesting this information is 17 U.S.C. §§ 1201(a)(1) and 705. Furnishing the requested information is voluntary. The 
principal use of the requested information is publication on the Copyright Office website and use by Copyright Office staff for purposes of the 
rulemaking proceeding conducted under 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1). NOTE: No other advisory statement will be given in connection with this 
submission. Please keep this statement and refer to it if we communicate with you regarding this submission.
