[PAGE 1]
Note: Please submit a separate comment for each proposed class. 
This is a Word document that allows users to type into the spaces below. The comment should be no more than one 
page in length (which may be single-spaced but should be in at least 12-point type). The italicized instructions on 
this template may be deleted.  
PRIVACY ACT ADVISORY STATEMENT Required by the Privacy Act of 1974 (P.L. 93-579) 
The authority for requesting this information is 17 U.S.C. §§ 1201(a)(1) and 705. Furnishing the requested information is voluntary. 
The principal use of the requested information is publication on the Copyright Office website and use by Copyright Office staff for 
purposes of the rulemaking proceeding conducted under 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1). NOTE: No other advisory statement will be given 
in connection with this submission. Please keep this statement and refer to it if we communicate with you regarding this submission. 
Short Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption 
Under 17 U.S.C. 1201 
  
Item 1. Commenter Information  
 
The National Congress of American Indians is the oldest and largest national 
organization of Indian tribal governments and was established in 1944.  www.ncai.org 
 
The headquarters s located at 1516 P Street, NW, Washington, DC  20005. 
 
John Dossett, NCAI General Counsel at jdossett@ncai.org
. 
 
 
 
Item 2.  Proposed Class Addressed 
 
Proposed Class 7: Audiovisual works – derivative uses – noncommercial remix videos 
 
 
Item 3. Statement Regarding Proposed Exemption 
 
NCAI supports an exemption for fair use remix.   Our recent issue ad, “Take It Away,” 
features altered footage from the NFL, and is an important part of NCAI’s campaign 
against the name and mascot of Washington’s football team. (View on the NCAI 
YouTube channel.) This issue ad, created for us by Goodness Mfg through a 
Kickstarter-funded campaign, is plainly noncommercial, transformative and critical fair 
use.   Advocacy organizations like NCAI respect copyright and also depend on fair use.   
 
NCAI only recently became familiar with 1201. Without an exemption, the NFL could 
shut our campaign down regardless of fair use.  The Copyright Office should protect 
political and cultural speech, and we encourage adoption of the exemptions proposed 
by the Electronic Frontier Foundation and the Organization for Transformative Works. 
 
 
