[PAGE 1]
February 6, 2015 
 
Music Library Association 
8551 Research Way 
Suite 180 
Middleton, WI 53562 
Ph. 608-836-5825 
 
The Music Library Association (MLA) respectfully submits the following comment in 
response to the call for comments, "Section 1201 Exemptions to Prohibition Against 
Circumvention of Technological Measures Protecting Copyrighted Works,” 
(http://copyright.gov/1201/).  The MLA is the professional association for music libraries 
and librarianship in the United States.  Founded in 1931, MLA has an international 
membership of over 800 librarians, musicians, scholars, educators, and members of the 
book and music trades.  Complementing the Association's national and international 
activities are eleven regional chapters that carry out its programs on the local level.  The 
Music Library Association provides a professional forum for librarians, archivists, and 
others who support and preserve the world's musical heritage. 
 
This comment addresses the eighth proposed class of exemptions out of 27 created by the 
Copyright Office in December 2014: 
 
8. Audiovisual works – space-shifting and format-shifting
 
 
This proposed class would allow circumvention of access controls on lawfully 
made and acquired audiovisual works for the purpose of noncommercial space-
shifting or format-shifting. This exemption has been requested for audiovisual 
material made available on DVDs protected by CSS, Blu-ray discs protected by 
AACS, and TPM-protected online distribution services. 
 
Music libraries have historically saved and preserved audiovisual materials. Space- and 
format-shifting are important preservation practices that ensure continued access to 
important musical materials as format and playback technology become obsolete. It is 
also important for purposes of reasonable non-commercial playback of music library 
materials in an educational setting.  For protected formats of audiovisual works, librarians 
must be able to circumvent access controls in order to make preservation copies and 
ensure the stewardship of our audiovisual cultural heritage.    
   
 
 
 
  
 
	
