[PAGE 1]
 
PRIVACY ACT ADVISORY STATEMENT Required by the Privacy Act of 1974 (P.L. 93-579) 
The authority for requesting this information is 17 U.S.C. §§ 1201(a)(1) and 705. Furnishing the requested information is voluntary. 
The principal use of the requested information is publication on the Copyright Office website and use by Copyright Office staff for 
purposes of the rulemaking proceeding conducted under 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1). NOTE: No other advisory statement will be given 
in connection with this submission. Please keep this statement and refer to it if we communicate with you regarding this submission. 
  
 
Long Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption 
Under 17 U.S.C. 1201  
  
Item 1. Commenter Information  
 
Prof. Steven M. Bellovin (Columbia University), Prof. Matt Blaze (University of Pennsylvania), 
Prof. Edward W. Felten (Princeton University), Prof. J. Alex Halderman (University of 
Michigan), and Prof. Nadia Heninger (University of Pennsylvania) (the “Security Researchers”). 
 
Item 2.  Proposed Class Addressed 
 
Proposed Class 25: Software – Security Research 
 
This proposed class would allow researchers to circumvent access controls in relation to 
computer programs, databases, and devices for purposes of good-faith testing, identifying, 
disclosing, and fixing of malfunctions, security flaws, or vulnerabilities. 
 
Item 3. Overview 
 
Literary works, including computer programs and databases, protected by access control 
mechanisms that potentially expose the public to risk of harm due to malfunction, security flaws 
or vulnerabilities when  
 
(a) circumvention is accomplished for the purpose of good faith testing for, investigating, or 
correcting such malfunction, security flaws or vulnerabilities in a technological 
protection measure or the underlying work it protects; OR  
 
(b) circumvention was part of the testing or investigation into a malfunction, security flaw or 
vulnerability that resulted in the public dissemination of security research when (1) a 
copyright holder fails to comply with the standards set forth in ISO 29147 and 30111; or 
(2) the finder of the malfunction, security flaw or vulnerability reports the malfunction, 
security flaw or vulnerability to the copyright holder by providing the information set 
forth in Form A* in advance of or concurrently with public dissemination of the security 
research.  
 
* Form A is a format derived from ISO 29147 Annex A:  
 
 
FORM A 
 
A researcher disclosing a vulnerability to a copyright holder shall provide the following 
information in writing: 
 
[PAGE 2]
 
2 
 
1. a basic summary that includes (a) a technical description, (b) the finder’s contact information, 
(c) a description of any public disclosure plans, (c) projected impact or a threat and risk 
assessment, to the extent possible (d) a description of the software configuration at the time of 
the discovery, if not default; (e) any relevant information about connected devices; AND  
 
2. a product-specific component consisting of (a) if the software or hardware, the product name 
or model, the operating system, and the version or revision number of the product or (b) if an 
online service, the time and date of discovery, the relevant URL, browser information including 
type and version, and the input required to reproduce the vulnerability. 
 
 
Item 4. Technological Protection Measure(s) and Method(s) of 
Circumvention 
 
For purposes of this exemption, any access control mechanism that potentially exposes the public 
to risk of harm due to malfunction, security flaws or vulnerabilities is an appropriate subject of 
research.   These access control mechanisms will vary in type from technology to technology. 
The particular design and architecture of the product dictate the type of copy protection measure 
selected by the copyright holder.  There are two types of copyrightable material implicated by 
this exemption:  first, software that runs on general purpose computer and, second, firmware and 
hardware in embedded devices and products.   A wide range of mechanisms exists – the 
hardware, platform and architecture of the device determine the choice.   Code obfuscation, 
failure to provide interfaces, sophisticated hardware with anti-reverse engineering features, and 
the use of encrypted code and data are some of the access control methods commonly used by 
copyright holders to limit copying of their code and are, therefore, implicated by this exemption.  
However, new methods of copy protection are developed regularly and a typical product or 
device may incorporate any combination of these or other methods.  
 
Example of TPMs in past research that could have raised DMCA concerns but did not solely 
because of Secretary of State intervention  
 
For example, one of the Security Researchers was asked by the Ohio Secretary of State to lead a 
team to examine the integrity of various vendors’ voting machines certified for use in Ohio.  
Because voting machine vendors generally maintain tight controls over the software and 
technical details of their systems, this investigation happened solely because of the Secretary of 
State’s intervention and request.  In the course of this investigation, the researcher team 
discovered numerous serious exploitable vulnerabilities in almost every component of every 
vendor’s system that was examined, including vulnerabilities that could be used to undetectably 
alter the outcome of an election. As a result of this study, technical and procedural changes were 
made in Ohio and other states to make it more difficult to exploit the flaws that we discovered.  
In the course of the analysis, the researcher team needed to defeat hardware and software 
mechanisms that were intended to prevent copying or alteration of data.   The research team 
developed techniques for misusing various hardware and software interfaces to extract and alter 
software, firmware and other data stored on the machines that were not intended to be copied or 
altered.  These machines used multiple different types of TPMs, and they all needed to be 
defeated in order to fully conduct the research as desired by the Secretary of State of Ohio.  
 
[PAGE 3]
 
3 
 
 
Example of TPM that inhibited actual research that remained unperformed until disclosure by a 
third party and a DMCA exemption.   
 
In 2006, two of us sought to research the safety of technological protection measures being 
included on consumer audio and other media CDs.  We sought the advice of counsel who 
cautioned us about risks associated with DMCA Section 1201.  We decided to request an 
exemption for the research from the Copyright Office.  This exemption was ultimately granted.  
We filed for a DMCA exemption request in which we described the TPMs at issue as follows:  
“The current breed of active technological protection measures rely almost invariably on the 
AutoRun feature of the Windows operating system for initial installation. AutoRun allows 
software code contained on removable media like CDs to run automatically when inserted into a 
computer. Using AutoRun a CD can automatically install software on a computer without the 
knowledge or consent of its owner. In the context of CD protection measures, the software 
installed using AutoRun often includes a device driver that limits the functionality of the 
consumer’s CD-ROM drive, preventing consumers from playing or copying their CD and 
creating the security risks described above. The current active technological protection measures 
exploit this aspect of AutoRun, because most consumers would prefer the freedom to make 
personal backup copies, listen to tracks in order of their preference, or transfer CDs to iPods or 
other portable media players and are therefore reluctant to install software that would limit these 
lawful activities. Absent the installation of the this software, the CD format by nature allows 
consumers to freely access and use CD audio files.”1    
 
However, the TPMs described above are not necessarily representative of all current approaches, 
as technology in these fields evolves quickly.  Meanwhile, a third party researcher disclosed a 
portion of the analysis, and we decided to assume the DMCA legal risk, complete the research 
and disclose our findings.  We were vindicated in this choice when the Copyright Office 
ultimately granted our exemption request, however, in the interim, we had delayed the 
performance of the research due to DMCA concerns and then later uncomfortably risked the 
possibility that a litigant or prosecutor may decide we violated Section 1201 in performing our 
research.   The ambiguities of the statute gave us no comfort.   The research had been time 
sensitive, and millions of machines were compromised by the rootkit at issue, in both the public 
and private sector.2  The delay in our research arguably had actual information security for 
consumers and national security consequences.  
 
Example of TPM that inhibited actual research that remain unperformed on the advice of counsel 
 
However, in most research circumstances, a governmental actor is not asking for the assessment 
or willing to intervene on behalf of researchers.  Consequently, in most other cases, when the 
research begins to involve TPMs, researchers seek the advice of counsel.  Attorneys regularly 
counsel in this circumstance that the DMCA is an unclear statute and that undertaking any such 
                                                 
1  See p. 3-4 Comments of Comment of Edward W. Felten Professor of Computer Science and Public Affairs; 
J. Alex Halderman Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, dated December 1, 2005 
2 http://www.nytimes.com/2005/11/19/business/media/19online.html?_r=0  For an academic discussion of legal 
implications of security-invasive digital rights management technologies for consumers, see, e.g., Andrea M. 
Matwyshyn, Technoconsen(t)sus, 85 Wash U. L. Rev. 3 (2007). 
[PAGE 4]
 
4 
 
research exposes the researcher to legal risk.  As such, attorneys usually counsel against 
continuing the research.  For example, one of us was investigating the integrity of a secure 
wireless communication system used by various government agencies.  In the course of this 
investigation, s/he was counseled by an attorney that constructing tools to extract the firmware 
from a particular vendor’s product in ways not supported by the existing interfaces for the 
purpose of vulnerability analysis could constitute a violation of the DMCA.   This precluded 
analysis of implementation vulnerabilities and limited the scope of analysis to those 
vulnerabilities that could be found in the published specifications for the system.   
 
Because the exemption request is driven by the nature of the research and the disclosure conduct 
of the researcher, the environment in which the research is conducted will vary.  Security 
research teams exist in many major corporations,3 in academia and in government agencies, 
among other places. 
 
Item 5. Asserted Noninfringing Use(s)  
 
The types of noninfringing uses that are adversely affected by the absence of this exemption 
under Section 1201 of the DMCA include the following: 
 
- Research:  The work will be used by security researchers in order to (a) unlock public 
access to knowledge about security research through conference presentations and 
publications in academic journals and proceedings; (b) improve safety of products and 
services relying on computer code; (c) improve national security of critical infrastructure 
relying on computer code; and (d) enable companies to perform and access security 
research as part of their legitimate business operations in order to create better products. 
Internet of things startups in particular face challenges in obtaining and affording security 
testing of their products. 
 
- Teaching:  Training the next generation of information security professionals to work in 
government and in the private sector as security engineers who defend sensitive 
information assets is impossible without their teachers being able to demonstrate the 
mechanics of various types of attacks, including those on devices with TPMs.  
 
- The policy goals that underpin Section 1201 (g)(f) and (j), when combined with the 
language of granted exemptions.  Granting this requested exemption cleanly updates and 
clarifies the scope of statutorily allowed research in Sections 1201(g)(f) and (j) in light of 
the ambiguities created by new types of information security threats facing companies, 
consumers, and our country’s national security.  Further, as articulated in the 2006 Audio 
Recording Security Research Exemption, no infringement occurs when circumvention is 
accomplished for the purpose of good faith testing, investigating, or correcting 
                                                 
3 See e.g., Short Comments of Internet Association supporting this exemption request  
[PAGE 5]
 
5 
 
malfunctions, security flaws or vulnerabilities, as well as the circumvention that was part 
of an investigation that resulted in the public dissemination of security research regarding 
malfunctions, security flaws or vulnerabilities.  
 
- Protecting consumers under Section 1201(i).  Section 1201(i) was presciently crafted by 
Congress and is well-suited to specifically encompass this exemption request in light of 
the new security and privacy dangers for consumers arising out of the Internet of Things. 
1201(i) on its face demonstrates that Congress specifically contemplated and sought to 
protect the public from malfunctioning, flawed or vulnerable code that harms consumers: 
Section 1201(i) states that a consumer’s investigation of code functionality on a 
privately-owned system in order to determine whether a privacy harm is happening does 
not constitute an impermissible circumvention. In this spirit of 1201(i), this exemption 
request similarly seeks to empower consumers with better information about how 
computer code is behaving on their systems and the systems upon which their safety 
relies. However, unlike 1201(i), this exemption request recognizes the practical reality 
that most consumers lack the technological skills needed to engage in the type of 
technical inquiry 1201(i) expressly authorizes. This exemption request, therefore, 
empowers security researchers to unlock the truth of code behaviors, acting as agents on 
behalf of the consumers suffering the harms contemplated by 1201(i) and other 
malfunctions, security flaws or vulnerabilities that expose the public to risk of harm.  
The security risks sought to be avoided include various forms of harms that arise from 
malfunctioning, flawed or vulnerable code and lead to a company’s or a consumer’s loss of 
control over a system, machine or device.  This loss of control may mean that a third party 
attacker can manipulate outcomes or that a malfunction will cause the machine to automatically 
generate a dangerous outcome.    
 
Technologically, this loss of control may result from any one of a number of categories of 
security problems and attacks including, but not limited to, the following examples: 
- Attacks that exploit race condition 
- Passive interception of communication 
- Active interception of communication such as a man in the middle attack 
- Exploitation of deliberate but unpublished backdoor access mechanisms 
- Rootkits 
- Code injection through mechanisms such as buffer/heap/stack overflows 
- Exploitation of poor input validation such as defects that permit SQL injection 
- XXS 
- DoS 
- Access control problems 
- Unvalidated inputs and misconfiguration errors 
- Weaknesses in authentication, authorization or cryptographic practices4 
 
                                                 
4 For discussions of various vulnerabilities and coding errors, see, e.g., Ross Anderson, Security Engineering (2001). 
[PAGE 6]
 
6 
 
As a result of this loss of control, the human-experienced security risks include but are not 
limited to the following:  
 
- Physical harm to humans through malfunctioning, e.g., medical devices, including possible 
death.  In some cases, children are disproportionately impacted by their reliance on devices.5 
- Damage to property, the economy and national security interests, e.g., loss of control over 
networked home and office automation devices. 
- Loss of control over sensitive information that resides on the machines or devices at issue. 
- Loss of control over privacy from unwanted intrusions by compromised cameras and 
microphones  
 
Item 6. Asserted Adverse Effects  
 
 
There are no potential alternatives that permit the asserted noninfringing uses without the need 
for circumvention.  The safety of the code of a particular machine or device can only be 
accomplished through rigorous analysis by experts. 
 
The inability to conduct security research where a TPM exists has or is likely to have adverse 
effects on the following noninfringing uses: 
 
1. Research: 
 
a. Research for journal publication and conference presentations.  The research of each 
of us has been negative impacted by the ambiguities of DMCA Section 1201.  We 
have altered both the subject matter and the methodology of our intended research in 
cases where we were advised by counsel of DMCA Section 1201 risks.   These 
alterations made our research lower in quality and thoroughness than it would have 
been otherwise.  This research directly leads to the development of more robust 
security strategies to innovate the next generation of more secure products. 
 
b. Government funded research.   Because some of us are funded by grants from the 
Federal Government, including the National Science Foundation and the Department 
of Defense, this means that when DMCA Section 1201 restrictions cause subject 
matter and methodology alterations in our research, this change then negatively 
impact our government-funded research,6 as well as our private sector funded 
research.  
 
c. National security research.  A portion of the research that we perform has obvious 
national defense implications, seeking to improve the information integrity of the 
economy and the security of government systems.  For example, some of us research 
and create software testing tools to facilitate manual and automated software security 
                                                 
5 See e.g., Short Form Comments of Jay Radcliffe, Senior Security Consultant, Rapid7  
6 See also Short Form Comments of Professor Salvatore Stolfo, Columbia University 
[PAGE 7]
 
7 
 
testing by legitimate businesses and government entities to defend their systems 
against criminals and attacking nation state actors.7  
 
d. International security research. Because the internet and networked devices are 
inherently global in their reach, the loss of security research caused by Section 1201 
has negative ripple effects not only domestically but also on the United States’ trusted 
global allies and researchers internationally.  When we quash security research in the 
United States we harm not only our own national security but also the security of 
other countries.8 
 
e. Consumer safety research. This exemption would facilitate researcher, consumer and 
third party diagnoses and mitigation of defects in consumer products such as Internet 
of Things devices, cars, and medical devices. Similarly, researchers could be asked by 
media or safety assessment organizations to empower consumers who want to make 
informed purchasing decisions with better information. 
 
2. Assisting consumers in permitted consumer investigations of privacy invasion under 
Section 1201(i).   
 
3. Educational use in teaching, especially for training minors in the basics of information  
security 
 
Granting the exemption would have no negative repercussions with respect to the safety or 
security of the works that are the subject of the research.  The flaws uncovered by the security 
research that the exemption will facilitate are pre-existing, not caused by the research.  The 
research does not make it easier for wrongdoers to access sensitive applications or databases – 
criminals undoubtedly already know about these defects in the code and are potentially already 
actively exploiting them to harm consumers.   
 
 
  
                                                 
7 Id. 
8 See e.g. Short Form Comment of Dr. Ian Brown, et. al.  
[PAGE 8]
 
8 
 
Item 7. Statutory Factors  
Evaluate the proposed exemption in light of each of the statutory factors set forth in 17 U.S.C. 
1201(a)(1)(C): 
(i) the availability for use of copyrighted works;  
The lack of a security research exemption damages the availability of works relating to security 
research.  Because of fear of legal consequences under the DMCA, security researchers are 
creating fewer publications relating to information security research.  This proposed exemption 
would ensure a safer environment for security research that would stimulate production of more 
works.   More copyrighted works would be created, and the work would be of even higher 
caliber.  
(ii) the availability for use of works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational purposes; 
The absence of this exemption means that information security education efforts are actively 
hampered on all levels of the educational system.  The information security skills needed to 
defend our country against sophisticated attackers from other countries take years of intensive, 
rigorous training that can only be accomplished through analysis and examination of flawed 
code, under the supervision of an expert.   
  
(iii) the impact that the prohibition on the circumvention of technological measures applied to 
copyrighted works has on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or 
research;  
A serious, negative impact on computer security scholarship exists because of fear of legal 
consequences under DMCA Section 1201.9    As explained above, teaching the next generation 
of technology professionals capable of defending our national security, economy and corporate 
digital assets is also hindered. If granted, this exemption would allow for secondary analysis and 
critique by the press to arise regarding security of consumer products.  This type of criticism and 
synthetic analysis by journalists for consumer consumption would stimulate safer consumer 
choices in their purchasing decisions.  Similarly, this exemption would allow for greater 
collaboration between news reporters and security researchers to investigate safety of code that 
runs critical systems and popular consumer products.  
 
(iv) the effect of circumvention of technological measures on the market for or value of 
copyrighted works; and  
 
Without robust security research the market fails to incorporate accurate information regarding 
quality of security in products.  Companies that invest in information security would be rewarded 
if this exemption is granted. This market information deficit on security quality undervalues 
companies that invest in security and overvalues those that do not.   
 
(v) any other factor that may be appropriate for the Librarian to consider in evaluating the 
proposed exemption. 
                                                 
9 See e.g., Short Form Comment of Prof. Salvatore Stolfo, Columbia University;  Short Form Comment of Prof. 
Brown et. al., Oxford University 
[PAGE 9]
 
9 
 
 
Granting this exemption would enable security research into products particularly designed for 
children.  For example, child diabetics are particularly dependent on insulin pumps that may 
contain code flaws.10 
 
Item 8. Documentary Evidence  
 
Because of the legal ambiguities that exist around Section 1201 with respect to security research, 
we, the Security Researchers have not performed the following specific acts of research, which 
have been foregone or delayed due to the lack of the current proposed exemption.   In each case, 
the security research at issue is critical to the safety and privacy of consumers, as well as the 
security of our economy and our country.  Delay in performing this research has been caused 
directly by our fear of legal consequences under the Section 1201 of the DMCA.  
- Potential backdoors in popular consumer programs and other privacy invading features.  
Such backdoors – unpublished remote access features included by design but not 
controllable by the user - would enable a remote attacker to engage in undisclosed and 
undetected privacy invasions of consumers.  A backdoor could allow a malicious attacker 
to remotely turn on webcams and microphones on computers and other devices to 
monitor consumers’ conversations and activities inside their homes. Similarly, a 
backdoor could allow for an attacker to control the speakers of a device to project 
harassing messages.  Child predators could use backdoors to control a system and, for 
example, communicate with children through devices in their rooms at times when 
parents were not present.  Additionally, this type of vulnerability would compromise the 
privacy of all of a consumers’ financial, health and other personal data stored on the 
machine or device.   
 
- Various vulnerabilities in cars: Cars contain millions of lines of computer code and are 
increasingly controlled by software.  Vehicles now also contain a wide range of wireless 
and other communication mechanisms that expose this software to inputs from 
potentially a wide range of potentially remote and malicious sources.  The consequences 
of security vulnerabilities in these systems can be dramatic and deadly, including loss of 
control over acceleration, braking, steering and other critical safety functions.  
 
- Various vulnerabilities in Internet of Things products: As the Internet of Things 
increasingly permeates the lives of consumers and connected devices become 
omnipresent, devices expose consumers to new types of risks, including death due to 
device malfunction.  For example, internet connected smoke alarms and carbon 
monoxide detectors present health risk.11   
 
- Various vulnerabilities in connected surveillance cameras.  Connected surveillance 
cameras allow third party attackers on servers, privately operated through the internet. In 
                                                 
10 See, e.g., Short Form Comment of Jay Radcliffe, Senior Security Consultant, Rapid7 
11 See, e.g., Short Form Comment of Mark Stanislav, Senior Security Consultant and Researcher, Rapid7 
[PAGE 10]
 
10 
 
this way, an attacker could blind cameras to commit crime both inside homes and inside 
government and commercial buildings. 
 
- Various vulnerabilities in public safety communications.  Analysis of software and 
firmware in two way secure public safety communications will find methods – attackers 
could disable, monitor or interfere with sensitive public safety and national security 
communications systems, such as those used by state and local law enforcement agencies, 
federal law enforcement, counterintelligence and executive protective security agencies 
 
- Evaluation of security of hardware and software cryptographic modules used in financial 
services. Cryptographic modules are used to protect a wide range of commercial financial 
transactions, including ATS, card payment systems, and mobile payment platforms.  
Flaws, malfunctions or vulnerabilities could result in financial losses for both consumers 
and business entities. In a large attack, defects in cryptographic modules could severely 
harm or even destabilize a portion of the U.S. economy or corrupt stock market 
transactions.  
 
- Evaluation of hardware and software cryptographic modules used to protect access 
controlled data and integrity in government and commercial computing and information 
systems. Any agency, government contractor or other company that transfers or protects 
sensitive data connected to network systems is at risk of information harm due to possible 
defects in these cryptographic modules. 
 
- Analysis of electronic and computerized systems used in physical security applications 
such as mechanical locks, “smart” locks, safes and vaults and alarm systems.  Physical 
security devices prevent attackers from intruding in physical space. 
- Analysis of electronic voting systems.  Electronic voting machines and the systems used 
to configure them and count votes are subject to manipulation and a wide of possible 
attacks. Flaws in these systems have obvious implications for the democratic process and 
discovery of weaknesses permits vulnerabilities to be repaired or procedural safeguards 
implemented to prevent their exploitation.12 
- Analysis of code in medical devices.  Flaws in code in medical devices may result in 
death or serious injury. 
 
ISO 29147 and ISO 30111, the standards referenced in the proposed exemption, provide a floor 
of corporate conduct that embodies security practices already implemented at responsible 
corporate entities. Hinging an exemption on these standards assists in creating a logical balance 
between information security and intellectual property protection for responsible corporate 
entities.  
 
                                                 
12 See e.g. Short Form Comment of Verified Voting 
