[PAGE 1]
Before the 
United States Copyright Office 
Library of Congress 
In the Matter of 
Exemption to Prohibition on 
Circumvention of Copyright Protection 
Systems for Access Control Technologies 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
Docket No. 2014-07 
COMMENT OF 
INTERNATIONAL DOCUMENTARY ASSOCIATION 
FILM INDEPENDENT 
KARTEMQUIN EDUCATIONAL FILMS
NATIONAL ALLIANCE FOR MEDIA ARTS+CULTURE 
INDIE CAUCUS 
UNIVERSITY FILM AND VIDEO ASSOCIATION 
CENTER FOR INDEPENDENT DOCUMENTARY 
WOMEN IN FILM AND VIDEO  
WOMEN IN FILM  
Submitted By: 
Jack I. Lerner 
UCI Intellectual Property, Arts, and 
Technology Clinic 
University of California, Irvine School of Law 
401 East Peltason Drive, Law 4800-P 
Irvine, CA 92697 
With the support of Kyle Reynolds, Mike Lee, 
Aaron Benmark, and Rahul Sajnani  
Michael C. Donaldson 
Donaldson & Callif, LLP 
400 South Beverly Drive  
Beverly Hills, CA 90212 
[PAGE 2]
Comment of International Documentary Association, et. al. 
 
 
 
 
Page 1 of 20 
 
I. Commenter Information 
Commenters are:  International Documentary Association, Film Independent, Kartemquin 
Films, National Alliance for Media, Arts, and Culture, Indie Caucus, University Film and 
Video Association, Center for Independent Documentary, Women in Film and Video, 
and Women in Film.  For information about the commenters, please see Appendix A, 
About the Commenters.  To contact the commenters, please contact the submitter, UCI 
Intellectual Property, Arts, and Technology Clinic, at dmcafilm @ law.uci.edu.  
 
II. Proposed Class:  Class 6—Audiovisual Works—Filmmaking Uses 
The Filmmaker Commenters propose the following exemption:  
Audiovisual works that are lawfully made and acquired from DVDs 
protected by Content Scramble System, or, if the work is not reasonably 
available in sufficient audiovisual quality on DVD, then from Blu-Ray 
discs protected by Advanced Access Content System, or, if the work is not 
reasonably available in sufficient audiovisual quality on DVD or Blu-Ray, 
then from digitally transmitted video protected by encryption measures, 
when the circumvention is accomplished solely in order to incorporate 
portions of motion pictures into new works for the purpose of fair use in 
filmmaking.  
 
III. Overview 
Filmmaking serves an important social and political function in our society. Filmmakers 
coming from a wide range of perspectives and background create works of authorship 
that criticize or comment on culture, history, politics, and society; encourage debate and 
the exchange of ideas and opinions; and raise awareness of issues facing 
underrepresented individuals who struggle to be heard. Filmmakers have long held the 
right to make fair use of copyrighted material, and they rely on fair use in order to serve 
these valuable social and political purposes. This is true not just of documentary 
filmmakers, but of those who make narrative films as well.  As creators and rights 
holders themselves, filmmakers understand the importance of copyright protections and 
have long exercised fair use rights appropriately, as informed by the Documentary 
Filmmakers’ Statement of Best Practices in Fair Use and a growing national practice of 
responsible fair use.
1    
But fair use is of little help if filmmakers cannot access the material they seek to use in 
the first place. Unfortunately, today, nearly all material is locked behind technological 
protection measures (“TPMs”). This is especially the case for the kind of high definition 
(“HD”) motion picture material filmmakers need to satisfy both distributors and viewers.  
HD has become the firmly entrenched industry standard, and many filmmakers and 
distributors have already begun to look toward higher-definition formats like 4K. Thus, 
                                                 
1 Documentary Filmmakers’ Statement of Best Practices in Fair Use, Ctr. for Media and Soc. Impact (Nov. 
18, 2005), http://www.cmsimpact.org/sites/default/files/fair_use_final.pdf. 
[PAGE 3]
Comment of International Documentary Association, et. al. 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 20 
 
even where low quality material is available, filmmakers cannot use it because 
broadcasters and distributors will discourage or reject it, or because high quality video is 
the only way to make the point the filmmaker is trying to get across to the viewer. The 
Copyright Office should recommend an exemption that encompasses all filmmakers in 
order to remedy this severe chill on an important form of creative expression. 
While the exemption granted in 2012 has greatly helped to remedy the DMCA’s harmful 
effects on the filmmaking community, the exemption must be modified for 2015-2018 to 
account for important changes in technology and practice. First, makers of narrative films 
with fictional content rely on fair use and the DMCA is causing harm to that use; the 
exemption must be modified to account for all filmmakers. Second, more content than 
ever before is now accessible exclusively on Blu-ray, and broadcasting standards require 
much higher resolution than in 2012.
2 The exemption must be modified to include TPMs 
on Blu-ray. Third, as filmmakers comment on current events they need access to 
ephemeral programming like news analysis or opinion that may never be re-aired or 
distributed after initial broadcast. An exemption that provides access only to online 
distribution sources is inadequate and should be modified to include digitally transmitted 
video. Fourth, the alternatives to circumvention remain impracticable and prohibitively 
difficult to use; the alternatives proposed in 2012 have become even more rare and 
difficult to utilize today.  
Over the last several years, access has become a significant impediment to the 
filmmaking process, replacing earlier problems with legal uncertainty around fair use. 
Filmmakers must have access to the material they need for fair use, at a sufficient level of 
quality, to continue to provide viewers the world over with important creative expression, 
commentary, criticism, investigative reporting, and education. The proposed exemption 
will go a long way toward alleviating this access problem and should be granted. 
 
IV. TECHNOLOGICAL PROTECTION MEASURES  
As we indicated in our Petition for Exemption, filmmakers need to access motion picture 
material on (1) DVDs, (2) Blu-Ray discs, and (3) digitally transmitted video in order to 
educate, inform, comment on or analyze important social issues or history, engage in 
artistic or literary criticism, or investigate and report on events in the world.  
 
A. Content Scramble System on DVDs 
 
We propose an exemption that permits circumvention, in certain circumstances, of CSS 
on DVDs.3 CSS employs a mix of access and use controls to protect DVD content from 
being copied, distributed, and viewed from unauthorized devices and the Register has 
previously concluded that it qualifies as a TPM subject to the DMCA’s anti-
circumvention provisions.4 In general, CSS encrypts, or scrambles, the DVD content to 
                                                 
2 Telephone Interview with David Field, Senior Director, Content Packaging, PBS (Jan. 27, 2015). 
3 See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40 (2010). 
4 See 2012 Recommendation at 126. 
[PAGE 4]
Comment of International Documentary Association, et. al. 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 20 
 
prevent copying.5 To decrypt the content, users must have a CSS-licensed hardware 
device, such as a DVD-ROM, which contains a fixed set of “keys” that can decrypt 
encryption on DVDs.6 The CSS key was cracked in 1999 and distributed freely on the 
internet.7 As a result, software that allows users to access digital files on DVDs has been 
available for many years. However, DVDs are still being produced with CSS and some 
contain content that filmmakers need and cannot obtain anywhere else.8  The proposed 
exemption is therefore necessary to allow filmmakers to access this motion picture 
material in order to make fair use.  
 
B. Advanced Access Content System on Blu-Ray discs 
 
The exemption we propose further permits circumvention, in certain circumstances, of 
AACS on Blu-Ray discs. AACS is also a mixed access and use control, and has also been 
previously recognized by the Register as a TPM subject to the DMCA.
9 AACS provides 
each individual device with a unique set of keys. If the keys are compromised, the 
licensor can revoke the keys associated with the device and that device will cease to 
decrypt future titles.10  It is our understanding that software exists which allows users to 
access digital files on AACS-protected Blu-ray. 
AACS on Blu-Ray discs qualifies as a TPM within the meaning of § 1201(a)(3) because 
it “effectively controls access” to a work by requiring the “application of information”—
namely, encryption keys—in order to gain access to the work. 
 
C. Encryption Measures on Digitally Transmitted Video  
 
The exemption we propose permits circumvention, in certain circumstances, of 
technologies that restrict access to digitally transmitted video through various protocols 
that use encryption. A considerable amount of motion picture material is ephemeral and 
captured exclusively on digitally transmitted video sources such as cable and online 
streaming. Much like CSS and AACS, the protection measures found on digitally 
transmitted video seek to control access through encryption and other mechanisms, and 
thus qualify as a TPM  within the meaning of Section 1201(a)(3) by requiring the 
“application of information”—namely, encryption keys—in order to gain access to the 
work.
11  The Register has previously recognized that “a significant number of platforms” 
                                                 
5 Gregory Kesden, Carnegie Mellon Univ., Lecture 33, Course: 15-412 Operating Systems: Design and 
Implementation (Dec. 6, 2000), https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~dst/DeCSS/Kesden. 
6 Id. 
7 See DVD Copy Control Ass’n, Inc. v. Bunner, 116 Cal. App. 4th 241, 255 (Cal. Ct. App. 2004). 
8 See DVD COPY CONTROL ASSOCIATION, Content Scramble System (CSS), 
http://www.dvdcca.org/css.aspx (last visited Feb. 3, 2015). 
9 2012 Recommendation at 126. 
10 Ed Felten, AACS Decryption Code Released, FREEDOM TO TINKER (Jan. 8, 2007), https://freedom-to-
tinker.com/blog/felten/aacs-decryption-code-released/ (last visited Feb. 3, 2015). 
 
[PAGE 5]
Comment of International Documentary Association, et. al. 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 20 
 
that distribute motion pictures online use encryption measures that constitute TPMs that 
control access to the works.12 
In general, protection measures on digitally transmitted video operate by utilizing a 
combination of (i) client verification, which ensures that an authorized client is receiving 
the content; (ii) encryption, which ensures that the content is delivered securely only to 
authorized client; and (iii) access controls, which ensure that the client cannot export the 
content for redistribution. 13 For example, Netflix content streamed to a laptop through a 
web browser plug-in is protected by both encryption and other protocols. The most 
popular of these are Microsoft Silverlight and Adobe Flash.  A client requests media 
usage rights from a rights server online and downloads a DRM license or key so that he 
or she can play the content.14   
The DRM systems that use these protocols are extremely diverse and in a state of 
constant flux.  For instance, even widely used online streaming protocols that update in 
real time are becoming obsolete; Microsoft and Adobe have announced that Silverlight 
and Flash will not be supported in the near future.15 In addition, while most browsers are 
now transitioning to the new Hypertext Markup Language 5 (“HTML5”) created by the 
World Wide Web Consortium (“W3C”), the W3C as of late 2014 has decided to 
postpone DRM incorporation until HTML5.1 is released, which is expected to occur later 
this year.16 Put simply, filmmakers cannot predict what kind of DRM will be 
incorporated into HTML5. However, HTML5’s clear focus on video functionality 
emphasizes the industry’s focus on video and the high likelihood for further changes in 
TPM implementation.  
TPMs on digitally transmitted video are not only ubiquitous, but diverse across all 
platforms.  For example, cable set-top boxes, DVR machines, Hulu, and Netflix are often 
protected by hardware encryption through High Definition Multimedia Interface 
(“HDMI”) cable outputs as well as encryption and other protocols active within DVR and 
cable boxes.
17 Many of these TPMs are not fully developed yet, like HTML5.  
Nevertheless, a “significant number of platforms” incorporate TPMs,18 and filmmakers 
nonetheless need to access them. Absent an exemption covering digitally transmitted 
sources, filmmakers cannot criticize, comment on, and educate others about a range of 
important issues, particularly those that include ephemeral content and current events 
affecting our society. 
Given that these TPMs are widely diverse and constantly evolving, any one subset of 
streaming technologies cannot be identified for purposes of this exemption because it 
                                                 
12  See 2012 recommendation pg. 126. 
13 See generally Letter from Alex Podobas, Appendix J. 
14See Id.; see also MICROSOFT.COM, Microsoft Services Agreement, http://windows.microsoft.com/en-
us/windows/microsoft-services-agreement (last visited Feb. 3, 2015).  
15 See 2012 Recommendation at 126; see also Christopher Mims, HTML5 Triumphant: Silverlight, Flash 
Discontinuing, MIT TECHNOLOGY REVIEW (NOV. 9, 2011), 
http://www.technologyreview.com/view/426083/html5-triumphant-silverlight-flash-discontinuing. 
16 Frederic Lardinois, W3C Declares HTML5 Standard Complete, TECH CRUNCH (Oct. 28, 2014), 
http://techcrunch.com/2014/10/28/w3c-declares-html5-standard-done. 
17 See generally 2012 Comment, Section (VI)(C). 
18 2012 Recommendation at 126. 
[PAGE 6]
Comment of International Documentary Association, et. al. 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 20 
 
would become obsolete long before the exemption expired.  It is clear, however, that all 
of the TPMs in use today seek to control access through a combination of encryption and 
other mechanisms that easily qualify as TPMs within the meaning of Section 1201(a)(3). 
 
V. Noninfringing Uses 
Filmmakers have long relied on fair use. Through fair use, filmmakers contribute 
substantially to society by providing criticism and commentary, educating, and reporting 
on the news and current events—activities that Congress has explicitly identified as fair 
uses.19 In addition, independent filmmaking often provides a voice to otherwise 
underrepresented groups. Fair use in filmmaking has been recognized in many judicial 
opinions and of course by the Register and Librarian. In fact, the National 
Telecommunications and Information Administration has recognized fair use in 
documentary filmmaking as a “paradigmatic fair use of copyrighted works” that 
“provide[s] beneficial commentary on important issues.”
20  For over a decade, the 
documentary filmmaking community has worked diligently to build a practice of 
responsible fair use, as exemplified by the Documentary Filmmakers’ Statement of Best 
Practices in Fair Use.
21  Because documentary filmmakers are also rights holders, the 
best practices are carefully balanced to foster responsible use.  
But it is not just documentary filmmakers who rely on fair use; filmmakers who produce 
narrative films with fictional content also regularly make fair use of copyrighted 
audiovisual works.  Just as documentary films use audiovisual clips to criticize, 
comment, explain, or educate about current society, scripted films incorporate aspects of 
reality for the same purposes. Fictional filmmaking is, of course, a long-established art 
form by which to conduct criticism and commentary, using techniques such as parody, 
reference, and pastiche.  In addition, filmmaking techniques such as “Cinema Verite,” use 
unaltered reality as a background to present fictionalized characters and narrative, similar 
to the way that documentary films include copyrighted works captured incidentally.22  
Similarly, “biopics” and other fact-based narratives present information and commentary 
meant to educate and analyze real events.  
Many courts have upheld fair use in fictional works,
23 and filmmaking is no exception.   
In cases such as Sofa Entertainment v. Dodger Productions, where Dodger used a short 
clip of the “Ed Sullivan Show” in the biographical musical “Jersey Boys,” the court held 
that the use fell squarely within Dodger’s fair use rights because the use was clearly 
transformative.24 In Arrow Productions. v. The Weinstein Company, the court concluded 
                                                 
19 Copyrights, 17 U.S.C.A. § 107 (2014). 
20 Lawrence E. Strickling, Re: Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems 
for Access Control Technologies, RM2011-7, NAT’L TELECOMM. AND INFO. AGENCY 23 (Sept. 21, 2012), 
http://copyright.gov/1201/2012/2012_NTIA_Letter.pdf.  
21 See supra, note 1. 
22 See Documentary Filmmakers’ Statement of Best Practices in Fair Use, supra at note 1, (Category 3: 
“Incidental Use.”) 
23 See, e.g., Suntrust Bank v. Houghton Mifflin Co., 268 F.3d 1257 (11th Cir. 2001); Campbell v. Acuff-
Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 569-70 (1994). Cf. MCA, Inc. v. Wilson, 677 F.2d 180, 185 (2d Cir. 1981) 
(permissible parody should target the original, but may also reflect on life in general). 
24 Sofa Entm’t, Inc. v. Dodger Prod., Inc., 782 F. Supp. 2d 898, 910-11 (C.D. Cal. 2010). 
[PAGE 7]
Comment of International Documentary Association, et. al. 
 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 20 
 
that the recreation of scenes from the pornographic film “Deep Throat” in a biopic about 
the star Linda Lovelace was also transformative and thus fair use.25 Last, in Bourne v. 
Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp., the court concluded that a parody of the song “When 
You Wish Upon A Star” in the show “Family Guy” was also fair use.26 Many other 
examples exist.27 
Section 1201’s prohibition is preventing filmmakers who wish to make similar uses from 
doing so. Matt Latham, an independent filmmaker, would like to produce a fictional film 
satirizing the representation of women in movies. Matt would like to include a montage 
of clips from actual films to illustrate how truly ridiculous the treatment of women in 
cinema can be—the montage clips would mirror situations that occurred in Matt’s film in 
order to make this point. However, to truly make a compelling case, Matt needs to use 
clips from well-known and accepted movies or else it may seem that the issue is being 
blown out of proportion. The use of these clips falls squarely within the traditional 
boundaries of fair use as a criticism on the original motion pictures from which the clips 
are taken. As in Sofa, Arrow, and Bourne, this use would clearly be transformative, as the 
clips would be used a new purpose beyond their original entertainment value. 
Unfortunately, Matt cannot make use of these clips unless the exemption embraces 
makers of narrative films, as his film would not be considered a documentary.
28  
As Michael C. Donaldson describes in his statement attached hereto as Appendix C, the 
independent narrative filmmaking community also relies on the Documentary 
Filmmakers’ Statement in making fair use, and over the last several years fair use in 
narrative filmmaking has burgeoned into a robust practice that has been largely without 
controversy.29  Critically, many scripted films with fictional content have received fair 
use endorsements on Errors & Omissions insurance policies.30   In addition, organizations 
like Film Independent and the University Film and Video Association have hosted events 
to inform filmmakers about how to make fair use responsibly.31   
We strongly urge the Register to consider our proposed exemption in light of the fair uses 
that we discuss in this Comment and reference in the accompanying appendices, and not 
based on the overall or primary purpose of the works being created.32   Courts uniformly 
apply the statutory fair use factors to the case at hand and have rejected bright line 
assessments as to a work’s overall purpose.  For example, in Wade Williams Distribution, 
Inc. v. Am. Broad. Co., Inc, the court considered whether use of video clips in an 
entertaining morning talk show constituted fair use. The court rejected the argument that 
                                                 
25 Arrow Prods. v. The Weinstein Co., No. 13-Civ.-5488 (S.D.N.Y. 2014).   
26 Bourne Co. v. Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp., 602 F. Supp. 2d 499, 511 (S.D.N.Y. 2009). 
27 See Mura v. Columbia Broad. Sys., Inc., 245 F. Supp. 587 (S.D.N.Y. 1965) (reproduction of a 
copyrighted puppet on a television program); Jackson v. Warner Bros., 993 F. Supp. 585 (E.D. Mich. 1997) 
(depiction of copyrighted lithographs on wall of set in film); and Amsinck v. Columbia Pictures Indus., 862 
F. Supp. 1044 (S.D.N.Y. 1994) (display of copyrighted artwork on a mobile in a film).  See also Letter 
from Michael C. Donaldson, Donaldson + Callif 1-2 (Feb. 5, 2015) and attachments, Appendix B.  
28 Filmmaker Testimony, Appendix I at 8-9. 
29 Letter from Michael C. Donaldson, Donaldson + Callif 1-2 (Feb. 5, 2015), Appendix C. 
30 Id. at 2. 
31 Events to Inform Filmmakers About Fair Use, Appendix L. 
32 But cf. 2012 Recommendation at 130.  
[PAGE 8]
Comment of International Documentary Association, et. al. 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 20 
 
“there can be no fair use when copyrighted excerpts are used for entertainment,” and 
held, “what is most persuasive in this case is that…use of the films was clearly 
transformative.”33 Similarly, the court in Hofheinz v. Discovery Communications, Inc. 
held that “[s]ection 107 does not explicitly distinguish between entertaining and serious, 
plausible and implausible, or weighty or frivolous commentaries.”34 The focus in these 
cases and the overwhelming majority of fair use decisions is on the specific use in 
question, not general characteristics of the genre.  Both documentary and narrative films 
entertain as well as educate, and inspire as well as inform.   
As we discuss below, Section 1201’s prohibition on circumvention seriously harms the 
ability of filmmakers to access the copyrighted motion picture materials they need to 
engage in noninfringing fair use. The proposed exemption would remedy this harm by 
facilitating the responsible fair use of copyrighted motion picture material at a sufficient 
level of quality to suit filmmaker needs. 
 
VI. Adverse Effects 
In the 2010 and 2012 rulemaking proceedings, the Register recognized that without an 
exemption to the DMCA, fair use in documentary filmmaking would be significantly 
compromised and would be adversely affected by the DMCA’s anti-circumvention 
provisions as to certain TPMs.
35 The same continues to hold true for filmmakers facing 
CSS on DVDs, AACS on Blu-ray, and encryption on digitally transmitted video. Without 
an exemption that applies to each of the requested TPMs,36 Section 1201’s prohibition on 
circumvention will adversely affect filmmakers in their ability to make fair use.   
The ubiquity of TPMs in the marketplace has created a serious obstacle for fair use in the 
filmmaking community. From Netflix37 to YouTube38 to Blu-ray39 to cable set top 
boxes,40 filmmakers face barriers to access caused by TPMs at every turn. These TPMs 
come in a variety of forms, from basic encryption on the medium that contains the 
material41 to persistent hardware encryption.42 Thus, even as filmmakers have begun to 
learn more about how to responsibly harness their fair use rights, they are still forced to 
self-censor their work because they often cannot obtain a usable copy of a copyrighted 
                                                 
33 Wade Williams Distrib., Inc. v. Am. Broad. Co., No. 00 CIV. 5002(LMM), 2005 WL 774275 at *9 
(S.D.N.Y. Apr. 5, 2005). 
34 Hofheinz v. Discovery Comm’cns, Inc., No. 00 Civ. 3802, 2001 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 14752 at *13 
(S.D.N.Y. 2001). 
35 Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights in RM 2008-8 at 2, Rulemaking on Exemptions from 
Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies (2010) 
(No. 2008-8); Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights at 3, Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth 
Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention (2012) (No. RM 2011-
07). 
36 See supra Part IV. 
37 See supra Part IV.C. 
38 Letter from Alex Podobas 4 (Feb. 4, 2015), Appendix J.  
39 See supra Part IV. 
40 Letter from Jim Morrissette, Kartemquin Films 4 (Feb. 4, 2015), Appendix B. 
41 See supra Part IV. 
42 See supra Part IV.C. 
[PAGE 9]
Comment of International Documentary Association, et. al. 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 20 
 
work for fair use.43 “Unfortunately for many,” Kenn Rabin points out, the fair use statute 
“includes no provision or precedent for how a justified user of that right might obtain 
access to the physical materials . . . that are needed for the . . . expression itself.”44 
The DMCA’s anti-circumvention provisions have shifted the question of fair use from 
“How do I use this appropriately and responsibly” to “How can I access this material at 
all?” At a time where filmmakers should feel empowered to create new expression 
through a more widespread understanding of fair use, they are instead fearful of 
rightsholder intimidation45 and criminal liability.  The result is an adverse effect on fair 
use and free expression. 
 
A. Content Scramble System on Digital Video Discs 
For the last six years, documentary filmmakers have had an exemption allowing them to 
circumvent CSS encryption on DVDs.
46 During those six years, there have been no 
allegations that these exemptions have harmed rights holders. In the meantime, even as 
Blu-Ray is becoming the new standard for physical distribution of motion picture and 
television material,
47 much of the material filmmakers need is still only available on 
DVD. Without the access to motion picture materials on CSS-protected DVDs provided 
by the current exemption, many films made during the current exemption period could 
not have been produced—and without an exemption providing for access to DVDs 
through this rulemaking, many films will not be made. As such, the inability to 
circumvent CSS on DVDs will have a substantial adverse effect on fair use in filmmaking 
that is far more than “de minimis.”
48  
The examples provided by the following filmmakers are instructive as to this point.49 
Joel Schroeder explained the following: 
In the past, more specifically, for a f ilm I directed and produced in 2013 
(Dear Mr. Waterson), I needed to show very brief clips of TV shows that 
were referenced in the film.  The narration talked about how “Calvin + 
Hobbes” was referenced in pop culture.  So we ripped DVDs to find the 
relevant parts of episodes from “Family Guy,” “Portlandia,” “Robot 
Chicken,” and “The Big Bang Theory.”   
                                                 
43 Letter from Kenn Rabin, President, Fulcrum Media Services 1-2, (Feb. 6, 2015), Appendix D. 
44 Id. at 2. 
45 Id. 
46 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, 75 Fed. Reg. 43,825 (July 27, 2010) (to be codified at 37 C.F.R. pt. 201); Exemption to 
Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 77 Fed. 
Reg. 65260 (Oct. 26, 2012) (to be codified at 37 C.F.R. pt. 201). 
47 Blu-ray Wins HD Wars, http://perfectimage.com.au/shop/index.php?main_page=page&id=4&chapter=0 
(last visited Feb. 4, 2015). 
48 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, 79 Fed. Reg. 73,856 (proposed Dec. 12, 2014) (to be codified at 37 C.F.R. pt. 201). 
49 Filmmaker Testimony, Appendix I. 
[PAGE 10]
Comment of International Documentary Association, et. al. 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 20 
 
The alternatives to ripping are very inconvenient and inefficient.  Copyright 
holders are not set up to provide the content, and in many cases don't want 
you to use the content, if it is something critical of them.  Docs in the rough 
cut stage know they want to use clips to demonstrate a point, and will need 
to test out tons of clips until they find the right one.  Without the exemption, 
I would not have been able to include crucial content to make points that I 
wanted to make in Waterson. 
Daniel McCabe explained the following: 
I produce documentaries for PBS.  I' ve used DVD or online material 
exclusively in that context with legal review of the applicability of 'fair use.' 
For example, I did a recent documenta ry for PBS about walking robots in 
which I used a clip from a well-known science fiction film.  The clip came 
from a DVD. Within the constraints of the production there was probably 
no other viable way for me to get that content.  Brief excerpts such as these 
serve as an audio/video reference in an educational context to deepen the 
understanding of the work itself and larger ideas.  They in no way diminish 
the value of the original works; if anything they increase their value by 
placing them in the larger context of our society. If you look at PBS 
documentaries, you are bound to find several other examples of ‘fair use’ 
that would be impossible without an exemption to the DMCA.  If we cannot 
rip from DVDs/Blu Ray, there will be no way to get access to that material.   
Joseph Stillman explained the following: 
My current film is about a fascinati ng man, former U.S. Attorney General 
Ramsey Clark. . . . The DMCA affects me massively.  It would be iffy 
whether I could still make this Clar k project without exemptions.  The 
broadcaster I am working with, PBS, has told me that they want more clips 
of Ramsey himself.  Without a DM CA exemption, I w ould be prevented 
from using clips of Ramsey during the last fifty years.   
As these examples illustrate, the current exemption has had a profound impact on 
filmmaking—both documentary and narrative. However, these are only some of the films 
made possible by the current exemption. Appendix I presents more testimonials from 
numerous filmmakers who relate how they made use of DVDs under the current 
exemption.
50 That testimony indicates projects that have used the exemption or will need 
a similar exemption. In light of this documentary evidence, it is clear that fair use in 
filmmaking will be adversely affected if filmmakers do not have the ability to legally 
circumvent CSS on DVDs. 
 
 
 
                                                 
50 Id. 
[PAGE 11]
Comment of International Documentary Association, et. al. 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 20 
 
B. Advanced Access Content System on Blu-Ray 
A substantial and increasing amount of motion picture material is now available 
exclusively on AACS-protected Blu-Ray discs.51 Blu-Ray is quickly supplanting DVD as 
the predominant source of motion picture material, especially high quality HD material 
and bonus footage.52 As such, filmmakers can no longer rely on DVD alone for access to 
the motion picture material they need to criticize, comment, or otherwise make their point 
to the viewer via fair use. The inability to circumvent AACS on Blu-Ray will thus have a 
substantial adverse effect on fair use in filmmaking. 
Many filmmakers need HD to make the point they are trying to make.   
As one example, the filmmakers at Finite Films wish to make a film examining the role 
media plays in shaping young people’s identities; for example, they seek to show how 
“young men…bombarded with images of hyper masculinity and violence” and “young 
women…constantly exposed to beauty commercials and male-centric Hollywood films 
that teach them their worth is based on their physical appearance.”53 To do this credibly 
and in a way that drives home the reality of the problem, they need to show real media 
images, and then show the impact those images have on the main characters of their film. 
They have expressed, however, that they will be unable to make this film without Blu-ray 
caliber footage because of the standards that most film festivals use (1080p, standard Blu-
ray resolution).54 Without this exemption, they will be unable to make the film they have 
in mind, and that they would otherwise have the legal right to make.  
 
Similarly, Paul Mariano of Gravitas films is currently producing a documentary about the 
film industry for which he would like to access Blu-ray and other high quality video 
sources.
55 Mr. Mariano has explained that, in order to better represent the material he is 
profiling in the film and to preserve the quality of the documentary, he needs the highest 
quality video possible—something he can only get from Blu-ray.56 Because it is 
necessary for the film to explore and compare the fine grained details of existing motion 
pictures, and because that kind of video quality cannot be found on standard definition 
DVDs, Mr. Mariano needs to be able to access motion picture material on Blu-ray in 
order to make fair use. 
 
Another filmmaker, who wished to remain anonymous, described the situation as 
follows: 
Today, DVDs are widely regarded as an old format (much like VHS used 
to be).  It is also a very compressed format.  Stretching the footage to meet 
the pixel ratio of the rest of the film severely degrades the footage’s quality.  
If you don’t stretch it, then you will ha ve a tiny square in  the middle of a 
huge screen.  Imagine taking your pictur e off of your driver’s license and 
                                                 
51 See supra Part IV.B. 
52 Letter from Jim Morrissette, Kartemquin Films 2-3 (Feb. 4, 2015), Appendix B. 
53 Letter from Alex Calleros, Ryan McDuffile, and Michael Tucker, Finite Films, Appendix H.  
54 Id. 
55 Letter from Paul Mariano and Kurt Norton, Gravitas Docufilms (Feb. 2, 2015), Appendix E. 
56 Interview with Paul Mariano and Kurt Norton, Gravitas Docufilms (Jan. 28, 2015). 
[PAGE 12]
Comment of International Documentary Association, et. al. 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 20 
 
placing it in the middle of a black movie poster.  That is what your DVD 
footage will look like. By giving us access to Blu-Ray footage, we are able 
to stay truer to the source material by not having to distort it via stretching.  
This pays proper respect to the artist of the original footage.  4K movies are 
no longer the future.  They are now.  Al l feature films are shot at 4K or 
higher resolution, and many documentaries are shot and mastered in 4K. To 
understand how this affects the exemption, let’s return to the driver’s license 
analogy.  This time, instead of placing the driver’s license on a black movie 
poster, imagine it in the middle of a black billboard.  That is what a DVD’s 
footage is like compared to 4K.
57   
These are only some of the stories of filmmakers who either need to use motion picture 
materials only available on Blu-Ray and could not under the current exemption or who 
wished to use Blu-Ray in a future project and will be adversely affected if the proposed 
exemption is not granted. Further evidence is available in Appendix I.58  In light of this 
documentary evidence, it is clear that fair use in filmmaking will be adversely affected if 
filmmakers cannot legally access material on Blu-Ray discs. 
 
C. Encryption measures on digitally transmitted video  
A significant amount of motion picture material is now available only through digitally 
transmitted video sources, protected by various encryption measures.59 This includes 
ephemeral motion picture material on cable television, Netflix, Hulu, YouTube, and 
iTunes as well as many other online distribution sources. The TPMs that protect these 
motion pictures are as varied as the platforms themselves,60 but all function to prevent 
filmmakers from making fair use of materials like news broadcasts, commercials, and 
other ephemeral content that is otherwise unavailable in any other format. Because 
filmmakers often require access to this material that does not exist on DVD or Blu-Ray, 
these various encryption measures will adversely affect fair use in filmmaking if the 
proposed exemption is not granted. 
There are many examples in our testimonials of the necessity of high quality online 
streaming. For example, Laurie Ann Schag reports that on a project dealing with a 
controversial topic, some of the material she needs can only be obtained online.61 This is 
a project so controversial that even licensing is likely not an option. Only fair use will 
allow her to move forward with the project. Similarly, a filmmaker who wished to remain 
anonymous reports that she was forced to replace footage in a documentary she made 
about a murder case because the resolution was too low, and she could not access the 
high quality footage she needed.62  
 
                                                 
57 Id. 
58 Id. 
59 See supra Part IV.C. 
60 See supra Part IV.C. 
61 Filmmaker Testimony, Appendix I at 6. 
62 Id. at 6-7. 
[PAGE 13]
Comment of International Documentary Association, et. al. 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 20 
 
Danny Yourd, a filmmaker who commonly makes use of news clips, indicated the 
following: 
 
Being able to have an exemption would be great.  In my filmmaking, I have 
made fair use of a lot of news c lips.  However, HD sources are very 
important, and online sources such as Youtube aren’t always available in 
HD.  Being able to use a DVR would greatly simply a lot of things for me.  
It would make it easier to obtain so me current news sources because I 
wouldn't have to scour YouTube and archives.  It would also lead to a much 
cleaner clearance log, making it easier to get E+O and distribution.
63 
 
Again, there have been no allegations that the current exemption, which embraces some 
forms of digitally transmitted video, has harmed rights holders. But as the above 
examples illustrate, filmmakers continue to require access to digitally transmitted video 
and must be able to circumvent the encryption measures that protect various platforms 
without fear of severe civil and criminal repercussions. In light of this documentary 
evidence, it is clear that fair use in filmmaking will be adversely affected if filmmakers 
do not have the ability to legally circumvent encryption measures on digitally transmitted 
video. 
 
D. No alternatives to circumvention are reasonably available 
Proposed technological alternatives to circumvention remain out of reach and a simply 
unrealistic option for the vast majority of filmmakers. As the entire industry has moved to 
HD content, the inferior quality provided by these alternatives is even less of an option 
than it was during the last exemption period.
64 Nonetheless, we address below some of 
the alternatives suggested in the last proceeding.   
First, often there are simply no alternatives to circumvention available. For example, Blu-
Ray and DVD players are no longer manufactured with analog outputs, meaning that 
older proposed alternative means of circumvention utilizing analog transfer methods are 
not possible for anyone without an older device that is still functional;65 if material is 
only available on DVD or Blu-ray, there is now no way to access the material.  
Second, the technology required for some alternatives is often entirely unavailable, too 
cost prohibitive, or too difficult to operate.  Even if one happens to have a legacy Blu-ray 
player, devices like a Teranex box,66 that can process the image in order to make it HD-
quality are far out of the price range of most independent filmmakers and require a high 
degree of technical skill to operate properly.   
Third, even where it might be possible to utilize an alternative to circumvention, the 
resulting video quality is often degraded so significantly as to be unusable—either 
                                                 
63 Id. at 7. 
64 Letter from Jim Morrissette, Kartemquin Films 3 (Feb. 4, 2015), Appendix B.; Letter from Kenn Rabin, 
President, Fulcrum Media Services 7-8, (Feb. 6, 2015), Appendix D. See also supra Part VI.B. 
65 Letter from Jim Morrissette, Kartemquin Films 3 (Feb. 4, 2015), Appendix B. 
66 Id. at 1. 
[PAGE 14]
Comment of International Documentary Association, et. al. 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 20 
 
because it is not of sufficient quality to make the point the filmmaker is trying to get 
across to the viewer or because it does not meet distributors’ technical standards.67  
Fourth, screen capture remains an impracticable alternative for many, if not all the 
reasons we indicated during the last proceeding: It presents a real question of legality to 
filmmakers who are concerned about violating the DMCA because it is not clear whether 
the copyrighted material is captured before or after decryption.68 It still has unacceptable 
stuttering, dropped frames, and image size issues.69 Finally, there is no screen capture 
software available for Blu-ray on the Mac platform used by a majority of filmmakers.70 
Nor is clearance from a copyright holder a realistic alternative to circumvention for 
filmmakers. Many rights holders often either fail to respond or simply deny usage, as any 
independent filmmaker can attest.71   
Rights holders also routinely deny permission based on the content of the intended use.  
For example, the documentary Inequality For All relied on the fair use exemption for 
documentary films to show an interview with the president of Viacom, Inc. that painted 
the president in a bad light.
72 The filmmakers attempted to license the clip, but were 
given a no-explanation turndown letter.73 Without fair use and the proposed exemption, 
they would have been unable to use the footage.  
In another example, clearance specialist Kenn Rabin attempted to license a clip he had 
previously licensed for a previous project – a clip depicting an American soldier during 
the Vietnam War smoking marijuana out of his rifle.74 He was denied use of the clip for 
the second project, and the reason he was given was that the rights holder did not want to 
license any negative depictions of American troops while we were at war.75 
Unfortunately, the DVD clip of the footage was of insufficient quality for the project, and 
so the filmmakers abandoned the use of the clip entirely.76  
                                                 
67 Letter from Jim Morrissette, Kartemquin Films 1-4 (Feb. 4, 2015), Appendix B.; Telephone Interview 
with David Field, Senior Director, Content Packaging, PBS (Jan. 27, 2015), Letter from Jack Lerner and 
Michael Donaldson to David Carson, General Counsel, U.S. Copyright Office (July 18, 2012), 
http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2012/responses/usclaw_donaldson_response_letter_regarding_exemption_
7_8.pdf; see also PBS
 TECHNOLOGY & OPERATIONS, TECHNICAL OPERATING SPECIFICATION: PROGRAM 
SUBMISSION (Nov. 2014). 
68 Letter from Jack Lerner and Michael Donaldson to David Carson, General Counsel, U.S. Copyright 
Office (July 18, 2012), 
http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2012/responses/usclaw_donaldson_response_letter_regarding_exemption_
7_8.pdf. 
69 Letter from Jim Morrissette, Kartemquin Films 3 (Feb. 4, 2015), Appendix B. 
70 Id. 
71 Letter from Kenn Rabin, President, Fulcrum Media Services 2, (Feb. 6, 2015), Appendix D. 
72 Id. at 3-4. 
73 Id. 
74 Id. at 5. 
75 Id. 
76 Id. 
[PAGE 15]
Comment of International Documentary Association, et. al. 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 20 
 
In cases like these, filmmakers have no other recourse. Where the footage is critical to the 
project, the filmmakers may even have to abandon the project, preventing entry into the 
marketplace and silencing those opinions that copyright holders do not deem appropriate.  
In fact, as we discuss above, Mr. Rabin reports that rights holder hostility presents such 
persistent and insurmountable obstacles to fair use as to create a pervasive environment 
of fear amongst filmmakers, who are often afraid even to ask for access to works for fair 
use purposes.77 Of course, this climate of fear chills valuable creative expression. 
Filmmaker Risé Sanders-Weir provides a poignant example of this chilling effect: 
I also have learned from experience  that if you ask for permission, the 
content holders use it as an acknowledgement that you don't believe the use 
is fair use.  I have been hurt by this  because they either want you to pay a 
fee that you cannot afford or they fight your fair use claim.78   
This is yet another continuation of the same kind of clearance issues pointed out in 
previous proceedings.79 Without the proposed exemption, the DMCA will operate as an 
additional control valve by which copyright holders can stop the free flow of opinions 
and expression they disfavor—even if that expression could otherwise be made through 
fair use. 
 
VII. Statutory Factors  
In conducting the rulemaking, the Librarian must examine the statutory factors listed in 
section 1201(a)(1)(C).80 An analysis under these factors favors granting the proposed 
exemption to Section 1201(a)(1)(A)’s prohibition on circumvention codified in Section 
1201(a)(1)(A) for filmmakers because the prohibition causes a substantial adverse effect 
on filmmakers’ ability to make non-infringing use of copyrighted materials. The 
proposed exemption is narrowly tailored to prevent harm to expressive and educational 
purposes served by fair use while avoiding prejudice to the interests of rights-holders. 
 
A. Availability for use of copyrighted works. 
If the proposed exemption is not granted, it will severely reduce the availability for use of 
copyrighted works.  
                                                 
77 Id. at 2. 
78 Filmmaker Testimony, Appendix I. 
79 See Comment of International Documentary Association, et. al., In the Matter of Exemption to 
Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies at 4 n.10 
(2011) (No. RM 2011-07) (citing Pat Aufderheide, Untold Stories: Creative Consequences of the Rights 
Clearance Culture for Documentary Filmmakers (November 2004),  http://www.cmsimpact.org/fair-
use/best-practices/documentary/untold-stories-creative-consequences-rights-clearance-culture); 
Comments of Kartemquin Educational Films, Inc., International Documentary Association, et. al, In the 
Matter of Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protected Systems For Access Control 
Technologies (2010) (No. RM 2008-08). 
80 Copyrights, 17 U.S.C.A. § 1201 (2014). 
[PAGE 16]
Comment of International Documentary Association, et. al. 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 20 
 
In previous rulemakings, the Register has stated that the relevant inquiries into the first 
factor should include: (1) whether the availability of the work in protected formats 
enhances and/or inhibits public use of particular works; (2) whether the work protected is 
also available in other formats; (3) whether such alternative formats are sufficient to 
accommodate non-infringing uses; or (4) whether the format is part of a “use-facilitating” 
model that offers the public access to work in a variety of new ways, and the proposed 
exemption would prejudice this model.81 A weighing of these factors favors the proposed 
exemption.  In addition, we urge the Register to consider the undeniable fact that more 
copyrighted works are available now than ever before.  Moreover, there has not been one 
allegation—much less any evidence—of a reduction in the availability of those works as 
a result of the documentary filmmakers’ exemption. These truths suggest that the first 
factor, in particular, strongly favors granting the proposed exemption. 
 
1. Whether the Availability of the Work in Protected Formats Enhances and/or 
Inhibits Public Use of Particular Works 
Section 1201 prevents filmmakers from making fair use of works in the formats 
identified in the proposed class. This prohibition can force filmmakers to make edits to 
footage motivated entirely by the underlying work’s rights holders’ interests, often 
driving this footage out of the public sphere. For example, during the production of the 
award-winning feature film Selma, a sequence depicting archival footage of the voting 
rights march from Selma to Montgomery was nearly cut at the last minute because the 
rights holder insisted that no children could be included in the sequence.82 Because the 
footage was protected by TPMs, the permission of the rights holder was critical to the 
footage.83 This conflict was only resolved because top management at the production 
company, which is owned by Brad Pitt, was able to utilize his personal clout to talk the 
rights holder into allowing the footage to be used.84  Without such high level connections, 
this footage would have been left out, and the public would have been denied an accurate 
depiction of the march. The proposed exemption would remedy this problem by allowing 
fair use of these materials, allowing filmmakers to overcome arbitrary decisions by rights 
holders.   
Nor would the proposed exemption do anything to harm the public availability of the 
original work on DVD, Blu-Ray, or digitally transmitted video. The Register has already 
considered this question for DVDs and recognized that the realities of the marketplace 
show that an exemption for certain non-infringing uses will not end their digital 
distribution.85   
 
                                                 
81 See 2012 Comment at Appendix C, Statement of Eric Rescorla on Digitally Transmitted Video. 
82 Letter from Kenn Rabin, President, Fulcrum Media Services, 5-6 (Feb. 6, 2015), Appendix D. 
83 Id. 
84 Id. 
85 Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights at 129, Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial 
Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention (2012) (No. RM 2011-07). 
[PAGE 17]
Comment of International Documentary Association, et. al. 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 20 
 
2. Whether the work protected is available in other formats and whether those 
formats are protected by access controls 
Aside from DVD, Blu-Ray, and digitally transmitted video, no viable alternative formats 
exist. Distribution of VHS tapes, for example, ended in 2008.86 In any event, VHS-
quality submissions are simply not acceptable in a digital filmmaking age; increasingly, 
even 1080p is insufficient to meet many broadcasters’ technical specifications.87  
Each of the formats in the proposed exemption are protected by TPMs that filmmakers 
reasonably fear are covered by Section 1201. In addition, especially in the case of Blu-
ray, certain important material is only included on one particular format, making it all the 
more essential that filmmakers have access to all three formats.88 The practical reality 
facing filmmakers is that when they need a certain piece of footage, such as certain bonus 
materials or outtakes, they have no alternative source for that material besides Blu-ray, 
and certainly no alternative that is not protected by TPMs. 
 
3. If alternative formats are available, whether such formats are sufficient to 
accommodate non-infringing uses 
Given that some motion picture material is available exclusively on a single format, such 
as Blu-ray, no single format is sufficient to accommodate filmmakers’ non-infringing 
uses. For older films, it may be only DVD. For newer films, it may be only Blu-Ray or 
digital transmission. Additionally, as minimum quality standards increase across the 
board, alternatives to Blu-ray such as DVDs may no longer suffice to meet increasing 
demands of distributors and audiences.  
Furthermore, as we discuss above in Part VI.D., proposed alternatives to circumvention 
such as screen capture, up-conversion, and others are even less practicable now than they 
were three years ago.
89 Even in the rare circumstance in which a filmmaker owns an old, 
out-of-production DVD or Blu-ray player with an analog output, these options remain 
prohibitively expensive and take a very high degree of technical skill to utilize. The result 
is that the practical availability of fair use material will fluctuate for arbitrary reasons 
having nothing to do with the underlying policy considerations motivating the exemption. 
This factor favors granting the proposed exemption.  
 
4. Whether the format is part of a “use-facilitating” business model that offers 
the public access to work in a variety of new ways and whether the proposed 
exemption would prejudice this model 
The TPMs on DVDs, Blu-Ray, and digital transmissions are, by their nature, use limiting. 
They restrict public access to material to one single format by preventing the public from 
                                                 
86 See Geoff Boucher, VHS Era Is Winding Down, L.A. TIMES (Dec. 22, 2008), 
http://articles.latimes.com/2008/dec/22/entertainment/et-vhs-tapes22 (last visited Jan. 1, 2015).  
87 Telephone Interview with David Field, Senior Director, Content Packaging, PBS (Jan. 27, 2015). 
88 See Exclusive Blu-rays and Extra Contents, Appendix K. 
89 See supra Part. VI.D. 
[PAGE 18]
Comment of International Documentary Association, et. al. 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 20 
 
being able to enjoy the copyrighted material in the way they see fit or through alternative 
means—such as through critical reviews or commentary. Audiences enjoy 
documentaries, parody works, and works that comment on or criticize prior works. Such 
works form an important part of the audience’s interaction with the world of film and 
even an important part of their relationship with the original artwork. For example, These 
Amazing Shadows is a documentary film depicting the power of movies as a major 
cultural force.
90 This film was only possible to create because of the fair use exemption 
for documentary filmmakers.91 When the fair use material that is necessary to create such 
works becomes inaccessible due to TPMs, the works themselves are not created, and 
audiences lose their ability to engage with both the fair use works and the original works 
in the method and manner that they would like.  
In the case of a film like These Amazing Shadows, this would be particularly unfortunate, 
as the filmmakers reported that after screenings of the film, audience members would 
come to them and say that they added fifteen to twenty new films to their watch list.92 
Rather than hurting the market for the underlying source material, These Amazing 
Shadows actually increases audience appetite for the underlying works. Without the fair 
use exemption, this increase in market value of the original films would have never 
materialized. 
In today’s content distribution ecosystem, rights holders use TPMs to fine-tune and 
regulate permitted uses. For instance, while Hulu is free on PCs, it requires a fee when 
used on mobile devices.
93 Examples such as these demonstrate rights holders frequently 
use TPMs to control how their material is used in ways they otherwise would have no 
right to control. Such arrangements are anti-competitive and actually hurt consumers’ 
ability to access the work in a variety of new ways; rather than being “use-facilitating,” 
TPMs are often “use-debilitating.” 
 
B. Availability of use of works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and 
educational purposes 
Documentary films continue to make many uses that fulfill educational and archival 
purposes, as recognized in previous proceedings. Increasingly, fictional films serve an 
equally important role in educational and social commentary. They are used in classroom 
settings as teaching tools because they often portray or illustrate historical and 
contemporary events.94 Outside of the classroom setting, fictional films are often 
catalysts for thought and inquiry. For example, of this year’s eight Academy Awards Best 
Picture nominees, four are biopics telling true stories of historical and modern figures.95 
                                                 
90 Letter from Paul Mariano and Kurt Norton, Gravitas Docufilms (Feb. 2 2015), Appendix E. 
91 Id. 
92 Interview with Paul Mariano and Kurt Norton, Gravitas Docufilms (Jan 28, 2015). 
93 Hulu Plus: Frequently Asked Questions, http://www.hulu.com/plus (last visited Jan. 31, 2015). 
94 See generally Teach With Movies, www.teachwithmovies.com/teachers.htm. 
95 Nominees – The 87th Academy Award Nominations for the 2015 Oscars, Oscar.go.com/nominees (last 
visited Jan. 31, 2015).  
[PAGE 19]
Comment of International Documentary Association, et. al. 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 20 
 
Both documentary and narrative films are critical to educational efforts, and the proposed 
exemption would greatly expand access to motion picture materials for these purposes. 
 
C. Impact of the prohibition on circumvention of TPMs applied to 
copyrighted works on criticism, commentary, news reporting, teaching, 
scholarship, or research 
Both documentary filmmakers and producers of narrative film continue to provide 
extensive commentary on important social issues. Documentary films have always been 
important sources of criticism, commentary, and in-depth reporting on issues that may 
otherwise not be widely known. Similarly, narrative films, such as this year’s Best 
Picture nominees Selma, American Sniper, The Theory of Everything, and The Imitation 
Game provide important social commentary and help to educate American moviegoers as 
to important events in both historical and modern times.96 As we discuss above, in many 
cases, the material required to make social commentary on these issues is trapped behind 
TPMs, making the underlying material inaccessible even though it would otherwise be 
usable under the fair use doctrine. Thus, the DMCA’s prohibition on circumvention 
adversely affects these otherwise lawful fair uses and reduces the availability of criticism, 
commentary, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, and education to the general public. 
Since access to underlying fair use materials is critical for filmmakers to provide these 
functions, an exemption is the only appropriate remedy. 
 
D. Effect of circumvention of TPMs on the market for, or value of, 
copyrighted works 
The Supreme Court has held that rights holders have no claim on derivative market for 
criticism of their works97 because rights holders of the underlying works are unlikely to 
desire an additional work lampooning or criticizing the original work, and would have no 
incentive to develop such markets. Additionally, the Register has previously concluded 
that transformative uses are unlikely to affect the relevant markets for the original work.98  
As in the previous rulemaking, we are not aware of any allegations that the filmmakers’ 
exemption has resulted in any harm done to the markets for copyrighted motion pictures. 
Again, this makes intuitive sense, as the class is narrowly tailored to a group of users who 
are already inclined to follow established best practices in fair use and thus are highly 
unlikely to utilize the exemption in way that harms existing markets. The same is the true 
for the proposed exemption. 
 
E. Such Other Factors as the Librarian Considers Appropriate 
                                                 
96 Id. 
97 Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569 (1994). 
98 Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights at 129, Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial 
Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention (2012) (No. RM 2011-07). 
[PAGE 20]
Comment of International Documentary Association, et. al. 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 20 
 
In addition to the enumerated factors, the Librarian should consider that the TPMs 
covered under the proposed exemption are mixed access and use controls. During the 
2010 Rulemaking, the Register of Copyrights emphasized that CSS on DVDs is subject 
to the Section 1201(a)(1) prohibition because it is a mixed use-control and access-control 
measure.
99 This factor weighed in favor of our proposed exemption because the “effect of 
the access control is not to prevent unauthorized access, but rather to restrict uses of 
motion pictures” in ways that harm “socially-beneficial non-infringing uses.”100 Similar 
logic applies to the TPMs on the formats we request here: AACS on Blu-Ray is 
analogous to CSS on DVD, and encryption measures on digitally transmitted video 
functionally restrict access with the same purpose and effect.
101 The TPMs at issue are 
chiefly used not to prevent unauthorized access or conceal the copyrighted material, but 
to prevent the public from copying the material.  The unfortunate side effect is that they 
also prevent the public from engaging in lawful, non-infringing uses of which the rights 
holder disapproves. Given its narrow tailoring, the exemption we propose will do nothing 
to encourage piracy. Alternatively, however, failure to grant an exemption will cast a 
deep pall over fair use in filmmaking. 
 
VIII. Reponses to the Copyright Office’s Inquiries 
1. “Whether the proposed exemption should ex tend to commercial uses in fictional 
(i.e., nondocumentary) films, including whether such uses could supplant 
derivative markets for the copyrighted works used.”  
As we address above in Part V, a distinction between fictional and documentary 
filmmaking is both arbitrary and unnecessary. Both documentary filmmakers and makers 
of scripted films commonly rely on fair use, and the proposed exemption properly 
embraces a class of users that constitutes all filmmakers and not simply documentary 
filmmakers. Further, filmmakers are copyright holders themselves and thus are keenly 
aware of the importance of copyright protections.   Finally, there is no viable reason to 
believe the proposed exemption would cause any harm to existing derivative markets if it 
includes makers of scripted film. 
 
2. “Whether the exemption can be limited to use of only short portions or clips of 
motion pictures or, if not, the basis for a broader exemption.” 
We strongly object to any quantitative limitation on an exemption for filmmakers who 
wish to make fair use of materials on media containing TPMs. While it is our 
understanding that when making fair use most filmmakers do not use the entire work, 
some may do so while remaining within the bounds of fair use.  More importantly, such a 
limitation would in practice mean that many filmmakers could not utilize the exemption 
or would be forced to constrain their uses in order to fit into it. A quantitative limit would 
not provide additional guidance for those who wish to utilize the exemption, but could 
                                                 
99 Id. at 126. 
100 Id. 
101 See supra Part IV.B-C. 
[PAGE 21]
Comment of International Documentary Association, et. al. 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 20 
 
instead create unintended consequences by undermining the principle that when making 
fair use, filmmakers must use only what they need and no more. The exemption should 
contain restrictions that focus on the decryption process rather than place arbitrary limits 
on permissible use.   
 
3. “Specific examples of whether access to Blu-ray content or other high resolution 
content is necessary to meet applicable distribution standards for documentary 
and/or fictional filmmaking.”   
We direct the Register to Part VI.B. above and Appendices D, E, F, G, H, I, and M.  In 
addition, there is overwhelming evidence that HD is the firmly established industry 
standard; HD is the default, and all filmmakers need it as a matter of basic practice.  A 
rule that requires filmmakers to use lower-than-HD resolution or engage in complicated 
workarounds when HD is otherwise available will severely undermine their ability to 
make fair use.  
 
4. “Any changed circumstances in the need  for an exemption over the last three 
years, including whether any viable alternatives have emerged or evolved during 
this period.” 
As we discuss above in Part VI.D., we know of no new alternatives that have developed 
in the last three years, and alternatives proposed in 2012 are either entirely unavailable, or 
even less practicable than before.  
 
5. “Whether the previously granted exem ption has had an adverse effect on the 
marketplace for the accessed copyrighted works.”  
We know of no adverse effects on existing business models or the marketplace for 
copyrighted works created by the previous exemption, and we know of no allegations of 
misuse whatsoever.  
 
 
[PAGE 22]
Comment of International Documentary Association, et. al. 
APPENDICES 
APPENDIX A: ABOUT THE COMMENTERS 
A
PPENDIX B: LETTER FROM JIM MORRISSETTE 
APPENDIX C: LETTER FROM MICHAEL DONALDSON 
APPENDIX D: LETTER FROM KENN RABIN 
APPENDIX E: LETTER FROM GRAVITAS FILMS 
APPENDIX F: LETTER FROM MICHAEL MAILER 
APPENDIX G: LETTER FROM PABLO CRUZ 
APPENDIX H: LETTER FROM FINITE FILMS 
APPENDIX I: FILMMAKER TESTIMONY 
APPENDIX J: STATEMENT OF ALEX PODOBAS 
APPENDIX K: EXCLUSIVE BLU-RAYS AND EXTRA CONTENTS 
APPENDIX L: EVENTS TO INFORM FILMMAKERS ABOUT FAIR USE 
APPENDIX M: LETTER OF ADAM FOLK 
[PAGE 23]
APPENDIX A: ABOUT THE COMMENTERS 
The International Documentary Association (IDA) is a non-profit 501(c)(3) organization that 
promotes nonfiction filmmaking, and is dedicated to increasing public awareness for the 
documentary genre. At IDA, we believe that documentary storytelling expands our 
understanding of shared human experience, fostering an informed, compassionate, and connected 
world, and we exist to serve the needs of those who create this art form. Our major program 
areas are: Advocacy, Filmmaker Services, Education, and Public Programs and Events. IDA also 
has a long history of protecting documentary filmmaking as a vital art form, and we continue to 
seek ways to ensure that the artists, activists and journalists who make documentaries receive the 
resources that they deserve. For over 30 years, IDA has worked to support the documentary art 
form.  
Film Independent is a non-profit arts organization and our mission is to champion the cause of 
Independent film and support a community of artists who embody diversity, innovation and a 
uniqueness of vision. We help independent filmmakers tell their stories, build an audience for 
their projects and diversify the voices in the film industry, supporting filmmakers at every 
experience level with a community in which their works can be appreciated and sustained. With 
over 200 annual screenings and events, Film Independent provides access to a network of like-
minded artists who are driving creativity in the film industry. Our free Filmmaker Labs for 
selected writers, directors, producers and documentary filmmakers and year-round educational 
programs serve as a bridge from film school to the real world of filmmaking – one with no 
defined career ladder. Project Involve is Film Independent’s signature program dedicated to 
fostering the careers of talented emerging filmmakers from communities traditionally 
underrepresented in the film industry. We also produce the weekly Film Independent at LACMA 
film series, the Los Angeles Film Festival in June and the annual awards programs for the finest 
independent films of the year—the Film Independent Spirit Awards.  
In 1966, Kartemquin Educational Films began making documentaries that examine and 
critique society through the stories of real people. Their documentaries, such as The Interrupters, 
Hoop Dreams and The New Americans, are among the most acclaimed of all time, leaving a 
lasting impact on millions of viewers. In 2014 they are having their busiest year ever, with 
multiple film releases and television broadcasts including The Trials of Muhammad Ali, The 
Homestretch, American Arab, Almost There, and Life Itself, about the film critic Roger Ebert, 
among others. Kartemquin Films is a home for independent media makers who seek to create 
social change through film. With a noted tradition of nurturing emerging talent and acting as a 
leading voice for independent media, Kartemquin is building on almost 50 years of being 
Chicago's documentary powerhouse. Kartemquin is a 501(c) 3 non-profit organization.  
The National Alliance for Media Arts and Culture (“NAMAC”) consists of 225 organizations 
that serve over 335,000 artists and media professionals nationwide. Members include 
community-based media production centers and facilities, university based programs, museums, 
[PAGE 24]
media presenters and exhibitors, film festivals, distributors, film archives, youth media programs, 
community access television, and digital arts and online groups. NAMAC’s mission is to foster 
and fortify the culture and business of the independent media arts. NAMAC believes that all 
Americans deserve access to create, participate in, and experience art. NAMAC co-authored the 
Documentary Filmmakers’ Statement of Best Practices in Fair Use and has long been an 
advocate for orphan works reform.  
Indie Caucus is a national, independent group of filmmakers who believe in the public mission 
of public media.  It is dedicated to strengthening our collective voice both within and outside of 
the public media system. 
University Film and Video Association (UFVA) aims to develop the potentialities of the 
motion picture and television media for purposes of instruction and communication throughout 
the world. UFVA works primarily in educational institutions with the goal of serving, 
encouraging, and assisting individuals who teach arts and sciences of motion picture and 
television production techniques, history, criticism and related subjects. 
Center for Independent Documentary (CID) was incorporated in1981. Its purpose of is to 
support the production and distribution of high quality independently produced documentaries 
and the filmmakers who create them. CID describes its organization as follows: 
To our knowledge, the extent of our cooperative arrangement with independent film and video 
producers is unique. Once we become involved in a project, we become totally committed to its 
successful completion and distribution. While we are neither a production house, funder or a 
distributor, we work with producers at all phases of the project- helping to raise project funding, 
manage project funds, and offer creative, technical, fundraising and distribution support.  In 
addition to our work with individual filmmakers on their projects, CID also is involved in 
professional development programs and collaborates with other organizations on initiatives that 
strengthen the production environment for independent filmmakers. 
CID has been honored with a Commonwealth Award by the Massachusetts Cultural Council as 
the “Outstanding Cultural Organization in Massachusetts” for “excellence, dedication and vision 
in giving voice to independent documentary filmmakers and for broadening the audience for this 
medium.” 
CID has been involved in the production of over 300 films which have received national 
broadcast on PBS as part of American Masters, American Experience, Independent Lens and 
POV.  They have received national cablecasts from the Sundance, Discovery and LOGO 
channels along with HBO.  They have appeared at every major film festival receiving awards 
from Emmy’s to the Peabody. Our roster of current and past productions include such notable 
films as: A Healthy Baby Girl and Blue Vinyl by Judith Helfand;  Downside Up, Smitten and 
TRUST  by Nancy Kelly;  Strange Fruit by Joel Katz;  Wild Combination: A Portrait of Arthur 
Russell and Teenage by Matt Wolf;  Woody Guthrie: Ain’t Got No Home by Peter Frumkin; 
[PAGE 25]
After Stonewall , Dangerous Living and Before Homosexuals by John Scagliotti; Baby Its You 
and As Nutayunean by Anne Makepeace; Brother Outsider and Regarding Susan Sontag by 
Nancy Kates; and the mobile application Murder on Beacon Hill by Eric Stange and Michael 
Epstein.   
CID works with filmmakers from around the United States, with representation from all regions 
of the country. We currently have 139 films in development and production.  The demographics 
of our filmmakers (age, ethnicity, gender and sexual orientation) and the subject matter of their 
films are equally diverse.  
We have made a special effort to work with LGBT filmmakers and to support the LGBT 
community in creating ways for films to be seen.  For the past five years we have worked closely 
with the Kopkind Colony to create the Pride of the Ocean Cruise /Film Festival and seminars for 
LGBT filmmakers.  Our goal is to create deep connections between all layers of the field -for 
LGBT filmmakers to strengthen their craft, their business expertise and networks- and for 
audiences to benefit by having increased access to the work and its messages. 
Women in Film & Video (WIFV) of Washington, DC is dedicated to advancing the 
professional development and achievement for women working in all areas of film, television, 
video, multimedia and related disciplines. WIFV supports women in the industry by promoting 
equal opportunities, encouraging professional development, serving as an information network, 
and educating the public about women’s creative and technical achievements. WIFV, a 501(c)(3) 
non-profit community benefit organization founded in 1979, is the premier professional resource 
for people who want successful media careers in the DC-metro region. Our resources, 
connections and advocates support a vibrant, creative media community. 
As a group we keep tabs on events related to indies and public media, and can quickly activate 
the national community when a crisis arises.  We aim to be a voice that represents independent 
filmmakers to our broadcast, programming and funding partners in public media. 
Members of the Indie Caucus Steering Committee are independent producers who meet 
regularly, who can intervene behind the scenes, and who are pledged to activate their networks 
when a large outcry and action is needed. 
Women In Film (WIF) recognizes the importance of developing pathways and opportunities to 
encourage current and future generations of women to explore and pursue careers in all fields of 
the entertainment industry. WIF actively supports women in the entertainment industry in four 
key ways: (1) assists independent filmmakers who have demonstrated advanced and innovative 
skills; (2) funds programs which provide scholarships and internships; (3) contributes financially 
and creatively to the production of PSAs which spotlight issues important to women and (4) 
creates events and seminars which are educational and creatively enlightening.  
[PAGE 26]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix B 
Letter from Jim Morrissette 
[PAGE 27]
 
Jim Morrissette 
Kartemquin Films 
1901 W. Wellington 
Chicago, IL 60657 
 
February 4, 2015 
 
To whom it may concern: 
I would like to thank the Copyright Office for the opportunity to speak in support of our 
proposed renewal of the exemption allowing us to circumvent CSS encryption on DVDs, 
AACS on Blu-Ray discs, and the various encryption and authentication protocols on 
Digital Video Transmissions (DVTs). DVTs include internet streaming, internet 
downloads, TV Pay-Per View, and recordings from Digital Video Recording (DVR) 
devices connected to cable or satellite dishes.  
As the Technical Director at Kartemquin Films in Chicago, and I feel strongly the 
proposed exemption is necessary for filmmakers to include “fair use” or public domain 
works in their films. We are also requesting that the current exemption be expanded to 
include Blu-Ray discs because of filmmaker’s ever increasing requirements for 
HDresolution content. 
Distribution of Documentary Films Expanded Since 2012 
Expanded documentary distribution into movie theaters for film festivals and theatrical 
release over the last few years requires higher resolution video sources than DVD can 
provide. Many documentary filmmakers, including Kartemquin Films, are showing their 
work as theatrical releases first, and then later on broadcast TV or cable distribution.   
Over 90% of all movie theaters in the US now have digital projection, in either 2K 
resolution (1920x1080 pixels) or 4K resolution (3840x2160 pixels). The digital theater 
projectors use DCP (Digital Cinema Pac) formatted files on hard disc that must be at least 
1920x1080 pixels, raising the bar for image resolution over anything a standard definition 
DVD (720x480 pixels) can adequately deliver.  
A DVD file can be “up-converted” to 1920x1080 pixels by creating additional “fake” 
pixels to fill in-between the real pixels using expensive video hardware boxes like the 
$2000 Teranex. The process of creating a DCP for theatrical screening requires additional 
conversion of EVERY frame of the video into individual still frames (1,440 per minute). 
During this process the “fake” frames behave differently than the actual frames from the 
1 
 
[PAGE 28]
DVD and create another level of image degradation beyond just the up-conversion to HD.  
DCP files also require conversion of the video from RGB color space to XYZ color space 
to adhere to the strict DCP specifications. Interpolated video frames from DVD up-
conversion to HD get degraded in the conversion to XYZ color space as well. If the video 
being converted to DCP format has HD 1080x1920 actual real frames, the video image 
quality remains high despite this conversion to multiple still frames and XYZ color space. 
Many documentary filmmakers are now shooting and editing programs in the new Ultra 
High Definition (UHD) 4K (3840x2160) format.  Required up-conversion of DVD 
content from 720 pixels (horizontally) to 3840 pixels (horizontally) is a difficult and 
costly process, and unacceptable visually on a 4K UHD TV, much less on a 60 foot wide 
theater screen. 
Netflix and Amazon are currently streaming movies and original content in 4K, and UHD 
TVs are selling well at retailers such as Best Buy and Amazon. Research NPD Group 
said 4K TV sales now account for 7% of overall U.S. flat panel revenues, or about $668 
million through October 25, 2014. UHD 4K programs are available now and people are 
watching them at home. 
4K UHD Blu-Ray players have been announced and are due to ship by this Fall.. Roku 
announced this month that their streaming boxes are adding 4K in the next version. 
Wired magazine states in the January 2015 issue: 
“Make no mistake: this is not just hype. It is not 3-D. This is the future, and in the coming 
years, 4K will be as ubiquitous and essential as HD video is now. Everyone from studios 
and streaming services to the manufacturers are putting their full weight behind the push. 
This is why the TV industry expects 2015 to be a breakout year for 4K. The Consumer 
Electronics Association predicts UHD TV shipments will hit 4 million in 2015 and 
revenues will exceed $5 billion. That’s up from around 800,000 shipments and $2.5 
billion in revenues last year— a huge leap forward.” 
Documentary filmmakers will be at a distinct disadvantage if they cannot acquire at least 
HD (1080) content to include in their 4K productions. Thus the urgent need for an 
exemption that allows filmmakers to access content on Blu-Ray discs. 
2 
 
[PAGE 29]
 
Here is a chart to scale showing just how small a DVD image is compared to HD and 4K. 
Image resolution is measured by the number of individual pixels that make up the video 
picture vertically and horizontally. DVD image resolution of 720x480 pixels is 
represented by the small purple box in the upper left of the chart. The green area is full 
HD Blu-Ray image resolution of 1920x1080 pixels, and the orange area represents 4K 
Ultra High Definition (UHD) with 3840x2160 pixels.. 
The total number of pixels per video frame for each format is as follows: 
DVD:       __ 345,600    
Blu-Ray: _2,073,600 or 6 times more than DVD 
4K UHD:_8,294,400  or 4 times more than Blu-Ray and 24 times more than DVD 
Alternatives to Circumvention More Rare and Problematic Than in 2012 
The so-called “analog” alternatives to circumvention of TPMs on HD sources are even 
more scarce and problematic than they were with DVD players. No Blu-Ray player 
available today has analog outputs, thus making the use of the “analog hole” as an 
alternative to circumvention no longer an option. This technique used the lower quality 
analog outputs of older Blu-Ray players to capture video clips from encrypted discs.   
Screen capture of Blu-Ray computer playback is not available on the Mac platform used 
by a majority of documentary filmmakers, and has unacceptable stuttering, dropped 
frames, and image size issues on the PC computer platform. 
Scan Conversion: 
Shooting video of an HDTV screen with an HD capable cell phone camera or HD 
camcorder remains unacceptable for Broadcast or Theatrical display because of aliasing 
issues, poor audio, color balance shifts, and camera auto-exposure flickering. Moiré 
rainbow banding and aliasing often occurs when shooting a flat screen monitor or TV 
with an HD video camera, and is not possible to fix in post production.  
3 
 
[PAGE 30]
Downloads,VOD (Video on Demand), and Streaming  
Internet downloads (iTunes, Amazon, etc.) are still needed when desired content, like 
recent TV shows, is not yet available on DVD or Blu-Ray. They do, however, present 
technical issues that make these files inferior to Blu-Ray content. For example: 
1. Downloaded content often has unacceptably high video   compression which is “lossy” 
and discards much of the picture information to keep file sizes manageable. This often 
causes macroblocking  and loss of  resolution in fast moving and highly detailed scenes.  
2. Streaming content often cannot be captured properly because of stuttering playbackdue 
to internet congestion. Since all streaming media boxes like Roku, Chrome, Apple TV, 
and Blu-Ray players only have hardware encrypted HDMI outputs,
1 capturing streaming 
video using a video capture box is not possible. This is because all such boxes disable the 
HDMI input if protected content is detected. This same problem exists with cable, and  
satellite DVR recorder boxes. Many consumers use the built in streaming apps in their 
TV to view content, but no TV available today has any video outputs that can be captured 
or recorded. 
3. Many films and TV shows streamed online are often not available in full 1080 HD 
image resolution. 
Updated Broadcast Technical Requirements Remain High 
Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) updated technical specs from November 2014 
specifically state: TOS 2.1.3 “The image must be free of compression artifacts (such as 
macroblocking and mosquito noise), aliasing (such as the artifacts associated with scan 
conversion), frame dropouts, and other artifacts association with conversion and 
encoding.” 
These kinds of artifacts, associated with up-converting DVD material to HD, are difficult 
and costly to fix, and often cannot be brought up to the PBS standards.  
Filmmakers Need Access to Content Only Available on Blu-Ray 
Blu-Ray versions of films often contain additional material not available on the DVD 
version of the film. These can include director's commentaries, deleted scenes, behind the 
scenes footage, etc. that is not available anywhere else. They also offer the film in its 
original wide screen aspect ratio. 
Here is an example of the “extras” available on the Blu-Ray version of the movie 
“HUGO” vs the DVD version of the same film. 
1 The article HDCP 2.2: What you need to know provides a useful overview of encryption on HDMI. 
HDCP2.2: What you need to know, http://www.cnet.com/news/hdcp-2-2-what-you-need-to-know/ (last 
visited Feb. 5, 2015).  
4 
 
                                                 
[PAGE 31]
 
In conclusion, over the last three years, filmmakers’ need for access to a minimum of HD 
1080 quality for fair use video clips has increased greatly. Theatrical distribution of 
documentaries in digital DCP format and the expansion of UHD 4K video streaming by 
Netflix and Amazon into homes are two major recent developments that have contributed 
to this increased need to make HD quality video accessible to filmmakers..  
The resolution requirements of theatrical DCP presentation, Broadcast network 
requirements, and the move to 4K UHD distribution for home viewing, is why an 
exemption that covers not only DVD and DVT, but also Blu-Ray is so crucial now. Over 
the next 3 years, this need will only increase as 4K UHD production and distribution 
expand. 
5 
 
[PAGE 32]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix C 
Letter from Michael Donaldson 
[PAGE 33]
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ _____________ 
 
MICHAEL C. DONALDSON        LISA A. CALLIF                 DEAN R. CHELEY                    CHRISTOPHER L. PEREZ                         MARISA S. KAPUST 
 
400 S. Beverly Drive, Suite 400      New York Affiliate 
Beverly Hills, CA 90212      Gray Krau ss Stratford, Sandler Des Rochers, LLP 
Office: 310-277-8394  Fax 310-277-4870      Ne w York, NY www.gksd-law.com 212-996-6700 
 
 
 
February 6, 2015 
U.S. Copyright Office 
101 Independence Avenue S.E. 
Washington, D.C. 20559-6000 
 
To the Register of Copyrights: 
Since the beginning of cinema, narrative film s have made use of copyrighted material 
pursuant to the fair use doctrine.  During th e period when production was dominated by major 
studios, the practice became to li cense anything and everything for fear of legal consequences.  
Fair use cases were based on situations such as a mistake as to who to license from (in Amsinck, 
the baby crib mobile manufacturer was paid, but the artist for the creative works dangling above 
the crib was not), oversight (the poster on the Roc set in Ringgold) or honest mistakes (the Mike 
Tyson’s tattoo in Hangover 2).  Al l of the fair use cases arose in studio films (as opposed to 
independent films), and the vast majority of them were shot on sound stages dressed by the 
production company. 
Today, however, independent films are on the rise.  For example, six out of the eight 
nominees for the 2015 Best Picture Oscar are independent films.  Th irty out of the total of fifty 
films nominated for Oscars in 2015 are independen t.  All of the nominees for Best Documentary 
are independent. Three years a go, I pointed out that a few na rrative films were beginning to 
exercise their rights under the fair use doctrine and predicted that this was the beginning of a 
major trend.  The basis for that prediction was the mobility within the independent film 
community.  Filmmakers would work on a documen tary one week and a narrative film the next 
week.  This intermingling between  these two types of work was inspiring filmmakers to take 
what they had learned to be their rights in ma king a documentary and use it when they worked 
on scripted films. 
That prediction has proven to become a reality more quickly and with greater gusto than I 
had imagined.  We have a prepared a chart of scripted films which our office cleared since the 
last round of Section 1201 Hearings  (organized categorically and th en in chronological order).  
As indicated in the chart, each of the films ma de fair use and obtained Errors and Omissions 
(E+O) insurance coverage, and these only involve the films in our small firm of just five 
lawyers.  The blue bar indicates decided cases on  which we did not work (such as “Midnight in 
Paris” and “What Women Want”). No te from the chart that out of the eighteen fact-based films 
made between 2011 and 2015, only one had had a fair use claim, and it resulted in fair use.  Of 
[PAGE 34]
   
 
 
Page 2 of 2  
__________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
the twelve totally fictional works in both natural and set dressed settings that were made between 
2000 and 2012, eleven were insured with no clai ms.  The only one that had a claim (“What 
Women Want” in 2000) resulted in fair use. 
Several filmmakers have expressed to me pers onally that they would like to use material 
pursuant to fair use in fictional films, but are nervous and have figured out other ways to tell 
their stories.  Each one expressed a preference  for being able to use real footage and had 
concerns about access to source material.  Each one represents a situation in which the DMCA 
has acted as censor to the storyt eller.  The purposes of the Copyr ight Law have been frustrated 
when authors are shackled into telling their st ories that explore and comment on our life and 
times. 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Michael C. Donaldson 
   
 
  

[PAGE 35]
DATE PP TITLE TYPE   CONTENT ASSESTS  USED Result
2004 “Jersey Boys”  Stage Play
Hit musical about the rise of the Four Seasons in 
the 50's and 60's.
Clip of Ed Sullivan introducing The Four 
Seasons.
Fair Use. (Decided 
2013.)
2013 DRC “No”  
Oscar nominated 
for best foreign  
film
About the defeat of Chilean Dictator Pinochet in 
a plebiscite.  Political commercial and street scenes. Insured,  no claim.
2014 CLP Caesar  Chavez" Feature  Film
Struggle during the 60's California migrant farm 
workers led by Caesar Chavez. Many  clips from television coverage. Insured,  no claim.
2014 "Lovelace" Feature  Film
A biopic about the story of the seminal porn film 
Deep Throat
Scenes recreated from the porn film using 
actors
Fair Use. (Decided 
2014.)
2014 "Jersey Boys" Feature  Film
Film based on the hit musical about the rise of 
the Four Seasons in the 50's and 60's.
Clip of Ed Sullivan introducing The Four 
Seasons. Insured,  no claim.
2014 CLP
"Welcome to 
New York"  Feature Film
Dominique Strauss Khan's production for New 
York Hotel maids. News  clips ‐ fair use and licensed.  Insured, no claim.
2015 CLP
"Ride The 
Thunder" Film
Vietnamese Soldiers fighting with the U.S.A 
forces. Clips  from Dick Cavett's television show.  Insured, no claim.
2015 CLP
"The 
Experimenter" Feature  Film Film  about Stanley Milgram. Clips  from Candid Camera. Insured,  no claim.
Completed, 
release 
expected fall of 
2015 MCD
"Untitled 
Terrence Malick 
Project" Feature  Film
Two intersecting love triangles. Obsession and 
betrayal set against the music scene in Austin, 
Texas. Starring Christian Bale, Michael 
Fassbender, Natalie Portman, Rooney Mara, and 
Ryan Gosling. In post‐production.
FAIR USE IN SCRIPTED FILMS 
                       1. Fair Use in Live Action Films that are "Based on a True Story" such as a bio‐pic.
Blue Shading = Decided Cases
[PAGE 36]
In production. LAC
"Untitled 
Snowden 
Project" Feature  Film 
Oliver Stone's take on The Edward Snowden 
saga.  Many news clips. In  production.
In pre‐
production. "The  Heist" Feature  Film In pre‐production.
[PAGE 37]
2011
"Midnight in 
Paris"
Woody Allen's 
2011 film
An aspiring novelist visits modern day Paris with 
his fiancé and travels to the Paris of the 20's 
each night at midnight, where he meets notable 
writers and artists from the era such as Ernest 
Hemmingway, Pablo Picasso and Gertrude Stein. Short  quote from Faulkner novel.
Fair Use. (Decided 
2013.)
2011 DRC "Joi  De Vivre" Scripted  Film Film  clips. Insured,  no claim.
2012 MCD
"The Pursuit of 
Loneliness"
black and white 
film. Sundance 
Film Festival Very  realistic film. Television  clip of shooting channel.
2012 CLP "I  Was There" Scripted  Film 9/11  first respondent developes PTSD.  Many radio clips from 9/11. Insured,  no claim.
2013 DRC
"The Banshee 
Chapter" Fictional  journalist experiments on U.S Citizens. 
Old interviews and news footage from the 
70's. A clip of President Clinton apologizing 
was also used. Insured,  no claim.
2013 MCD
"Farah Goes 
Bang" Feature  Film
A woman in her twenties who tries to lose her 
virginity while campaigning across America for 
presidential candidate John Kerry in 2004. Many  campagin clips. Insured,  no claim.
2014 MCD "Yellow  Rain" Short  Film
The U.S Government misread bee poop as a 
dangerous chemical during Vietnam War. Television  news clips. Insured,  no claim.
2014 DRC
"Free the 
Nipple" Scripted  Film
A group of young, topless women who take to 
the streets of New York to protest the archaic 
censorship laws in the U.S.A.
A lot of fair use. Superbowl clip that 
triggered the FCC Hearings.  IFC distributed.  Insured, no claim.
2. Fair Use in Fictional Works in which real events are the launching point for the film ((i.e. "inspired by")
[PAGE 38]
2014 CLP "Camp  X Ray" Scripted  Film
A soldier assigned to Guantanamo Bay befriends 
a man who has been imprisoned there for eight 
years. Readings  from Harry Potter Book.  Insured, no claim.
2014 LAC
"Dear White 
People" Scripted  Film Film  about how the races interrelate. 
Released YouTube clips, photographs, Effie 
Brown provided.  Insured, no claim.
2014 LAC
"Friends and 
Romans" Feature  Film
an extra actor who claims to have appeared in 
various studio feature films; comedy.
Stills and dialogue clips from Good Fellas, 
Guys and Dogs. Insured,  no claim.
2015 CLP "#  Horror" Scripted  Film 13 ‐15 year old girls cyber‐bullying.  Huge montage from internet.  Insured, no claim.
2015 LAC "Kicks" Scripted  Film
The great lengths folks go to when Nike shoes 
are stolen. Very dark film. Artwork  on wall, Michael Jordan Poster. Insured,  no claim.
In pre‐
production, 
completion in 
2015 CLP "Mandorla" Feature  Film
A man with an over active imagination. It calls 
him away from the realities of corporate and 
family life to face a dark and magical place in a 
medieval French city.  
Clips from Excalibur which constantly 
makes him want to recreate the scene in 
his own life.  In production.
In pre‐
production, 
completion in 
2015 CLP
"The Phoenix 
Incident" Feature  Film
Based on a real event that occurred on March 
13, 1997 in Phoenix, Arizona, when thousands 
of people, including then‐state governor Fife 
Symington, claimed to have simultaneously 
witnessed inexplicable lights in the night sky. In  post‐production.
In pre‐
production, 
completion 
expected in 2015 CLP "Showing  Roots"  Feature Film
The film explores what it would be like for a 70's 
black family watching Roots. Clips  from original Roots mini TV series.  In production.
[PAGE 39]
2000
"What Women 
Want"
Paramount 
Pictures 2000 film.  Mel Gibson stars as an advertising executive. 
In a particular scene, Gibson brainstorms 
with employees to develop marketing ideas 
targeted at women. At some points during 
the scene, the Plaintiff's pinball machine 
appears in the background. The pinball 
machine is never the focus of the scene.
Fair Use. (Decided 
2008.)
2007 MCD "Once" Oscar  for best song
Modern‐day musical largely shot on the streets 
of Dublin.  A lot of images in the background.  Insured, no claim.
2009 DRC
"Waiting for 
Ophelia" IFC  Release Romantic  Comedy
Artwork located in the home of a wealthy 
owner which was used as the set for the 
home of a wealthy character.  Insured, no claim.
2009 DRC
"He's Such a 
Girl" IFC  Release
Teen comedy about a boy with feminine traits 
who attempts to solidify a relationship with a 
girl.  Artwork on the wall of a cabin.  Insured, no claim.
2012 LAC
"Thanks for 
Sharing" Film  and Trailer Mark  Ruffalo stars as a sex addict. 
Various copyrights protecting poster 
owned by Victoria's Secret. Insured,  no claim.
2013 LAC "A  Case of You" Feature  Film
Protagonist first learns about his love interest 
from Facebook. Facebook  clips. Insured,  no claim.
2013 DRC
"Crystal Fairy 
and the Magical 
Cactus" Feature  Film Search  for a fabled hallucinogen. Incidental  artwork. Insured,  no claim.
2014 LAC
"Heaven Knows 
What" Feature  Film
A vagabond couple in NYC battling addiction 
amidst a manic love affair. trademarks,  screen grabs from computer.
3. Totally Fiction Works ‐ Natural Settings
[PAGE 40]
2009 MCD "Big  Fan" Comedy
A hardcore New York Giants football fan is the 
central character of the film.  Posters in the bedroom.  Insured, no claim.
2011 MCD "Bellflower"
The main character is obsessed with Lord 
Humungus from "Mad Max II"
During the film, two friends build the 
copyright protected Mad Max car. Note: 
The studio had already won a lawsuit 
against a company building and selling 
replicas of Mad Max cars. Insured,  no claim.
2013 DRC
"Homre de 
Piedra" Feature  Film
Father comes up from Mexico to bond with and 
take care of his daughter.
Many photos were photo‐shopped to add 
the absent mother in order to fool her 
daughter into believing that the mom was 
traveling extensively.  Insured. No claim.
2014 LAC "Boyhood"
Richard Linklatter's 
film shot over 12 
years A  family goes through its many changes
Shot in a realistic setting, all manner of 
third‐party, unlicensed items appear in the 
film. Insured.  No claim.
4. Totally Fiction Works ‐ Set Dressing in Natural Settings
[PAGE 41]
1955‐1984
"Captain 
Kangaroo"
Popular children's 
show CBS  TV Show.
A minor character from the show 
manipulated the puppet as hand puppets 
for 35 seconds.
Fair Use. (Decided 
1965.)
1989
"Immediate 
Family" Studio  feature film
Married childless couple who want a baby. They 
decide to adopt from a pregnant teenage girl 
who later gets second thoughts.
Artistic animals affixed to a mobile which 
was prominently displayed over a baby crib 
in several scenes.
Fair Use. (Decided  
1994.)
1991‐1994 "ROC" Television  show Sitcom
Artist created a painting of a story quilt 
which turned into a poster. Poster was 
used as part of background of church for a 
scene.
Fair Use at trial 
court; reversal on 
appeal.    (Decided 
1997.)
1993
"Made In 
America" Studio  feature film
Zora Matthews, whose mother Sarah conceived 
her with the aid of an anonymous sperm donor, 
discovers her father is a white man named Hal 
Jackson.
Paintings are featured and knocked down 
to show evidence of the sexual activities 
taking place in the scene.
Fair Use. (Decided 
1997.)
1995 "12 Monkeys" Studio  feature film
James Cole is a convicted criminal living beneath 
a post‐apolcalyptic Philadelphia in the year 
2035. In 1996‐97, the Earth's surface had been 
contaminated by a virus so deadly that it forced 
the survivors to move underground.
A scene featured a room and a chair that 
resembled a graphite pencil drawing 
created by an artist.
Not fair use. 
(Decided 1996.)
1995 "Seven" Studio  feature film
Soon‐to‐be retiring Detective William R. 
Somerset is partnered with short‐tempered but 
idealistic Detective David Mills, who recently 
transferred to the department.  They discover 
an obese man who was forced to feed himself to 
death, and the next day investigate a fatal 
bloodletting of a rich attorney.
Black and white translucent photos were 
hung over light board and used as the 
background of the crime scene.
Fair Use. (Decided 
1998.)
5. Set Dressing on a Soundstage ‐ Claims on all the following projects
[PAGE 42]
1999‐                    
(Episode aired 
in 2006) "Family  Guy" Animated "Family  Guy" Episode
An animated Carol Burnett is shown 
sweeping up a sex shop and giving her ear 
tug that she used as a sign off on her 
television show for years. 
Fair use. (Decided 
2007.)
2011‐
DRC/
MCD "Trailer  Trash" Animated Internet  Comedy Series 
Each episode contained 3 to 4 clips of a 
major motion picture while the characters ‐ 
all occupants of a single trailer ‐ 
commented on the clips and films they 
were from.  Insured, no claim.
2013
"Escape From 
Tomorrow
A low budget, back 
and white horror 
film
A man who has a meltdown at Disneyland while 
on a family trip.
All manners of copyrights, trademark and 
personal appearances.  Insured, no claim.
6. Parody 
[PAGE 43]
FILM COMPANY IND or STUD
1 American 
Sniper
Warner Bros STUD
2 Birdman New 
Regency/20th Fox
IND
3 Boyhood IFC/Universal & 
Paramount
IND
4 Grand 
Budapest 
Hotel
Indian Paintbrush 
& Scott Rudin 
Productions/20th 
Fox
IND
5 Imitation 
Game
Black 
Bear/Weinstein
IND
6 Selma Cloud Eight & 
Harpo
IND
7 Theory of 
Everything
Working 
Title/Universal
STUD
8 Whiplash Bold IND
9 Foxcatcher Annapurna/Sony IND
10 Two Days, 
One Night
Les Films du 
Fleuve/Wild 
Bunch
IND
11 Wild Fox 
Searchlight/20th 
Fox
STUD
12 Still Alice BSM Studio IND
13 The Judge Warner Bros STUD
14 Into the 
Woods
Lucamar/Disney STUD
15 Big Hero 6 Disney STUD
16 How to Train 
Your Dragon 
Dreamworks/20th 
Fox
STUD
17 Boxtrolls Laika/Focus 
Features&Univers
al
IND
18 Song of the 
Sea
Big Farm IND
19 Tale of 
Princess 
Kaguya
Studio Ghibli/Wild 
Bunch
IND
20 Inherent Vice Warner Bros STUD
21 Ida Opus Film/Music 
Box
IND
22 Mr. Turner Film4&Focus 
Features/Sony 
Pictures Classics
IND
23 Unbroken 3 Arts 
Ent.&Legendary 
Pictures/Universal 
Pictures
STUD
24 Maleficient Disney STUD
25 Leviathan Non-Stop 
Productions/ Sony
Pictures Classics
STUD
26 Tangerines All Film & 
Georgian Film
IND
27 Timbuktu Les Films du 
Worso/Cohen 
Media Group
IND
28 Wild Tales El Deseo/Sony 
Pictures Classics
IND
29 Guardians of 
the Galaxy
Marvel/Disney STUD
30 Nightcrawler Bold/Open Road IND
31 Interstellar Paramount STUD
32 Gone Girl 20th Fox STUD
33 The Lego 
Movie
Warner Bros STUD
34 Beyond The 
Lights
Relativity Media IND
35 Glen 
Campbell…I'll 
Be Me
PCH Films IND
36 Begin Again Apatow 
Productions
IND
37 The Bigger 
Picture
Chris Hees IND
38 The Dam 
Keeper
Megan Bartel & 
Duncan Ramsay
IND
39 Feast Disney STUD
40 Me and My 
Moulton
Mikrofilm & 
National Film 
Board of Canada
IND
41 A Single Life Marieke Blaauw & 
Joris Oprins & 
Job Roggeveen
IND
42 Aya Oded Binnun & 
Mihal Brezis
IND
43 Boogaloo and 
Graham
Out of Orbit IND
44 Butter Lamp Wei Hu & Julien 
Feret
IND
45 Parvaneh Talkhon 
Hamazavi
IND
46 The Phone 
Call
RSA Films IND
47 sound editing The Hobbit: 
Battle of the 
Five Armies
MGM & New Line 
(Warner Bros.)
STUD
48 Captain 
America: The 
Winter Soldier
Marvel/Disney STUD
49 Dawn of the 
Planet of the 
Apes
Chernin 
Entertainment 
(Fox)
STUD
50 X-Men: Days 
of Future Past
Marvel&20th 
Fox/20th Fox
STUD
BEST 
PICTURE 
NOMINEES 
(8 FILMS)
2015 Oscar Nominated Films (minus Music; Shorts; Sound Editing; Sound Mixing; Visual Effects)
original song
animated 
short
visual effects
live short
SUMMARY:
Out of the 50 films nominated
for Oscars, 20 are studio films
and 30 are independent films.
Out of the 8 films nominated
for Best Picture, 2 are studio
films and 6 are independent 
films.
 1
[PAGE 44]
Appendix D 
Letter from Kenn Rabin 
[PAGE 45]
F  U  L  C  R  U  M        M  E  D  I  A        S  E  R  V  I  C  E  S  
PO Box 177    San Anselmo    California    94979.0177           Tel: 415.459.4429   Fax: 415.459.4498 
 
 
 
 
 
 
February 2, 2015 
 
Professor Jack I. Lerner 
Mr. Michael C. Donaldson 
c/o Donaldson + Callif 
400 South Beverly Drive 
Beverly Hills, California 90212 
 
Dear Michael and Jack: 
 
From the very beginning of my career as a producer, archival researcher and consultant on 
both documentaries and feature films, I’ve come across many barriers to the use of 
copyrighted, third-party owned footage, music and stills. This has resulted in a long-term 
pattern of difficulty in using relevant cultural touchstones, local, national and international 
news programs, and, in general, media that illustrates context for public debate and the 
examination of history and popular culture.  
 
Many of these uses we now think of as fair, but it wasn’t until the release of the Center for 
Social Media’s Documentary Filmmakers’ Statement of Best Practices in Fair Use, in 
November 2005, that I and other filmmakers began to feel empowered to demand our fair use 
rights and codify clear “safe harbor” instances in which we could triumph over some of these 
barriers. One service I now perform for studio feature producers and independent feature and 
documentary filmmakers alike involves explaining what fair use is, and how and when to 
invoke it, so that they can use all of their storytelling tools and not be hampered in their ability 
to present important illustrative evidence or artifacts to their audience. I also explain that, the 
primary raison d’etre of fair use is not to save them money, but rather to be “the lubricant that 
allows copyright law to work smoothly with first amendment free speech,” as attorney Tony 
Falzone has said. In some cases, circumstances – or even whim – might push a copyright 
holder to withhold his/her permission for use in order to avoid the copyrighted material being 
criticized, re-contextualized, or otherwise transformed in a way that is not under the copyright 
holder’s control. This document will give several examples of this situation, and my book for 
filmmakers, Archival Storytelling, deals quite extensively with fair use. 
  
[PAGE 46]
2 
 
Even as clarity among filmmakers about fair use increased after the publication of the Best 
Practices document, obstacles to fair use still remain. Where, previously, film producers 
would often self-censor regarding their use of an item because of copyright issues (“They’ll 
never give me permission to use that clip. I might as well not bother even trying.”), now, as 
filmmakers better understand their right to fair use, the self-censorship hasn’t necessarily gone 
away. It has simply re-focused on the next seemingly-insurmountable obstacle (“I’ll have to 
fair use that clip, since the copyright holder will never give me permission. But how and 
where am I going to actually get a copy, so that I can put it in my film, if I don’t get it directly 
from the copyright holder?”)  
 
Unfortunately for many, the fair use statute includes no provision or precedent for how a 
justified user of that right might obtain access to the physical materials (films, videotapes, 
digital files, lab elements, etc.) that are needed for the fair use expression itself. This is an 
issue that’s not unique to audiovisual storytelling, but it is especially troubling because of the 
nature and technical needs of production in the audiovisual realm. My clients wonder what 
they can do when I explain that, “if only you could obtain that clip of your documentary 
subject appearing on The Tonight Show with Johnny Carson, or that scene from Mississippi 
Burning which illustrates your explanation of how point of view affects viewers’ reactions, or 
if only you could access the videotape of Walter Cronkite telling the American people that the 
Vietnam War is a stalemate at best in order to talk about the turning tide of public opinion 
about the war, or of Richard Pryor satirizing race in a skit on an old Saturday Night Live 
show, then licensing wouldn’t be an issue, and fair use would have worked its magic once 
more as the lubricant between copyright and free speech. If only.” 
 
Of course, in many cases, the copyright holders are the gatekeepers of the unique copy of the 
material itself – and if you don’t pay, you don’t play. Understand that it is not inconceivable 
that going to certain copyright holders with a fair use request could result in their cooperation, 
both in the form of a non-objection letter and even occasionally a reel of film or videotape. 
This is, however, the rare exception. Normally, copyright holders view fair use with 
suspicion, disdain, and a bank of lawyers at the ready. In fact, the climate is so hostile that 
many producers are afraid even to approach copyright holders for fear they will then be “on 
the radar.”  
 
One rare case where I actually obtained a non-objection letter from a copyright holder came 
up in a Barry Levinson film I associate produced, entitled Yesterday’s Tomorrows. We needed 
a specific 1940s magazine ad for a Ford automobile. Ford agreed the use was fair, provided a 
non-objection letter, and even found us clean art of the original ad in their archives. Another 
example happened when I was archival scene researcher on George Clooney’s feature about 
Edward R. Murrow, Good Night, and Good Luck. I got a great deal of cooperation from both 
an advertising agency and the public relations department of a certain tobacco company, both 
[PAGE 47]
3 
 
of which indicated in writing their belief that our use of a 1953 cigarette commercial for 
television was fair use. In this case, however, they were simply unable to provide us with a 
clip of the commercial, so I had to try to find a copy elsewhere. 
 
A more typical example came during the same project: Although ultimately we opted not to 
do it, for a while during the post-production of Good Night, and Good Luck, we considered 
creating a montage for the end of the film which would show, in rapid-fire, the “evolution” of 
television news from See It Now to network evening news, to 60 Minutes, to Nightline, to 
Dateline NBC, A Current Affair, The O’Reilly Factor, Entertainment Tonight, The Daily 
Show, and TMZ. Luckily for me, the idea was dropped, but for several days I sat at my desk 
daunted by the prospect of having to gather the actual materials for such a montage, which 
may have qualified as fair use, but the idea of which would not have been received positively 
by the copyright holders. How would I find the necessary materials if we went forward? 
Perhaps by recording the more current examples off-air in as high a format as I could? 
Finding older ones in special collections? Pulling them off YouTube? Ripping some from 
commercially-available DVDs might have been possible, but these types of programs are 
rarely released publicly on DVD, as they have the short half-life of spot news. 
   
One of the most notable films I’ve worked on lately which had extensive issues with 
obtaining physical materials for fair use was the feature documentary, Inequality for All, 
which profiled economist and former Clinton cabinet member Robert Reich and his economic 
theories. The film won multiple awards at film festivals and was distributed theatrically by 
TWC/Radius.  
 
In that film, we needed to use clips under fair use in a variety of ways. One type of fair use we 
invoked was simply to illustrate and give witness to Reich’s statement (in his on-screen 
interview with us) that, during his tenure as Secretary of Labor, he often appeared on 
television – both news and talk shows – in order to present himself and the economic policies 
of the Clinton administration to as broad an audience as possible. To that end, we fair used 
clips from The Tonight Show with Jay Leno, The Daily Show, The Conan O’Brien Show, The 
Rachel Maddow Show, The O’Reilly Factor and others that showed Reich discussing the 
economy with the host, entertaining the audience in a skit, or presenting a quick sound bite 
that was smart but also humorous – thus corroborating his appearances in the public eye, and 
defining his sense of humor and affability. 
 
Another example of fair use for illustration in Inequality for All involved clips from Fox News 
that we would not have been able to license from them. In fact, Fox News does license their 
broadcast footage, however, it will under no circumstances license footage that includes any 
on-screen talent, or anyone on their staff or payroll. Because most of what is broadcast on Fox 
[PAGE 48]
4 
 
is intimately tied to their on-air talent, it would have been impossible to license any of the 
material we needed from them.  
 
An issue similar to the Fox News one involved an interview with the president of Viacom, 
Inc. which appeared on the online channel of The Wall Street Journal, WSJ. I had entered 
negotiations with them to use the clip in good faith but then was suddenly faced with a no-
explanation turndown for permission. Although we had been turned down, we had a sure bet 
for a fair use if we went ahead and used the clip. In the interview, the billionaire executive 
bemoaned the fact that he had to lay off thousands of workers because of the economic 
downturn and its effect on his company, never mentioning the outrageously high salary and 
bonuses he received, nor how many workers’ jobs might have been saved had he sacrificed 
even a small percentage of his own income for a year. We superimposed information about 
his earnings over the interview clip. 
 
The broader issue of using on-air reporters’ voices or likenesses, and any branding or branded 
shows (60 Minutes, Larry King Live, Anderson Cooper 360, etc.) has been an issue not only 
with Fox, but with all network and cable news worldwide over the 35+ years that I’ve been 
working in this field. In recent years, these restrictions have gotten broader, and waivers to the 
policy more difficult to obtain. Sometimes the only solution is to find and rip an off-air 
recording, if one can find it in a special collection somewhere.  
 
Feature film and television clips are even more complex if we cannot make fair use. In that 
case, we would have been required to pay large clip fees to the studios, but then also fees to 
the Writers Guild, the Directors Guild, and possibly the copyright holder of the underscore. 
But the real difficulty would be in locating, negotiating with, and obtaining signed releases 
from all the SAG/AFTRA actors appearing in the scene. If one actor says no, delays too 
much, is on location and unreachable, or demands too high a fee, the clip’s use is as good as 
dead.  
 
There was an additional category of fair use footage in Inequality for All, which was that of 
popular culture and entertainment. We needed to produce a segment to illustrate Reich’s 
discussion of women entering the employment marketplace in the late 1970s as a result of the 
stagnation of middle class wages (even more so than because of the women’s movement, 
which was in full swing by that time). We wanted to show how this huge cultural shift was 
mirrored in the popular media of the day by running short, iconic clips from “working 
women” TV shows such as The Mary Tyler Moore Show, Cagney and Lacy, and Murphy 
Brown. We also wanted to show the shift reflected in television commercials, and thus used a 
1970s Enjoli perfume commercial aimed at women who went from workplace to after-work 
socializing to cooking for the family – to then being a sex kitten for her husband when all the 
chores were done – and all to the tune of the Helen Reddy song, “I’m a Woman.” And finally, 
[PAGE 49]
5 
 
we wanted to remind people of the huge popularity of the film 9 to 5 at the time. The song had 
become the anthem of working women and led to the formation of an organization of the 
same name that fought for and protected women’s rights in the workplace. 
 
Some clips in Inequality for All had to be ripped from commercially-available DVDs. 
Normally, if a feature clip is licensed, the studio provides it in a 2K or, much preferably, 4K 
digital scan. A 2K scan is roughly twice the resolution and quality of a Blu-ray, but it is really 
a 4K scan from 35mm which is considered ideal for such use – this is four times the sharpness 
and detail of a Blu-ray and, at this level of resolution, begins to approximate the amount of 
information available in a 35mm film frame. Therefore, a Blu-ray (an HD 1K scan, if you 
will) is generally not even adequate and is already starting to become obsolete in the face of 
these other formats, some of which are already in the consumer market. Blu-ray, which 
includes picture encoded at up to 1080 line resolution, is the minimum level of high definition, 
while a DVD is the equivalent in resolution to our old square standard definition (SD) 
television format (525 line resolution), in use since TV entered the consumer market in the 
1940s. When projected in a theater or even seen on a broadcast, SD quality now stands out as 
being visually degraded, and the video scan lines are usually obvious. Fine detail—which 
could be critical to the point the fair use is making—is hard to discern and the audience is 
distracted by the sudden quality shift.  
 
DVD quality was a barely viable option even in 2012, when we were producing Inequality for 
All. With new rules, already in effect, from broadcasters such as PBS and other gatekeepers, 
including theatrical and foreign broadcast distributors about delivering HD product, 
filmmakers are already put in a position in which, were they to continue to be restricted to 
DVD, they would truly have their hands tied vis fair use. To claim fair use, they would use 
shots that would fail minimal technical specs. This would require filmmakers to spend so 
much money doing needless technical improvements and alterations that not only would it 
deplete their budgets and wreak havoc with their production schedules, but at the end of the 
day, it would also yield a far inferior visual result than had they just worked from a Blu-ray or 
2K or 4K scan to begin with – in other words, starting right off “within spec” instead of trying 
to force inferior elements to appear like high definition. All of these considerations would 
undoubtedly mean that producers would decide to forego exercising their fair use rights for 
many contemplated clips.   
 
Now, I’d like to cite two recent examples of the lack of access to physical materials necessary 
for a fair use, even when we licensed the footage from the copyright holder simply in order to 
have access to the materials when there seemed to be no other choice (a situation that arises 
on many occasions). One involved a documentary about Vietnam War veterans and post-
traumatic stress syndrome (PTSD), and the other relates to my work on the recent 
Paramount/Pathé feature film, Selma. 
[PAGE 50]
6 
 
 
In the case of the veterans documentary, I wanted to pull an ABC News shot I had found  
previously for the landmark WGBH series, Vietnam: A Television History. The shot showed 
off-duty American soldiers sitting on a hillside in South Vietnam, relaxing, and using a rifle 
as a so-called “shotgun” with which to smoke marijuana. They were passing around the rifle; 
each put the barrel in his mouth and inhaled. The shot formed a complex comment about the 
schizoid life of the soldiers – from relaxation to fighting for their lives, sometimes in a matter 
of seconds. It also had disturbing overtones of suicide and conjured associations with inhaling 
the smoke from a recent discharge of the gun.  
 
I had originally found the shot back in 1983. Now, in 2013, I wanted to use it again. But this 
time, ABC News refused, claiming “We do not want to provide a shot that shows American 
soldiers in a bad light at a time when we’re at war. Period.” In this case, the archival turndown 
was politically motivated. Did the fact that ABC was now Disney have anything to do with 
the change of heart? Did it matter?  
 
I was furious. However, the solution seemed obvious: claim fair use, and obtain a clean 
master of the shot from the Vietnam edit room negatives. Unfortunately, the documentary I 
was working on had a miniscule budget for lab work, and WGBH would have requested a 
usage fee as well as a fee for finding the shot and having the lab make us a duplicate master. 
The one other alternative would have been ripping the shot from the commercially-available 
home DVD of Vietnam, but in this case, the quality wasn’t sufficient for our needs and the 
producer simply decided it wasn’t worth the trouble and didn’t use the shot. An historical shot 
that was previously available had been quietly removed from public access, and in a tiny but 
important way, our audiovisual history had been altered. 
  
For the 2014 feature, Selma, which focuses on the historic 1965 voting rights march from 
Selma to Montgomery, I had located a good deal of archival film. We had created an archival 
sequence we liked, showing the “real” march spanning the time the marchers cross the 
Edmund Pettus Bridge to the time they arrive in downtown Montgomery. It showed the 
marchers on the road, at rest in the evenings, being joined by celebrities such as Tony 
Bennett, Sammy Davis Jr., and Harry Belafonte, and crowds by the side of the road, cheering 
the marchers on. It’s historically relevant and accurate to illustrate the participation of 
children in the movement, and children were very present in both the marchers and the 
crowds cheering the marchers on. In addition, most adult participants in the march would 
probably say that voting rights had to be secured for the sake of their children.  
 
Less than a week before picture lock, a U.S. network news division, on whose footage we had 
relied heavily, announced that they would not allow us to show any children in their footage. 
When we asked for an explanation, we were told we weren’t entitled to one – they were the 
[PAGE 51]
7 
 
copyright holders and could construct the rules any way they wanted; we just had to remove 
any shot that included children, and there was to be no further discussion. Filmmakers reading 
this would instantly understand that this request would mean a major re-edit of the sequence 
at a point in time when that would be nearly impossible given our picture-lock date. 
Historians of the civil rights movement would cringe as well: To not show children 
participating in the march and cheering from the sidelines would be historically inaccurate, as 
children were a large part of the movement. I felt quite sure I could construct a good case for 
fair use, for all the reasons above, not to mention that the decision was untimely and arbitrary. 
The director, Ava DuVernay, was dead set against removing the shots, as was I. But if the 
copyright holder was refusing us the physical shots, we’d had no choice but to remove them. 
There was no other source for these shots. 
 
In this situation, the problem was solved literally after the eleventh hour, and after many 
attempts – by getting the president of the network news division on the phone with the top 
management of the production company, which is owned by Brad Pitt. The issue was resolved 
within a few minutes. I had suggested taking this route because it had worked for me once 
before. CBS News had an issue with our using their branding all through Good Night, and 
Good Luck. And yet the whole story takes place in the studio, essentially. The CBS “eyeball” 
was everywhere – on the sides of cameras, on the office walls, on letterhead. Director George 
Clooney called the president of CBS, Leslie Moonves, and the issue was quickly resolved. 
However, in either case, had that solution not worked, who knows what we would have done? 
In the case of the Clooney film, the whole project might have had to be scrapped. In the case 
of Selma, as with the Vietnam soldiers, children would have been erased from the historical 
record. How many media makers and producers have access to the likes of George Clooney, 
Brad Pitt, or Oprah Winfrey (the other producer of Selma)? Practically speaking, we are 
sometimes in a situation where the ability to take advantage of fair use rights depends on who 
you know. 
 
All this is simply to illustrate the need for another step beyond fair use in its current form, in 
order to render it truly practical for those media makers who would justifiably invoke it. In the 
print world, it is not an issue for reviewers who are quoting as part of critique or analysis – 
they need nothing but the words–or maybe a photo willingly supplied by the studio’s PR 
department. But in the audiovisual world, “quoting” becomes a much more technologically 
complex issue, often dependent on the copyright holders themselves. 
  
One of my next projects will be a documentary about obituaries – how they are produced for 
television news and newspapers, what is chosen to be said about the recently deceased, who 
determines which people are worthy of certain kinds of recognition and which aren’t. What 
criteria do they use? How do they chose what aspects of a life are important enough to focus 
on? 
[PAGE 52]
8 
 
 
For this film, I will need to access footage and stills of celebrities of various kinds, whether in 
fields of math or science, music, theater, film and television, politics, literature . . . I’ll need 
illustrations of their accomplishments and the effect they had on history, and on the popular 
culture and imagination. I’ll need materials showing them. In addition, I’ll need to show how 
their obituaries were presented on news and entertainment programming, and I’ll need to 
show newspapers. I expect much of my use of this material to qualify as fair use, but will it – 
can it? -- come from Blu-rays and streams of movies, television shows, live concerts, 
educational films and videos, or cable channel shows? And if I can’t use those, how will I 
obtain what I need? 
 
So when I write of the need for another step beyond fair use in its current form, I mean that 
we need to develop a practical system so that suitable physical assets can be obtained for a 
legitimate fair use. The legal right to rip a DVD or streaming file in order to yield a useful 
master has been a critical first step, as you can gather from the examples cited here. But, also 
for reasons I’ve cited here, that’s not the whole solution. Too many assets are only available 
from the copyright holder, or are illegal to obtain from higher-resolution media like Blu-ray 
that begins to approach industry standards. 
 
This question of access to quality master, as opposed to any master, is not just a cosmetic 
problem. Many distributors and vendors don’t allow certain types of degraded visual 
elements. More important, especially broadcasters require every shot to pass stringent 
technical specifications, and while possible in most cases, the struggle to get inferior quality 
archival materials “to spec” can be expensive and time consuming. In my experience, PBS 
has the most stringent requirements. For example, they do not allowing head-switching 
(which is an issue with almost every news videotape from the 1970s to the 1980s), they 
demand that gamma be within a certain range (difficult with multi-generational film and 
analog tape copies), and audio must fit certain criteria as well. In the case of head-switching, 
the image has to be enlarged and cropped in order to remove this technical problem. Once you 
crop your original artifact, the resolution goes down, the sharpness disappears, the scan lines 
increase in relative size . . . and maybe even more important, the original artifact, the primary 
source material, is altered. Content in the frame is cropped out, disappears. Depending on how 
stringent a filmmaker, or her critics, or her audience might be about the original source 
material, it could be considered manipulated from its original form, a journalistic ethical 
lapse. All of this often requires audio and video engineers and sophisticated equipment that 
only can be found in an expensive post-production suite. Quality control is important of 
course, and certainly a positive thing, but it can present obstacles to fair use. 
 
Studios and feature film companies are also very strict regarding technical requirements for 
theatrical release, as they are imagining every shot projected by digital means onto a giant 
[PAGE 53]
9 
 
screen from some distance away. Among younger film and television producers, there’s even 
a lack of understanding of the history of film and video technology and therefore an 
intolerance for materials that don’t have that high definition digital “look.” They demand that 
everything, from early Library of Congress footage to 1970s nightly news, be made to look as 
good as high definition material recorded yesterday.  
 
And, finally, cosmetics are important too. Ironically, at the end of the day, both the media 
makers and the copyright holders usually want the same thing: for the material they own, or 
the film they make, to look as good as possible and represent accurately the level of craft that 
went into the original creation. News camerapeople, feature set designers and costumers want 
to see clips of their work that are clear and bright, sharp, and in the correct aspect ratio. Film 
directors and directors of photography want the clips to integrate well with the high-quality 
original footage they themselves have shot. Both also have financial concerns – many 
filmmakers can’t afford exorbitant license fees and guild payments—and are worried that any 
needed correction of technical issues could add to their budgetary woes by consuming money 
that could otherwise be used for additional clearances – or even toward their next film.  
  
Archives and other repositories need that income stream in order to afford the cataloguing and 
preservation efforts that keep that same piece of film looking good and available to media 
producers, historians, students and others without the loss and disintegration that plagues all 
media formats over time to a greater or lesser extent. But how much is enough income stream, 
versus extravagant profit required by an estate, a corporate owner, or its stockholders? Is it 
worth hobbling would-be storytellers, whose voices are important to our democracy? 
 
I sincerely hope that access to fair use, as interpretation of its nuances change over time, will 
reflect the technical needs of the 21
st century. While I know current legal wisdom dictates that 
mere convenience is not enough to warrant an exemption, the reality filmmakers face is that 
all archival materials are not created equal–not in the eyes of the media maker, the exhibitor 
or the audience, because of the reasons I’ve stated and the examples I’ve given. It is critical 
that fair users have access to high-quality copies of what can only be described as true 
artifacts of our recent and continuing history and culture–copies that better match producers’ 
vision of their statement, satisfies their gatekeepers, and is of sufficient quality to actually 
examine and evaluate, critique and parody, or offer historical evidence and illustration in the 
way fair use is meant to do.  
 
As to the additional problem—complete lack of access to any copy with which to make a fair 
use (common, because copyright holders often own the only physical copies), media makers 
still hit that brick wall: Fair use is impossible. I still need to pre-censor. I still can’t practice 
my fair use rights.   
 
[PAGE 54]
10 
 
Therefore, it is important that some common ground be reached where all parties involved 
recognize the social value and necessity of fair use. Such a mutual understanding could even 
lead to outside-the-box creative partnerships between providers and fair users, and surprising 
initiatives yielding solutions that honor and protect both the artifacts themselves, and the 
historical and cultural record. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Kenn Rabin 
President, Fulcrum Media Services 

[PAGE 55]
F  U  L  C  R  U  M        M  E  D  I  A        S  E  R  V  I  C  E S  
 PO Box 177    San Anselmo    California    94979.0177          Tel: 415.459.4429   Fax: 415.459.4498 
 
KENN RABIN 
 
PRODUCTION CREDITS – SELECTED HIGHLIGHTS 
 
Archival Producer - Plan B/Paramount/Pathé, Selma. 2013-2014. 
Archival Producer/Consultant – Apple, Inc, various online films promoting educational software. 2013-present. 
Archival Supervisor - Apple Corps/OVOW Productions, Beatles Live!  2012-present. 
Production/Archival Consultant - 72 Productions, Inequality for All.  2012-2013. 
Production Consultant/Film Researcher - HTSAP LLC, How to Survive a Plague. 2011-2012. 
Producer, Writer, Archivist - Paradigm Productions, The Storm that Swept Mexico, 2008-2011.  
Archival Consultant - Kovno Communications, The Most Dangerous Man in America, 2010. 
Archival Consultant - Telling Pictures, Howl, 2008. 
Archival Film Researcher - Smoke House/Warner Bros., The Men Who Stare at Goats, 2008-2009. 
Archival Film Researcher - Groundswell/Focus Features, Milk, 2008.  
Archival Film Researcher - Bauer Martinez, I Could Never Be Your Woman, 2004-2006. 
Archival Film Researcher - Bauer Martinez, Land of the Blind, 2001-2006. 
Archival Film Researcher/Consultant - Warner Bros/Section Eight, The Good German, 2001-2006. 
Archival Scene Researcher - Warner Bros/Section Eight, Good Night, and Good Luck, 2002-2005. 
Film Researcher - Interfaze Productions, Daughter From Danang. 1999-2002. 
Researcher/Consultant - Tell the Truth Pictures, Mighty Times: The Legacy of Rosa Parks. 2001. 
Archival Consultant - New Images Productions, Ralph Ellison: An American Journey. 1999-2002. 
Associate Producer/Writer - Touchstone Television/Barry Levinson, Yesterday’s Tomorrows.  1998-1999. 
Series Archival Consultant - Touchstone Television, The 20th Century: A Moving History.  1998-1999. 
Archival Consultant - Telling pictures, Paragraph 175.  1999. 
Archival Consultant/Archival Researcher - Sonneborn Productions, Regret to Inform.  1998-1999. 
Archival Consultant - American Film Foundation, Return With Honor.  1998. 
Production Consultant - Paradigm Productions, Fight in the Fields. 1995-1997. 
Archival Consultant - HBO Films, Truman. 1995. (uncredited) 
Archival Consultant - Trans Pacific Television, Cadillac Desert. 1995-1996. 
Production Consultant/Researcher - ABC News, and NHK, The 20th Century Project. 1993-1999. 
Archival Consultant - HBO Films/John Frankenheimer, Up Against the Wall. 1994.  
Production Consultant - Cronkite/Ward Productions, Walter Cronkite Remembers.  1993-1995. 
Production Consultant/Researcher - Clarity Film Productions, Freedom on My Mind.  1993-1994.  
Archival Manager - Tig/Pathways Productions, 500 Nations. 1993. (uncredited) 
Film Researcher - Marlon T. Riggs Films, Color Adjustment. 1989-1993. (Emmy nomination) 
Writer/Consultant - The Rockefeller Foundation/National Video Resources, 1991-1995. 
Writer/Director of Film Research - Blackside, Inc., NEH funding proposals, America’s War  
  on Poverty, and The Great Depression. 1991-1993. 
Film Researcher - Columbia Pictures/Sean Penn, The Indian Runner. 1991. (credited Special Thanks) 
Production/Archives Consultant, Researcher - Varied Directions, Inc., Making Sense  
  of the Sixties. 1991. 
Archival Consultant - WGBH Educational Foundation. Various projects including: War and Peace  
  in the Nuclear Age, American Experience, American Masters, Frontline, specials, etc. 
Film Researcher/Consultant - WQED-TV, W. Eugene Smith: Photography Made Difficult. 1989. 
Archivist, Film Research Coordinator - Blackside, Inc., Eyes on the Prize: America’s Civil Rights 
  Years and Eyes on the Prize II: America at the Crossroads. 1985-1989. (Emmy nomination) 
Archivist, Film Research Coordinator - WGBH, Educational Foundation, Frontline: Crisis in Central  
  America. 1984-1985. 
Archivist, Film Research Coordinator - WGBH, Educational Foundation, Vietnam: A Television 
   History. 1980-1983. 
Production Associate/Assistant Publicist - WNET/Thirteen, Bill Moyers’ Journal. 1979-1980. 
Production Associate - The Lathe of Heaven, WNET/13. 1978-1979. 
                                                                                                                                                                          -- more -- 
[PAGE 56]
 
 
TEACHING/LECTURING EXPERIENCE 
 
Workshop Presenter/Panelist - EBS International Documentary Film Festival, Seoul, Korea, 2012. 
Workshop Presenter - Independent Television Service (ITVS), 2012. 
Workshop Presenter/Panelist - Broadcast Educators’ Association, 2008-2011. 
Visiting Lecturer - Northwestern University, Graduate Film Program. 2008. 
Visiting Lecturer - Columbia College, Film Program. 2008. 
Visiting Lecturer - San Francisco State University, Graduate Film Department.  1999-2005. 
Visiting Lecturer - University of California at Berkeley, Graduate Journalism School.  1999-present. 
Visiting Lecturer - Stanford University, Graduate Film Program. 1994-2005. 
Adjunct Faculty - Sonoma State University, Hutchins School for Liberal Studies. 1996-2003. 
Visiting Lecturer - Sonoma State University, Hutchins School, “The Human Enigma.” 1995-1998. 
Workshop Presenter - Miami Film Festival. 1995. 
Visiting Lecturer - Sonoma State University, History Department. 1995. 
Visiting Lecturer - Northeastern University, History Department. 1991-1993. 
Instructor - Film Arts Foundation, San Francisco, CA. 1994-present. 
Instructor - Boston Film/Video Foundation. 1983-1994.  
Instructor - Maine International Film & Television Workshops. 1992.    
Presenter - Woodrow Wilson Center for Scholars, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC  
  Paper: “Media Coverage of Black Americans.” 1988. 
Teaching Assistant - State University of NY at Albany, School of Continuing Education. 1974. 
Teaching Assistant - State University of NY at Albany, English Department. 1972-1974. 
Teaching Assistant - State University of NY at Albany, Art History Department. 1970-1974. 
 
SELECTED PUBLICATIONS, INTERVIEWS & MISC. 
 
Panelist, National Endowment for the Humanities, “Bridging Cultures” grants, 2013. 
Juror, San Francisco International Jewish Film Festival, 2011. 
Panelist, National Endowment for the Humanities, “America’s Media Makers” grants, 2010. 
Book, Archival Storytelling: A Filmmaker’s Guide to Finding, Using, and Licensing Third-Party Visuals and Music,  
2008, Focal Press/Elsevier 
Article, “Ethical Use of Archival Visuals: Memories of Vietnam: A Television History,”  
Stills, Audio, Motion (UK), 2008. 
Winner, FOCAL International, Best Use of Archival in a Feature Film, for Good Night, and Good Luck. 2006.  
Sidebar Article, “Fair Use: A Statement of Best Practices,” in Release Print, January/February, 2006. 
Interviewed for Documentary Storytelling for Film and Videomakers, Sheila Curran Bernard, Focal Press 2004. 
Feature Interview, “Overheard,” in the Pacific Sun, October 31, 2001. 
Chapter, “Licensing Footage: A Researcher’s Perspective,” in The Administration of Television Newsfilm 
and Videotape Collections: A Curatorial Manual, Davidson & Lukow, eds., AFI, 1997. 
Article, “Not Worth the Gamble: 10 Misconceptions about Archival Rights & Clearances,”  
in The Independent Film & Video Monthly, May 1997. 
Article, “Changes in New York Film Archives,” in Focal International, Issue #13, Autumn 1994,  
(reprinted in Moving Image Review, Summer 1994). 
Subject of NVR Reports (newsletter of National Video Resources, Rockefeller Foundation),  
Issue #8, February 1992. 
Interviewed for “The Archives Gets Strict,” in The Washington Post, January 27, 1992. 
Interviewed for “Black Filmmakers Re-trace the Civil Rights Struggle,” in  
The New York Times, Sunday January 26, 1986. 
Feature Interview, “Looking Back on War,” in Visions, December 1983. 
Interviewed for “Preserving the Best of Today’s Programming For Tomorrow’s Viewers,” in  
The New York Times, Sunday October 2, 1983. 
 
 
PLEASE ALSO SEE: WWW.FULCRUMMEDIASERVICES.COM AND WWW.IMDB.COM/NAME/NM0704899/ FOR ADDITIONAL CREDITS AND INFORMATION 
[PAGE 57]
A
ppendix E 
Letter from Gravitas Films 
[PAGE 58]
1000 West Arlington, Martinez, California 94553
February 2, 2015 
To the Register of Copyrights,
 
This letter is in support of the renewal of the fair use exemption to the Digital Millennium 
Copyright Act proposed by IDA and Kartemquin Films for filmmakers and for its modification 
to include other sources of media. We believe that this exemption is essential to the continued 
ability of independent documentary producers to effectively and openly tell stories about our 
culture, history and society. 
We are independent filmmakers who directed and produced These Amazing Shadows, a 
documentary about the power of the movies and the Library of Congress’ National Film 
Registry. Our film could not have been possible without the fair use exemption allowing us to 
legally access the media we used.  
Our story involved numerous classic American films that are in the Registry. It was imperative to 
the integrity of our production that we present those films in their original aspect ratio and in the 
highest quality possible. This goal was not only out of respect for the films themselves, but also 
so that our audience could fully appreciate the artistry and craft of these historically, culturally, 
and aesthetically significant motion pictures. Our efforts were successful as we were told time 
and again by our audiences. Viewers were thrilled, educated, and inspired by the visual quality of 
our production and the story we told. In a subtle way These Amazing Shadows is as much a story 
about the true spirit of fair use as it is about American film. 
It is a simple and demanding fact for any independent documentarian that we are held by the 
public and the marketplace to a high standard of quality. To live up to this standard we must 
always be allowed to pursue, in a respectful and responsible way, the best source for the media 
we access. These exemptions don’t encourage piracy of but rather a respect for film. 
As filmmakers we must always be ahead of the curve when it comes to the digital revolution. 
The way we view media is changing rapidly. The home theater experience is being pushed 
toward the very high quality 4K format. Theaters across the country have converted to digital 
projection. Our personal digital devices provide incredible resolution in a very small package. 
What looked good enough as recently as six years ago is simply not good enough today. 
What this means is that independent filmmakers must keep up with this revolution in visual 
quality in order to stay relevant to the public. So that we, as independent voices, can continue to 
tell stories that illuminate, educate, and inspire. The proposed exemption will allow us to do that. 
Sincerely, 
Paul Mariano Kurt Norton 
[PAGE 59]
Appendix F 
Letter from Michael Mailer 
[PAGE 60]

[PAGE 61]
Appendix G 
Letter from Pablo Cruz 
[PAGE 62]
CANANA 
1639 11TH ST, SUITE 180 
SANTA MONICA, CA 90404 
T: 310-392-3031 
E: Pablo@canana.net 
My name 
is Pablo Cruz, and I was a producer on the narrative film "Cesar 
Chavez" starring Michael Pena and directed by Diego Luna.  The film told 
the story of Cesar Chavez's amaz ing leadership in organizing migrant farm 
workers in California. It was a long struggle.  We intercut original footage 
we shot with the actors with ex tensive footage from the actual historical 
events.  This added a realism and authenticity to the film that could not 
have been achieved any other way.  The credibility of the film and the point 
of view in the storytelling were strongly reinforced by the use of the 
historical footage.  Often the procedures we used implicated the 
restrictions set out in the Digital Millennium Copyright Act.  We are very 
hopeful that the Copyright Office sees fit to include narrative films in the 
exemption to the DMCA that would allow narrative filmmakers to access 
DVDs, Blu-ray and other material in or der to gain access to material to be 
used pursuant to fair use. 
Best,  
Pablo Cruz 
Partner at Canana 
[PAGE 63]
Appendix H 
Letter from Finite Films,  
Alex Calleros, Ryan McDuffie, Michael Tucker 
[PAGE 64]
	
 
We are narrative filmmakers living in Los Angeles, and are very interested in 
examining in our films how the media defines our values and dictates how we 
operate as a culture. We believe the lack of media literacy is one of the most 
concerning issues facing us today, especially as it pertains to young people being 
incessantly exposed to more media than ever before. These are issues that we are 
eager to examine and tell stories about in our films, but we’ve found that this is very 
difficult without the ability to use actual media from film and TV--specifically, without 
the ability to rip DVDs and Blu-Rays.
 
 
Narrative films allow an audience to embody the perspective of a character, 
and sink into the world in which the character exists. They allow storytellers to 
access an audience not just intellectually, but emotionally. This is why we feel it 
would be very effective to tell stories of characters who are being directly influenced 
by this image-culture that we live in: young men who are bombarded with images of 
hyper masculinity and violence, and young women who are constantly exposed to 
beauty commercials and male-centric Hollywood films that teach them their worth is 
based on their physical appearance. The problem is simple; without being able to 
use actual clips from TV shows and films, much of the potential impact would be lost.
 
 
If we were to create new, artificial content for a film to represent the media, 
and then juxtaposed the characters' media-influenced behavior with this artificial 
content, it would feel disingenuous. This false representation of the media would be 
easier to write off as exaggerated than actual footage from TV and film. Using actual 
footage would also allow the characters to live in the same world that we do, which 
would make their situations and conflicts resonate more deeply with the viewer. 
 
 
We know that documentary films are allowed an exemption to use 
copyrighted materials protected by TPMs if they fall under fair use. We feel that the 
usage of those same materials would have exactly the same educational purpose 
and effect if the exemption for fair use was extended to narrative filmmaking. We 
would also like to stress that it would be important to use high-quality sources for 
these clips in order to have the production value required to be admitted into film 
festivals and other important outlets where these stories should be shared. Blu-ray 
quality would be the minimum that we would feel comfortable with, since most, if not 
all, film festivals now project their films in at least 1080p resolution (standard Blu-ray 
resolution). Therefore, we fully support the petition to create a fair use exemption to 
1201(a) for narrative filmmakers.
 
	
	
	
	
Ryan McDuffie Michael Tucker Alex Calleros 
[PAGE 65]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix I 
Filmmaker Testimony 
[PAGE 66]
APPENDIX I:  FILMMAKER TESTIMONY 
The following statements of filmmakers were provided to staff of the International Documentary 
Association or counsel for the Commenters. Several of the interviewees requested to remain 
anonymous.     
 
1. Joel Schroeder:  
In the past, more specifically, for a film I directed and produced in 2013 (Dear Mr. 
Waterson), I needed to show very brief clips of TV shows that were referenced in the 
film.  The narration talked about how “Calvin + Hobbes” was referenced in pop culture.  
So we ripped DVDs to find the relevant parts of episodes from Family Guy, Portlandia, 
Robot Chicken, and The Big Bang Theory.   
 
The alternatives to ripping are very inconvenient and inefficient.  Copyright holders are 
not set up to provide the content, and in many cases don't want you to use the content, if 
it is something critical of them.  Docs in the rough cut stage know they want to use clips 
to demonstrate a point, and will need to test out tons of clips until they find the right one.  
Without the exemption, I would not have been able to include crucial content to make 
points that I wanted to make in Waterson.  Quality control is a big deal with distributors, 
and it is daunting to deal with to be able to provide deliverables.  When broadcasters see 
something in a deliverable that is not good enough to meet their standards, they flag it.  
We had some less than optimal clips ripped from DVDs at 640 x 480 px and we had to 
up-res it (basically stretch it) to meet the 1920 x 1080 px standards. This was very 
difficult, expensive, and time-consuming. If I could have ripped the same content from a 
BluRay, it would have already been in the proper format.  In order to be able to deliver to 
Discovery and CBS, the standard has to be at least a master of 1080p or 29.9 FPS.  Sound 
quality cannot over-modulate.  Picture requires whites not to be too bright and blacks not 
to be too dark.  All of this means that if we cannot rip from Blu-ray, too much content 
will be too expensive for us.. 
 
2. Anonymous Filmmaker 1: 
   
On a film that I am making, we had to rip from DVDs. In my film, an interviewee talks 
about how space exploration was originally influenced by SciFi movies from the 50s and 
60s.  Using clips to illustrate this connection is instrumental to the interview.  Thus, I 
showed a clip from a famous SciFi film from the 1960s that featured a space craft flying.  
I overlaid the footage of the interviewee and included text that referenced the film. 
 
Also in my film, there is an interview with people talking about the commercialization of 
space exploration.  One interviewee mentioned a scene from a film from the 1950s.  The 
film is essentially about a corporation sending people to space.  To illustrate this, I 
 1 
[PAGE 67]
obtained from the DVD a clip featuring someone saying that the government would never 
send people to space, and that it is up to corporations to invest in it.  
 
Another example is a clip from Star Trek (1966) where one of the crew members is 
speaking about the early days of space exploration, this ties into the story of the 
documentary because it is a fictional look at future space efforts looking back to the past, 
using this clip and then transitioning to people talking about the same thing today makes 
this relevant to the story. This footage was ripped from a DVD. 
 
Additionally, one of the interviewees talks about how the United States and the Soviet 
Union were like the Tortoise and the Hare, so I used footage from Looney Tunes to 
illustrate this comparison, specifically the episode of Bugs Bunny as the hare, racing the 
Tortoise. This was from a DVD. 
 
Part of my film talks about how President Nixon cut funding from certain programs.  I 
found news footage clips from the 1960s to the 1970s at Vanderbilt’s News Archive and 
Nixon’s Presidential Library.  I used this footage to add commentary and further context 
to the segment. 
 
Most consumer DVDs are encrypted these days.  You have to go around this encryption 
to get the footage.  There are no other ways besides going to the studios for the footage. 
That option is too expensive to be viable for most documentary film making.  When an 
audience looks at archival footage, you won’t be able to get the point across if it is low 
resolution because they cannot see the detail.  Broadcasters such as PBS and BBC will 
not let you get away with low resolution.  If it is grainy, they will not air it.  They actually 
make you remove the clip. 
 
Today, DVDs are widely regarded as an old format (much like VHS used to be).  It is 
also a very compressed format.  Stretching the footage to meet the pixel ratio of the rest 
of the film severely degrades the footage’s quality.  If you don’t stretch it, then you will 
have a tiny square in the middle of a huge screen.  Imagine taking your picture off of 
your driver’s license and placing it in the middle of a black movie poster.  That is what 
your DVD footage will look like. By giving us access to Blu-Ray footage, we are able to 
stay truer to the source material by not having to distort it via stretching.  This pays 
proper respect to the artist of the original footage.  4K movies are no longer the future.  
They are now.  All feature films are shot at 4K or higher resolution, and many 
documentaries are shot and mastered in 4K. To understand how this affects the 
exemption, let’s return to the driver’s license analogy.  This time, instead of placing the 
driver’s license on a black movie poster, imagine it in the middle of a black billboard.  
That is what a DVD’s footage is like compared to 4K.   
 
Cameras recording the TV cannot be done.  It is just not an option.  Cameras are not able 
to record digitally projected images off a screen to the quality needed for professional 
film work. Additionally, the sound has to be directly ripped from the discs or source 
 2 
[PAGE 68]
content, as recording the speakers will create feedback effects and other unwanted sounds 
that are not suitable for professional work. 
 
3. Anonymous Filmmaker 2: 
Everything made now is in HD, not SD.  Archival footage may only be available in low 
resolution formats and remastered on BluRay.  More and more content is appearing in 
HD, and there is heavy pressure for us filmmakers to deliver HD.  Think of it like 
shopping for clothes.  You go to a store.  You try on clothes.  Then, if you like it, you 
purchase it.  It should be the same thing with footage.  Yes, we can sometimes get the 
content without circumventing software protections, but it is extremely inefficient.  It is 
time consuming and costs money, and it most of the time yields no gain.  For example, I 
had some footage of a Gospel singer, Houston.  After her publicized death, a lot of people 
contacted me for my footage of her.  There are clerical fees just to handle the calls.  Then, 
I have to find the footage, prepare it, digitize it, avoid conflicting with others' copyrights, 
add a time code burn in, and deliver it.  This is very time consuming, and if none of them 
end up wanting it, then I did it all for nothing.  It is in the best interest of everyone to cut 
out the useless clerical work, get it from the DVD or BluRay or wherever, and calm the 
fears of the FBI busting in and arresting you, when you are often going to pay for the 
content, if you like it.  A lot of the time, we deal with inquiries that aren't entirely serious, 
and we have to stop everything and do all of this just for the promise of a couple of 
hundred dollars.  It simply isn't worth our time.  It would be more efficient to let them rip 
it, and then if they like it, they can make fair use or send a check to use it.  
 
The exception for documentary filmmakers has been wonderful!  We don't have to feel 
like criminals, when we are just doing our job.  I currently am working on an unreleased 
project that has clips from DVD.  Being able to access DVD is great!  DVDs are all 
digital and can easily be turned into a file for editing.  It amazes me that this law targets 
filmmakers.  We are the least likely class to abuse another's copyright because we all 
have our own copyrights, deal with our own piracy concerns, and appreciate the work 
that goes into making the content. Smaller festivals these days prefer BluRay for 
projection.  It is HD, and it is extremely low cost.  Also, the qualities are comparable.  
BluRays, I believe, are also universal.  DVDs are formatted per region (unless it is an all-
region DVD), and using a foreign DVD can require a lot of work to get the content.  
BluRays largely don't have these issues.  Distributors such as PBS require you provide a 
broadcast master in HD.  This means either expensive HD cam tapes or BluRay.   
 
 
 3 
[PAGE 69]
4. Joseph Stillman: 
A Life of Principle... The Ramsey Clark Story is a documentary I created.  
I have been making films for 44 years.  My current film is about a fascinating man, 
former U.S. Attorney General Ramsey Clark.  During his tenure, he was responsible for 
many advances in civil rights and justice and made many speeches.  I would like to be 
able to use some of those speeches, many of which are on YouTube and on DVDs.  Many 
people have been sending me links to online content that would be ideal for my project.  
There is a compilation film (DVD) that has content that I want, and the owner of the film 
gave me permission to use it, but I cannot find the original source.  I have the name of the 
source, contacted him but that person won't contact me back.  I have considered flying to 
L.A. to find him since the clip is so important to this project.  Ramsey Clark is 
responsible for the safety of James Meredith and for the safety of the marchers from 
Selma to Montgomery.  He was responsible for the federal stay on executions until the 
Timothy McVeigh/Oklahoma City bombings incident.  The clip I want is of a speech that 
is the "quintessential element" of my film and where Ramsey talks about the military 
industrial complex and American plutocracy.   I have licensed many materials in my 
career.  The DMCA affects me massively.  It would be iffy whether I could still make 
this Clark project without exemptions.  The broadcaster I am working with, PBS, has told 
me that they want more clips of Ramsey himself.  Without a DMCA exemption, I would 
be prevented from using clips of Ramsey during the last fifty years.   
 
From Mills River to Babylon and Back... The Jimmy Massey Story is an anti- War Film.  
PBS also said I must deliver my previous in HD. They wouldn't accept SD.  The industry 
is changing its resolution standards.  I have even been looking into 4k production.  The 
film was an anti-Iraq war documentary.  It followed a career marine who killed innocent 
civilians.  I am against pirating.  Being able to break even on this film was affected 
because so many people copied it and gave it away for free.  But the DMCA exemption 
these organizations are requesting wouldn’t affect this issue at all. 
 
5. David Zeiger:  
I am working on a picture about the student movement in the 1960s. One of the big issues 
in the film is how the media depicted the movement. This requires commentary of all 
aspects of media, including film and television shows. The footage is most likely not 
available in its original format anymore. It is however available online and on DVD.  
  
In my film, Sir! No Sir!, I used clips from the 1970s and 1980s under fair use. Had I gone 
to the original source for those clips, I would not have gotten the material. I've have 
noticed that increasingly, for streaming distributors such as Netflix, resolution quality is a 
consideration. Normally, things have to be in high resolution. 
 
 4 
[PAGE 70]
6. Bill Lichtenstein: 
I am currently producing a film, The American Revolution, which we anticipate may 
utilize fair use as part of the rights clearance process and has already received significant 
press as a result.  The film is about a radio station and features a collection archival 
footage.  In order to decide what material we want to include in the final film, it has been 
in cases necessary to be able to access DMCA protected content as part of the editing 
process, as there have been DVDs we wanted to look at that were content protected.  We 
need to be able to access the video material and to work with it in the edit room in order 
to determine if and how we want to include it in the final film.  It is not enough for a 
filmmaker to simply view the footage and make a determination.  It has to be used as part 
the editing process.   The exemption is important because in some cases we are unable to 
find the content from any source other than protected DVDs. 
 
 
7. Anonymous Filmmaker 3:  
I was shooting something where the subject was Dean Martin's accompanist and I needed 
a shot from the Dean Martin Show.  I would have never been able to afford the clip, but it 
was online. I looked everywhere to find ownership as well, to no avail. It was only 8 
seconds.  
 
One feature I did during the change from SD to HD that contained a collage of footage of 
differing resolutions.  The film festival (Woods Hole Festival) told me that the footage 
wasn't clear enough, and that among other possible reasons were reason enough to not 
accept my film. 
 
 
8. Daniel McCabe:  
 
I produce documentaries for PBS.  I've used DVD or online material exclusively in that 
context with legal review of the applicability of 'fair use.' For example, I did a recent 
documentary for PBS about walking robots in which I used a clip from a well-known 
science fiction film.  The clip came from a DVD. Within the constraints of the production 
there was probably no other viable way for me to get that content.  Brief excerpts such as 
these serve as an audio/video reference in an educational context to deepen the 
understanding of the work itself and larger ideas.  They in no way diminish the value of 
the original works; if anything they increase their value by placing them in the larger 
context of our society. If you look at PBS documentaries, you are bound to find several 
other examples of ‘fair use’ that would be impossible without an exemption to the 
DMCA.  If we cannot rip from DVDs/Blu Ray, there will be no way to get access to that 
material.  In addition, online media is clearly a large and growing part of our culture.  To 
comment on the media of today, you have to have access to online sources to be used 
within the context of ‘fair use.’ 
 
 
 5 
[PAGE 71]
9. Risé Sanders-Weir:  
 
Everything is moving toward software protected content.  For instance, I teach a class and 
the vast majority of my students said that they only watch streaming content.  Since these 
people will be the future of consumers, it is not likely that future content will be without 
software protections.  A lot of the time, it is not viable to get the content any other way 
because of this.  I also have learned from experience that if you ask for permission, the 
content holders use it as an acknowledgement that you don't believe the use is fair use.  I 
have been hurt by this because they either want you to pay a fee that you cannot afford or 
they fight your fair use claim.   
 
 
 
10. Laurie Ann Schag: 
 
In the last year I consulted on two films that used DVD and online material pulled from 
news and other programs.  We worked with a clearance consultant and our E&O attorney 
to determine what could be included under Fair Use exemptions and what needed to be 
licensed or replaced with other footage.  Both films dealt with controversial current topics 
and if we had gone to the original licensors they would have probably denied access. 
  
I am currently consulting on a project that deals with a controversial current topic and 
will need to make fair use of current news footage in high definition as well as archival 
footage.  We are finding that some of this footage is only available on BluRay or online.   
 
 
11. Amber Dawn:   
 
I might use DVD footage in the future.  My future project involves accessing news 
footage from the 1990s of a person who is no longer alive.  There is also a fake/parody 
Denny's commercial that portrays the chain negatively that I want to access. 
   
 
12. Anonymous Filmmaker 4: 
In the past I made a documentary about union workers striking against Northwest 
Airlines. Networks would have made it impossible to use the footage without fair use.  
The footage does not paint the network in the best light, and due to the footage's 
controversy, odds are I couldn't license it for any cost.  We ended up utilizing footage 
recorded on VCRs by union workers. This reduced the quality of that footage by a large 
amount, but we decided we needed it to show the impact of the story on the national 
dialogue.  This may have impacted our ability to distribute the program in the end. 
 
I have a future need for a project I am doing which involves a US story of forgiveness 
where a woman forgave the murderer of her son.  Networks would make it impossible to 
 6 
[PAGE 72]
use the footage without fair use, as the fees they charge independent producers are 
completely inaccessible to us.  Some footage is available on YouTube, and I would use it 
to show the impact of the story on the national dialogue.   
 
To me, this is a freedom of speech situation.  High resolution allows the viewer to best 
see the film, telling the best story.  When I produced a project for television, we wanted 
to use footage from the web.  However, due the resolution standards, we had to replace it.   
 
13. Danny Yourd: 
Being able to have an exemption would be great.  In my filmmaking, I have made fair use 
of a lot of news clips.  However, HD sources are very important, and online sources such 
as Youtube aren’t always available in HD.  Being able to use a DVR would greatly 
simply a lot of things for me.  It would make it easier to obtain some current news 
sources because I wouldn't have to scour YouTube and archives.  It would also lead to a 
much cleaner clearance log, making it easier to get E+O and distribution. 
 
14. Anonymous Filmmaker 5:  
For the documentary I am currently working on, it will be screened at festivals, on a big 
screen and in a theatre, and it won’t be easily visible on low resolution. I am also in the 
middle of talking to PBS and Discovery Health, and both of those broadcasters have 
higher resolution standards (HD). The film is about a rare disease, where I am using a 
using a clip from the television show House MD, and the clip is a close-up on Dr. House 
talking about the disease in highly technically detail. We need the HD for people to be 
able to understand what the clip is saying. We consciously chose to have a high visual 
quality film so it did not feel like a trashy medical show, we wanted a cinematic, 
theatrical feel. In order to get that feel, we purchased a very expensive camera for the 
shoots. We wanted the footage to be in super high resolution, we shot it in 2k. The 
contrast from that to a low quality resolution would ruin the film and be jolting to the 
viewers and it negates the quality and the value of the film. Bad quality would make the 
film not worth watching and would kill it economically. 
 
15. Erikka Yancy: 
I make documentaries for HBO and need them in broadcast quality. Also, I make films 
that are going into theatre, thus regular definition would ruin the experience. VHS 
footage is no good because it deteriorates overtime and we usually have a tough time to 
even get the VCR to work. It is much easier to get a DVD and just pull it from there. It is 
consistent that way. I really need HD also to make my point-the film is about 
immigration reform, and it is important for the audience to see how people cross the 
 7 
[PAGE 73]
border in a very specific way. The Youtube version was very bad quality because it was 
very pixelated from being reposted over and over.  
All of our distributors and broadcasters have high technical standards, such as HBO and 
NBC which we mainly work with. This is a huge reason why we need Blu-ray, it is the 
only place we could find broadcast quality. Youtube is usually not broadcast quality.  
 
16. Diane Carson:  
I'm working on a documentary on fair use. My documentary partner is Robert O. 
Johnson, Jr. and the documentary is Other People's Footage: Copyright vs. Fair Use.  So, 
as you can well imagine, we need examples of fair use from a variety of documentarians 
to make our point, and that's what we've needed to access. In order to receive good 
exposure for the documentary, we absolutely need a high quality sample. 
We've now completed almost two-dozen interviews and are just beginning editing of a 
longer version for which we'll need, again, DVD or Blu-ray clips. 
 
17. Rick Stevenson: 
I work for the Oxford Film Company, where I write, direct, and produce various feature 
films and television series.  
I would appreciate the Copyright Office correcting what I believe to be a mistake in the 
current rules. Much of fair use material is only available on DVD and specifically Blu-
Ray discs.  As a filmmaker, it is essential I get the highest quality material if I am meet 
modern technical standards set by publishers and broadcasters.  However, the DMCA's 
anti-circumvention law, incredibly, bars me from making fair use of important material 
from Blu-Ray discs.  Rather, the only legal option available is to copy the very same disc 
in substandard ways, which make little sense and risk causing my film to be rejected by 
publishers. As it currently stands, the DMCA prohibits our ability to engage in lawful, 
creative expression. I would deeply appreciate it if the Copyright Office would correct 
this oversight. 
 
18. Matt Latham:  
I am a filmmaker who primarily works in the narrative fiction form. I am interested in 
bringing in elements from the real world and real existing culture—for example, other 
movies and television shows—into my fictional world, as a means of adding an 
additional layer of commentary. In the instances where it would fall under fair use, it 
would be immensely helpful to be able to rip a high-quality copy of existing films from a 
DVD or Blu-Ray, that I can incorporate into my scenes. 
 8 
[PAGE 74]
For example, I would like to make a narrative film that satirizes the representation of 
women in cinema. The film would have a woman decide to treat men the way that 
women are treated in movies—as secondary, passive characters in her life's story. This 
would be done to a ridiculous degree. At the end of the film, I would like to have a 
montage of clips from movies with situations that were just as ridiculous, except that they 
were not thought of as ridiculous, because we are used to seeing men as active characters 
and women as passive characters, only there to be some combination of wallpaper and 
eye-candy, or sometimes as a mother figure. This would really only work if we could use 
clips from well-known movies that people have generally accepted without much thought 
as to how narrative media influences actual behavior. If we did not use clips from actual 
movies, the audience might think that my movie was blowing this issue out of proportion, 
that actual movies aren't that ridiculously sexist. Being able to have a montage of these 
scenes would make absolutely clear that my movie is highlighting an actual problem in 
representation of women in cinema. 
I am aware of an exemption for documentary filmmakers to be able to rip a clean copy of 
a DVD to use in their work, provided it falls under fair use. This is something that I 
would love to be able to do, but haven't pursued, for fear that it will violate copyright 
law. I feel that what I would like to do would be just as legitimate in terms of fair use as 
those documentaries, and would like to see this exemption extended to narrative 
filmmakers, as well. 
 
19. Nick Toti:  
As a filmmaker whose approach is heavily influenced by my academic experiences, the 
use of quoting and the ability to enter into dialogue with other movies is very important 
to my creative output. Fair use laws are a necessity for the sort of creatively engaged 
critical work that I do. In my work there often isn't a clear line between documentary and 
fiction. Referencing other movies is as important for my work as sampling previously 
recorded music is to hiphop. An exemption would make this process easier and make my 
extremely low budget work more widely available would mark a major step in the right 
direction. 
 9 
[PAGE 75]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix J 
Letter from Alex Podobas 
[PAGE 76]
1	
	
STATEMENT OF ALEX PODOBAS 
 
FEBRUARY 4, 2015 
 
Biography 
 
Alex M. Podobas is a senior information security analyst for the UCLA Information 
Security Office and Juris Doctor candidate at the University of California, Irvine School 
of Law. He specializes in analyzing web applications and networks for security 
vulnerabilities, developing applications to parse “Big Data” sets to analyze anomalous 
security events, and reviewing web applications, databases, and other cloud-related 
technologies for compliance with federal and state data privacy statutes. 
 
This statement presents his analysis alone and does not represent in any way the opinions 
of the University of California, Los Angeles or any other organization or person.  
 
  
 
Introduction 
 
The number of software tools and services specifically built to deliver media content 
online has risen as the Internet has increasingly become a distribution system for video 
streaming. The combination of technologies that combine high-performance data 
streaming with security are designed to empower content holders to distribute, but retain 
control, over their intellectual property. Encryption measures are routinely integrated into 
online distribution platforms to protect digital video files during storage and transmission.  
 
 
 
1. How online distribution systems work 
 
At a basic level, online video streaming involves four discrete steps:  
 
(1) A user (the “client”) visits a source that hosts video content. This may be a web 
application like Netflix, a software application like iTunes, or a webpage with 
embedded video content (such as a YouTube video); 
(2) The source sends a request to itself or, more typically, a media server that requests 
a specific media file; 
(3) The media server opens a connection directly with the client device or streams the 
file back through the requesting web server 
(4) The client’s device decodes and plays the file. The client is responsible for 
managing the playback quality and, if requested, decrypting video content from 
the server. Examples of the client’s device software include Apple’s QuickTime 
player or Google’s YouTube mobile application.  
 
[PAGE 77]
Statement of Alex Podobas 
  2 
The methods by which the video is streamed in step 3 can employ a wide variety of 
protocols. RTP (real-time transfer protocol), RTSP (real-time streaming protocol), or 
RTCP (real-time transport control protocol), or HTTP live-streaming protocol are 
common technical choices used to transfer video content for client playback. Encryption 
can potentially occur in two places: first, in “transit,” second, in “storage.” The former 
most typically refers to any network responsible transporting data between an end or 
intermediate source to the client. The latter pertains to where the data is held after it 
reaches the client and is occasionally referred to “data in rest.”1 
 
 
2. Encryption mechanisms used in online distribution systems vary across 
platform, device, browser, and provider. 
 
Developers and institutions have vast choice in selecting differing technical protocols to 
stream online video and in encrypting streamed content. Examples of several popular 
platforms are illustrated in this section. The diversity of options illustrates that online 
video distribution systems perform a similar task, but differ widely in technical 
implementation across operating system platforms and software applications used to 
facilitate video playback. 
 
 
2.1: iTunes 
 
Apple’s developer tools make HTTP streaming available for third-party applications on 
its iOS and iTunes platforms. This technology provides delivery of video content to a 
customer’s device and features media file encryption in both storage and transmission. 
 
First, each media file (in this case, videos) may be individually encrypted in storage. 
Playing an encrypted video file on the client-side device (such as a customer’s Apple 
iPad tablet) is completed by accessing decryption keys. Apple’s API provides three 
methods for developers to decrypt protected content: 1) a static key; 2) a randomly 
generated key for the entire file; or 3) a randomly generated key for segments of the 
video file. 
 
Second, Apple employs industry-standard protections to encrypt content in transmission 
over HTTPS. Each client-side device connects to the upstream video provider over a 
connection protected by SSL (secure socket layer) that implements an AES 128-bit 
encrypted file using 16-octet keys. This prevents streamed content from being intercepted 
with “Man-In-The-Middle” attacks because the client connects to a server it trusts, with 
the server identified by a trusted SSL certificate. 
 
2.2: HTML5 video and MediaSource Extensions 
 
The HTML Working Group (a collaboration of major technology companies seeking to 
define standards for web-based technologies) supports HTML5 as the standard for online 
																																																							 	
1	https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Cryptographic_Storage_Cheat_Sheet	
[PAGE 78]
Statement of Alex Podobas 
  3 
video playback. HTML5 is a standard for embedding video onto web pages or client 
applications using the <video> tag. It finds support in Internet Explorer 9.0+, Firefox 
3.5+, Safari 3.0+, Chrome 3.0+, Opera 10.5+, iPhone 1.0+, and Android 2.0+.  	HTML5 
does have encryption capabilities, but the standard is still being developed by the World 
Wide Web Consortium (W3C).2   
 
2.3: Netflix and HTML5 Video 
 
In 2013, Netflix announced that the company’s technical mechanism to securely stream 
video content, Microsoft Silverlight, would be replaced by a newer solution in light of 
Microsoft’s decision to end-of-life the Silverlight software in 2015. In the future, Netflix 
will employ HTML5 streaming video for playback to replace Silverlight for all use cases. 
As of January 31st, 2015, Netflix still offers video streaming with either Silverlight or 
HTML 5 video. 
 
In conjunction with its migration to HTML5, Netflix announced a new encryption 
technology named “Message Secure Layer” (hereafter “MSL”) in October, 2014. Netflix 
makes the MSL source code freely available on GitHub under an Apache 2.0 license. As 
of January 31, 2015, the MSL project and source code are both hosted at: 
https://github.com/Netflix/msl. MSL seeks to protect streaming content from fundamental 
security issues associated with the SSL/TLS protocols discovered within the past 5 years 
as well as to provide faster performance and content delivery.  
 
MSL is a security architecture developed by Netflix and used by the company to encrypt 
its digitally delivered videos to customers. It is not a distinct software application. 
Instead, different software applications (including Netflix) utilize MSL to permit 
different client devices (e.g. – Netflix on the Google Chrome web browser) to integrate 
with different authentication services (e.g. – a Netflix user account or DRM license) to 
encrypt the contents of delivered data (e.g. - Netflix streaming video). Therefore, MSL is 
best regarded as a messaging protocol that provides encryption protections that can be 
used to transport data between two or more communicating entities 
 
MSL was developed and is deployed by Netflix to implement the following, broad 
security objectives:
3 
 
 Integrity protection. Messages in transit are protected from tampering. 
 Encryption. Message data is protected from inspection 
 Authentication: Messages can be trusted to come from a specific device and user 
 Non-replayable. Messages containing non-idempotent data can be non-replayable. 
 
Communications secured by MSL (such as Netflix streaming video) utilize the JavaScript 
API named “Web Crypto” to for performing basic cryptographic operations in web 
applications, such as hashing, signature generation and verification, and encryption and 
																																																							 	
2	http://arstechnica.com/business/2013/05/drm-in-html5-is-a-victory-for-the-open-web-not-a-defeat/	
3	http://techblog.netflix.com/2014/10/message‐security‐layer‐modern‐take‐on.html	
[PAGE 79]
Statement of Alex Podobas 
  4 
decryption. 
 
A typical MSL message consists of a header and one or more application 
payload chunks. Each chunk is individually protected which allows the 
sender and recipient to process application data as it is transmitted. A 
message stream may remain open indefinitely, allowing large time gaps 
between chunks if desired. Each MSL message is associated with an entity 
(One of the participants in a MSL communication). Cryptographic keys 
associated with the entity are used to authenticate the entity and integrity 
protect the message.   Data, whether confidential or not, is typically 
encrypted during transport using cryptographic keys associated with the 
entity, but non-confidential data may also be transmitted without 
encryption. Messages are optionally associated with a user by including 
data that can be used to authenticate the user. Messages are optionally 
protected against replay through the use of a non-replayable ID 
synchronized between the communicating entities.”
4  
 
 
 
3. Encryption mechanisms in online distribution systems are constantly changing. 
 
In recent years, online video distributors have been implementing a categorical shift from 
Adobe’s Flash Player to HTML5-based video. Driven in part by widespread support for 
common web standards between different software platforms, cloud-based architectures, 
web browsers, and other client applications, the shift to support and prefer HTML5 video 
illustrates how fundamental shifts can be rapidly achieved for consumers. Furthermore, 
some technology companies have developed their own, in-house solutions for more 
discrete control over security and performance in digital content distribution. Netflix was 
built upon online video streaming, and elected to create the MSL architecture and 
cryptographic library for its own purposes. YouTube abruptly announced on January 27
th, 
2015 that HTML5 video and support for MediaSource Extensions will be its default 
video choice.5 These innovations exemplify a continuous uncertainty as to which 
technical protocols will be used or even available from year to year. 
 
Online distribution systems for video are varied in the choice of technology related to 
streaming and content protection protocols. However, the examples above illustrate 
common implementations that individually represent the same goal of online video 
delivery.  
 
 
 
																																																							 	
4	https://github.com/Netflix/msl/wiki	
5	http://youtube-eng.blogspot.jp/2015/01/youtube-now-defaults-to-html5_27.html	
[PAGE 80]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix K 
Exclusive Blu-rays and Extra Contents 
 
[PAGE 81]
Exclusive Blu-rays and Extra Contents 
Below is a list of films only available on Blu-ray and descriptions of extra contents exclusive to 
Blu-ray (e.g., director’s commentary, interviews, blogs, deleted scenes, and behind-the-scenes 
footage). The list is not exhaustive, but illustrative of the amount of extra content available on 
Blu-ray compared to DVD. 
Title Year Exclusive Content Description (if available) 
Beat the Devil 2008 Only available on Blu-ray 
 
(http://www.blu-ray.com/movies/movies.php?studioid=64) 
Eye on Extreme 
Monster Trucks 
 Only available on Blu-ray 
 
(http://www.blu-ray.com/movies/movies.php?studioid=64) 
Eye on Extreme 
Professional Bull 
Riding 
2008 Only available on Blu-ray 
 
(http://www.blu-ray.com/movies/movies.php?studioid=64) 
Jack & The 
Beanstalk 
2008 Only available on Blu-ray 
 
(http://www.blu-ray.com/movies/movies.php?studioid=64) 
Marvel'S Guardians 
Of The Galaxy  
2014 Audio commentary, visual effects, deleted and extended 
scenes, exclusive trailer, gag reel, and documentary. 
 
(http://www.blu-ray.com/movies/Guardians-of-the-Galaxy-
3D-Blu-ray/79118/) 
Terminator 
Anthology  
2013 Visual effects and music, audio commentary, deleted scenes, 
trailers, downloadable content through BD-Live (Blu-ray 
online feature). 
 
(http://www.blu-ray.com/movies/The-Terminator-Anthology-
Blu-ray/51917/) 
The Resident Evil 
Collection 
2012 Alternate ending, behind the scenes footage, deleted scenes, 
filmmaker and cast commentaries, music video, outtakes, and 
zombie special effects make-up. 
 
(http://www.bestbuy.com/site/resident-evil-blu-ray-disc-5-
disc-boxed-set/7025116.p?id=2625859&skuId=7025116) 
Harry Potter 
Hogwarts Collection 
2014 Deleted scenes, making of Harry Potter documentary, 
extended scenes, and interviews. 
 
(http://www.blu-ray.com/movies/Harry-Potter-Hogwarts-
Collection-Blu-ray/92712/) 
Bond 50: The 
Complete 23 Film 
Collection with 
Skyfall 
2013 The World of Bond montage; Being Bond, analysis of actors 
who played James Bond, Videoblogs 
 
(http://www.blu-ray.com/movies/Bond-50-Blu-ray/81677/) 
[PAGE 82]
1 
 
Fight Club 10th 
Anniversary Edition 
2009 Audio commentaries, interactive search function, scene audio 
remix, footage of Mel Gibson, behind the scenes, deleted and 
alternate scenes, publicity material, and art gallery. 
 
(http://www.blu-ray.com/movies/Fight-Club-Blu-ray/5587/) 
Gone with the Wind 
70th Anniversary 
Collector’s Edition  
2009 Audio commentary, documentaries, featurettes, vintage 
footage, a book, and soundtrack CD. 
 
(http://www.blu-ray.com/movies/Gone-with-the-Wind-Blu-
ray/758/) 
Zodiac Director’s 
Cut  
2014 Director and actor commentaries, documentary on the history 
of the production, visual effects, computer-generated three 
scenes, and trailers. 
 
(http://www.blu-ray.com/movies/Zodiac-Blu-ray/458/) 
Blade Runner 5-Disc 
Complete Collector’s 
Edition 
2007 Audio commentaries, documentaries, deleted scenes, alternate 
scenes, vintage featurettes, theatrical trailers, and screen tests. 
 
(http://www.blu-ray.com/movies/Blade-Runner-Blu-ray/545/) 
Sleeping Beauty 50th 
Anniversary 
Platinum Edition 
2014 Audio commentary, song selection, interviews, music video, 
games and activities, alternate opening, deleted songs, art 
galleries, cut material, and promotional goodies. 
 
(http://www.blu-ray.com/movies/Sleeping-Beauty-Blu-
ray/555/) 
Frozen, Collector’s 
Edition 
 2014 Documentary of the film’s history and eventual production, 
behind the scenes, deleted scenes, music videos, animated 
short, and original teaser trailer. 
 
(http://www.blu-ray.com/movies/Frozen-Blu-ray/56784/) 
The Wizard of Oz 
70th Anniversary 
Collector’s Edition  
2009 Audio commentary, documentaries, deleted scenes, original 
song recordings, still galleries, actor biographies, storybook, 
4K digital restoration sample, various music tracks in different 
formats, radio show, radio promo, and trailers. 
 
(http://www.blu-ray.com/movies/The-Wizard-of-Oz-Blu-
ray/6366/) 
*Any Pixar Title Varies Documentaries, featurettes, short films, and interactive 
content. 
 
(http://www.soundandvision.com/content/100-best-blu-ray-
discs-best-extras ) 
Sin City 2014 Behind the scenes, interviews with actors and director, 15-
minute film school education, and hyper-screen version of the 
movie in green. 
 
[PAGE 83]
2 
 
(http://www.soundandvision.com/content/100-best-blu-ray-
discs-best-extras) 
Star Trek: The 
Compendium 
2014 Gag reels, behind the scenes, the cast and crew interviews, 
trailers, prank scenes, audio commentaries, and documentaries. 
 
(http://www.blu-ray.com/movies/Star-Trek-The-Compendium-
Blu-ray/107044/) 
 
* This list is not exhaustive. Major retailers like Target, Best Buy, Walmart, and Amazon each 
have some exclusive distribution rights for new Blu-ray releases. 
  
[PAGE 84]
3 
 
Exclusive Digitally Transmitted Videos 
Below is a list of original network programs currently only available on digital cable and satellite 
television as of February 6, 2015. The list is not exhaustive but illustrative of diverse shows 
produced by major networks. Some shows that will be subsequently released on DVD and Blu-
ray are generally released four to six months after the season finale.
1  
 
Title Genre Network Year 
Released 
Content Source 
Game of Thrones Drama HBO 2011 http://www.hbo.com/#/game-of-
thrones 
True Detective Drama HBO 2014 http://www.hbo.com/true-
detective#/ 
The Leftovers Drama HBO 2014 http://www.hbo.com/the-
leftovers#/ 
The Comeback Comedy HBO 2014 http://www.hbo.com/the-
comeback#/ 
Girls Comedy HBO 2012 http://www.hbo.com/girls#/ 
Veep Comedy HBO 2013 http://www.hbo.com/veep#/ 
Getting On Comedy HBO 2013 http://www.hbo.com/getting-on#/ 
Looking Comedy HBO 2014 http://www.hbo.com/looking#/ 
Silicon Valley Comedy HBO 2014 http://www.hbo.com/silicon-
valley#/ 
Togetherness Comedy HBO 2015 http://www.hbo.com/togetherness
#/ 
Hard Knocks Sports 
Documentary 
HBO 2001 http://www.hbo.com/hard-
knocks#/ 
Real Time With Bill 
Maher 
Unscripted HBO 2003 http://www.hbo.com/real-time-
with-bill-maher#/ 
Last Week Tonight 
with John Oliver 
Unscripted HBO 2014 http://www.hbo.com/last-week-
tonight-with-john-oliver#/ 
Vice Unscripted HBO 2013 http://www.hbo.com/vice#/ 
HBO World 
Championship Boxing  
Unscripted HBO 1973 http://www.hbo.com/boxing#/ 
Real Sports with 
Bryant Gumbel 
Unscripted HBO 1995 http://www.hbo.com/real-sports-
with-bryant-gumbel#/ 
Boxing After Dark Unscripted HBO 1996 http://www.hbo.com/boxing#/ 
24/7 Unscripted HBO 2007 http://www.hbo.com/sports#/ 
Masterclass Unscripted HBO 2010 http://www.hbo.com/documentaries/maste
r-class#/ 
The Fight Game with 
Jim Lampley 
Unscripted HBO 2012 http://www.hbo.com/the-fight-
game-with-jim-lampley#/ 
     
1 E.g., Jen Chaney, An Ever-Shorter Leap From Theater to DVD, The Washington Post, (February 3, 2015), 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A26877-2005Mar11.html; e.g., http://www.blu-
ray.com/movies/releasedates.php. 
                                                 
[PAGE 85]
4 
 
Homeland Drama Showtime 2011 http://www.sho.com/sho/homelan
d/home 
Ray Donovan Drama Showtime 2013 http://www.sho.com/sho/ray-
donovan/home 
Masters of Sex Drama Showtime 2013 http://www.sho.com/sho/masters-
of-sex/home 
Penny Dreadful Drama Showtime 2014 http://www.sho.com/sho/penny-
dreadful/home 
The Affair Drama Showtime 2014 http://www.sho.com/sho/the-
affair/home 
Shameless Comedy Showtime 2011 http://www.sho.com/sho/shamele
ss/home 
Nurse Jackie Comedy Showtime 2009 http://www.sho.com/sho/nurse-
jackie/home 
Episodes Comedy Showtime 2011 http://www.sho.com/sho/episodes
/home 
Web Therapy Comedy Showtime 2011 http://www.sho.com/sho/web-
therapy/home 
House of Lies Comedy Showtime 2012 http://www.sho.com/sho/house-
of-lies/home 
The Green Room with 
Paul Provenza 
Talk Show Showtime 2010 http://www.sho.com/sho/the-
green-room-with-paul-
provenza/home 
Inside Comedy Talk Show Showtime 2012 http://www.sho.com/sho/inside-
comedy/home 
Showtime Boxing Sports Showtime 1986 http://www.sho.com/sho/sports/h
ome 
ShoBox: The New 
Generation 
Sports Showtime 2001 http://www.sho.com/sho/schedule
s/titles/134845/the-new-
generation#/index 
The Franchise Sports Showtime 2011 http://www.sho.com/sho/the-
franchise/home 
All Access Sports Showtime 2011 http://www.sho.com/sho/all-
access/home 
Jim Rome on 
Showtime 
Sports Showtime 2012 http://www.sho.com/sho/jim-
rome-on-showtime/home 
60 Minutes Sports Sports Showtime 2012 http://www.sho.com/sho/60-
minutes-sports/home 
Polyamory: Married 
& Dating 
Documentary Showtime 2012 http://www.sho.com/sho/polyamo
ry-married-and-dating/home 
Oliver Stone’s Untold 
History of the United 
States 
Documentary Showtime 2012 http://www.sho.com/sho/oliver-
stones-untold-history-of-the-
united-states/home 
Gigolos  Documentary Showtime 2011 http://www.sho.com/sho/gigolos/
home 
Time of Death  Documentary Showtime 2013 http://www.sho.com/sho/time-of-
death/home 
     
Da Vinci's Demons  Drama Starz 2013 http://www.starz.com/originals/da
vincisdemons 
Black Sails Drama Starz 2014 http://www.starz.com/originals/bl
acksails 
[PAGE 86]
5 
 
Power Drama Starz 2014 http://www.starz.com/originals/po
wer 
Outlander Drama Starz 2014 http://www.starz.com/originals/ou
tlander 
The Missing  Drama Starz 2014 http://www.starz.com/originals/th
emissing 
Survivor's Remorse Comedy Starz 2014 http://www.starz.com/originals/su
rvivorsremorse 
Starz Inside  Unscripted Starz 2007 http://www.starz.com/titles/starzi
nsidecomicsonscreen/1666 
The Chair Unscripted Starz 2014 http://www.starz.com/originals/th
echair 
     
American Horror 
Story 
Drama FX 2011 http://www.fxnetworks.com/show
s/american-horror-story/about 
The Americans  Drama FX 2013 http://www.fxnetworks.com/show
s/the-americans/about 
Fargo  Drama FX 2014 http://www.fxnetworks.com/show
s/fargo/about 
Tyrant  Drama FX 2014 http://www.fxnetworks.com/show
s/tyrant/about 
The Strain Drama FX 2014 http://www.fxnetworks.com/show
s/the-strain/about 
Louie Sitcom FX 2010 http://www.fxnetworks.com/show
s/louie/about 
Married Sitcom FX 2014 http://www.fxnetworks.com/show
s/married/about 
Archer Animation FX 2009 http://www.fxnetworks.com/show
s/archer/about 
     
Strike Back  
 
Drama Cinemax 2011 http://www.cinemax.com/strike-
back/ 
Banshee Drama Cinemax 2013 http://www.cinemax.com/banshee
/ 
Knick Drama Cinemax 2014 http://www.cinemax.com/the-
knick/ 
     
Mad Men Drama AMC 2007 http://www.amctv.com/shows/ma
d-men 
The Walking Dead  Drama AMC 2010 http://www.amctv.com/shows/the
-walking-dead 
Hell on Wheels  Drama AMC 2011 http://www.amctv.com/shows/hel
l-on-wheels 
TURИ: Washington's 
Spies  
Drama AMC 2014 http://www.amctv.com/shows/tur
n 
Halt and Catch Fire  Drama AMC 2014 http://www.amctv.com/shows/hal
t-and-catch-fire 
Talking Dead  Unscripted AMC 2011 http://www.amctv.com/shows/tal
king-dead 
Comic Book Men  Unscripted AMC 2012 http://www.amctv.com/shows/co
mic-book-men 
 
[PAGE 87]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix L 
Events to Inform Filmmakers About Fair Use 
[PAGE 88]
 
 
EVENTS TO INFORM FILMMAKERS ABOUT FAIR USE 
 
Various organizations and institutions have held panels, discussions, and lectures in 
order to inform filmmakers about fair use of copyrighted materials. 
 
 
1. 2015 - IFP Chicago - Event: Fair Use for Filmmakers with Michael 
Donaldson. http://www.ifpchicago.org/event/2015/2/10/ifpchicago-presents-fair-
use-for-filmmakers-with-michael-donaldson 
 
2. 2014 - CA Lawyers For The Arts - Fair Use in Filmmaking: Counseling 
Clients About Footage, Music or Art in Film Projects. Interactive presentation 
by CLA and UC Irvine School of Law professor Jack 
Lerner.  http://www.calawyersforthearts.org/event-1771902 
 
3. 2014 - IFP Chicago - Conference: Fair Use and Copyright for Filmmakers. 
Panel featuring Robert Labate, Holland & Knight; Gordon Quinn & Justine 
Nagan, Kartemquin Films.” http://www.ifpchicago.org/news/2014/9/21/2014-
conference-friday-panel-fair-use-copyright-for-filmmakers  
 
4. 2014 - SXSW - Panel: Stand Up To Content Bullies, Know Your Copy 
Rights. Panel featuring Spalding, McIntosh, and Karobonik.  
http://www.rebelliouspixels.com/2014/stand-up-to-content-bullies-panel-at-sxsw 
 
5. 2014 - IFP PRO - Panel: Freeze Frame: Clearing Rights in Documentary 
Films. Interactive demonstration by veteran art and entertainment attorney Walter 
Lehmann teams and award-winning documentary filmmaker Norah Shapiro. 
http://ifpmn.org/event/ifp-pro-presents-freeze-frame-clearing-rights-documentary-
films 
 
6. 2014 - CA Lawyers For The Arts - Fair Use in Filmmaking. Seminar by CLA 
and USC Law Professor Jack Lerner. http://www.calawyersforthearts.org/event-
804602 
 
7. 2014 - Producers Guild of America - Fair Use Workshop. Panel featuring 
litigation partner Tom J. Ferber and Of Counsel F. Robert Stein. 
http://www.pryorcashman.com/news-events-181.html 
 
8. 2014 - Maryland Film - Workshop: The Nuts & Bolts of Film Production in 
Maryland. Panel featuring Pierre Walcott and Talaya Grimes.  
http://www.eventbrite.com/e/nuts-bolts-of-film-production-in-maryland-a-
creative-edge-innovation-studio-workshop-registration-13539716657 
 
 1 
[PAGE 89]
9. 2014 - New Media Rights - Workshop: Fair Use and Copyright for 
Filmmakers and Video Creators. Workshop by attorney Art Neill of New 
Media Rights. 
http://www.newmediarights.org/event/copyright_fair_use_workshop_filmmakers
_and_video_creators_doculink_sponsored_event_los_angeles 
 
 
10. 2014 - New York Foundation for the Arts - Workshop: Transformers, Fair 
Use for Media Artists. Presentation by Thea Kerman, an attorney who 
specializes in intellectual property and entertainment law.” 
http://current.nyfa.org/post/99518913128/workshop-transformers-fair-use-for-
media-artists 
 
11. 2014 –International Documentary Association – Getting Real Conference – 
How Fair Use Changed the Documentary Form. Panel featuring Michael 
Donaldson, Patricia Aufderheide, and Gordon 
Quinn. http://gettingreal2014.com/sessions/how-fair-use-changed-documentary-
form/  
 
12. 2013 - TIFF - Conference: The Fight for Fair Use. Discussion by Lisa Calif on 
Fair Use. “https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FbjkQTyNVIo 
 
13. 2012 - Tribeca Film Institute - Event: Legal 101. Panel discussion with the 
Time Warner Foundation. http://vimeo.com/52937807 
 
14. 2012 - Santa Fe Independent Film Festival - Skype Workshop: Fair Use 
without Fear: How Filmmakers and Copyright Can Get Along. Discussion by 
guest speaker Professor Patricia Aufderheide from the School of Communication 
at American Univesity. 
http://santafeindependentfilmfestival.com/Detailed/377.html 
 
15. 2012 - BYOD - What is Fair Use in a Documentary Film? Guest lecture by 
entertainment lawyer Michael C. Donaldson on the key points surrounding Fair 
Use. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6uDr0LAMqws 
 
16. 2012 - IDA - Doc U: Understanding Fair Use. Attorney and author Michael 
Donaldson gives a brief history of copyright law and the impact of the DMCA. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-
wGS7CBlMOQ&list=PL4A07B1F4A0733569 
 
 
17. 2012 - SOCDOC - Fair Use and Rights & Clearance Panel. Panel featuring VP 
of Global ImageWorks Cathy Carapella, visual researcher Jim McDonnel, award 
winning documentary filmmaker Dana Perry, and intellectual property attorney 
Neil Rosini. http://mfasocdoc.sva.edu/blog/fair-use-and-rights-clearance-panel-at-
socdoc-last-week/ 
 2 
[PAGE 90]
 
18. 2012 - SXSW - WTFair Use?! An Interactive Fair Use Workshop. Panel 
featuring attorneys Michael C. Donaldson, Deena Kalai, and Robert Kleinman 
http://schedule.sxsw.com/2012/events/event_FP13896 
 
19. 2011 - Doc NYC - Panel: What’s Fair in Fair Use? 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q_sHxjEGx8Q 
 
20. 2011 - Sundance – ShortsLab. Guest lecture by Jonathan Gray, a senior partner 
at Gray Krauss Des Rochers, LLP. http://filmmakermagazine.com/27357-a-day-
at-the-sundance-shortslab/#.VNMbpGTF-Hw 
 
21. 2011 - Center For Media & Social Impact - Media That Matters Conference: 
Fair Use Workshop. Discussion led by Patricia Aufderheide and Peter Jaszi, 
with CSM Grad Fellow Katie Bieze.” http://www.cmsimpact.org/fair-
use/events/fair-use-workshop 
 
22. 2010 - New York Women in Film and Television - Playing Fair: An 
Interactive Panel on Fair Use Doctrine. Panel hosted by the Chubb Group of 
Insurance Companies, a leader in film package and errors and omissions 
insurance, and moderated by Octavia Taylor, an entertainment lawyer and 
member of the NYWIFT Board. http://www.nywift.org/article.aspx?id=2575 
 
23. 2010 - IFP - Podcast: Fair Use 101. Discussion led by Michael Donaldson of 
Donaldson and Hart.” http://www.ifp.org/resources/fair-use-101/#.VNMs4WTF-
Hw 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
[PAGE 91]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix M 
 Letter of Adam Folk  
[PAGE 92]
mail@belladonna.bz 9th floorFAX: 212-807-6263TEL. 212-807-0108 NEW york
BELLADONNA     PRODUCTIONS
N.Y . 10001 164 West 25th ST.
www .belladonna.bz
 
 
February 06, 2015   My name is Adam Folk, and I was a producer on the narrative film Welcome to New York starring Gerard Depardieu.  The film tells the story of a wealthy French man embroiled in a very public sex scandal in New York.  The film was inspired by a true story.  We intercut original footage we shot with the actors with footage of news coverage from an actual scandal.  This added a realism and authenticity to the film that could not have been achieved any other way.  The credibility of the film and the point of view in the storytelling were strongly reinforced by the use of the news footage.    The procedures we used implicated the restrictions set out in the Digital Millennium Copyright Act.  We are very hopeful that the Copyright Office sees fit to include narrative films in the exemption to the DMCA that would allow narrative filmmakers to access DVDs, Blu-ray and other material in order to gain access to material to be used pursuant to fair use.   Sincerely,     Adam Folk Producer, Welcome to New York 
