[PAGE 1]
Note: Please submit a separate comment for each proposed   class.
This is a Word document that allows users to type into the spaces below. The comment should be no more than one 
page in length (which may be single-spaced but should be in at least 12-point type). The italicized instructions on 
this template may be deleted. 
Short Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption
Under 17 U.S.C. 1201
Item 1. Commenter Information 
David Darling, iOS jailbreak developer. I can be reached at milodarling98@gmail.com.
Item 2. Proposed Class Addressed
Proposed Class 16: Jailbreaking—Wireless Telephone Handsets.
Item 3. Statement Regarding Proposed Exemption
Jailbreaking my iPhone has been an awesome hobby of mine for years. I have always found 
"jailed" iOS to be very restrictive, and jailbreaking has allowed me to add and change the things 
I want on my device. In fact, this hobby of mine has become profitable in the recent months, as I 
have become a developer for the Cydia store. I have met many members of the rich and awesome
jailbreak community, collaborated with numerous developers, and even joined a team of 
developers. I now plan on majoring in computer programming in college, and becoming a 
programmer as my career. Without jailbreaking, I never would have found this passion of mine.
Despite the fact that I could develop on a platform more open by nature, such as Android, I chose
iOS because I needed iOS for several reasons, such as to use iMessage and FaceTime with my 
family, and jailbreaking made it that much more awesome, and allowed me to develop on it. I 
also found the jailbreak community to have a very welcoming presence to new developers. There
are very well documented tutorials to get started with iOS jailbreak develop, plenty of people to 
chat with for tips and help, and lots of open source tweaks (jailbreak software) which helped me 
learn how to do things. I have worked with numerous people on various projects, and am now on
a development team with some really cool people, and we can work on projects, help each other, 
and just have a good time!
Jailbreaking is not about piracy or illegal activities. It's about the freedom to do what I want with 
my device. Because of jailbreaking, you can reinvent your multitasking experience on iOS, 
change the look of your icons, password-protect applications, or even make your phone scream 
when you drop it! There's even a tweak in the works that allows blind people to read the news 
more conveniently, as stock iOS doesn't fit their needs! Jailbreaking is about fun, and making the
iPhone behave in cool and different ways. It is not about piracy. In fact, piracy is highly frowned 
upon by the active members of the jailbreak community. Without jailbreaking, I would not have 
met some great friends. We are a thriving community, with a convention to meet up and talk 
about what we love. We are a bunch of people who love messing with our phones, not pirates, 
and we want jailbreaking to stay legal.
PRIVACY ACT ADVISORY STATEMENT Required by the Privacy Act of 1974 (P.L. 93-579)
The authority for requesting this information is 17 U.S.C. §§ 1201(a)(1) and 705. Furnishing the requested information is voluntary. 
The principal use of the requested information is publication on the Copyright Office website and use by Copyright Office staff for 
purposes of the rulemaking proceeding conducted under 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1). NOTE: No other advisory statement will be given 
in connection with this submission. Please keep this statement and refer to it if we communicate with you regarding this submission.
