[PAGE 1]
Note: Please submit a separate comment for each proposed class. 
This is a Word document that allows users to type into the spaces below. The comment should be no more than one 
page in length (which may be single-spaced but should be in at least 12-point type). The italicized instructions on 
this template may be deleted.  
PRIVACY ACT ADVISORY STATEMENT Required by the Privacy Act of 1974 (P.L. 93-579) 
The authority for requesting this information is 17 U.S.C. §§ 1201(a)(1) and 705. Furnishing the requested information is voluntary. 
The principal use of the requested information is publication on the Copyright Office website and use by Copyright Office staff for 
purposes of the rulemaking proceeding conducted under 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1). NOTE: No other advisory statement will be given 
in connection with this submission. Please keep this statement and refer to it if we communicate with you regarding this submission. 
Short Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption 
Under 17 U.S.C. 1201 
  
Item 1. Commenter Information 
 
Rachel Englander 
Rachel.r.englander@gmail.com 
 
 
Item 2.  Proposed Class Addressed 
Proposed class 10, section (B) (2) : Literary Works Distributed Electronically—
SpaceShifting and Format-Shifting  
 
Item 3. Statement Regarding Proposed Exemption 
Greetings, 
 
Regarding Proposed class 10, section (B) (2) of the regulations you have proposed. I am in 
favor of these regulations as both a consumer of electronic books and as a librarian who 
has to help patrons use them. 
 
In the increasingly digital world we find ourselves in, it is important to plan for not only today 
but tomorrow as well. And tomorrow is likely to have network/computer issues that will result 
in loss of data, unless a proper backup is made. I myself have been in the position of having 
to purchase multiple copies of the same item, due to computer failure and restrictive DRM 
that prevents a backup being made. I can only fathom that such a thing must also happen at 
an institutional level at even greater frequency and effect.  
 
A library should be able to take preventive measures to ensure the continued access of its 
information by its patrons. Digital or not. 
 
Thank you, 
Rachel Englander 
 
