[PAGE 1]
 
Before the 
U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE 
Washington, DC 20554 
 
 
 
In the Matter of 
 
 
Proposed Exemption to Prohibition on 
Circumvention Under 47 U.S.C. § 1201 
 
 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proposed Class 12: Unlocking – All-
Purpose Tablet Computers 
 
 
 
COMMENTS OF CONSUMERS UNION 
 
 
George P. Slover 
Senior Policy Counsel 
Consumers Union 
1101 17th St., NW, Suite 500 
Washington, DC  20036 
(202) 462-6262 
 
 
 
 
 
 
February 6, 2015 
Aaron Mackey 
Angela J. Campbell 
   Margaret Thomas 
   Georgetown Law Student 
Institute for Public Representation 
Georgetown University Law Center 
600 New Jersey Avenue, NW 
Suite 312 
Washington, DC 20001 
(202) 662-9535 
 
Of Counsel to Consumers Union 
 
[PAGE 2]
 
Table of Contents 
I. Commenting Party ................................................................................................................ 1 
II. Overview and Proposed Class Addressed ............................................................................ 1 
III. Technological Protection Measures and Methods of Circumvention .................................. 4 
A. SIM Locks ....................................................................................................................... 5 
B. SPC Locks ....................................................................................................................... 6 
C. SOC Locks ...................................................................................................................... 6 
D. Band Order Locks ........................................................................................................... 6 
E. Master Subscriber Locks ................................................................................................. 7 
IV. In the Unlocking Act, Congress Permanently Broadened the Class of Consumers Who 
Could Unlock Their Devices Under Future DMCA Exemptions. ....................................... 7 
V. Unlocking a Mobile Device is a Legitimate, Non-infringing Use ....................................... 9 
A. Congress Affirmed that Unlocking Mobile Devices is Non-infringing ........................ 10 
B. The Software Enabling Connectivity Between Mobile Devices and Wireless Networks  
is Not Copyrightable ..................................................................................................... 10 
C. Unlocking Mobile Devices Does Not Re-Copy or Modify the Underlying Software, 
Meaning That No Copyright Infringement Occurs ....................................................... 11 
VI. There Are Demonstrated Adverse Effects That Result When Individuals Cannot Unlock 
Their Mobile Devices ......................................................................................................... 12 
A.  Excessive Limitations On Unlocking Mobile Devices Inhibit Consumer Choice and 
Impede the Proper Competitive Functioning of the Market ......................................... 13 
1. The Ban On Unlocking Prevents Customers From Moving Freely  
Between Carriers ....................................................................................................... 13 
2. The Ban On Unlocking Stifles Competition and Innovation in the  
Wireless Industry ...................................................................................................... 14 
3. The Ban On Unlocking Adversely Affects the Resale Market for  
Mobile Devices ......................................................................................................... 15 
B. Other Adverse Effects of the Ban On Unlocking Include Excessive Roaming Charges, 
Environmental Waste, and Harm to Recyclers ............................................................. 16 
C. The Voluntary Carrier Unlocking Policies of Major Wireless Carriers Are No 
Substitute for the Legal Right to Unlock ...................................................................... 17 
VII.  The Four Nonexclusive Statutory Factors Weigh in Favor of Granting an Exemption for 
Mobile Device Unlocking ................................................................................................. 20 
A. Availability for Use of Copyrighted Works .................................................................. 20 
[PAGE 3]
 
B. Availability of Works for Nonprofit Archival, Preservation, and  
Educational Purposes .................................................................................................... 21 
C. Impact That the Prohibition on the Circumvention of Technological Measures Applied 
to Copyrighted Works Has on Criticism, Comment, News Reporting, Teaching 
Scholarship, or Research ............................................................................................... 22 
D.  Effect of Circumvention of Technological Measures on the Market for or Value of 
Copyrighted Works. ...................................................................................................... 23 
VIII. Conclusion ....................................................................................................................... 23 
[PAGE 4]
1 
I. Commenting Party 
Consumers Union is the public policy and advocacy arm of Consumer Reports.  
Consumers Union is an expert, independent, nonprofit organization whose mission is to work for 
a fair, just, and safe marketplace for all consumers, and to empower consumers to protect 
themselves.  It conducts this work in the areas of telecommunications reform, health care reform, 
food and product safety, financial reform, and other areas.  Consumer Reports is the world’s 
largest independent product-testing organization.  Using its more than 50 labs, auto test center, 
and survey research center, the nonprofit organization rates thousands of products and services 
annually.  Founded in 1936, Consumer Reports has over 8 million subscribers to its magazine, 
website, and other publications. 
Consumers Union proposed an exemption in previous triennial reviews to the anti-
circumvention prohibition in section 1201 of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) for 
mobile phone and mobile wireless communications device unlocking.  We wrote to Congress 
and the FCC in the spring of 2013 urging them to restore the exemption.  And we worked closely 
with the House and Senate in helping Congress enact the Unlocking Consumer Choice and 
Wireless Competition Act (“Unlocking Act”) to restore it.1  
II. Overview and Proposed Class Addressed 
Consumers should have the right to use their mobile phones and other mobile devices on 
the wireless communications networks they choose.  Given the right to unlock their devices, 
owners can continue to use the devices for as long as they continue to function, maintaining their 
useful life.  For example, consumers should have the right to sell or give away their used devices, 
or new devices they receive as upgrades if they choose to continue using their old devices 
themselves.  When consumers are allowed to make this full use of their mobile devices, the 
                                                 
1 Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act, Pub. L. No. 113-144, 128 Stat. 
1751 (2014) (“Unlocking Act”). 
[PAGE 5]
2 
markets for both mobile devices and wireless networks are more efficient and more competitive, 
benefitting consumers in greater choice and lower costs.  Moreover, allowing mobile device 
unlocking will reduce electronic waste, as consumers will no longer be forced to prematurely 
dispose of their devices.   
Recognizing these benefits and others more fully described below, Consumers Union 
provides the following comments in support of its proposed exemption to allow owners to unlock 
their mobile devices.  Specifically, Consumers Union proposes the following exemption: 
Computer programs, in the for m of firmware or software, that 
enable a mobile wireless communications devic e to connect to a 
wireless communications network, when circumvention is initiated 
by – 
 
(1) the owner of the device, 
(2) another person at the direction of the owner, 
(3) a provider of a commercial mobile radio service or a 
commercial mobile data service at the direction of such owner 
or other person, 
 
solely in order to enable the device to connect to other wireless 
communications networks, subject to the connection to any such 
other wireless communications network being authorized by the 
operator of such network. 
 
The term “mobile wireless communications device” means (1) a 
wireless telephone handset, or (2) a hand -held mobile wireless 
device used for any of the same wireless communications 
functions, and using equivalent technology, as a wireless telephone 
handset. 
Notably, Consumers Union’s proposed exemption encompasses both mobile handsets and 
hand-held wireless devices, such as tablets, that are functionally equivalent.  Consumers Union 
respects the Copyright Office’s decision to separate the proposed exemption into two separate 
proposals for (1) mobile handsets and (2) tablets, and is filing separate comments in support of 
both.2  Given that mobile handsets and tablets rely on the same wireless communications 
                                                 
2 See Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access 
[PAGE 6]
3 
networks and are locked to those networks by similar technology, however, the analysis and 
factual record supporting both proposals is essentially the same.  Moreover, as evidenced by the 
fact that larger mobile handsets are being referred to as “phablets,” the market does not 
distinguish between these devices in the way previously supposed.  In light of this, Consumers 
Union respectfully requests that the Copyright Office adopt the language above to cover both 
Proposed Class 11: Unlocking – Wireless Telephone Handsets and Proposed Class 12: 
Unlocking – All-Purpose Tablet Computers.  Granting the same exemption as to both classes 
would reflect the current marketplace for both kinds of devices and conform to consumer 
expectations for how they are used. 
Consumers Union’s proposed exemption should be granted because unlocking a mobile 
device is a non-infringing, legitimate activity that enables consumers to connect their devices to 
the wireless network they choose.  The legal case for allowing circumvention of the 
technological protection measures to unlock mobile devices is strong.  Congress explicitly 
granted mobile device owners the right to unlock them this past summer, ratifying that such 
activity is non-infringing.  Additionally, as has been described before, the underlying software 
facilitating connectivity between a mobile device and wireless network may not even be 
copyrightable.  Also, because connecting a phone to another network merely changes built-in 
variables in software and does not re-copy or change the underlying software itself, no 
copyrighted material is affected. 
Not only is unlocking mobile devices non-infringing, the adverse effects of failing to 
grant the exemption to permit it are significant.  The threat of DMCA liability discourages 
consumers from taking their devices to different networks – even after they have completed their 
contractual obligations with their original carrier.  The DMCA even imposes potential felony 
                                                                                                                                                             
Control Technologies, 79 Fed. Reg. 73,856, 73,863 (Dec. 12, 2014) (“2014 Notice of Proposed 
Rulemaking”). 
[PAGE 7]
4 
criminal fines and prison sentences on unlocking, even though unlocking does not facilitate 
copyright infringement in any way. 
The Copyright Office’s 2012 decision to sunset the unlocking exemption predictably led 
to a sharp plunge in the resale value for used phones, as the ability to legally place them back 
into useful service came under a dark legal cloud.  Some carriers made it very difficult for 
consumers to unlock their phones.  Deciding now not to extend and update this exemption would 
once again bring back this legal cloud.  It would also put consumers at the mercy of carriers’ 
voluntary unlocking policies.  Those voluntary policies  – which the carrier can change or 
rescind at will – are no substitute for a legal right to unlock.  And as will be shown below, the 
current voluntary carrier policies fall short of providing consumers with the same kind of easy 
network switching that would be enabled by the exemption. 
More broadly, failure to grant the unlocking exemption would also reduce healthy 
incentives for competition and innovation in the way mobile devices and wireless service are 
developed and offered for sale, as it becomes more difficult and costly for consumers to switch 
carriers and take advantage of more affordable choices. 
A balancing of the DMCA’s non-exclusive statutory factors further supports the 
exemption, as they tilt heavily in favor of granting consumers the right to unlock their mobile 
devices. 
III. Technological Protection Measures and Methods of Circumvention 
Wireless carriers rely on a number of different technological protection measures to 
restrict access to the underlying software that enables a mobile device to connect to a wireless 
network.  Consumers cannot access this underlying software, which is arguably a copyrighted 
work, without circumventing the technological protection measures.  Hence, a consumer cannot 
[PAGE 8]
5 
engage the software to connect the device to a different wireless network without risking a 
violation of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act’s anti-circumvention prohibitions.3   
Although wireless carriers, usually with the aid of device manufacturers, employ several 
technologies to lock devices to particular networks, technological advances could create new 
measures that function in the same way.  Thus, Consumers Union requests that the Copyright 
Office adopt a functional definition of the technological protection measures and their 
circumvention.  The functional definition would encompass any technological protection 
measure that prohibits consumers from accessing the underlying software or firmware that 
enables devices to connect to particular wireless networks.  Adopting a functional definition 
would ensure that the exemption is technology-neutral, avoiding a scenario in which the legality 
of unlocking the device would depend on the type of technological protection measure being 
used by the particular wireless carrier or device manufacturer.  
Current technological protection measures used by wireless carriers include:4 
A. SIM Locks 
Many mobile devices are sold with a locked subscriber identity module card (SIM card).  
These cards store information used by a mobile device to identify and authenticate itself on a 
wireless network.  The cards are often sold already inside the device, which usually has 
preinstalled software, known as a SIM lock, that prevents the device from recognizing non-
native SIM cards.  The SIM lock causes the device to reject any SIM card it has not been 
programmed to recognize, namely SIM cards that would connect to other wireless networks.  
SIM Locks frustrate the inherent efficiency of SIM cards, which were designed to allow device 
owners to easily remove and replace them to work with different wireless networks.  For 
                                                 
3 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a). 
4 Consumers Union has provided nearly identical descriptions of these Technological Protection 
Measures in previous rulemakings.  See Comments of Consumers Union at 5-7, 2012 Triennial 
Review (Dec. 1, 2011) (“2012 CU Comments”). 
[PAGE 9]
6 
example, swapping SIM cards is essential for international travelers to connect to local networks 
and pay non-roaming rates for service. 
B. SPC Locks 
Service Provider Code Locks (SPC Locks) are also preinstalled technological measures 
that limit access to the software that enables devices to connect to wireless networks using the 
CDMA standard.  An SPC is a number generated from the mobile device’s electronic serial 
number, using a service provider’s algorithm.  The only way to get around SPC Locks is by 
entering in the correct SPC.  This renders mobile devices operating on the CDMA standard—
technically capable of operating on any network using that standard—useless to connect to any 
network other than that of the device’s original carrier.  
C. SOC Locks 
System Operator Code Locks (SOC Locks) are preinstalled software that prevents mobile 
devices from changing their SOCs.  SOCs are code numbers, associated with particular carriers, 
that prevent mobile devices from connecting to wireless networks not identified by the codes.  
SOC Locks prevent consumers from changing the underlying code on their device in order to 
connect it to a different wireless network than the device’s original carrier. 
D. Band Order Locks 
Band Order Locks are firmware that restricts mobile devices to using the wireless 
communications radio frequencies controlled by a particular carrier.  The Federal 
Communications Commission allocates a particular band of radio frequencies for mobile 
communications, then licenses individual service carriers to operate only on certain portions of 
that band.  Although most mobile devices have the technology to operate across the entire mobile 
communications band, Band Order Locks restrict the devices to a much more limited frequency 
range.  With the lock in place, the device cannot connect to other carriers. 
[PAGE 10]
7 
E. Master Subscriber Locks 
A master subscriber lock (“MSL”) is a technological measure that controls access to 
firmware, software, and other content on a mobile device.  Devices sold for operation on Virgin 
Mobile’s network are preinstalled with this measure.  A device locked in this way cannot be used 
to connect to any network other than that of the device’s original carrier. 
Although the underlying Technological Protection Measures described above vary, they 
all act to artificially limit the usefulness of the device.  In each case, circumvention involves 
bypassing the software or firmware lock that controls access to the software that connects to a 
wireless communications network.  Once the lock is bypassed, the software controlling access to 
particular networks can be engaged, allowing the device to work on competing networks. 
IV. In the Unlocking Act, Congress Permanently Broadened the Class of 
Consumers Who Could Unlock Their Devices Under Future DMCA 
Exemptions. 
Although the Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act did not create a 
permanent unlocking exemption, it did make permanent that the owner of the device has the right 
to initiate circumvention under any unlocking exemption the Librarian grants in the future.  In 
doing so, Congress made a commonsense course correction to the Copyright Office’s narrower 
conception of who has the authority to unlock mobile devices.  The most recent unlocking 
exemptions had given the right to unlock to the “owner of the copy of the computer program,”5 
meaning that parties circumventing mobile handset locks had to own both the device and its 
underlying software.  Carriers claimed that the consumer did not actually own the software, but 
merely had a license to it6 – creating a legal cloud over whether any consumer actually had the 
right to unlock, even when the exemption was in place.  
                                                 
5 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(3). 
6 See Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access 
Control Technologies, 77 Fed. Reg. 65,260, 65,265 (Oct. 26, 2012) (“2012 Final Rule”) 
(“CTIA…cited agreements from several major carriers in an effort to demonstrate that the 
software on the mobile handsets is licensed, rather than sold, to a phone’s owner.”). 
[PAGE 11]
8 
In passing the Unlocking Act, Congress permanently removed this uncertainty, stating 
explicitly in the Act that the owner of the mobile device has the right to take advantage of any 
unlocking exemption granted by the Librarian, regardless of whether the owner of the device is 
also considered to be the owner of the underlying software.  The statute states that 
“circumvention . . . may be initiated by the owner of any such handset or other device.”7  The 
legislative history indicates that Congress regarded this as an important commonsense 
clarification.  As the House Report states, “the language of the exemption adopted by the 
Librarian should have referred to the owner of the device, rather than the owner of the copy of 
the computer program since most computer programs are licensed, rather than sold.”8  To ensure 
that owners of devices could seek help in unlocking their devices if necessary, Congress also 
explicitly provided that any circumvention authorized in a future exemption could be initiated 
“by another person at the direction of the owner, or by a provider of a commercial mobile radio 
service or a commercial mobile data service at the direction of such owner or other person.”9 
In the Notice of Inquiry starting this rulemaking, the Copyright Office recognized that the 
Unlocking Act makes this change permanent, stating that “circumvention under any future 
‘unlocking’ exemption for wireless telephone handsets and other wireless devices adopted by the 
Librarian may be initiated by the persons Congress identified in the Unlocking Act.”10  Of 
course, in any future exemption, the Librarian may decide to authorize additional persons to 
initiate circumvention beyond those specified by Congress. 
Congress recognized the benefits of permitting consumers to unlock their mobile devices.  
After appeals from the White House,11 the FCC,12 and directly from the American people,13 
                                                 
7 Unlocking Act, sec. 2(c)(2). 
8 H.R. Rep. No. 113-356 at 8 (2014) (“House Report”) (Exhibit A). 
9 Unlocking Act, sec. 2(c)(2). 
10 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access 
Control Technologies, 79 Fed. Reg. 55,687, 55,689 (Sept. 11, 2014) (“2014 Notice of Inquiry”). 
11 See David Edelman, It’s Time to Legalize Cell Phone Unlocking, The White House: We The 
[PAGE 12]
9 
Congress passed the Unlocking Act in order to “protect consumers and promote competition in 
the wireless market.”14  As explained in more detail below, allowing consumers to unlock their 
mobile devices lowers artificial barriers that make it more difficult to switch wireless networks.  
When consumers are allowed to use their mobile devices on any network they choose, networks 
face greater competition, and device manufacturers must compete to convince customers to 
purchase new phones.  Congress recognized that limiting the right to unlock to the owner of the 
underlying software, or denying consumers the ability to seek outside help with the mechanics of 
unlocking, would undercut the right.  Congress specified who could unlock in order to ensure 
that the right would be effective. 
V. Unlocking a Mobile Device is a Legitimate, Non-infringing Use 
The Unlocking Act explicitly affirms that unlocking mobile devices is legitimate, non-
infringing behavior.  In reinstating the 2010 exemption,15 Congress explained that cell phone 
unlocking is legitimate and non-infringing, and has several pro-consumer benefits, including 
enabling interoperability on multiple wireless networks, increasing competition among wireless 
carriers, and extending the life and value of mobile devices.  In addition, multiple legal theories 
discussed below further support Consumers Union’s position that circumventing these mobile 
device locks is non-infringing. 
                                                                                                                                                             
People (March 4, 2013), https://petitions.whitehouse.gov/response/its-time-legalize-cell-phone-
unlocking. 
12 See Edward Wyatt, FCC Backs Consumers in Unlocking of Cellphones, N.Y. Times, March 5, 
2014, at B1. 
13 See Make Unlocking Cell Phones Legal, The White House: We The People (Jan. 24, 2013), 
https://petitions.whitehouse.gov/petition/make-unlocking-cell-phones-legal/1g9KhZG7.  
14 S. Rep. No. 113-212 at 5 (2014) (“Senate Report”) (Exhibit B). 
15 Unlocking Act, sec. 2(a). 
[PAGE 13]
10 
A. Congress Affirmed that Unlocking Mobile Devices is Non-infringing 
The Unlocking Act embodies Congress’s view that unlocking a mobile device to connect it 
to another wireless network is a legitimate, non-infringing use.  The legislative history further 
confirms this view.  The Senate Report explicitly states that “unlocking a cell phone to connect 
to a wireless network typically does not facilitate copyright infringement.”16  The same report 
also states that “unlocking . . . does not enable the device owner, or a third party on an owner’s 
behalf, to engage in other activities that infringe copyrighted works.”17  Likewise, the House 
Report describes consumers’ interest in unlocking a mobile device as “legitimate.”18 
B. The Software Enabling Connectivity Between Mobile Devices and Wireless 
Networks is Not Copyrightable 
As Consumers Union has noted in previous DMCA exemption rulemakings, the 
underlying software that facilitates connectivity between a mobile device and a wireless network 
likely falls outside the Copyright Act’s protection for expressive works.  Section 102(b) sets the 
outer limit for what qualifies as protected works under the Copyright Act, stating that  
[i]n no case does copyright protection . . . extend to any idea, 
procedure, process, system, method of operation, concept, 
principle, or discovery, regardless of the form in which it is 
described, explained, illustrated, or embodied in such work.19  
This limitation, commonly called the idea/expression dichotomy, means that copyright protects 
only the expression of concepts and not the underlying ideas.  Hence, the Supreme Court has 
held that functional or factual elements of a work are not copyrightable.20  In the case of 
computer software, courts have held that both functional and expressive elements can be 
contained within software, and that some elements may not be protected by copyright.21 
                                                 
16 Senate Report at 6 (Exhibit B). 
17 Id. 
18 House Report at 3 (Exhibit A). 
19 17 U.S.C. § 102(b). 
20 Baker v. Selden, 101 U.S. 99, 102-04, (1879). 
21 See Computer Assocs. Int’l v. Altai, 982 F.2d 693, 705 (2d Cir. 1992) (“those elements of a 
[PAGE 14]
11 
The software that connects a mobile device to a wireless network is a “procedure, 
process, system [or] method of operation” under Section 102(b), and therefore falls outside of the 
Copyright Act’s protections.  Moreover, because the software facilitates a function – connecting 
a device to a particular wireless network – a court would likely find that the software at issue is 
not copyrightable.   
Of course, the fact that the software is not copyrightable does not render an exemption 
under the DMCA unnecessary.  First, mobile device manufacturers and wireless carriers have not 
conceded this point, and the only way to get a definitive court ruling is to subject oneself to 
felony criminal prosecution.  Moreover, even if the underlying software connecting a device to a 
wireless carrier is not copyrightable, courts have held that the mere act of circumventing is a 
violation of the DMCA.22  That is, without an exemption, individuals who circumvent 
technological protection measures to unlock their devices can be liable under the DMCA 
regardless of whether the underlying work is copyrightable.  So a DMCA exemption is still 
necessary to protect consumers from inappropriate DMCA liability for unlocking.  
C. Unlocking Mobile Devices Does Not Re-Copy or Modify the Underlying 
Software, Meaning That No Copyright Infringement Occurs 
Consumers Union and others have also explained that allowing a mobile device to 
communicate with another wireless network is non-infringing because no copyrighted works are 
accessed or modified.  Although mobile devices use software to connect to wireless networks, 
                                                                                                                                                             
computer program that are necessarily incidental to its function are . . . unprotectable.”); Sega 
Enters. v. Accolade, Inc., 977 F.2d 1510, 1525 (9th Cir. 1992) (“many aspects of the program are 
not protected by copyright.”); General Universal Sys. v. Lee, 379 F.3d 131, 142 (5th Cir. 2004) 
(endorsing the abstraction-filtration-comparison test to determine which elements of a work are 
protected); R.C. Olmstead, Inc. v. CU Interface, LLC, 606 F.3d 262, 272 (6th Cir. 2010) 
(software developer failed to “identify those elements of the [allegedly infringing] software that 
are unique and original, rather than necessary to the function of any credit union software.”).  
22 See MDY Industries, Inc. v. Blizzard Entertainment, Inc., 629 F.3d 928, 948 (9th Cir. 2010) 
(section 1201(a) “creates a new anticircumvention right distinct from copyright infringement”). 
[PAGE 15]
12 
the actual connection is facilitated by a string of electronic variables that function as a “key” to a 
particular wireless network.23  When the consumer wants to use the phone on a different 
network, the key is switched, but the underlying software is left intact.  So the computer program 
is not re-copied or modified when the device is connected to another wireless network, and there 
is no infringement. 
VI. There Are Demonstrated Adverse Effects That Result When Individuals 
Cannot Unlock Their Mobile Devices 
The fallout from the 2012 decision to sunset the unlocking exemption showed that 
prohibiting consumers from unlocking their mobile devices has significant adverse effects.  The 
negative consequences of letting the unlocking exemption expire affected a large segment of the 
American public,24 over 114,000 of whom made their frustration known by signing a petition 
asking the White House to take action.25  The White House, the FCC, and Congress have all 
recognized the proven harms of the unlocking prohibition, and each took action to remove it.26  
Because consumers increasingly use tablets for the same functions as cell phones, the negative 
consequences of the prohibition on unlocking affect consumers’ use of both of these kinds of 
devices in essentially the same fashion.  These adverse effects will resume and continue unless 
the proposed exemption is granted. 
                                                 
23 See 2012 CU Comments at 14 (citing Comments of Metro PCS Communications, Inc. at 8 
(Dec. 2, 2008)). 
24 As of January 2014, 90% of American adults have a cell phone; 58% have a smartphone; 32% 
own an e-reader; 42% own a tablet. See Mobile Technology Fact Sheet, Pew Research Internet 
Project (January 2014), 
http://www.pewinternet.org/fact-sheets/mobile-technology-fact-sheet. 
25 See Edelman, supra note 11, The White House: We The People (March 4, 2013), 
https://petitions.whitehouse.gov/response/its-time-legalize-cell-phone-unlocking. 
26 See id.; Wyatt, supra note 12; Unlocking Act. 
[PAGE 16]
13 
A. Excessive Limitations On Unlocking Mobile Devices Inhibit Consumer Choice 
and Impede the Proper Competitive Functioning of the Market 
The DMCA threatens consumers with felony criminal fines and imprisonment for 
unlocking their phones to connect to a different network – even when they are in compliance 
with their contractual duties to their current carrier.  This significantly impedes consumers’ 
ability to move freely between carriers and to take their devices with them if they do.  
Accordingly, the prohibition on unlocking unfairly enriches carriers and device manufacturers at 
the expense of consumers, and interferes with competition and innovation in the wireless 
industry.  Furthermore, banning unlocking limits consumer choice in the resale market.  The 
proposed exemption would remove these obstructions to healthy competition, promote consumer 
choice and mobility, and help spur innovation in the wireless industry as a whole. 
1. The Ban On Unlocking Prevents Customers From Moving Freely Between 
Carriers 
Consumers should have a right to unlock their mobile devices without the specter of 
felony criminal fines and imprisonment under the DMCA.  As Congress recognized, “because of 
the availability of civil or criminal sanctions under the DMCA, consumers with a legitimate 
interest in unlocking their wireless devices may be afraid to do so.”27  FCC Commissioner Pai 
has also pointed out the severe market distorting effects of this severe legal disincentive to 
switch carriers:  “In a free market, once a consumer’s contract expires, she should be able to take 
her device to another carrier.  The government shouldn’t tilt the scales with legal penalties; it 
should leave the mobile marketplace alone.”28  The potential penalties consumers face under the 
DMCA are particularly harsh in light of the fact the unlocking is legal in many parts of the 
                                                 
27 Senate Report at 3 (Exhibit B). 
28 Ajit V. Pai, Don’t Treat Consumers Like Criminals, N.Y. Times, June 5, 2013, at A23 (Exhibit 
C). 
[PAGE 17]
14 
world, and has in fact been recognized as legitimate by the White House,29 Congress,30 the 
FCC,31 and even the carriers themselves. 
Additionally, the prohibition on unlocking artificially props up the “subsidy” business 
model, which itself limits consumer choice and mobility.  Wireless carriers often attract new 
customers by offering discounts, or subsidies, on devices.  To recoup this initial subsidy, carriers 
require customers to sign long-term service contracts, with high early termination fees, and they 
lock devices so that consumers cannot easily switch to another provider.  By erecting costly 
barriers against switching wireless providers, carriers create customer “lock-in.”32  The DMCA 
prohibition on unlocking reinforces this customer lock-in by threatening consumers with felony 
prosecution if they take their mobile device with them to the new carrier to make the switch 
more affordable.   
2. The Ban On Unlocking Stifles Competition and Innovation in the Wireless 
Industry 
By preventing consumers from moving freely between carriers and taking their devices 
with them, the prohibition on unlocking reduces the incentives for carriers and device 
manufacturers to compete and innovate.  Locking helps ensure that customers cannot easily be 
lured away by a competitor, which dampens competitive pressure on carriers to improve prices 
and terms of service.33  
                                                 
29 See Edelman, supra note 11. 
30 See Senate Report at 3 (Exhibit B); House Report at 3 (Exhibit A). 
31 Wyatt, supra note 12. 
32 See 2012 CU Comments, supra note 4, at 17-19. 
33 See Statement of George P. Slover Before House Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee 
on Courts Intellectual Property and the Internet, June 6, 2013 at 4 (“The lock benefits carriers, by 
propping up the long-term bundled contract.  And it benefits mobile device manufacturers, by 
artificially inflating demand for new devices, through forced retirement of used ones.  But for 
consumers, it means less competition, less choice, more expense, and more waste.”). 
[PAGE 18]
15 
Restoring and expanding the exemption as proposed would facilitate consumer mobility 
by enabling consumers to keep using the same device if they want, thereby spurring competition 
and innovation among wireless carriers and device manufacturers.34  Indeed, that is already 
beginning to happen.  For example, T-Mobile has a “Bring Your Own Device Policy” that 
encourages users to unlock and bring their own devices with them to T-Mobile.35  Carriers have 
also started experimenting with alternatives to the subsidy model, like no-annual-contract 
plans.36  Similarly, enabling consumers to retain their old devices when they switch carriers 
would put healthy competitive pressure on device manufactures to continue innovating and 
improving quality, while keeping prices reasonably low, to entice customers to voluntarily buy 
the latest models. 
3. The Ban On Unlocking Adversely Affects the Resale Market for Mobile 
Devices 
A locked device is less valuable, because it is only useful on one network.37  The 
Copyright Office asks whether the 2012 exemption “has had an adverse effect on the 
marketplace for the accessed copyrighted works.”38  The market’s reaction to the 2012 order 
                                                 
34 See, e.g., Senate Report at 4 (Exhibit B) (The exemption “promot[es] flexibility for consumers 
and enhanc[es] competition in the wireless market.”); Statement of George P. Slover Before 
House Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on Courts Intellectual Property and the 
Internet, June 6, 2013 at 5. 
35 See T-Mobile Bring Your Own Phone, http://www.t-mobile.com/bring-your-own-phone.html 
(last visited Jan. 28, 2014). 
36 See, e.g., T-Mobile Simple Choice Plan, http://www.t-mobile.com/cell-phone-
plans/individual.html (last visited Jan. 28, 2014).   
37 For example, Gazelle offers consumers $350 for a locked AT&T phone and $400 for an 
unlocked version.  Anthony Scarsella, What is a locked phone and why do carriers lock them?, 
Gazelle.com (Jan. 29, 2014), https://www.gazelle.com/thehorn/2014/01/29/what-is-a-locked-
phone-and-why-do-carriers-lock-them/ (“You will get more cash for your unlocked phone 
compared to a phone locked to your carrier when you trade it in. An unlocked phone can be used 
– and sold – anywhere around the world, which increases the amount of money people are 
willing to pay for your used phone.”).  
38 2014 Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, supra note 2, at 73,860. 
[PAGE 19]
16 
closing the exemption demonstrated undoubtedly that the answer is yes – the inability to unlock 
a device significantly decreases its value on the resale market.  According to one cellphone 
recycling company, “during the two years that cellphone unlocking was illegal, prices for phones 
that could not be unlocked dropped by about $20 per unit.”39 
When circumvention is illegal, individuals are unable to unlock their devices and resell 
them or give them away to friends or family.  It also means that consumers who purchase a 
phone or tablet on the resale market cannot have it connected to their network of choice.  
Congress explicitly recognized these adverse effects on consumers who seek to sell or give away 
devices, and on consumers who want to them, and restored the unlocking exemption to alleviate 
these harms.40 
B. Other Adverse Effects of the Ban On Unlocking Include Excessive Roaming 
Charges, Environmental Waste, and Harm to Recyclers 
When consumers are not able to unlock their phones, they may be forced to pay 
exorbitant roaming charges imposed by their carrier when traveling abroad.  In contrast, 
consumers with unlocked phones can simply purchase a much less expensive local SIM card to 
use while abroad.   For example, an AT&T customer would pay $1.50 per minute to place a call 
in Europe on a U.S.-based AT&T account, but with an unlocked phone a prepaid local SIM card 
would pay only $0.30 per minute.41   
                                                 
39 Kyle Wiens, Opinion: Why Cellphone Unlocking Could Soon Be Illegal Once Again, Wired 
(Dec. 9, 2014) http://www.wired.com/2014/12/dmca-exemptions-cell-phone-unlocking/.  For 
example, AT&T made it harder to unlock its phones, and their value on the resale market 
dropped significantly.  Whereas the previous year, a used AT&T iPhone was worth $45 more 
than a used Verizon iPhone, an AT&T iPhone was worth $20 less than the same Verizon version 
in 2013, because the AT&T version was much harder to unlock.  See Thomas Gryta, The 
Mystery of the iPhones that Won’t Unlock, Wall Street Journal, Nov. 13, 2013, available at 
http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052702303559504579195881629809394 (Exhibit D). 
40 See House Report at 3 (Exhibit A).  
41 Derek Khanna, The Law Against Unlocking Cellphones is Anti-Consumer, Anti-Business, and 
Anti-Common Sense, The Atlantic (Feb. 11, 2013) 
http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2013/02/the-law-against-unlocking-cellphones-is-
[PAGE 20]
17 
Additionally, by making it more difficult and less valuable for consumers to sell or give 
away their old devices, restrictions on unlocking turn perfectly functional equipment into 
environmental waste.  The decrease in usefulness makes it more likely that consumers will 
simply discard their old devices, that they will end up gathering dust in a drawer, and eventually 
slowly deteriorating in a landfill. 
Prohibiting mobile device unlocking also harms businesses and organizations that take 
old devices and refurbish them for reuse.  Experience under the 2012 decision to sunset the 
exemption demonstrated that prohibiting unlocking damages businesses that perform unlocking 
services for consumers.42  These businesses contribute to a vibrant resale market for used 
devices, providing consumers with greater choices when shopping for devices and preventing the 
waste of functional equipment.  The ability of these companies to provide this important service 
to consumers depends on unlocking being legal. 
C. The Voluntary Carrier Unlocking Policies of Major Wireless Carriers Are No 
Substitute for the Legal Right to Unlock  
Consumers ought to have a legal right to unlock their devices, and not have to depend on 
the continued good graces of their carrier for the privilege to do so.  The carriers’ current 
unlocking policies are voluntary, and can be revoked at any moment, as the carriers themselves 
admit.43  Consumers are rightfully concerned with the precarious nature of this arrangement.  
                                                                                                                                                             
anti-consumer-anti-business-and-anti-common-sense/272894/ (Exhibit E). 
42 See, e.g., Wiens, supra note 39 (discussing the harm to such businesses under the 2012 
exemption). 
43 See, e.g., T-Mobile Unlocking Policy, https://support.t-mobile.com/docs/DOC-1588 (last 
visited Jan. 28, 2015) (“…this policy is subject to T-Mobile’s Terms and Conditions of service 
and may change without notice”) (Exhibit F); Sprint Unlocking Policy, 
http://www.sprint.com/legal/unlocking_policy.html (last visited Jan. 28, 2015) (“This unlocking 
policy is subject to change at Sprint’s discretion without advance notice.”) (Exhibit G); AT&T 
Unlocking Policy, http://www.sprint.com/legal/unlocking_policy.html (last visited Jan. 28, 2015) 
(“AT&T further reserves the right to alter this unlocking policy at its discretion without advance 
notice.”) (Exhibit H). 
[PAGE 21]
18 
After the 2012 decision to sunset the exemption, consumers had no choice but to go to their 
carriers if they wanted to unlock their devices, and some carriers made it very difficult if not 
impossible.  For example, an AT&T customer described his frustration at being unable to unlock 
his iPhone despite his contract being up,44 an experience shared by other AT&T customers 
according to other news stories.45  The proposed exemption would ensure that consumers do not 
have to rely on their self-interested carrier to give its blessing as to whether and when they can 
unlock their devices. 
Indeed, without a legal right, current carrier unlocking policies would still make it very 
inconvenient – and in some cases, impossible – to unlock.  At least one major carrier’s unlocking 
policy is not in effective compliance with the terms of CTIA Unlocking Commitment.46  Even 
those carrier policies that do comply are insufficient, because they impose conditions on 
unlocking that can make it very difficult in practice for consumers.  All four major carriers 
require that certain conditions be met before they will unlock a customer’s device.  For example, 
the carrier may require that the customer provide proof of purchase for the device,47 or require 
that the account be in “good standing.”48  Perhaps most onerous are device eligibility 
requirements that effectively mean certain devices are not authorized to be unlocked at all.  Both 
                                                 
44 Jeff John Roberts, AT&T Is Holding My iPhone Hostage and Obama Doesn’t Care: Why the 
FCC Must Act on Locked Phones, Gigaom.com, Nov. 19, 2013, available at 
https://gigaom.com/2013/11/19/att-is-holding-my-iphone-hostage-and-obama-doesnt-care-why-
the-fcc-must-act-on-locked-phones/ (describing one AT&T customer’s inability to unlock his 
iPhone even though his contract had ended). 
45 See, e.g., Gryta, supra note 40 (Exhibit D). 
46 Although the CTIA agreement requires carriers to unlock prepaid devices, Sprint does not 
currently do so though it states that it is “working on policies and procedures to unlock prepaid 
devices” and “will implement these new policies and procedures no later than February 11, 
2015.” Sprint Unlocking Policy (Exhibit G).  Other aspects of Sprint’s policy also arguably 
contradict the Unlocking Agreement. 
47 T-Mobile Unlocking Policy (Exhibit F). 
48 The unlocking policies of T-Mobile, Sprint, and Verizon all require that the account associated 
with the device be in “good standing” to be eligible for unlocking. 
[PAGE 22]
19 
T-Mobile and AT&T impose device eligibility requirements,49 and Sprint admits that it is 
actually incapable of unlocking several of its devices, including its iPhones.50 
Congress recognized the importance of an unlocking exemption for consumers who 
cannot, or do not wish to, unlock their devices through their carrier.  For example, consumers 
who buy a used cell phone or tablet from an online stores or auction site “may not be able to 
work with, or even know, the original purchaser and/or network carrier to have the device 
unlocked by the original network carrier.”51  Additionally, some consumers may find it too 
difficult or inconvenient to unlock their devices under their carrier’s policy.  Congress 
recognized this reality as well when enacting the Unlocking Act:  “There are . . . circumstances 
in which additional avenues for unlocking may be preferable over attempting to unlock through 
the carrier.”52  For these consumers, requiring them to go back to the carrier to unlock devices 
may stop them from unlocking at all.  By giving consumers the right to unlock independently of 
the carrier, the proposed exemption would address Congress’s concerns and ensure that all 
consumers have a right to unlock, not just a tenuous privilege dependent on the good graces of 
their carrier. 
                                                 
49 For example, AT&T requires that the device be “designed for use on, and locked to, the AT&T 
network” (Exhibit H), and T-Mobile requires that the “device be a T-Mobile device” (Exhibit F). 
50 Sprint Unlocking Policy (Exhibit G) (“It is important to note that not all devices are capable of 
being unlocked, often because of the manufacturers' device designs, and that even for those 
devices capable of being unlocked, not all device functionality may be capable of being 
unlocked. Specifically, devices manufactured with a SIM slot within the past three years 
(including, but not limited to, all Apple iPhone devices), cannot be unlocked to accept a different 
domestic carrier's SIM for use on another domestic carrier's network. Sprint has no technological 
process available to do this.”). 
51 House Report at 3 (Exhibit A). 
52 Senate Report at 2 (Exhibit B). 
[PAGE 23]
20 
VII. The Four Nonexclusive Statutory Factors Weigh in Favor of Granting an 
Exemption for Mobile Device Unlocking 
The DMCA states that when considering proposed exemptions, the Copyright Office 
should examine (1) the availability for use of copyrighted works; (2) the availability for use of 
works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational purposes; (3) the impact that the 
prohibition on the circumvention of technological protection measures applied to copyrighted 
works has on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research; (4) the 
effect of circumvention of technological measures on the market for or value of copyrighted 
works; and (5) any other factor that may be appropriate for the Librarian to consider.53 
A balancing of the four nonexclusive factors weighs in favor of granting the proposed 
exemption, particularly in light of the demonstrated and likely adverse effects of the prohibition. 
A. Availability for Use of Copyrighted Works 
This factor weighs strongly in favor of granting the exemption.  Although there are 
unlocked mobile devices available for sale, and although carriers will agree to unlock some 
devices under certain conditions, many consumers remain unable to receive the full benefits of 
an unobstructed market for unlocked mobile device.  Unlocked mobile devices can be quite 
expensive, and the proposed exemption would increase the supply of unlocked devices available 
for sale and thus decrease their prices.  Increased competition would drive down the prices of 
unlocked phones.54  Additionally, as explained above, the carriers’ voluntary and conditional 
unlocking policies are no substitute for a consumer right to unlock.55  Therefore, neither the 
availability of some unlocked devices for sale nor the possibility of unlocking via carrier 
permission provides a viable alternative to a right to circumvention.  The proposed exemption 
                                                 
53 17 U.S.C. §1201(a)(1)(C). 
54 See Molly Wood, Dear America: Meet Unlocked Phones, CNET (July 26, 2013), 
http://www.cnet.com/news/dear-america-meet-unlocked-phones/ (“[A] little competition would 
probably be great for unlocked phone prices, which have been mysteriously stuck at about $600 
or $650 since the introduction of the original Treo.”). 
55 See VI.C, supra p. 17-19. 
[PAGE 24]
21 
would secure for consumers a lawful means of accessing and utilizing the underlying software 
that runs their lawfully purchased devices. 
B. Availability of Works for Nonprofit Archival, Preservation, and Educational 
Purposes 
This factor weighs strongly in favor of granting the exemption.  Consumers increasingly 
use mobile devices as educational tools both in and out of the classroom.  Mobile handsets and 
tablets give students access to educational apps, e-textbooks, and the Internet.56  Schools are 
increasingly recognizing the potential of mobile devices as valuable teaching tools.57  
Furthermore, studies suggest that students appreciate the integration of mobile devices into the 
classroom.  One study found that a substantial majority of U.S. students believe that use of 
mobile devices improves education, and would like to use them more in school for educational 
purposes.58  
However, as mobile devices become must-have educational tools, schools and families 
struggle with how to pay for them.  Many schools have started experimenting with “Bring Your 
Own Device” policies, in which they encourage students to bring devices of their choice from 
home for use in the classroom.59  Financially strapped schools and families may look to purchase 
                                                 
56 See Gayle Bennet, Tablets Rewrite the Classroom Rules, USA Today (June 23, 2014), 
http://www.usatoday.com/story/sponsor-story/dell/2014/04/28/dell-tablets-in-
education/8420627/. 
57 According to an initiative of Project Tomorrow, an education nonprofit, “between 41 percent 
and 66 percent of students in K-12 schools had access to mobile devices at home and in the 
classroom in 2013.” Id.  
58 New Study Reveals U.S. Students Believe Strongly That Mobile Devices Will Improve 
Education, Pearson (Apr. 29, 2013), http://www.pearsoned.com/new-study-reveals-u-s-students-
believe-strongly-that-mobile-devices-will-improve-education/#.VMe-r3aTqSU (finding that 92 
percent of students believe that mobile devices will change how students learn in the future and 
69 percent would like to use them more in school). 
59 See, e.g., Donna George, Schools move toward “Bring Your Own Device” policies to boost 
student tech use, Washington Post (Sept. 14, 2014), 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/local/education/stem/schools-move-toward-bring-your-own-
device-practices-to-boost-student-tech-use/2014/09/14/4d1e3232-393e-11e4-9c9f-
[PAGE 25]
22 
less expensive used mobile devices instead of expensive new ones.  As discussed above, the 
prohibition on unlocking has significant adverse effects on the resale market for used devices.60  
The proposed exemption would encourage a more vibrant and diverse resale market for used 
devices, providing schools and families with more choices when searching for less expensive 
options for educational use. 
C. Impact That the Prohibition on the Circumvention of Technological Measures 
Applied to Copyrighted Works Has on Criticism, Comment, News Reporting, 
Teaching Scholarship, or Research 
This factor weighs strongly in favor of granting the exemption.  Consumers increasingly 
get their news from mobile devices.61  However, tablet and smartphone news consumers are 
typically more highly educated and earn higher wages.62  In this regard, prohibiting unlocking 
reinforces this digital divide, as lower-income consumers cannot as easily afford expensive full-
price mobile devices to access digital news.  As discussed above, the prohibition on unlocking 
adversely affects the resale market for mobile devices.63  The proposed exemption would make it 
easier for more consumers to obtain a mobile device affordably and get the benefits of the digital 
news revolution. 
Furthermore, mobile devices are valuable tools for news reporting.  They enable 
journalists to capture and distribute information quickly on the go.64  News reporters would 
                                                                                                                                                             
ebb47272e40e_story.html. 
60 See Section VI.A.3, supra p. 15-16. 
61Amy Mitchell, Tom Rosentiel, and Leah Christian, Pew Research Center’s Project for 
Excellence in Journalism, The State of the News Media 2012: An Annual Report on American 
Journalism (finding that 27% of the American population now gets news on mobile devices; 
51% of smartphone owners and 56% of tablet owners use their device for news). 
(2012), available at 
http://www.pewinternet.org/~/media//Files/Reports/2010/PIP_Mobile_Access_201 
0.pdf. 
62 Id. 
63 See Section VI.A.3, supra p. 15-16. 
64 See, e.g., Mark Memmott, “Chicago Sun Times” Fires Its Photographers, NPR (May 30, 
[PAGE 26]
23 
likewise benefit from an increased range of affordable choices of mobile devices, which the 
proposed exemption would facilitate for the reasons discussed above.   
D. Effect of Circumvention of Technological Measures on the Market for or Value 
of Copyrighted Works. 
This factor weighs strongly in favor of granting the exemption.  Experience under the 
2012 decision to sunset the exemption demonstrates the negative effects that restrictions on 
unlocking have on the market for and value of used mobile phones.  As discussed above, during 
the two-year period when unlocking was illegal, the price of locked phones on the resale market 
dropped significantly, because they were rightly perceived to be of limited usefulness.65  Because 
more consumers are willing to purchase devices that they can unlock and connect to the carrier 
they choose, the right to unlock devices increases their value on the resale market.  The adverse 
effects of letting the unlocking exemption expire in 2012 clearly demonstrated that technological 
protection measures that cannot be circumvented without risking criminal prosecution decrease 
the value of the devices.  
VIII. Conclusion 
Giving consumers the right to unlock their mobile devices would create innovation in the 
wireless carrier and device marketplaces.  Imposing DMCA civil and criminal liability on 
consumers who seek to use their devices on different wireless networks leads to customer lock-
in, arbitrary forced purchases of new devices, and the consignment of useful equipment to the 
scrapheap.  Allowing unlocking rebalances the market in favor of consumers, as they can more 
easily switch carriers and make choices based on value and service.  As shown above, granting 
Consumers Union’s proposed exemption is required under the DMCA, as the circumvention is 
                                                                                                                                                             
2013), http://www.npr.org/blogs/thetwo-way/2013/05/30/187292393/chicago-sun-times-fires-its-
photographers (discussing the paper’s firing of its entire photography staff and its decision to 
rely on its reporters to photograph news events with their smartphones). 
65 See Section VI.A.3, supra pp. 15-16. 
[PAGE 27]
24 
non-infringing, the harms from prohibiting circumvention or casting a legal cloud over it are 
significant, and the nonexclusive statutory factors weigh in favor of the exemption.  Consumers 
Union therefore respectfully requests that the Copyright Office recommend granting the mobile 
device exemption as proposed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aaron Mackey 
Angela J. Campbell 
   Margaret Thomas 
   Georgetown Law Student 
Institute for Public 
Representation 
Georgetown University 
Law Center 
600 New Jersey Avenue, 
NW 
Suite 312 
Washington, DC 20001 
(202) 662-9535 
 
Of Counsel to Consumers 
Union  
 
 
 
 
 
 
February 6, 2014 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
 
George P. Slover 
Senior Policy Counsel 
Consumers Union 
1101 17th St., NW, Suite 500 
Washington, DC  20036 
(202) 462-6262 
 
 
 

[PAGE 28]
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit A 
[PAGE 29]
3 9 – 0 0 6  
1 1 3 T H C O N G R E S S  R E P O R T  
"  !  
H O U S E  O F  R E P R E S E N T A T I V E S  
2 d  S e s s i o n  1 1 3 – 3 5 6  
U N L O C K I N G  C O N S U M E R  C H O I C E  A N D  W I R E L E S S  
C O M P E T I T I O N  A C T  
F E B R U A R Y 2 5 ,  2 0 1 4 . — C o m m i t t e d  t o  t h e  C o m m i t t e e  o f  t h e  W h o l e  H o u s e  o n  t h e  S t a t e  
o f  t h e  U n i o n  a n d  o r d e r e d  t o  b e  p r i n t e d  
M r .  G O O D L A T T E ,  f r o m  t h e  C o m m i t t e e  o n  t h e  J u d i c i a r y ,  
s u b m i t t e d t h e f o l l o w i n g  
R  E  P  O  R  T  
t o g e t h e r  w i t h  
M I N O R I T Y  A N D  A D D I T I O N A L  V I E W S  
[ T o  a c c o m p a n y  H . R .  1 1 2 3 ]  
[ I n c l u d i n g  c o s t  e s t i m a t e  o f  t h e  C o n g r e s s i o n a l  B u d g e t  O f f i c e ]  
T h e  C o m m i t t e e  o n  t h e  J u d i c i a r y ,  t o  w h o m  w a s  r e f e r r e d  t h e  b i l l  
( H . R .  1 1 2 3 )  t o  p r o m o t e  c o n s u m e r  c h o i c e  a n d  w i r e l e s s  c o m p e t i t i o n  
b y  p e r m i t t i n g  c o n s u m e r s  t o  u n l o c k  m o b i l e  w i r e l e s s  d e v i c e s ,  a n d  f o r  
o t h e r  p u r p o s e s ,  h a v i n g  c o n s i d e r e d  t h e  s a m e ,  r e p o r t  f a v o r a b l y  t h e r e -
o n  w i t h  a n  a m e n d m e n t  a n d  r e c o m m e n d  t h a t  t h e  b i l l  a s  a m e n d e d  
d o  p a s s .  
C O N T E N T S  
P a g e  
T h e  A m e n d m e n t  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2  
P u r p o s e  a n d  S u m m a r y  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2  
B a c k g r o u n d  a n d  N e e d  f o r  t h e  L e g i s l a t i o n  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2  
H e a r i n g s  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3  
C o m m i t t e e  C o n s i d e r a t i o n  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4  
C o m m i t t e e  V o t e s  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4  
C o m m i t t e e  O v e r s i g h t  F i n d i n g s  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5  
N e w  B u d g e t  A u t h o r i t y  a n d  T a x  E x p e n d i t u r e s  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5  
C o n g r e s s i o n a l  B u d g e t  O f f i c e  C o s t  E s t i m a t e  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5  
D u p l i c a t i o n  o f  F e d e r a l  P r o g r a m s  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7  
D i s c l o s u r e  o f  D i r e c t e d  R u l e  M a k i n g s  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7  
P e r f o r m a n c e  G o a l s  a n d  O b j e c t i v e s  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7  
A d v i s o r y  o n  E a r m a r k s  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7  
S e c t i o n - b y - S e c t i o n  A n a l y s i s  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7  
M i n o r i t y  V i e w s  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9  
A d d i t i o n a l  V i e w s  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 4  
V e r D a t e  M a r  1 5  2 0 1 0  0 5 : 2 5  F e b  2 7 ,  2 0 1 4 J k t  0 3 9 0 0 6 P O  0 0 0 0 0 F r m  0 0 0 0 1 F m t  6 6 5 9 S f m t  6 6 4 6 E : \ H R \ O C \ H R 3 5 6 . X X X H R 3 5 6
s m a r t i n e z  o n  D S K 6 T P T V N 1 P R O D  w i t h  R E P O R T S

[PAGE 30]
2  
T h e  A m e n d m e n t  
T h e  a m e n d m e n t  i s  a s  f o l l o w s :  
S t r i k e  a l l  a f t e r  t h e  e n a c t i n g  c l a u s e  a n d  i n s e r t  t h e  f o l l o w i n g :  
S E C T I O N  1 .  S H O R T  T I T L E .  
T h i s  A c t  m a y  b e  c i t e d  a s  t h e  ‘ ‘ U n l o c k i n g  C o n s u m e r  C h o i c e  a n d  W i r e l e s s  C o m p e t i -
t i o n  A c t ’ ’ .  
S E C .  2 .  R E P E A L  O F  E X I S T I N G  R U L E  A N D  A D D I T I O N A L  R U L E M A K I N G  B Y  L I B R A R I A N  O F  C O N -
G R E S S .  
( a )  R E P E A L A N D R E P L A C E . — P a r a g r a p h  ( 3 )  o f  s e c t i o n  2 0 1 . 4 0 ( b )  o f  t i t l e  3 7 ,  C o d e  o f  
F e d e r a l  R e g u l a t i o n s ,  a s  a m e n d e d  a n d  r e v i s e d  b y  t h e  L i b r a r i a n  o f  C o n g r e s s  o n  O c t o -
b e r  2 8 ,  2 0 1 2 ,  p u r s u a n t  t o  t h e  L i b r a r i a n ’ s  a u t h o r i t y  u n d e r  s e c t i o n  1 2 0 1 ( a )  o f  t i t l e  1 7 ,  
U n i t e d  S t a t e s  C o d e ,  s h a l l  h a v e  n o  f o r c e  a n d  e f f e c t ,  a n d  s u c h  p a r a g r a p h  s h a l l  r e a d ,  
a n d  s h a l l  b e  i n  e f f e c t ,  a s  s u c h  p a r a g r a p h  w a s  i n  e f f e c t  o n  J u l y  2 7 ,  2 0 1 0 ,  s u b j e c t  t o  
s u b s e c t i o n s  ( c )  a n d  ( d ) .  
( b )  R U L E M A K I N G . — N o t  l a t e r  t h a n  1  y e a r  a f t e r  t h e  d a t e  o f  t h e  e n a c t m e n t  o f  t h i s  
A c t ,  t h e  L i b r a r i a n  o f  C o n g r e s s ,  u p o n  t h e  r e c o m m e n d a t i o n  o f  t h e  R e g i s t e r  o f  C o p y -
r i g h t s ,  w h o  s h a l l  c o n s u l t  w i t h  t h e  A s s i s t a n t  S e c r e t a r y  f o r  C o m m u n i c a t i o n s  a n d  I n -
f o r m a t i o n  o f  t h e  D e p a r t m e n t  o f  C o m m e r c e  a n d  r e p o r t  a n d  c o m m e n t  o n  h i s  o r  h e r  
v i e w s  i n  m a k i n g  s u c h  r e c o m m e n d a t i o n ,  s h a l l  d e t e r m i n e ,  c o n s i s t e n t  w i t h  t h e  r e q u i r e -
m e n t s  s e t  f o r t h  u n d e r  s e c t i o n  1 2 0 1 ( a ) ( 1 )  o f  t i t l e  1 7 ,  U n i t e d  S t a t e s  C o d e ,  w h e t h e r  t o  
e x t e n d  t h e  e x e m p t i o n  f o r  t h e  c l a s s  o f  w o r k s  d e s c r i b e d  i n  s e c t i o n  2 0 1 . 4 0 ( b ) ( 3 )  o f  t i t l e  
3 7 ,  C o d e  o f  F e d e r a l  R e g u l a t i o n s ,  a s  a m e n d e d  b y  s u b s e c t i o n  ( a )  o f  t h i s  s e c t i o n ,  t o  i n -
c l u d e  a n y  o t h e r  c a t e g o r y  o f  w i r e l e s s  d e v i c e s  i n  a d d i t i o n  t o  w i r e l e s s  t e l e p h o n e  
h a n d s e t s .  
( c )  U N L O C K I N G A T D I R E C T I O N O F P U R C H A S E R O R F A M I L Y M E M B E R . — W i t h  r e s p e c t  
t o  p a r a g r a p h  ( 3 )  o f  s e c t i o n  2 0 1 . 4 0 ( b )  o f  t i t l e  3 7 ,  C o d e  o f  F e d e r a l  R e g u l a t i o n s ,  a s  
m a d e  e f f e c t i v e  b y  s u b s e c t i o n  ( a )  o f  t h i s  s u b s e c t i o n ,  a n d  w i t h  r e s p e c t  t o  a n y  o t h e r  
c a t e g o r y  o f  w i r e l e s s  d e v i c e s ,  i n  a d d i t i o n  t o  w i r e l e s s  t e l e p h o n e  h a n d s e t s ,  w i t h  r e s p e c t  
t o  w h i c h ,  a s  d e t e r m i n e d  b y  t h e  L i b r a r i a n  o f  C o n g r e s s  i n  a  r u l e m a k i n g  c o n d u c t e d  
u n d e r  s u b s e c t i o n  ( b )  o r  o t h e r w i s e  u n d e r  s e c t i o n  1 2 0 1 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( C )  o f  t i t l e  1 7 ,  U n i t e d  
S t a t e s  C o d e ,  c i r c u m v e n t i o n  o f  a  c o m p u t e r  p r o g r a m  b y  t h e  o w n e r  o f  a  c o p y  o f  t h e  
p r o g r a m  i s  p e r m i t t e d  s o l e l y  i n  o r d e r  t o  c o n n e c t  t o  a  w i r e l e s s  c o m m u n i c a t i o n s  n e t -
w o r k  w h e n  s u c h  c o n n e c t i o n  i s  a u t h o r i z e d  b y  t h e  o p e r a t o r  o f  s u c h  n e t w o r k ,  i n  t h e  
c a s e  o f  a  p u r c h a s e r  o f  s u c h  h a n d s e t  o r  d e v i c e  f o r  p e r s o n a l  u s e ,  s u c h  c i r c u m v e n t i o n  
m a y  b e  i n i t i a t e d  b y  t h e  p u r c h a s e r ,  b y  a  f a m i l y  m e m b e r  o f  s u c h  p u r c h a s e r ,  o r  b y  a n -
o t h e r  p e r s o n  a t  t h e  d i r e c t i o n  o f  s u c h  p u r c h a s e r  o r  f a m i l y  m e m b e r ,  f o r  t h e  s o l e  u s e  
o r  b e n e f i t  o f  s u c h  p u r c h a s e r  o r  f a m i l y  m e m b e r .  
( d )  R U L E O F C O N S T R U C T I O N . — N o t h i n g  i n  t h i s  A c t  a l t e r s ,  o r  s h a l l  b e  c o n s t r u e d  t o  
a l t e r ,  t h e  a u t h o r i t y  o f  t h e  L i b r a r i a n  o f  C o n g r e s s  u n d e r  s e c t i o n  1 2 0 1 ( a ) ( 1 )  o f  t i t l e  1 7 ,  
U n i t e d  S t a t e s  C o d e ,  i n c l u d i n g  t h e  a u t h o r i t y ,  w i t h  r e s p e c t  t o  t h e  a p p l i c a b l e  3 - y e a r  
p e r i o d ,  t o  m o d i f y  o r  d e l e t e  p a r a g r a p h  ( 3 )  o f  s e c t i o n  2 0 1 . 4 0 ( b )  o f  t i t l e  3 7 ,  C o d e  o f  F e d -
e r a l  R e g u l a t i o n s ,  o r  m o d i f y  o r  d e l e t e  a n y  c a t e g o r y  o f  w i r e l e s s  d e v i c e s  e x e m p t e d  
u n d e r  s u b s e c t i o n  ( b )  o f  t h i s  s e c t i o n .  
P u r p o s e  a n d  S u m m a r y  
T h e  l e g i s l a t i o n  r e p e a l s  a n  e x i s t i n g  e x e m p t i o n  m a d e  b y  t h e  L i -
b r a r i a n  o f  C o n g r e s s  p u r s u a n t  t o  S e c t i o n  1 2 0 1  o f  T i t l e  1 7  c o n c e r n i n g  
t h e  c i r c u m v e n t i o n  o f  a c c e s s  c o n t r o l  m e a s u r e s  o n  c e l l  p h o n e s ,  a l s o  
k n o w n  a s  ‘ ‘ u n l o c k i n g ’ ’ ,  r e i n s t a t e s  a n  e a r l i e r  v e r s i o n  o f  t h i s  e x e m p -
t i o n ,  d i r e c t s  t h e  L i b r a r i a n  o f  C o n g r e s s  t o  u n d e r t a k e  a  n e w  r u l e -
m a k i n g  f o r  o t h e r  c e l l u l a r  d e v i c e s  s u c h  a s  t a b l e t s  w i t h  c e l l u l a r  
c o n n e c t i v i t y ,  a n d  p e r m i t s  u n l o c k i n g  t o  b e  i n i t i a t e d  b y  t h e  o w n e r  o f  
a  d e v i c e  o r  b y  a n  e n t i t y  o r  p e r s o n  o f  t h e i r  c h o o s i n g  u n d e r  s p e c i f i c  
p u r p o s e s  f o r  c u r r e n t  o r  f u t u r e  e x e m p t i o n s  r e l a t e d  t o  w i r e l e s s  d e -
v i c e s .  T h e  l e g i s l a t i o n  i s  n o t  i n t e n d e d  t o  e n a b l e  b u l k  u n l o c k i n g  b y  
r e s e l l e r s .  
B a c k g r o u n d  a n d  N e e d  f o r  t h e  L e g i s l a t i o n  
T h e  l e g i s l a t i o n  r e p e a l s  a  c u r r e n t  e x e m p t i o n  i n  f a v o r  o f  r e i n -
s t a t i n g  a n  e a r l i e r  e x e m p t i o n  f o r  w h i c h  t h e  L i b r a r i a n  o f  C o n g r e s s  
V e r D a t e  M a r  1 5  2 0 1 0  0 4 : 4 6  F e b  2 7 ,  2 0 1 4 J k t  0 3 9 0 0 6 P O  0 0 0 0 0 F r m  0 0 0 0 2 F m t  6 6 5 9 S f m t  6 6 0 1 E : \ H R \ O C \ H R 3 5 6 . X X X H R 3 5 6
s m a r t i n e z  o n  D S K 6 T P T V N 1 P R O D  w i t h  R E P O R T S
[PAGE 31]
3  
p r e v i o u s l y  d e t e r m i n e d  t h a t  a n  a d e q u a t e  r e c o r d  h a d  b e e n  e s t a b -
l i s h e d .  R a p i d  t e c h n o l o g i c a l  c h a n g e  i n  t h e  c e l l u l a r  t e l e p h o n e  i n d u s -
t r y ,  i n c l u d i n g  c o n s u m e r  i n t e r e s t  i n  m o r e  e x p e n s i v e  s m a r t p h o n e s ,  
h a s  r e s u l t e d  i n  a  s h i f t  a w a y  f r o m  t h e  e a r l i e r  p r a c t i c e  o f  c o n s u m e r s  
e s s e n t i a l l y  d i s p o s i n g  o f  t h e i r  o l d  c e l l  p h o n e s  a f t e r  a  f e w  y e a r s  o f  
o w n e r s h i p .  E s p e c i a l l y  f o r  s m a r t p h o n e s ,  c o n s u m e r s  n o w  u s e  t h e i r  
c e l l  p h o n e s  f o r  l o n g e r  p e r i o d s  o f  t i m e ;  r e u s e  t h e i r  d e v i c e s  u p o n  u p -
g r a d i n g  b y  g i v i n g  t h e i r  o l d e r  d e v i c e s  t o  f a m i l y  m e m b e r s ;  o r  s e l l  
t h e i r  u s e d  d e v i c e s  i n  a  g r o w i n g  m a r k e t p l a c e  f o r  u s e d  p h o n e s  a n d  
t h e n  u s i n g  t h e  p r o c e e d s  f r o m  t h e  s a l e  t o  o f f s e t  t h e  c o s t  o f  r e p l a c e -
m e n t  d e v i c e s .  S i n c e  c o n s u m e r s  w i t h  a  l e g i t i m a t e  i n t e r e s t  i n  
u n l o c k i n g  a r e  u n a b l e  t o  d o  s o  w i t h o u t  r i s k  o f  v i o l a t i n g  1 7  U . S . C .  
§ 1 2 0 1 ,  t h e  C o m m i t t e e  h a s  s u p p o r t e d  t h i s  l e g i s l a t i o n .  E v e n  w i t h  
t h e  r e c e n t  i n d u s t r y  a n n o u n c e m e n t  i n  D e c e m b e r  2 0 1 3  c o n c e r n i n g  
u n l o c k i n g ,  t h e  l e g i s l a t i o n  i s  n e e d e d  t o  a v o i d  t h e  p o t e n t i a l  f o r  c r i m i -
n a l  o r  c i v i l  s a n c t i o n s  f o r  t h o s e  w h o  u n l o c k  c e l l p h o n e s  f o r  c o n -
s u m e r s .  
C o n s u m e r s  s e e k i n g  t o  o w n  a  c e l l p h o n e  w i t h o u t  t h e  i n i t i a l  u p f r o n t  
c o s t  a r e  m o r e  w i l l i n g  t h a n  e v e r  t o  p u r c h a s e  a  u s e d  c e l l p h o n e ,  b u t  
m a y  b e  p r e v e n t e d  f r o m  u s i n g  t h e i r  n e w l y  a c q u i r e d  d e v i c e  o n  t h e i r  
n e t w o r k  o f  c h o i c e  s i n c e  t h a t  d e v i c e  m a y  b e  l o c k e d  t o  a  p a r t i c u l a r  
c a r r i e r .  S i n c e  c o n s u m e r s  m a y  h a v e  a c q u i r e d  t h e  u s e d  c e l l p h o n e  v i a  
a n  o n l i n e  s t o r e  o r  a u c t i o n  s i t e ,  t h e y  m a y  n o t  b e  a b l e  t o  w o r k  w i t h ,  
o r  e v e n  k n o w ,  t h e  o r i g i n a l  p u r c h a s e r  a n d / o r  n e t w o r k  c a r r i e r  t o  
h a v e  t h e  d e v i c e  u n l o c k e d  b y  t h e  o r i g i n a l  n e t w o r k  c a r r i e r .  C o n -
s u m e r s  s e e k i n g  t o  s w i t c h  n e t w o r k  c a r r i e r s  m a y  a l s o  n e e d  a s s i s t -
a n c e  u n l o c k i n g  t h e i r  c e l l p h o n e s ,  e i t h e r  o u t  o f  p e r s o n a l  p r e f e r e n c e  
o r  a n  i n a b i l i t y  t o  e n a b l e  t h e  u n l o c k i n g  o n  t h e i r  o w n .  T h e  C o m -
m i t t e e  b e l i e v e s  t h a t  c o n s u m e r s  s h o u l d  b e  a b l e  t o  s e e k  h e l p  f r o m  
o t h e r s  s u c h  a s  r e l a t i v e s ,  n e i g h b o r s ,  c e l l u l a r  p r o v i d e r s  a n d  t h e i r  
a g e n t s ,  e t c .  . . .  t o  e f f e c t  t h e  u n l o c k i n g .  T h e  C o m m i t t e e  d o e s  n o t  
s u p p o r t  e f f o r t s  t o  u s e  t h i s  l e g i s l a t i o n  f o r  b u l k  u n l o c k i n g .  I n  t h e s e  
s i t u a t i o n s ,  t h e  c o n s u m e r  m u s t  a l r e a d y  b e  i n  p o s s e s s i o n  o f  t h e  c e l -
l u l a r  d e v i c e  i n  o r d e r  t o  u s e  t h i s  p r o v i s i o n .  
T h e  C o m m i t t e e  c o n s i d e r e d  H . R .  1 1 2 3  w i t h  a  f o c u s  o n  i n d i v i d u a l s  
b e i n g  g r a n t e d  t h e  r i g h t  t o  u n l o c k ,  o r  s e e k  a s s i s t a n c e  t o  u n l o c k ,  
t h e i r  w i r e l e s s  d e v i c e s .  S u c h  a c t i o n s  w o u l d  b e  o p p o s i t e  n o t  o n l y  t h e  
C o m m i t t e e ’ s  l e g i s l a t i v e  i n t e n t ,  b u t  a l s o  t h e  s p e c i f i c  s t a t u t o r y  l a n -
g u a g e  a d o p t e d  b y  t h e  C o m m i t t e e .  T h e  C o m m i t t e e  r e c e i v e d  t e s t i -
m o n y  o n ,  a n d  i s  a w a r e  g e n e r a l l y ,  o f  o n g o i n g  c r i m i n a l  e n t e r p r i s e s  
i n  l a r g e  c i t i e s  t h a t  p r o f i t a b l y  s t e a l  l a r g e  n u m b e r s  o f  s m a r t p h o n e s  
f o r  r e s a l e  a f t e r  t h e y  a r e  u n l o c k e d .  T h i s  l e g i s l a t i o n  w o u l d  n o t  e n a b l e  
s u c h  e n t e r p r i s e s  t o  a v o i d  p r o s e c u t i o n  u n d e r  t h e  l a w  f o r  t h e  u n d e r -
l y i n g  t h e f t  o r  f o r  t h e  c i r c u m v e n t i o n .  
T h e  C o m m i t t e e  a l s o  c o n s i d e r e d  H . R .  1 1 2 3  w i t h  a  f o c u s  o n  t h e  
s p e c i f i c  i s s u e  o f  u n l o c k i n g  w i r e l e s s  d e v i c e s ,  r a t h e r  t h a n  t h e  b r o a d e r  
i s s u e  o f  c i r c u m v e n t i o n .  
H e a r i n g s  
T h e  C o m m i t t e e ’ s  S u b c o m m i t t e e  o n  C o u r t s ,  I n t e l l e c t u a l  P r o p e r t y ,  
a n d  t h e  I n t e r n e t  h e l d  a  h e a r i n g  o n  H . R .  1 1 2 3  o n  J u n e  6 ,  2 0 1 3 .  T e s -
t i m o n y  w a s  r e c e i v e d  f r o m  M i c h a e l  A l t s c h u l ,  S e n i o r  V i c e  P r e s i d e n t  
a n d  G e n e r a l  C o u n s e l ,  C T I A  T h e  W i r e l e s s  A s s o c i a t i o n ;  S t e v e  B e r r y ,  
C E O ,  C o m p e t i t i v e  C a r r i e r s  A s s o c i a t i o n ;  S t e v e  M e t a l i t z ,  P a r t n e r ,  
M i t c h e l l ,  S i l b e r b e r g ,  a n d  K n u p p ,  L L P ;  a n d  G e o r g e  S l o v e r ,  S e n i o r  
V e r D a t e  M a r  1 5  2 0 1 0  0 4 : 4 6  F e b  2 7 ,  2 0 1 4 J k t  0 3 9 0 0 6 P O  0 0 0 0 0 F r m  0 0 0 0 3 F m t  6 6 5 9 S f m t  6 6 0 1 E : \ H R \ O C \ H R 3 5 6 . X X X H R 3 5 6
s m a r t i n e z  o n  D S K 6 T P T V N 1 P R O D  w i t h  R E P O R T S
[PAGE 32]
4  
P o l i c y  C o u n s e l ,  C o n s u m e r s  U n i o n .  A d d i t i o n a l  m a t e r i a l  w a s  s u b -
m i t t e d  b y  D i s r u p t i v e  I n n o v a t i o n  a n d  t h e  L i b r a r y  C o p y r i g h t  A l l i -
a n c e .  
C o m m i t t e e  C o n s i d e r a t i o n  
O n  J u l y  3 1 ,  2 0 1 3  t h e  C o m m i t t e e  m e t  i n  o p e n  s e s s i o n  a n d  o r d e r e d  
t h e  b i l l  H . R .  1 1 2 3  f a v o r a b l y  r e p o r t e d  w i t h  a n  a m e n d m e n t ,  b y  a  
v o i c e  v o t e ,  a  q u o r u m  b e i n g  p r e s e n t .  
C o m m i t t e e  V o t e s  
I n  c o m p l i a n c e  w i t h  c l a u s e  3 ( b )  o f  r u l e  X I I I  o f  t h e  R u l e s  o f  t h e  
H o u s e  o f  R e p r e s e n t a t i v e s ,  t h e  C o m m i t t e e  a d v i s e s  t h a t  o n e  r o l l c a l l  
v o t e  o c c u r r e d  d u r i n g  t h e  C o m m i t t e e ’ s  c o n s i d e r a t i o n  o f  H . R .  1 1 2 3 —  
t h e  C o m m i t t e e  c o n s i d e r e d  a  2 n d  d e g r e e  a m e n d m e n t  o f f e r e d  b y  M r .  
W a t t  o f  N o r t h  C a r o l i n a  t h a t  w o u l d  h a v e  l i m i t e d  t h e  l e g a l  r i g h t  t o  
u n l o c k  a  c e l l  p h o n e  t o  t h e  p u r c h a s e r  o r  a  w i r e l e s s  c o m m u n i c a t i o n s  
n e t w o r k  p r o v i d e r  o r  i t s  a u t h o r i z e d  a g e n t  o r  l i c e n s e d  v e n d o r .  T h e  
W a t t  a m e n d m e n t  w a s  d e f e a t e d  8  t o  1 7 .  
R O L L C A L L  N O .  1  
A y e s  N a y s  P r e s e n t  
M r .  G o o d l a t t e  ( V A ) ,  C h a i r m a n . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X  
M r .  S e n s e n b r e n n e r ,  J r .  ( W I ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
M r .  C o b l e  ( N C ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X  
M r .  S m i t h  ( T X ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X  
M r .  C h a b o t  ( O H ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
M r .  B a c h u s  ( A L ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X  
M r .  I s s a  ( C A ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X  
M r .  F o r b e s  ( V A ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X  
M r .  K i n g  ( I A ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X  
M r .  F r a n k s  ( A Z ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X  
M r .  G o h m e r t  ( T X ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
M r .  J o r d a n  ( O H ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X  
M r .  P o e  ( T X ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
M r .  C h a f f e t z  ( U T ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X  
M r .  M a r i n o  ( P A ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X  
M r .  G o w d y  ( S C ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X  
M r .  A m o d e i  ( N V ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
M r .  L a b r a d o r  ( I D ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
M s .  F a r e n t h o l d  ( T X ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
M r .  H o l d i n g  ( N C ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X  
M r .  C o l l i n s  ( G A ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X  
M r .  D e S a n t i s  ( F L ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X  
M r .  S m i t h  ( M O ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
M r .  C o n y e r s ,  J r .  ( M I ) ,  R a n k i n g  M e m b e r . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X  
M r .  N a d l e r  ( N Y ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X  
M r .  S c o t t  ( V A ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X  
M r .  W a t t  ( N C ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X  
M s .  L o f g r e n  ( C A ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X  
M s .  J a c k s o n  L e e  ( T X ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
M r .  C o h e n  ( T N ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
M r .  J o h n s o n  ( G A ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X  
V e r D a t e  M a r  1 5  2 0 1 0  0 4 : 4 6  F e b  2 7 ,  2 0 1 4 J k t  0 3 9 0 0 6 P O  0 0 0 0 0 F r m  0 0 0 0 4 F m t  6 6 5 9 S f m t  6 6 2 1 E : \ H R \ O C \ H R 3 5 6 . X X X H R 3 5 6
s m a r t i n e z  o n  D S K 6 T P T V N 1 P R O D  w i t h  R E P O R T S
[PAGE 33]
5  
R O L L C A L L  N O .  1 — C o n t i n u e d  
A y e s  N a y s  P r e s e n t  
M r .  P i e r l u i s i  ( P R ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
M s .  C h u  ( C A ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X  
M r .  D e u t c h  ( F L ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X  
M r .  G u t i e r r e z  ( I L ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
M s .  B a s s  ( C A ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
M r .  R i c h m o n d  ( L A ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
M s .  D e l B e n e  ( W A ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X  
M r .  G a r c i a  ( F L ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
M r .  J e f f r i e s  ( N Y ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . X  
T o t a l . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8  1 7  
T h e r e  w e r e  t w o  a m e n d m e n t s  a d o p t e d  b y  v o i c e  v o t e :  t h e  u n d e r -
l y i n g  m a n a g e r ’ s  a m e n d m e n t  o f f e r e d  b y  M r .  G o o d l a t t e  o f  V i r g i n i a  
a n d  t h e  2 n d  d e g r e e  a m e n d m e n t  o f f e r e d  b y  M r .  C h a f f e t z  o f  U t a h  
a n d  M s .  L o f g r e n  o f  C a l i f o r n i a .  
C o m m i t t e e  O v e r s i g h t  F i n d i n g s  
I n  c o m p l i a n c e  w i t h  c l a u s e  3 ( c ) ( 1 )  o f  r u l e  X I I I  o f  t h e  R u l e s  o f  t h e  
H o u s e  o f  R e p r e s e n t a t i v e s ,  t h e  C o m m i t t e e  a d v i s e s  t h a t  t h e  f i n d i n g s  
a n d  r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s  o f  t h e  C o m m i t t e e ,  b a s e d  o n  o v e r s i g h t  a c t i v i -
t i e s  u n d e r  c l a u s e  2 ( b ) ( 1 )  o f  r u l e  X  o f  t h e  R u l e s  o f  t h e  H o u s e  o f  R e p -
r e s e n t a t i v e s ,  a r e  i n c o r p o r a t e d  i n  t h e  d e s c r i p t i v e  p o r t i o n s  o f  t h i s  r e -
p o r t .  
N e w  B u d g e t  A u t h o r i t y  a n d  T a x  E x p e n d i t u r e s  
C l a u s e  3 ( c ) ( 2 )  o f  r u l e  X I I I  o f  t h e  R u l e s  o f  t h e  H o u s e  o f  R e p r e s e n t -
a t i v e s  i s  i n a p p l i c a b l e  b e c a u s e  t h i s  l e g i s l a t i o n  d o e s  n o t  p r o v i d e  n e w  
b u d g e t a r y  a u t h o r i t y  o r  i n c r e a s e d  t a x  e x p e n d i t u r e s .  
C o n g r e s s i o n a l  B u d g e t  O f f i c e  C o s t  E s t i m a t e  
I n  c o m p l i a n c e  w i t h  c l a u s e  3 ( c ) ( 3 )  o f  r u l e  X I I I  o f  t h e  R u l e s  o f  t h e  
H o u s e  o f  R e p r e s e n t a t i v e s ,  t h e  C o m m i t t e e  s e t s  f o r t h ,  w i t h  r e s p e c t  t o  
t h e  b i l l ,  H . R .  1 1 2 3 ,  t h e  f o l l o w i n g  e s t i m a t e  a n d  c o m p a r i s o n  p r e p a r e d  
b y  t h e  D i r e c t o r  o f  t h e  C o n g r e s s i o n a l  B u d g e t  O f f i c e  u n d e r  s e c t i o n  
4 0 2  o f  t h e  C o n g r e s s i o n a l  B u d g e t  A c t  o f  1 9 7 4 :  
U . S .  C O N G R E S S ,  
C O N G R E S S I O N A L B U D G E T O F F I C E ,  
W a s h i n g t o n ,  D C ,  N o v e m b e r  5 ,  2 0 1 3 .  
H o n .  B O B G O O D L A T T E ,  C H A I R M A N ,  
C o m m i t t e e  o n  t h e  J u d i c i a r y ,  
H o u s e  o f  R e p r e s e n t a t i v e s ,  W a s h i n g t o n ,  D C .  
D E A R M R .  C H A I R M A N :  T h e  C o n g r e s s i o n a l  B u d g e t  O f f i c e  h a s  p r e -
p a r e d  t h e  e n c l o s e d  c o s t  e s t i m a t e  f o r  H . R .  1 1 2 3 ,  t h e  ‘ ‘ U n l o c k i n g  
C o n s u m e r  C h o i c e  a n d  W i r e l e s s  C o m p e t i t i o n  A c t . ’ ’  
V e r D a t e  M a r  1 5  2 0 1 0  0 4 : 4 6  F e b  2 7 ,  2 0 1 4 J k t  0 3 9 0 0 6 P O  0 0 0 0 0 F r m  0 0 0 0 5 F m t  6 6 5 9 S f m t  6 6 0 1 E : \ H R \ O C \ H R 3 5 6 . X X X H R 3 5 6
s m a r t i n e z  o n  D S K 6 T P T V N 1 P R O D  w i t h  R E P O R T S
[PAGE 34]
6  
I f  y o u  w i s h  f u r t h e r  d e t a i l s  o n  t h i s  e s t i m a t e ,  w e  w i l l  b e  p l e a s e d  
t o  p r o v i d e  t h e m .  T h e  C B O  s t a f f  c o n t a c t  i s  S u s a n  W i l l i e ,  w h o  c a n  
b e  r e a c h e d  a t  2 2 6 – 2 8 6 0 .  
S i n c e r e l y ,  
D O U G L A S W .  E L M E N D O R F ,  
D I R E C T O R .  
E n c l o s u r e  
c c :  H o n o r a b l e  J o h n  C o n y e r s ,  J r .  
R a n k i n g  M e m b e r  
H . R .  1 1 2 3 — U n l o c k i n g  C o n s u m e r  C h o i c e  a n d  W i r e l e s s  
C o m p e t i t i o n  A c t .  
A s  o r d e r e d  r e p o r t e d  b y  t h e  H o u s e  C o m m i t t e e  o n  t h e  J u d i c i a r y  
o n  J u l y  3 1 ,  2 0 1 3 .  
C B O  e s t i m a t e s  t h a t  i m p l e m e n t i n g  H . R .  1 1 2 3  w o u l d  h a v e  n o  s i g -
n i f i c a n t  e f f e c t  o n  d i s c r e t i o n a r y  s p e n d i n g  o v e r  t h e  2 0 1 4 – 2 0 1 8  p e r i o d .  
E n a c t i n g  H . R .  1 1 2 3  w o u l d  n o t  a f f e c t  d i r e c t  s p e n d i n g  o r  r e v e n u e s ;  
t h e r e f o r e ,  p a y - a s - y o u - g o  p r o c e d u r e s  d o  n o t  a p p l y .  
H . R .  1 1 2 3  w o u l d  r e p e a l  a  r u l e  p u b l i s h e d  i n  O c t o b e r  2 0 1 2  b y  t h e  
L i b r a r i a n  o f  C o n g r e s s  ( L O C )  t h a t  w o u l d  l i m i t  t h e  a b i l i t y  o f  c e r t a i n  
o w n e r s  o f  w i r e l e s s  t e l e p h o n e  h a n d s e t s  t o  ‘ ‘ u n l o c k ’ ’  t h e i r  p h o n e s ,  
t h a t  i s ,  t o  c i r c u m v e n t  s o f t w a r e  p r o t e c t i o n s  t h a t  p r e v e n t  t h e  o w n e r  
f r o m  c o n n e c t i n g  t o  a  d i f f e r e n t  w i r e l e s s  n e t w o r k .  T h e  b i l l  w o u l d  r e -
i n s t a t e  a n  e a r l i e r  r u l e  t h a t  p r o v i d e d  b r o a d e r  a u t h o r i t y  t o  c i r -
c u m v e n t  s u c h  s o f t w a r e  p r o t e c t i o n s .  H . R .  1 1 2 3  a l s o  w o u l d  d i r e c t  t h e  
L O C  t o  c o n s i d e r ,  w i t h i n  a  y e a r  a f t e r  e n a c t m e n t ,  w h e t h e r  t o  e x t e n d  
t h a t  b r o a d e r  a u t h o r i t y  t o  o t h e r  c a t e g o r i e s  o f  w i r e l e s s  d e v i c e s  i n  a d -
d i t i o n  t o  s m a r t p h o n e s .  B a s e d  o n  i n f o r m a t i o n  f r o m  t h e  L O C ,  C B O  
e x p e c t s  t h a t  i m p l e m e n t i n g  t h e  p r o v i s i o n s  o f  t h e  b i l l  w o u l d  n o t  h a v e  
a  s i g n i f i c a n t  e f f e c t  o n  t h e  a g e n c y ’ s  w o r k l o a d .  
H . R .  1 1 2 3  c o n t a i n s  n o  i n t e r g o v e r n m e n t a l  m a n d a t e s  a s  d e f i n e d  i n  
t h e  U n f u n d e d  M a n d a t e s  R e f o r m  A c t  a n d  w o u l d  n o t  a f f e c t  t h e  b u d g -
e t s  o f  s t a t e ,  l o c a l ,  o r  t r i b a l  g o v e r n m e n t s .  
H . R .  1 1 2 3  w o u l d  i m p o s e  a  p r i v a t e - s e c t o r  m a n d a t e  b y  e l i m i n a t i n g  
a n  e x i s t i n g  r i g h t  o f  a c t i o n  f o r  w i r e l e s s  c a r r i e r s  ( a n d  o t h e r s ) — w h o  
a r e  c u r r e n t l y  a b l e  t o  p u r s u e  l e g a l  a c t i o n  a g a i n s t  t h o s e  w h o ,  w i t h o u t  
p e r m i s s i o n ,  c i r c u m v e n t  t h e  a c c e s s  c o n t r o l s  o n  w i r e l e s s  t e l e p h o n e  
h a n d s e t s  s o l d  a f t e r  J a n u a r y  2 6 ,  2 0 1 3 .  T h e  c o s t  o f  t h e  m a n d a t e  
w o u l d  b e  t h e  f o r g o n e  n e t  v a l u e  o f  s e t t l e m e n t s  a n d  d a m a g e s  i n  s u c h  
c a s e s .  A  s e a r c h  o f  t h e  l i t e r a t u r e  s u g g e s t s  t h a t  f e w ,  i f  a n y ,  o f  t h o s e  
t y p e s  o f  l a w s u i t s  h a v e  b e e n  b r o u g h t  a g a i n s t  i n d i v i d u a l  c o n s u m e r s .  
B e c a u s e  s u c h  c l a i m s  w o u l d  p r o b a b l y  b e  u n c o m m o n  i n  t h e  f u t u r e  
a n d  t h e  d a m a g e  a w a r d s  a l l o w e d  i n  s u c h  c a s e s  w o u l d  b e  r e l a t i v e l y  
s m a l l ,  C B O  e s t i m a t e s  t h a t  t h e  c o s t  o f  t h i s  m a n d a t e  w o u l d  b e  s m a l l  
a n d  f a l l  b e l o w  t h e  a n n u a l  t h r e s h o l d  e s t a b l i s h e d  i n  U M R A  f o r  p r i -
v a t e - s e c t o r  m a n d a t e s  ( $ 1 5 0  m i l l i o n  i n  2 0 1 3 ,  a d j u s t e d  a n n u a l l y  f o r  
i n f l a t i o n ) .  I f  t h e  L i b r a r i a n  o f  C o n g r e s s  d e c i d e s  t o  b r o a d e n  t h e  e x -
e m p t i o n  a l l o w e d  u n d e r  t h e  b i l l  t o  c o v e r  o t h e r  t y p e s  o f  m o b i l e  d e -
v i c e s ,  s u c h  a n  a c t i o n  w o u l d  e x p a n d  t h e  l i m i t  o f  s u c h  r i g h t s  o f  a c -
t i o n .  T h e  c o s t  o f  t h a t  e x p a n s i o n  w o u l d  d e p e n d  o n  w h a t  d e v i c e s  t h e  
L i b r a r i a n  w o u l d  i n c l u d e  u n d e r  t h e  e x e m p t i o n .  C B O  h a s  n o  b a s i s  t o  
V e r D a t e  M a r  1 5  2 0 1 0  0 4 : 4 6  F e b  2 7 ,  2 0 1 4 J k t  0 3 9 0 0 6 P O  0 0 0 0 0 F r m  0 0 0 0 6 F m t  6 6 5 9 S f m t  6 6 0 1 E : \ H R \ O C \ H R 3 5 6 . X X X H R 3 5 6
s m a r t i n e z  o n  D S K 6 T P T V N 1 P R O D  w i t h  R E P O R T S
[PAGE 35]
7  
e s t i m a t e  a d d i t i o n a l  c o s t s  a s  t h e y  w o u l d  d e p e n d  o n  t h e  r e g u l a t o r y  
a c t i o n s  t a k e n  b y  t h e  L i b r a r i a n .  
T h e  C B O  s t a f f  c o n t a c t s  f o r  t h i s  e s t i m a t e  a r e  S u s a n  W i l l i e  ( f o r  
F e d e r a l  c o s t s ) ,  a n d  M a r i n  B u r n e t t  a n d  N a t h a n  M u s i c k  ( f o r  t h e  p r i -
v a t e - s e c t o r  i m p a c t ) .  T h e  e s t i m a t e  w a s  a p p r o v e d  b y  T h e r e s a  G u l l o ,  
D e p u t y  A s s i s t a n t  D i r e c t o r  f o r  B u d g e t  A n a l y s i s .  
D u p l i c a t i o n  o f  F e d e r a l  P r o g r a m s  
N o  p r o v i s i o n  o f  H . R .  1 1 2 3  e s t a b l i s h e s  o r  r e a u t h o r i z e s  a  p r o g r a m  
o f  t h e  F e d e r a l  G o v e r n m e n t  k n o w n  t o  b e  d u p l i c a t i v e  o f  a n o t h e r  F e d -
e r a l  p r o g r a m ,  a  p r o g r a m  t h a t  w a s  i n c l u d e d  i n  a n y  r e p o r t  f r o m  t h e  
G o v e r n m e n t  A c c o u n t a b i l i t y  O f f i c e  t o  C o n g r e s s  p u r s u a n t  t o  s e c t i o n  
2 1  o f  P u b l i c  L a w  1 1 1 – 1 3 9 ,  o r  a  p r o g r a m  r e l a t e d  t o  a  p r o g r a m  i d e n -
t i f i e d  i n  t h e  m o s t  r e c e n t  C a t a l o g  o f  F e d e r a l  D o m e s t i c  A s s i s t a n c e .  
D i s c l o s u r e  o f  D i r e c t e d  R u l e  M a k i n g s  
T h e  C o m m i t t e e  e s t i m a t e s  t h a t  H . R .  1 1 2 3  s p e c i f i c a l l y  d i r e c t s  t h e  
L i b r a r i a n  o f  C o n g r e s s  t o  c o n d u c t  o n e  r u l e  m a k i n g  p r o c e e d i n g  w i t h -
i n  t h e  m e a n i n g  o f  5  U . S . C .  5 5 1 .  
P e r f o r m a n c e  G o a l s  a n d  O b j e c t i v e s  
T h e  C o m m i t t e e  s t a t e s  t h a t  p u r s u a n t  t o  c l a u s e  3 ( c ) ( 4 )  o f  r u l e  X I I I  
o f  t h e  R u l e s  o f  t h e  H o u s e  o f  R e p r e s e n t a t i v e s ,  H . R .  1 1 2 3  r e i n s t a t e s  
a n  e a r l i e r  e x e m p t i o n  t o  1 7  U . S . C .  1 2 0 1  t o  p e r m i t  i n d i v i d u a l s  t o  
u n l o c k  t h e i r  c e l l  p h o n e s ,  c r e a t e s  a  n e w  r u l e m a k i n g  t o  d e t e r m i n e  i f  
t h a t  e x e m p t i o n  s h o u l d  b e  e x t e n d e d  t o  o t h e r  c e l l u l a r  d e v i c e s ,  a n d  
e n a b l e s  o t h e r s  t o  l e g a l l y  p r o v i d e  t e c h n i c a l  a s s i s t a n c e  f o r  t h e  p u r -
p o s e  o f  u n l o c k i n g .  
A d v i s o r y  o n  E a r m a r k s  
I n  a c c o r d a n c e  w i t h  c l a u s e  9  o f  r u l e  X X I  o f  t h e  R u l e s  o f  t h e  H o u s e  
o f  R e p r e s e n t a t i v e s ,  H . R .  1 1 2 3  d o e s  n o t  c o n t a i n  a n y  c o n g r e s s i o n a l  
e a r m a r k s ,  l i m i t e d  t a x  b e n e f i t s ,  o r  l i m i t e d  t a r i f f  b e n e f i t s  a s  d e f i n e d  
i n  c l a u s e  9 ( e ) ,  9 ( f ) ,  o r  9 ( g )  o f  r u l e  X X I .  
S e c t i o n - b y - S e c t i o n  A n a l y s i s  
T h e  f o l l o w i n g  d i s c u s s i o n  d e s c r i b e s  t h e  b i l l  a s  r e p o r t e d  b y  t h e  
C o m m i t t e e .  
S e c .  1 .  S h o r t  t i t l e .  S e c t i o n  1  s e t s  f o r t h  t h e  s h o r t  t i t l e  o f  t h e  b i l l  
a s  t h e  ‘ ‘ U n l o c k i n g  C o n s u m e r  C h o i c e  a n d  W i r e l e s s  C o m p e t i t i o n  
A c t . ’ ’  
S e c .  2 .  R e p e a l  o f  E x i s t i n g  R u l e  a n d  A d d i t i o n a l  R u l e m a k i n g  b y  L i -
b r a r i a n  o f  C o n g r e s s .  S u b s e c t i o n  2 ( a )  r e i n s t a t e s  a n  e x e m p t i o n  i n  
p a r a g r a p h  ( 3 )  o f  s e c t i o n  2 0 1 . 4 0 ( b )  o f  t i t l e  3 7 ,  C o d e  o f  F e d e r a l  R e g u -
l a t i o n s ,  t h a t  w a s  i n  e f f e c t  o n  J u l y  2 7 ,  2 0 1 0 .  T h i s  e x e m p t i o n  w a s  
m a d e  p u r s u a n t  t o  t h e  a u t h o r i t y  o f  t h e  L i b r a r i a n  o f  C o n g r e s s  a s  a  
p a r t  o f  h i s  s t a t u t o r y  a u t h o r i t y  u n d e r  S e c t i o n  1 2 0 1 ( a ) .  T h i s  e x e m p -
t i o n ,  s e t  f o r t h  i n  p a r a g r a p h  ( 3 )  o f  s e c t i o n  2 0 1 . 4 0 ( b )  o f  T i t l e  3 7 ,  C o d e  
o f  F e d e r a l  R e g u l a t i o n s  s t a t e s  ‘ ‘ ( 3 )  C o m p u t e r  p r o g r a m s ,  i n  t h e  f o r m  
o f  f i r m w a r e  o r  s o f t w a r e ,  t h a t  e n a b l e  u s e d  w i r e l e s s  t e l e p h o n e  
h a n d s e t s  t o  c o n n e c t  t o  a  w i r e l e s s  t e l e c o m m u n i c a t i o n s  n e t w o r k ,  
w h e n  c i r c u m v e n t i o n  i s  i n i t i a t e d  b y  t h e  o w n e r  o f  t h e  c o p y  o f  t h e  
c o m p u t e r  p r o g r a m  s o l e l y  i n  o r d e r  t o  c o n n e c t  t o  a  w i r e l e s s  t e l e -
V e r D a t e  M a r  1 5  2 0 1 0  0 5 : 2 5  F e b  2 7 ,  2 0 1 4 J k t  0 3 9 0 0 6 P O  0 0 0 0 0 F r m  0 0 0 0 7 F m t  6 6 5 9 S f m t  6 6 0 1 E : \ H R \ O C \ H R 3 5 6 . X X X H R 3 5 6
s m a r t i n e z  o n  D S K 6 T P T V N 1 P R O D  w i t h  R E P O R T S
[PAGE 36]
8  
c o m m u n i c a t i o n s  n e t w o r k  a n d  a c c e s s  t o  t h e  n e t w o r k  i s  a u t h o r i z e d  
b y  t h e  o p e r a t o r  o f  t h e  n e t w o r k . ’ ’  
S u b s e c t i o n  2 ( b )  c r e a t e s  a n  e x p e d i t e d  p r o c e s s  t o  d e t e r m i n e  w h e t h -
e r  o r  n o t  t h e  r e i n s t a t e d  r u l e  s h o u l d  c o v e r  o t h e r  c a t e g o r i e s  o f  w i r e -
l e s s  d e v i c e s .  T h e  C o m m i t t e e  a d d e d  t h i s  p r o v i s i o n  t o  p e r m i t  t h e  L i -
b r a r i a n  o f  C o n g r e s s  t o  c r e a t e  p a r i t y  a m o n g  d e v i c e s  w i t h  c e l l u l a r  
c o n n e c t i v i t y .  A l t h o u g h  t h e  l a n g u a g e  o f  S u b s e c t i o n  2 ( b )  d o e s  n o t  
l i m i t  t h e  c a t e g o r i e s  o f  d e v i c e s  t h a t  c o n n e c t  t o  w i r e l e s s  t e l e -
c o m m u n i c a t i o n s  n e t w o r k s  t o  b e  c o n s i d e r e d ,  t h e  C o m m i t t e e  a n t i c i -
p a t e s  t h a t  t h i s  S u b s e c t i o n  w i l l  b e  m o s t  r e l e v a n t  t o  c o m p u t e r  t a b l e t  
d e v i c e s  t h a t  h a v e  t h e  a b i l i t y  t o  c o n n e c t  t o  w i r e l e s s  n e t w o r k s .  T h e  
C o m m i t t e e  e x p e c t s  r o b u s t  d e b a t e  a m o n g  i n t e r e s t e d  p a r t i e s  b e f o r e  
t h e  r e s u l t i n g  C o p y r i g h t  O f f i c e  r u l e m a k i n g  p r o c e s s  c o n c e r n i n g  
w h i c h  a d d i t i o n a l  c a t e g o r i e s  o f  d e v i c e s ,  i f  a n y ,  s h o u l d  b e  e x e m p t  
f r o m  t h e  1 2 0 1  a n t i - c i r c u m v e n t i o n  r e s t r i c t i o n s .  G i v e n  t h e  t e c h n i c a l  
s i m i l a r i t i e s  a m o n g  c e l l u l a r  c o n n e c t e d  d e v i c e s ,  t h e  C o m m i t t e e  e x -
p e c t s  t h e  R e g i s t e r  o f  C o p y r i g h t s  a n d  L i b r a r i a n  o f  C o n g r e s s  t o  e i -
t h e r  c r e a t e  a  b l a n k e t  e x e m p t i o n  o r  n o  e x e m p t i o n  i n  t h e  f u t u r e  f o r  
a l l  c e l l u l a r  d e v i c e s .  
S u b s e c t i o n  2 ( c )  a l l o w s  a n  a c t  o f  u n l o c k i n g  t o  b e  i n i t i a t e d  b y  t h e  
p u r c h a s e r  o f  a  w i r e l e s s  t e l e p h o n e  h a n d s e t ,  b y  a  f a m i l y  m e m b e r  o f  
s u c h  p e r s o n ,  o r  b y  a n o t h e r  p e r s o n  a t  t h e  d i r e c t i o n  o f  s u c h  p u r -
c h a s e r  o r  f a m i l y  m e m b e r  f o r  t h e  s o l e  u s e  o r  b e n e f i t  o f  s u c h  p u r -
c h a s e r  o r  f a m i l y  m e m b e r .  T h i s  c i r c u m v e n t i o n  m u s t  b e  w i t h i n  t h e  
c o n s t r a i n t s  o f  t h e  e x e m p t i o n  t h a t  h a d  p r e v i o u s l y  b e e n  g r a n t e d  b y  
t h e  L i b r a r i a n  o f  C o n g r e s s ,  t h a t  a r e  a d o p t e d  b y  t h e  L i b r a r i a n  b a s e d  
o n  t h e  n a r r o w  a d d i t i o n a l  r u l e m a k i n g  a u t h o r i z e d  b y  t h i s  l e g i s l a t i o n ,  
o r  t h a t  m a y  b e  a d o p t e d  f o r  t h e  s a m e  p u r p o s e  i n  s u b s e q u e n t  p r o -
c e e d i n g s  u n d e r  S e c t i o n  1 2 0 1 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( C ) .  A s  r e i n s t a t e d ,  s e c t i o n  
2 0 1 . 4 0 ( b ) ( 3 )  o f  t i t l e  3 7 ,  C o d e  o f  F e d e r a l  R e g u l a t i o n s ,  a l l o w s  s u c h  
a c t s  o f  c i r c u m v e n t i o n  t o  b e  i n i t i a t e d  b y  t h e  o w n e r  o f  t h e  c o p y  o f  t h e  
c o m p u t e r  p r o g r a m  o n  t h e  p h o n e  t h a t  e n a b l e s  i t  t o  c o n n e c t  t o  a  
w i r e l e s s  t e l e c o m m u n i c a t i o n s  n e t w o r k ,  a n d  t h e n  o n l y  w h e n  p e r -
f o r m e d  s o l e l y  i n  o r d e r  t o  c o n n e c t  t o  a  w i r e l e s s  t e l e c o m m u n i c a t i o n s  
n e t w o r k  a n d  s u c h  a c c e s s  i s  a u t h o r i z e d  b y  t h e  o p e r a t o r  o f  t h e  n e t -
w o r k .  F o r  a c c u r a c y ,  t h e  C o m m i t t e e  n o t e s  t h a t  l a n g u a g e  o f  t h e  e x -
e m p t i o n  a d o p t e d  b y  t h e  L i b r a r i a n  s h o u l d  h a v e  r e f e r r e d  t o  t h e  
o w n e r  o f  t h e  d e v i c e ,  r a t h e r  t h a n  t h e  o w n e r  o f  t h e  c o p y  o f  t h e  c o m -
p u t e r  p r o g r a m  s i n c e  m o s t  c o m p u t e r  p r o g r a m s  a r e  l i c e n s e d ,  r a t h e r  
t h a n  s o l d ,  a l t h o u g h  t h e  C o m m i t t e e  b e l i e v e s  t h a t  t h e  d i f f e r e n c e  i n  
l a n g u a g e  h a s  n o  s u b s t a n t i v e  e f f e c t .  H o w e v e r ,  t h e  C o m m i t t e e  w i l l  
c h a n g e  t h e  l a n g u a g e  o f  t h i s  l e g i s l a t i v e  p r o v i s i o n  a c c o r d i n g l y  i n  f u -
t u r e  a c t i o n s .  
A s  t h e s e  l i m i t a t i o n s  i m p l y ,  t h e  l e g i s l a t i o n  d o e s  n o t  g r a n t  t h e  L i -
b r a r i a n  a u t h o r i t y  t o  a u t h o r i z e  c i r c u m v e n t i o n  i n  a n y  o t h e r  c o n t e x t  
i n  w h i c h  t h e  L i b r a r i a n  m a y  g r a n t  a n  e x e m p t i o n  u n d e r  S e c t i o n  
1 2 0 1 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( C ) .  T h e  C o m m i t t e e  u n d e r s t a n d s  t h a t  u n l o c k i n g  a  
h a n d s e t  t o  e n a b l e  i t  t o  c o n n e c t  t o  t h e  n e t w o r k  o f  a n o t h e r  c a r r i e r  
t y p i c a l l y  i n v o l v e s  t h e  s i m p l e  e n t r y  o f  a  c o d e ,  a n d  t h a t  d o i n g  s o  r e -
s u l t s  i n  n o t h i n g  m o r e  t h a n  e n a b l i n g  t h e  p h o n e  t o  c o n n e c t  t o  a n -
o t h e r  n e t w o r k .  I n  r e p o r t i n g  t h i s  l e g i s l a t i o n ,  t h e  C o m m i t t e e  n o t e s  
t h e  u n i q u e  c i r c u m s t a n c e s  o f  t h e  p h o n e  u n l o c k i n g  s i t u a t i o n ,  i n c l u d -
i n g  t h e  f a c t  t h a t  t h e  c i r c u m v e n t i o n  t h a t  i s  a u t h o r i z e d  e n a b l e s  t h e  
p u r c h a s e r  o n l y  t o  c o n n e c t  h i s  o r  h e r  d e v i c e  t o  a  w i r e l e s s  t e l e p h o n e  
n e t w o r k  o t h e r  t h a n  t h e  o n e  a s s o c i a t e d  w i t h  t h e  d e v i c e  w h e n  i t  w a s  
V e r D a t e  M a r  1 5  2 0 1 0  0 4 : 4 6  F e b  2 7 ,  2 0 1 4 J k t  0 3 9 0 0 6 P O  0 0 0 0 0 F r m  0 0 0 0 8 F m t  6 6 5 9 S f m t  6 6 0 1 E : \ H R \ O C \ H R 3 5 6 . X X X H R 3 5 6
s m a r t i n e z  o n  D S K 6 T P T V N 1 P R O D  w i t h  R E P O R T S
[PAGE 37]
9  
1
T h e  f i v e  w i r e l e s s  c o m p a n i e s  a r e :  A T & T ,  S p r i n t ,  T - M o b i l e ,  U . S .  C e l l u l a r ,  a n d  V e r i z o n  W i r e -
l e s s .  L e t t e r  f r o m  S t e v e  L a r g e n t ,  P r e s i d e n t  &  C E O ,  C T I A ,  t o  T h o m a s  E .  W h e e l e r ,  C h a i r ,  F e d e r a l  
C o m m u n i c a t i o n s  C o m m i s s i o n  e t  a l .  ( D e c .  1 2 ,  2 0 1 3 ) ,  a v a i l a b l e  a t  h t t p : / / w w w . f c c . g o v / d o c u m e n t /  
c t i a - l e t t e r - c a r r i e r - u n l o c k i n g - v o l u n t a r y - a g r e e m e n t - f c c - s t a t e m e n t s .  
p u r c h a s e d .  C i r c u m v e n t i o n  f o r  u n l o c k i n g  d o e s  n o t  c o m p r o m i s e  t h e  
s e c u r i t y  o f  t h e  i n f o r m a t i o n  o n  t h e  p h o n e ,  a n d  i t  d o e s  n o t  e x p o s e  
a n y  c o p y r i g h t e d  w o r k s  p r e s e n t  o n  t h e  p h o n e  t o  i n c r e a s e d  r i s k  o f  i n -
f r i n g e m e n t .  L e g a l i z a t i o n  o f  c i r c u m v e n t i o n  t h a t  h a s  s u c h  h a r m f u l  
e f f e c t s  i s  n o t  t h e  i n t e n t  o f  t h i s  l e g i s l a t i o n  a n d  i t  w o u l d  n o t  b e  a u -
t h o r i z e d  b y  i t s  p r o v i s i o n s .  
N o t h i n g  i n  t h i s  A c t  i s  i n t e n d e d  t o  s e r v e  a s  a  l i m i t a t i o n  o n  s e c t i o n  
1 2 0 1 ( a ) ( 2 )  o r  s e c t i o n  1 2 0 1 ( b ) ,  w h i c h  r e m a i n  c r i t i c a l  t o  t h e  e f f e c t i v e -
n e s s  o f  C h a p t e r  1 2  o f  T i t l e  1 7  a n d  a r e  i n  n o  w a y  a l t e r e d  o r  m o d i -
f i e d  b y  t h e  p r o v i s i o n s  o f  t h i s  l e g i s l a t i o n .  
S e c t i o n  2 ( d )  c o n t a i n s  a  r u l e  o f  c o n s t r u c t i o n  t o  c l a r i f y  t h e  l e g i s l a -
t i o n ’ s  i m p a c t  u p o n  t h e  L i b r a r i a n ’ s  e x i s t i n g  a u t h o r i t y .  S p e c i f i c a l l y ,  
a s  a  r e s u l t  o f  t h i s  l e g i s l a t i o n ,  t h e  L i b r a r i a n  i s  n o t  a l l o w e d  t o  m o d i f y  
t h e  u s u a l  3 - y e a r  c y c l e  f o r  i t s  s e c t i o n  1 2 0 1  r u l e m a k i n g s ,  t o  m o d i f y  
o r  d e l e t e  e x i s t i n g  e x e m p t i o n s ,  o r  t o  m o d i f y  o r  d e l e t e  e x e m p t i o n s  
c r e a t e d  b y  s u b s e c t i o n  ( b ) .  
M i n o r i t y  V i e w s  
H . R .  1 1 2 3 ,  t h e  ‘ ‘ U n l o c k i n g  C o n s u m e r  C h o i c e  a n d  W i r e l e s s  C o m -
p e t i t i o n  A c t , ’ ’  a s  i n t r o d u c e d ,  w a s  a  b i p a r t i s a n ,  b i c a m e r a l  b i l l  d e -
s i g n e d  t o  r e s t o r e  c o n s u m e r s ’  a b i l i t y  t o  u n l o c k  t h e i r  c e l l  p h o n e s .  W e  
s u p p o r t  t h i s  c o m m o n  s e n s e  p r o p o s a l  b e c a u s e  i t  p r o v i d e s  c o n s u m e r s  
w i t h  g r e a t e r  c h o i c e  b y  a l l o w i n g  t h e m  t o  k e e p  t h e i r  e x i s t i n g  c e l l  
p h o n e s  i f  t h e y  c h o o s e  t o  s w i t c h  t o  a  n e w  c e l l u l a r  n e t w o r k  p r o v i d e r .  
W e  a l s o  a g r e e  t h a t  i n d i v i d u a l s  w h o  a r e  n o t  t e c h n o l o g i c a l l y  s a v v y  
s h o u l d  b e  a l l o w e d  t o  o b t a i n  a s s i s t a n c e  w i t h  u n l o c k i n g  t h e i r  c e l l  
p h o n e s .  
N o n e t h e l e s s ,  w e  b e l i e v e  t h a t  a m e n d m e n t s  a d o p t e d  d u r i n g  t h e  J u -
d i c i a r y  C o m m i t t e e ’ s  m a r k u p  o f  t h i s  l e g i s l a t i o n  m e r i t  f u r t h e r  a t t e n -
t i o n .  I n  p a r t i c u l a r ,  C o n g r e s s  s h o u l d  c o n s i d e r  t h e  p o s s i b l e  u n i n -
t e n d e d  p o l i c y  c o n s e q u e n c e s  o f  t h e  f o l l o w i n g  k e y  c h a n g e s  m a d e  b y  
t h e  m a n a g e r ’ s  a m e n d m e n t :  ( 1 )  t h e  e x p a n s i o n  o f  t h e  u n i v e r s e  o f  p e r -
s o n s  a u t h o r i z e d  t o  u n l o c k  c e l l  p h o n e s ;  ( 2 )  t h e  i m p o s i t i o n  o f  t h e  
t h i r d  p a r t y  a s s i s t a n c e  r e q u i r e m e n t  o n  a n y  f u t u r e  e x e m p t i o n s  i n -
v o l v i n g  t h e  c a t e g o r y  o f  w o r k s  t h a t  i n c l u d e s  t a b l e t s ;  a n d  ( 3 )  t h e  p o -
t e n t i a l  i m p a c t  o n  t h e  C o p y r i g h t  O f f i c e  r u l e m a k i n g  p r o c e s s .  W e  s u b -
m i t  t h e s e  v i e w s  t o  h i g h l i g h t  t h e s e  c h a n g e s  a n d  i d e n t i f y  i s s u e s  o f  
p o s s i b l e  c o n c e r n  r e g a r d i n g  t h e  b i l l  a s  r e p o r t e d .  
W e  w o u l d  a l s o  n o t e  t h a t  s i n c e  t h e  C o m m i t t e e ’ s  m a r k u p  o f  H . R .  
1 1 2 3  o n  J u l y  3 1 ,  2 0 1 3 ,  t h e  f i v e  l a r g e s t  m o b i l e  c a r r i e r s  h a v e  a g r e e d  
t o  a l l o w  c e l l  p h o n e  u n l o c k i n g  a f t e r  a  c o n s u m e r ’ s  s e r v i c e  c o n t r a c t  
e x p i r e s .  S p e c i f i c a l l y ,  i n  D e c e m b e r  2 0 1 3 ,  f i v e  m a j o r  U . S .  w i r e l e s s  
c o m p a n i e s  e n t e r e d  i n t o  a  v o l u n t a r y  c o m m i t m e n t  w i t h  t h e  F e d e r a l  
C o m m u n i c a t i o n s  C o m m i s s i o n  t h a t  w i l l  m a k e  i t  e a s i e r  f o r  c o n -
s u m e r s  t o  u n l o c k  t h e i r  d e v i c e s  a n d  s w i t c h  f r o m  o n e  c a r r i e r  t o  a n -
o t h e r .
1
T h e  a d o p t i o n  o f  t h e s e  v o l u n t a r y  p r i n c i p l e s  u n d o u b t e d l y  w i l l  
a s s i s t  c o n s u m e r s  a n d  m a y  m i t i g a t e  t h e  n e e d  t o  r u s h  l e g i s l a t i o n  t o  
t h e  f l o o r .  
V e r D a t e  M a r  1 5  2 0 1 0  0 4 : 4 6  F e b  2 7 ,  2 0 1 4 J k t  0 3 9 0 0 6 P O  0 0 0 0 0 F r m  0 0 0 0 9 F m t  6 6 5 9 S f m t  6 6 0 1 E : \ H R \ O C \ H R 3 5 6 . X X X H R 3 5 6
s m a r t i n e z  o n  D S K 6 T P T V N 1 P R O D  w i t h  R E P O R T S
[PAGE 38]
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit B 
  
[PAGE 39]
39–010 
1 See Mobile Technology Fact Sheet, PEW RESEARCH INTERNET PROJECT (January 2014), 
http://www.pewinternet.org/fact-sheets/mobile-technology-fact-sheet. 
113TH CONGRESS R EPORT 
" ! SENATE 2d Session 113–212 
UNLOCKING CONSUMER CHOICE AND WIRELESS 
COMPETITION ACT 
JULY 17, 2014.—Ordered to be printed 
Mr. LEAHY, from the Committee on the Judiciary, 
submitted the following 
R E P O R T 
[To accompany S. 517] 
[Including cost estimate of the Congressional Budget Office] 
The Committee on the Judiciary, to which was referred the bill 
(S. 517), to promote consumer choice and wireless competition by 
permitting consumers to unlock mobile wireless devices, and for 
other purposes, having considered the same, reports favorably 
thereon, with an amendment, and recommends that the bill, as 
amended, do pass. 
CONTENTS 
Page 
I. Background and Purpose of the Bill ............................................................ 1 
II. History of the Bill and Committee Consideration ....................................... 5 
III. Section-by-Section Summary of the Bill ...................................................... 5 
IV. Congressional Budget Office Cost Estimate ................................................ 7 
V. Regulatory Impact Evaluation ...................................................................... 8 
VI. Conclusion ...................................................................................................... 8 
VII. Changes to Existing Law Made by the Bill, as Reported ........................... 9 
I. BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE OF THE BILL 
A. BACKGROUND 
As of January 2014, 90% of American adults own a cell phone, 
58% percent own a smartphone, and 40% own tablets. 1 Wireless de-
vices like cell phones, smart phones, and tablets empower con-
sumers, facilitating communication, education, work, and enter-
tainment for Americans of all ages. Network carriers that operate 
voice and data networks often sell these devices in conjunction with 
VerDate Mar 15 2010 00:39 Jul 19, 2014 Jkt 039010 PO 00000 Frm 00001 Fmt 6659 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\SR212.XXX SR212tjames on DSK5VPTVN1PROD with REPORTS
[PAGE 40]
2 
2 See Consumer and Governmental Affairs Bureau, Consumer Guide: Mobile Phone and Device 
Unlocking FAQ’s, FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION (Feb. 24, 2014), http://www.fcc.gov/ 
device-unlocking-faq (‘‘Unless you purchased a phone or device specifically sold as ‘unlocked’ at 
the point of purchase, you should assume that it is locked to a specific service provider’s net-
work. This is true whether you purchase the device from a service provider, at a general retail 
outlet (in person or on the web), or through a third-party.’’). 
3 Consumer Code for Wireless Service , CTIA—The Wireless Association, http://www.ctia.org/ 
docs/default-source/default-document-library/ctia-consumer-code-for-wireless-service.pdf; see also 
Letter from Steve Largent, President and CEO, CTIA—The Wireless Association, to Thomas E. 
Wheeler, FCC Chairman, and Mignon L. Clyburn, Jessica Rosenworcel, Ajit Pai, & Michael P. 
O’Reilly, FCC Comm’rs (Dec. 12, 2013), https://apps.fcc.gov/edocs _public/attachmatch/DOC- 
324664A1.pdf. The carriers that established the unlocking principles have agreed to fully imple-
ment them by early 2015. The principles do not address questions related to unlocking phones 
by third parties for bulk resale. See Letter from Senators Richard A. Blumenthal, Amy Klo-
buchar, Cory A. Booker, Mark R. Warner, and Edward J. Markey to Thomas E. Wheeler, FCC 
Chairman (April 29, 2014), www.blumenthal.senate.gov/download/letter-to-fcc-on-bulk-unlocking; 
Letter from Thomas E. Wheeler, FCC Chairman to Senator Richard A. Blumenthal (June 17, 
2014), www.blumenthal.senate.gov/download/fcc-reply-to-bulk-unlocking-letter-from-sen- 
blumenthal. 
4 See Consumer and Governmental Affairs Bureau, Consumer Guide: Mobile Phone and Device 
Unlocking FAQ’s, FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION (Feb. 24, 2014), http://www.fcc.gov/ 
device-unlocking-faq (‘‘Contact your mobile wireless service provider. Devices can be unlocked 
with unlock codes or other software updates provided to you by your provider. Some providers 
will complete the unlocking process in-store, others will unlock your device remotely and auto-
matically.’’). 
service contracts, at a reduced cost in exchange for the consumer’s 
agreement to use the carrier’s voice or data plan for a predeter-
mined period, often two years. Carriers typically place software on 
the device that prevents it from being used on another carrier’s 
network.
2 This is often referred to as ‘‘locking’’ the device; efforts 
to alter this software are typically referred to as ‘‘unlocking’’ the 
device. 
Consumers whose contracts with their original carrier have ex-
pired, or who have otherwise complied with the applicable contrac-
tual terms, may wish to continue using their old devices with new 
carriers who may offer better prices or better coverage. Alter-
natively, they may wish to give their old phone to a family member 
or friend or sell it to another consumer. Smart phones and tablets, 
for example, can cost many hundreds of dollars—sometimes more 
than $500 each—and many consumers would like to choose which 
network they connect to without incurring the substantial cost of 
purchasing a brand new device. From 2006 until 2012, an exemp-
tion to the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) expressly 
permitted cell phone users to ‘‘unlock’’ their cell phones when their 
contract expired, allowing them to connect to their chosen wireless 
network. The Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competi-
tion Act restores that exemption to promote consumer choice. 
Some carriers, including the four largest national carriers, have 
established principles under which they will help consumers unlock 
their phones, and the Committee expects that most unlocking will 
continue to be done by wireless carriers at the request of their cus-
tomers.
3 There are, however, circumstances in which additional 
avenues for unlocking may be preferable over attempting to unlock 
through the carrier. For example, some carriers require customers 
to bring their devices to the carrier’s physical store to have them 
unlocked.
4 For those customers who do not live near the carrier’s 
retail location—perhaps because they live in a rural area, because 
they have limited mobility, or because the device was a gift from 
a friend or family member who lives in another part of the coun-
try—this requirement may prevent them from being able to get 
their devices unlocked. 
VerDate Mar 15 2010 00:39 Jul 19, 2014 Jkt 039010 PO 00000 Frm 00002 Fmt 6659 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\SR212.XXX SR212tjames on DSK5VPTVN1PROD with REPORTS
[PAGE 41]
3 
5 17 U.S.C. 1201(a). 
6 See Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access 
Control Technologies, 71 Fed. Reg. 68472 (Nov. 27, 2006); Exemption to Prohibition on Cir-
cumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 75 Fed. Reg. 
43,825 (July 27, 2010). 
7 See Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access 
Control Technologies, 77 Fed. Reg. 65260 (Oct. 26, 2012); id. at 65266 (‘‘[I]n light of carriers’ 
current unlocking policies and the ready availability of new unlocked phones in the marketplace, 
the record did not support an exemption for newly purchased phones.’’). 
8 Make Unlocking Cell Phones Legal, T HE WHITE HOUSE: W E THE PEOPLE, https:// 
petitions.whitehouse.gov/petition/make-unlocking-cell-phones-legal/1g9KhZG7. 
9 R. David Edelman, It’s Time to Legalize Cell Phone Unlocking, THE WHITE HOUSE: WE THE 
PEOPLE (March 4, 2013), https://petitions.whitehouse.gov/response/its-time-legalize-cell-phone- 
unlocking. 
While it is not particularly difficult for a tech-savvy phone owner 
to unlock her device independently, it is possible that those who 
unlock their own devices to connect to their chosen network may 
violate Section 1201(a)(1) of the DMCA, which prohibits the cir-
cumvention of technological measures that control access to copy-
righted works.
5 Because of the availability of civil or criminal sanc-
tions under the DMCA, consumers with a legitimate interest in 
unlocking their wireless devices may be afraid to do so. 
From 2006 until 2012, because of an exemption granted by the 
Librarian of Congress pursuant to Section 1201(a)(1) of the DMCA, 
consumers had a guarantee that they were not breaking any laws 
when they unlocked their own cell phones simply in order to con-
nect to their chosen network. The DMCA gives the Librarian of 
Congress the authority to conduct a triennial review process 
through which it may grant exemptions to anti-circumvention 
measures in Section 1201(a)(1). Beginning in 2006, the Librarian 
granted an exemption that allowed users to unlock their own cell 
phones in order to connect to their chosen network, provided that 
the carrier authorized the connection. The Librarian’s exemption 
was narrowly focused on cell phones, which were then the domi-
nant mobile digital devices on the market. The exemption was also 
granted by the Librarian in 2010.
6 
In its 2012 rulemaking, the Librarian chose not to recognize an 
‘‘unlocking’’ exemption for new cell phones purchased after January 
26, 2013, finding that an adequate record had not been established 
pursuant to the Librarian’s de novo review requirement.
7 The Li-
brarian’s decision prompted a strong public reaction: a ‘‘We the 
People’’ petition on the White House website opposing the Librar-
ian’s decision garnered over 110,000 signatures.
8 On March 4, 
2013, in response to the ‘‘We the People’’ petition, the White House 
said that it would ‘‘support a range of approaches’’ to permitting 
mobile phone unlocking.
9 
On March 11, 2013, Senators Leahy, Grassley, Franken, Lee, 
Hatch, and Klobuchar introduced the bipartisan Unlocking Con-
sumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act, S. 517, to restore the 
exemption for cell phone unlocking that had been in effect in pre-
vious years. Senators Thune and Whitehouse were also cosponsors. 
Chairman Goodlatte subsequently introduced identical legislation 
in the House of Representatives, and the House passed a modified 
version of the legislation in February 2014 (H.R. 1123). 
B. PURPOSE OF THE LEGISLATION  
The Unlocking Consumer Choice and Competition Act, S. 517, 
ensures that individual consumers are not prevented from 
VerDate Mar 15 2010 00:39 Jul 19, 2014 Jkt 039010 PO 00000 Frm 00003 Fmt 6659 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\SR212.XXX SR212tjames on DSK5VPTVN1PROD with REPORTS
[PAGE 42]
4 
10 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Con-
trol Technologies, 75 Fed. Reg. 43,825, 43,831–32 (July 27, 2010). 
unlocking their phone for the legitimate purpose of connecting to 
a wireless network of their choice. While many network carriers al-
ready sell unlocked phones, or will unlock phones for consumers 
under the terms of their contracts, the Committee recognizes that 
many consumers want the ability to unlock their cell phones them-
selves—or receive assistance doing so—for purposes of connecting 
to a network of their choice. The exemption created by the Librar-
ian of Congress from 2006–2012 permitted users to unlock their 
cell phones for this purpose without fear of penalties under the 
DMCA. The Unlocking Consumer Choice and Competition Act re-
stores that exemption until the Librarian of Congress’ next tri-
ennial rulemaking under the DMCA, promoting flexibility for con-
sumers and enhancing competition in the wireless market. A fur-
ther provision instructs the Librarian of Congress to consider, dur-
ing its next rulemaking, whether to allow unlocking for wireless de-
vices other than cell phones, such as tablets. 
The legislation provides two ways that cell phones may be un-
locked, in addition to authorized unlocking by a device owner’s 
wireless carrier. First, it restores the Library of Congress’ 2010 ex-
emption so that consumers may unlock their cell phones them-
selves in order to change carriers consistent with the terms of their 
contracts, provided that access to the chosen network is authorized. 
Second, the legislation ensures that cell phone owners who lack the 
technological understanding to unlock their phones can direct oth-
ers to do the unlocking for them, solely to enable the owner or a 
family member to connect to a new wireless network. 
Neither of the methods for unlocking recognized by the legisla-
tion excuses owners from compliance with applicable service agree-
ments they may have with the wireless carriers that service their 
phones. Such agreements may, for example, require fulfillment of 
an applicable postpaid service contract, device financing plan, or 
payment of an applicable early termination fee. Moreover, nothing 
in the bill permits third parties to unlock devices independently of 
the device owner’s direction, or for a purpose other than allowing 
the owner or a family member to connect to a new wireless net-
work. As the Librarian of Congress explained with respect to the 
scope of permissible commercial activity under the 2010 determina-
tion that is reinstated by the bill, ‘‘the designation of this class will 
not benefit those who engage in the type of commercial activity 
that is at the heart of the objections of opponents of the proposed 
class: the ‘bulk resellers’ who purchase new mobile phone handsets 
at subsidized prices and, without actually using them on the net-
works of the carriers who market those handsets, resell them for 
profit. The type of commercial activity that would be permitted 
would be the resale of used handsets after the owners of the 
handsets have used them and then given or sold them to somebody 
else, who then resells them just as a used bookstore sells used 
books.’’
10 
The legislation also creates no new obligations for cell phone 
manufacturers or wireless carriers, such as how a carrier may 
choose to process unlocking requests or provide unlocking codes to 
third parties. 
VerDate Mar 15 2010 00:39 Jul 19, 2014 Jkt 039010 PO 00000 Frm 00004 Fmt 6659 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\SR212.XXX SR212tjames on DSK5VPTVN1PROD with REPORTS
[PAGE 43]
5 
Section 2(b) of S. 517 instructs the Librarian of Congress to con-
sider, as part of its next triennial rulemaking under the DMCA, 
whether to allow unlocking for wireless devices other than cell 
phones, such as tablets, many of which may also be locked by car-
riers. This instruction acknowledges the growing importance of tab-
lets and the potential for consumer harm if used tablets cannot be 
taken to a network of the consumer’s choice, while respecting the 
independence and judgment of the Librarian of Congress and the 
rulemaking process established under existing law for exemptions 
to the anti-circumvention prohibitions of the DMCA. 
While there are larger ongoing debates about the scope and ap-
plication of Section 1201 of the DMCA, as well as other aspects of 
phone unlocking, those issues are not addressed by the legislation, 
which makes no changes to Section 1201 of the DMCA. The bill re-
spects the independence of the Library of Congress under existing 
law to conduct the triennial rulemakings set forth in Section 
1201(a)(1) and does not alter the authority of the Librarian in fu-
ture rulemakings. Instead, the legislation takes a narrow, targeted 
approach to protect consumers and promote competition in the 
wireless market by allowing consumers, and those acting at their 
direction, to transfer their phones to alternative providers as de-
scribed in the bill. 
II. H
ISTORY OF THE BILL AND COMMITTEE CONSIDERATION 
On March 11, 2013, Senators Leahy and Grassley introduced the 
Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act. Sen-
ators Franken, Hatch, Lee, and Klobuchar were original cospon-
sors. The bill was referred to the Committee on the Judiciary. 
The bill was placed on the Committee’s agenda on June 26, 2014. 
The Committee considered S. 517 on July 10, 2014. Senators Leahy 
and Grassley offered a substitute amendment which added a provi-
sion allowing consumers to seek help unlocking their devices from 
a third party. Senators Coons and Blumenthal were added as co-
sponsors of the bill during Committee consideration of the sub-
stitute amendment. 
The substitute amendment was accepted by a voice vote without 
objection. 
The Committee then voted to report the Unlocking Consumer 
Choice and Wireless Competition Act, with an amendment in the 
nature of a substitute, favorably to the Senate by voice vote. 
III. S
ECTION-BY-SECTION SUMMARY OF THE BILL 
Section 1—Short title 
This section provides that the legislation may be cited as the 
‘‘Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act.’’ 
Section 2—Repeal of Existing Rule and Additional Rulemaking by 
Librarian of Congress 
Subsection (a): This subsection repeals Paragraph (3) of 37 C.F.R. 
§ 201.40, as amended and revised by the Librarian of Congress on 
October 28, 2012 and replaces that text with the equivalent para-VerDate Mar 15 2010 00:39 Jul 19, 2014 Jkt 039010 PO 00000 Frm 00005 Fmt 6659 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\SR212.XXX SR212tjames on DSK5VPTVN1PROD with REPORTS
[PAGE 44]
6 
11 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Con-
trol Technologies, 75 Fed. Reg. 43,825 (July 27, 2010). 
graph that was in effect on July 27, 2010. 11 In so doing, the sub-
section repeals the Library of Congress’ 2012 cell phone unlocking 
exemption, and reinstates the exemption that was granted pursu-
ant to the triennial rulemaking conducted by the Librarian of Con-
gress in 2010. The exemption created by the bill will remain in ef-
fect until the Library of Congress conducts its next triennial rule-
making and reaches a new decision on whether or not the record 
supports such an exemption. This subsection does not alter any 
other section of the Librarian of Congress’ 2010 or 2012 
rulemakings, nor does it alter the authority of the Librarian of 
Congress in future rulemakings. 
Subsection (b): This subsection directs the Librarian of Congress 
to consider, as part of its next regularly scheduled, triennial rule-
making, whether to extend an unlocking exemption to ‘‘other 
categor[ies] of wireless devices.’’ The subsection instructs the Reg-
ister of Copyrights to consult with the Assistant Secretary for Com-
munications and Information at the Department of Commerce be-
fore presenting a recommendation on this matter to the Librarian 
of Congress, as is required under 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). The Li-
brarian’s determination shall be conducted as a part of and subject 
to the applicable rules governing the Librarian’s triennial rule-
making under 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1). 
Subsection (c): Some consumers may find it challenging to unlock 
their devices. Accordingly, Subsection (c) allows owners of mobile 
devices to seek help unlocking their devices from a third party, and 
provides that they will likewise be able to do so under any future 
exemption applied to other wireless devices under Subsection (b), 
or future unlocking exemptions granted by the Librarian of Con-
gress as described in Subsection (c)(2). In authorizing consumers to 
seek unlocking assistance, the Committee notes the limited cir-
cumstances under which phone or mobile device unlocking will 
occur. Unlocking a cell phone or other wireless device enables the 
device owner to connect his or her device to a wireless telephone 
network of his or her choice, and does not enable the device owner, 
or a third party on an owner’s behalf, to engage in other activities 
that infringe copyrighted works. Unlike many other situations 
where an exemption from the circumvention prohibition may be 
sought or granted, unlocking a cell phone to connect to a wireless 
network typically does not facilitate copyright infringement. 
The ‘‘direction of the owner’’ extension is limited in scope. A per-
son authorized by an exemption to unlock their wireless telephone 
handset or other wireless device may authorize a third party to 
unlock the device for them where: (1) the circumvention is done 
solely to connect to a wireless telecommunications network; (2) the 
person directing the act of circumvention is the owner of the device; 
(3) the person connecting to the new wireless network is either the 
owner of the device or a family member of the owner; and (4) ac-
cess to the new wireless network is authorized by the operator of 
the network. This section does not authorize circumvention in order 
to enable other unauthorized or harmful actions, such as removing 
or impairing security features that limit access to personal data or 
by exposing copyrighted content in ways that enable copyright in-
VerDate Mar 15 2010 00:39 Jul 19, 2014 Jkt 039010 PO 00000 Frm 00006 Fmt 6659 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\SR212.XXX SR212tjames on DSK5VPTVN1PROD with REPORTS
[PAGE 45]
7 
fringement. Nor does the ability to seek help from a third party to 
unlock a device alter the contractual relationship between a con-
sumer and that consumer’s wireless carrier. Directing a third party 
to unlock his or her device does not excuse a consumer from com-
plying with his or her contractual obligations in any underlying 
service agreement. 
Subsection (d): This subsection sets forth two rules of construc-
tion to clarify and ensure that the legislation does not alter the 
scope of any party’s rights under existing law, and that the legisla-
tion does not alter the authority of the Librarian of Congress under 
Section 1201(a)(1) to engage in the rulemaking process created by 
the DMCA. Nor does this bill affect the scope and applicability of 
other aspects of Section 1201, including the prohibitions of Sections 
1201(a)(2) and 1201(b), which remain critical components of the 
DMCA. 
Subsection (e): This subsection defines terms that appear in the 
legislation. The terms ‘‘commercial mobile data service’’ and ‘‘com-
mercial mobile radio service’’ are intended to cover what are typi-
cally known as data plans and voice plans. The terms ‘‘wireless 
telephone handset’’ and ‘‘wireless device’’ mean a handset or other 
device that operates on a wireless telecommunications network.’’ 
Smartphones and wireless-enabled tablets are two examples of the 
types of the devices that are covered by these respective definitions. 
IV. C
ONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE COST ESTIMATE 
The Committee sets forth, with respect to the bill, S.517, the fol-
lowing estimate and comparison prepared by the Director of the 
Congressional Budget Office under section 402 of the Congressional 
Budget Act of 1974: 
U.S. C
ONGRESS, 
CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE, 
Washington, DC, July 17, 2014. 
Hon. PATRICK J. LEAHY, 
Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary, 
U.S. Senate, Washington, DC. 
D
EAR MR. C HAIRMAN: The Congressional Budget Office has pre-
pared the enclosed cost estimate for S. 517, the Unlocking Con-
sumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act. 
If you wish further details on this estimate, we will be pleased 
to provide them. The CBO staff contact is Susan Willie. 
Sincerely, 
D
OUGLAS W. ELMENDORF. 
Enclosure. 
S. 517—Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act. 
CBO estimates that implementing S. 517 would have no signifi-
cant effect on discretionary spending over the 2015–2019 period. 
Enacting S. 517 would not affect direct spending or revenues; 
therefore, pay-as-you-go procedures do not apply. 
S. 517 would repeal a rule published in October 2012 by the Li-
brarian of Congress (LOC) that limited the ability of certain owners 
of wireless telephone handsets to ‘‘unlock’’ their phones, that is, to 
circumvent software protections that prevent the owner from con-
VerDate Mar 15 2010 00:39 Jul 19, 2014 Jkt 039010 PO 00000 Frm 00007 Fmt 6659 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\SR212.XXX SR212tjames on DSK5VPTVN1PROD with REPORTS
[PAGE 46]
8 
necting to a different wireless network. The bill would reinstate an 
earlier rule that provided broader authority to circumvent such 
protections. S. 517 also would direct the LOC to consider whether 
to extend that broader authority to other categories of wireless de-
vices in addition to smartphones. Based on information from the 
LOC, CBO estimates that implementing the provisions of the bill 
would not have a significant effect on the agency’s workload. 
S. 517 contains no intergovernmental mandates as defined in the 
Unfunded Mandates Reform Act (UMRA) and would not affect the 
budgets of state, local, or tribal governments. 
S. 517 would impose a private-sector mandate by eliminating an 
existing right of action for wireless carriers (and others), who are 
currently able to pursue legal action against those who, without 
permission, circumvent the access controls on certain wireless tele-
phone handsets. The cost of the mandate would be the forgone net 
value of settlements and damages in such cases. A search of the 
literature suggests that few, if any, of those types of lawsuits have 
been brought against individual consumers. Because such claims 
would probably be uncommon in the future and the damage awards 
allowed in such cases would be relatively small, CBO estimates 
that the cost of this mandate would be small and fall below the an-
nual threshold established in UMRA for private-sector mandate 
($152 million in 2014, adjusted annually for inflation). If the Li-
brarian of Congress decides to broaden the exemption allowed 
under the bill to cover other types of mobile devices, such an action 
would eliminate additional rights of action. The cost of that expan-
sion would depend on what devices the Librarian would include 
under the exemption and the forgone net value of settlements and 
damages. CBO has no basis to estimate the cost of such mandates 
as it would depend on the regulatory actions taken by the Librar-
ian. On November 5, 2013, CBO transmitted a cost estimate for 
H.R. 1123, the Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competi-
tion Act, as ordered reported by the House Committee on the Judi-
ciary on July 31, 2013. The provisions of both pieces of legislation 
are similar, as are the CBO cost estimates. 
The CBO staff contacts for this estimate are Susan Willie (for 
federal costs) and Marin Burnett (for the private-sector impact). 
The estimate was approved by Theresa Gullo, Deputy Assistant Di-
rector for Budget Analysis. 
V. R
EGULATORY IMPACT EVALUATION 
In compliance with subsection (b) of paragraph 11 of rule XXVI 
of the Standing Rules of the Senate, it is hereby stated that the 
passage of S. 517 will require the Librarian of Congress to make 
a determination concerning an exemption for wireless devices other 
than cell phones during its next triennial rulemaking conducted 
pursuant to 17 U.S.C. 1201(a). The Committee finds that no signifi-
cant regulatory impact will otherwise result from the enactment of 
S. 517. 
VI. C
ONCLUSION 
The Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act 
will ensure that consumers will be able to take their cell phones 
VerDate Mar 15 2010 00:39 Jul 19, 2014 Jkt 039010 PO 00000 Frm 00008 Fmt 6659 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\SR212.XXX SR212tjames on DSK5VPTVN1PROD with REPORTS
[PAGE 47]
9 
with them to the network of their choice after satisfying their con-
tracts without violating the copyright laws. 
VII. CHANGES TO EXISTING LAW MADE BY THE BILL, AS REPORTED 
Pursuant to paragraph 12 of rule XXVI of the Standing Rules of 
the Senate, the Committee finds no changes in existing law made 
by S. 517, as ordered reported. 
Æ 
VerDate Mar 15 2010 00:39 Jul 19, 2014 Jkt 039010 PO 00000 Frm 00009 Fmt 6659 Sfmt 6611 E:\HR\OC\SR212.XXX SR212tjames on DSK5VPTVN1PROD with REPORTS
[PAGE 48]
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit C 
  
[PAGE 49]
June 5, 2013
Don’t Treat Consumers Like Criminals
By AJIT V. PAI
WASHINGTON — THE House Judiciary Committee will hold a much-needed hearing  today
on cellphone unlocking. At stake is whether wireless consumers can be prosecuted for what,
not long ago, was considered a routine practice.
Before 2012, if you bought and paid for a cellphone, the government didn’t prevent you
from choosing your wireless carrier. Once your contract with your original carrier ended,
you were free to “unlock” your phone — to make it usable on another wireless network —
and switch to another carrier in order to get lower prices, faster service or better coverage.
No longer. Last October, the Library of Congress, which oversees the United States
Copyright Office, decided  that when a consumer unlocks her cellphone — a process that can
be as straightforward as entering a code on the keypad — she may be violating the Digital
Millennium Copyright Act  of 1998. Essentially, the millions of Americans who try to take
their phones with them when they switch wireless carriers are suddenly in the cross hairs of
American copyright law. These consumers now face the prospect of harsh fines and even jail
time.
The Library’s decision was based on a desire to protect the intellectual property rights to the
software that “locks” a cellphone to a particular network — software for which each
cellphone owner could be considered a licensee. The Library also noted that some wireless
carriers allow unlocking and that unlocked phones are often available from third-party
providers.
But the decision — a heavy-handed and unnecessary intervention into the private
marketplace — is a classic example of government overreach. It allows a wireless carrier to
sue, under copyright law, a consumer who unlocks her phone even if that consumer has paid
off her two-year contract with the carrier or never had a contract in the first place.
This isn’t what the 1998 act was meant to do. That law was intended to prevent piracy. For
example, it prohibits consumers from getting rid of digital protections to illicitly distribute a
copyrighted song or movie on the Internet.
Switching Wireless Carriers Shouldn’t Be a Crime - NYTimes.com http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/06/opinion/switching-wireles...
1 of 3 2/4/15, 1:08 PM
[PAGE 50]
No one seriously believes that unlocking a cellphone to switch carriers is equivalent to
piracy. Yet the Library’s decision places the two on the same plane, with the same civil and
criminal penalties. This isn’t consistent with the spirit of the law, with the free market or
with common sense.
So what’s the right response? To borrow the tag line from AT&T’s new commercials, “It’s
not complicated.” Let’s go back to the free market. Let’s allow contract law — not copyright
or criminal law — to govern the relationship between consumers and wireless carriers.
The free market for mobile devices and wireless service has been a dramatic success. As the
Federal Communications Commission reported  earlier this year, prices in the wireless
market are down, and investment is up. More manufacturers are developing innovative
mobile devices, and consumers are reaping the benefits.
Wireless carriers certainly don’t need the federal government’s help. Long before the
Library’s decision, they recognized that not many consumers wanted to spend upward of
$600 on a new smartphone. So they have given consumers another option: Sign a two-year
contract, and they’ll knock hundreds of dollars off the phone’s price. For consumers who
don’t want to think about switching carriers every few months, that’s a great deal. And no
surprise, millions of consumers (including me) have bought cellphones this way.
But in a free market, once a consumer’s contract expires, she should be able to take her
device to another carrier. The government shouldn’t tilt the scales with legal penalties; it
should leave the mobile marketplace alone.
To restore a free market that benefits consumers, we should amend the 1998 act to allow
consumers to take their mobile devices from one carrier to another without fear of criminal
prosecution or civil fines. We should also make clear that those who help consumers unlock
their phones and tablets won’t be prosecuted either. And we should reiterate that contracts
remain valid and enforceable. These fixes should be permanent, so that consumers,
developers and wireless carriers don’t have to worry about the law shifting on a whim.
In making these fixes, we should also avoid government overreach in the other direction.
Some people want to leverage this controversy into something more than it is. They want
the F.C.C. to take aggressive action — to void wireless-service contracts and to impose
sweeping mandates on wireless carriers. Others want to overhaul copyright law entirely.
We should leave those larger debates for another day. More than 100,000 Americans
petitioned  the White House about the narrow issue of cellphone unlocking. The Obama
Switching Wireless Carriers Shouldn’t Be a Crime - NYTimes.com http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/06/opinion/switching-wireles...
2 of 3 2/4/15, 1:08 PM
[PAGE 51]
administration, to its credit, has called for a narrow legislative solution. Congress should
follow suit by taking the hammer of copyright law out of the government’s toolbox. Let the
free market for wireless services and devices flourish. If the government gets out of the way,
the wireless marketplace will continue to be an American success story.
Ajit V. Pai  is a commissioner of the Federal Communications Commission.
Switching Wireless Carriers Shouldn’t Be a Crime - NYTimes.com http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/06/opinion/switching-wireles...
3 of 3 2/4/15, 1:08 PM
[PAGE 52]
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit D 
  
[PAGE 53]
This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit
http://www.djreprints.com.
http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052702303559504579195881629809394
Louis Ashner ran a brisk business buying used phones from Americans and
reselling them in China. But one day in early October, it just stopped.
Mr. Ashner, who owns Side Street Technology Inc. in Baton Rouge, La., said he
was suddenly unable to "unlock" AT&T Inc. versions of the iPhone in bulk so
they could work on other networks.
He doesn't know the cause, but he knows the effect. No one in China wants an
iPhone that only works on AT&T. His business collapsed and is in the process of
closing its office and liquidating inventory at a loss.
"The market is gone," Mr. Ashner said, who said he was on track for $1 million in
revenue this year. "We are closing up."
Business owners throughout the U.S. used-smartphone market are reporting the
same problem, and like Mr. Ashner none of them knows exactly what went
TECHNOLOGY
The Mystery of the iPhones That
Won't Unlock
Used-Phone Resellers Caught Off Guard and Wonder What AT&T Changed
Nov. 13, 2013 4:10 p.m. ET
By  THOMAS GRYTA
The Mystery of the iPhones That Won't Unlock - WSJ http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB1000142405270230355950457...
1 of 5 2/4/15, 1:10 PM
[PAGE 54]
wrong.
Whatever
changed, AT&T
appears to be at
the center of it.
The carrier
accounts for 48%
of the iPhones
now operating in
the U.S., according
to comScore, and
the technology it
uses is compatible
with most of the
world's networks.
That gives its phones the widest resale
market.
Wholesalers had long been able to get AT&T's iPhones unlocked on a mass scale
by specialized services, many working out of Asia, for relatively little cost. That
changed about a month ago, when people in the industry say AT&T suddenly
made it harder to unlock phones on its network.
"AT&T was very lax for a long time in regards to mobile phone unlocking. If they
said no, a third-party unlocker would be happy to unlock any AT&T iPhone or
other device for a very decent price," said Will Strafach, who runs a
Connecticut-based unlocking company called ChronicUnlocks. "AT&T is really
taking action and coming down hard."
An AT&T spokeswoman said the company hasn't changed its policies for
unlocking phones for individual customers, but wouldn't discuss the subject of
bulk unlocking by third parties or whether it had made any changes there. An
Apple Inc. spokeswoman declined to comment.
Phones like AT&T's that run on GSM have traded at a premium.  BLOOMBERG NEWS
The Mystery of the iPhones That Won't Unlock - WSJ http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB1000142405270230355950457...
2 of 5 2/4/15, 1:10 PM
[PAGE 55]
In mid-October, AT&T did stop accepting unlocking requests over the phone and
now requires that they be made online, a person familiar with the matter said.
The process is only open to current and former customers, who must enter their
email addresses and last four digits of their social security numbers, among
other information, according to AT&T's website.
The mystery underscores how shadowy the used-phone market remains even as
it enjoys explosive growth. Apple Inc., AT&T and others have leapt into the
business this year as a way to help their customers trade up to newer models
more quickly.
Those companies can unlock phones one at a time as their customers turn
them in. But much of the business is still done by wholesalers, many of them
small, for whom unlocking is a bigger hurdle.
Some simply sell the locked phones to buyers in Asia, where a separate industry
of bulk unlockers has blossomed. Many people in the used phone business don't
know exactly how it works. One wholesaler based in Hong Kong said her
company would email a list of hundreds of phone identification numbers to a
contact in China, and the phones would be quickly unlocked.
With the scarcity of mass unlocking, the price to unlock an AT&T iPhone has
gone from $1 or $2 per device to as high as $100 in just a month, according to
people in the industry and companies that still offer the service.
DECODING THE PHONE-PLAN PUZZLE
Input your information to see which of the four biggest U.S. carriers might
best fit your needs.
Select the image to go to the interactive.
The Mystery of the iPhones That Won't Unlock - WSJ http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB1000142405270230355950457...
3 of 5 2/4/15, 1:10 PM
[PAGE 56]
Online device trade-in company EleGreen now advertises it will pay customers
an extra $40 if they bring in their phone already unlocked.
Buying and selling used smartphones is a straightforward process in much of the
world, where devices can be used interchangeably on any number of networks.
But in the U.S., smartphones often come "locked" to the selling carrier's network.
Hackers can unlock phones, but their work can often be reversed by carriers.
The gold standard is the so-called factory unlock, where carriers or Apple make
the change through their systems.
The locking is an outgrowth of the subsidy model for phone sales in the U.S.
Carriers cover the bulk of the cost of devices like the iPhone then recover their
outlay over two years via monthly service fees. Locking makes sure customers
stick with the service until their obligation is cleared.
Carriers like AT&T and Sprint Corp. have long agreed to unlock phones once
their customers complete their service agreements. Verizon Wireless phones
generally come already unlocked.
The inability to unlock AT&T iPhones has turned the relative values of used
iPhones upside down. For years, phones like AT&T's that run on GSM network
technologies have traded at a premium, because they work on more networks
around the world than phones used by Verizon Wireless and Sprint.
Last November, used-phone company Gazelle Inc. was offering $205 for a
iPhone 4s with 16 gigabytes of storage a year after its launch, compared with the
$160 it was offering for Verizon's version of the same phone. Now, for a similar,
year-old iPhone 5, Gazelle offers $230 for the AT&T model and $250 for the
Verizon model.
"When a carrier makes unlocking more difficult or more costly, it takes money
out of the consumer's pocket and makes reselling phones more of a hassle for
the consumer," Gazelle CEO Israel Ganot said.
—Daisuke Wakabayashi contributed to this article.
Write to Thomas Gryta at thomas.gryta@wsj.com
The Mystery of the iPhones That Won't Unlock - WSJ http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB1000142405270230355950457...
4 of 5 2/4/15, 1:10 PM
[PAGE 57]
Copyright 2014 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by our Subscriber Agreement and by
copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or visit www.djreprints.com.
The Mystery of the iPhones That Won't Unlock - WSJ http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB1000142405270230355950457...
5 of 5 2/4/15, 1:10 PM
[PAGE 58]
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit E 
  
[PAGE 59]
 
 • •Subscribe • •Renew • •Give a Gift • •Digital Edition Print | Close 
The Law Against Unlocking Cellphones Is Anti-Consumer, Anti-Business, and Anti-Common Sense By Derek Khanna The legal argument -- and the business case -- against the rule making it illegal to take your phone to a different carrier 

[PAGE 60]
 Reuters 
Since I called the Librarian of Congress's decision against unlocking cell phones "the most ridiculous law of 2013," legal experts, techies, and other readers have written to tell me they, too, consider the restriction an outrageous violation of property rights. In particular, several people asked, "No one would really get into trouble for this. Right?" Maybe not. But as I said, the real problem is not the danger that average people would get a $500,000 fine and 5 years in jail. The problem is that 95% of the accused currently accept a plea deal and would accept almost anything to avoid risking such a stark penalty and that this stark penalty can be used by companies to scare average consumers from exercising their own property rights. For that reason, this restriction violates one of our most basic and fundamental of freedoms and represents an Orwellian invasion of our personal liberty. The legal instrument that makes this activity illegal is the Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 1998, which contains a broad, vague section making it illegal to circumvent digital protection technology. The Librarian of Congress decided that the protection available to consumers through an exception as no longer necessary, therefore, presumably making this now illegal. Cellphone companies can now intimidate ordinary people who are forced to wonder who exactly owns the phone that they've legally purchased. This isn't a debate about big business vs. little consumers. It's a story of crony-capitalism. (In fact, T-Mobile was asking their customers to unlock their phones until Saturday when this became illegal for new phones, as you can see in this image).  

[PAGE 61]
 THE DMCA vs. YOUR PHONE The DMCA was initially set up to help stop piracy. So what, you might wonder, does piracy have to do with unlocking your phone? Very little. The law made it illegal to use technology to circumvent digital protection technology. The Librarian of Congress, who has power to grant exceptions to the law, has kept seemingly harmless activities illegal. For example, a court can shut down a blog or website simply for discussing the techniques and procedures on how to back up a DVD to your home PC (and they have done so). This is remarkable considering that in the Pentagon Papers case the Supreme Court ruled that a court 

[PAGE 62]
cannot order an injunction to prevent the release of classified documents unless under extraordinary circumstances in which the government can demonstrate "grave and irreparable danger" to the public interest. So, releasing classified documents: allowed. But discussing how to back-up DVDs and unlocking phones: illegal. Some have argued that prohibiting unlocking phones is important to enforce contract law. But the DMCA is concerned with protecting copyrights. It has nothing to do with enforcing contract law. The law is being co-opted to serve the interests of one or two phone companies. And the contract argument is specious, even if you unlock your phone, you are still under contract with your cellphone provider, unlocking your phone has nothing to do with contract law and everything to do with basic property rights. We must ask ourselves: "What specific limitations upon our personal freedom and liberty are we prepared to accept in the name of achieving the goal of protecting intellectual property?" Some limitations may be sound, and Congress should debate them on the record. Obviously, we do not have the right to copy books, movies and music and sell them. But other restrictions are invasive and have nothing to do with protecting intellectual property (like unlocking and jail-breaking your phone or adaptive technology for the blind to read). Restrictions upon the use of technology should receive strict legislative scrutiny because of its impact upon innovation and our personal freedom. Congress's inaction in the face of the decision by the Librarian of Congress represents a dereliction of duty. It should pass a new law codifying that adaptive technology for the blind, backing up DVD's to your computer, and unlocking and jail breaking your phone are lawful activities regardless of the decisions of the Librarian of Congress. Instead, Washington has removed a business model, hurt consumers and chosen winners and losers in a dynamic and emerging market. These decisions have a real impact on real people without the resources to hire lobbyists. Sina Khanifar (@sinak) is one of them, and he has even drafted a White House petition to reverse the ruling by the Librarian of Congress. So far the petition has over 61,000 signatories. Sina, now a co-founder at OpenSignal, was challenged under the DMCA for unlocking phones while in college. Here's his story: SINA'S STORY In September 2005, I received a cease and desist letter from Motorola for selling software to unlock their cell phones. The letter indicated that I was in breach of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) by circumventing protection measures in their phones, a crime that's punishable by up to 5 years in prison and half a million dollars in fines per incident. At the time, I was an undergraduate student studying Physics. The prospect of 5 years or more in prison was devastating. A HUNGRY STUDENT I started unlocking phones after a typical entrepreneurial experience: I had a problem and was forced to find a solution. I'd brought a cell phone from California to use while attending college in the UK, but quickly discovered that it wouldn't work with any British cell networks. The phone was locked. Strapped for cash and unable to pay for a new phone, I figured out how to change the Motorola firmware to unlock the device. Realizing that others were likely having the same problem, I worked with a programmer to create an application that allowed people to quickly and easily unlock their Motorola phones and use them with any 
[PAGE 63]
carrier. After my first year of college ended in summer of 2004, I launched a website (Cell-Unlock.com) selling the software. It was a make-or-break moment for me personally. I was in a major financial crunch. At first sales were slow, but during my second year at college Motorola released the extremely popular RAZR V3, and my website became a success. It was then that I received Motorola's cease and desist letter. It claimed that I was in violation of the DMCA, a crime punishable by up to $500,000 in fines and five years in jail per offense. I was 20 years old and terrified; my immediate reaction was to shut down the business. I was preparing to do just that when I was introduced to Jennifer Granick, founder of Stanford's Cyberlaw Clinic. She offered pro bono help, and worked with me to respond to Motorola's demands. THE DMCA AND UNLOCKING Motorola's cease and desist letter didn't claim that I was illegally distributing their copyrighted software. Instead, it claimed that I was "distributing software ... for the purpose of circumventing the protection measures" associated with their copyrighted software. There is a subtle but meaningful difference. The DMCA includes anti-circumvention provisions that are intended to protect music and movie owners who want to distribute their work digitally, but are afraid of piracy. The provisions prohibit anyone from circumventing the locks that control access to copyrighted works. For example, DVDs are protected by a Digital Rights Management (DRM) system that attempts to prevent anyone from easily making copies of movies. The DMCA prohibits circumventing that type of protection system. But unlocking a phone has nothing to do with copyright infringement, and using the DMCA to prosecute unlocking cell phones is not what the law was intended for. If Motorola's interpretation of the DMCA were valid, companies would be able to create simple software security mechanisms that legally prevent a customer from using a device in any way except that in which the manufacturer intended. Jennifer helped me respond to Motorola by disputing their interpretation of the DMCA; thanks to her efforts, eventually Motorola decided that a college student wasn't worth pursuing. I was very lucky that they didn't decide to take the case to court. THE BIGGEST PROBLEM WITH THE UNLOCKING LAW In the year after helping me with my case, Jennifer Granick fought for an exemption from the DMCA for unlocking phones, and in November 2006 it was granted. That exemption was in place for 6 years, until the Library of Congress and the Copyright Office decided to remove it. As of January 26th, anyone unlocking a new cell phone or providing unlocking services unlocking phones once again risks up to five years in jail for each offense. For consumers, the consequences of this are fewer choices and increased restrictions to freedoms we currently take for granted. If you're traveling abroad and want to use your current cell phone, you'll need to pay exorbitant roaming charges. As an example, AT&T charges customers $1.50 per minute for calls and $19.50 per megabyte consumed while traveling in Europe. Compare that with the $0.30 per minute and $0.20 per megabyte that you'd be charged in the UK with a prepaid SIM card and an unlocked phone, and it amounts to extortion. Locking cell phones also prevents consumers from freely choosing their cell carrier. If you decide to change your network, say from AT&T to T-Mobile, the DMCA regulations mean that unless your carrier agrees to unlock your phone, you'll need to buy a new device. As a result, manufacturers like Motorola and Apple are keen to keep their devices locked so that they can sell more phones. 
[PAGE 64]
The CTIA, the trade association that represents the wireless industry, claims that the illegality of phone unlocking prevents "large scale phone trafficking operations" that involve unlocking carrier-subsidized phones and selling them abroad. But consumers who buy subsidized phones commit to two-year contracts with hefty early-termination fees (up to $350 for most carriers). The carrier's subsidies are already contractually protected. The decision to remove the exemption for unlocking phones is bad for consumers, and it's up to our elected officials to help defend consumer rights. Unfortunately, the Library of Congress and the Copyright Office are staffed by unelected officials who aren't directly beholden to voters. I was fortunate that Motorola weren't more motivated and didn't take my case further. The company I started still exists, now run by my brother. With the unlocking exemption removed, it's only a matter of time before entrepreneurs and consumers are once again bullied by carriers and manufacturers seeking to protect their profits by constraining consumer choice. Next time around, a Verizon, AT&T, or Apple will likely take the case to court, and it's possible that someone will end up in jail." ><  This article available online at: http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2013/02/the-law-against-unlocking-cellphones-is-anti-consumer-anti-business-and-anti-common-sense/272894/ Copyright © 2015 by The Atlantic Monthly Group. All Rights Reserved.  
[PAGE 65]
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit F 
  
[PAGE 66]
T-Mobile.com  > T-Mobile Support  > Phones, Tablets & Devices  > SIM cards  > Documents
Learn how to unlock your wireless mobile device for use on other carriers (formerly SIM Unlock).
 
We're committed to providing you with clear information about how to unlock your mobile wireless phones and tablets for
use across diﬀerent mobile carriers. Most mobile devices are programmed to prevent the device from operating with
another wireless carriers network without ﬁrst obtaining an unlock code.
 
Go to:
Device compatibility
Unlock requirements
Request an unlock
 
 
Device compatibility
It's important to understand that mobile carriers typically use diﬀerent frequencies and technology to provide wireless
network access. This means that not all phones and tablets are compatible between every mobile carrier – for more
information about compatibility with T-Mobile’s network please check Bring Your Own Device . Even if your phone or
tablet is compatible between carriers, some functionality of your device may not operate the same on a diﬀerent mobile
carrier’s network. Please carefully review your device functionality with any new carriers’ network to make sure that the
services are operating as expected.
 
In order to obtain an unlock code for your mobile wireless phone or tablet you need to contact the mobile carrier or
manufacturer who sold you the device. The original carrier or manufacturer can provide you with instructions and speciﬁc
information on how to unlock the device for use with another mobile carrier. If you purchased your device from T-Mobile
or if you have a T-Mobile authorized device please follow the steps outlined below to determine your eligibility to receive
an unlocking code for your device.
 
 
Unlock requirements
We provide mobile device unlock codes free of charge within two business days (or provides further information about
timing) for eligible devices.
 
Device eligibility is determined as follows:
The device must be a T-Mobile device.
The device must not be reported as lost, stolen or blocked to T-Mobile.
The account associated with the device must be in good standing.
You have requested no more than 2 mobile device unlock codes per line of service in the last 12 months.
The device must satisfy all the Postpaid or Pay in Advance (Prepaid) Unlocking terms outlined below.
You may need a non-T-Mobile and non-MetroPCS SIM card to insert in the phone.
 
Unlock Eligibility for Monthly Phones and Tablets
The device must have been active on the T-Mobile network for at least 40 days on the requesting line.
If the device is ﬁnanced using T-Mobile’s Equipment Installment Plan (EIP), all payments must be satisﬁed and the
device must be paid in full.
If the device is on an account that is under a service contract term, at least 18 consecutive monthly payments must
have been made or the account has migrated to Simple Choice no contract rate plan.
If the device is associated with a canceled account, the account balance must be zero, including all pending
charges
T-Mobile may request proof of purchase or additional information in its discretion and certain other exceptions may
apply.
 
Unlock Eligibility for Pay in Advance (Prepaid) Phones and Tablets
The device has been active on the T-Mobile network for more than 1 year on the requesting line.
If the device has been active for less than 1 year on the requesting line, the Pay in Advance account associated with
Unlock your mobile wireless device
Created by tmo_alan  on Jun 27, 2011 1:37 PM. Last modiﬁed by tmo_mikem  on Jan 12, 2015 8:03 AM.
Click to Chat Button
Unlock your mobile wireless device | T-Mobile Support https://support.t-mobile.com/docs/DOC-1588
1 of 3 1/29/15, 9:21 AM
[PAGE 67]
CONTACT US
Contact information  ➤
Check order status  ➤
View return policy  ➤
Get a rebate  ➤
Find a store  ➤
Trade-in program  ➤
T-MOBILE
Manage your account on My T-Mobile  ➤
Shop phones, tablets & accessories  ➤
Shop T-Mobile plans  ➤
Check coverage  ➤
Why T-Mobile  ➤
BUSINESS
Wireless that works for your business  ➤
Business support  ➤
Get help from customers like you.
Visit our customer community  
Need our help? Contact Us.
View contact information
Average User Rating
(71 ratings)
the device must have had more than $25 in reﬁlls for basic phones or $100 in reﬁlls for smartphones or tablet since
device ﬁrst use date.
The account must not be canceled and in good standing.
T-Mobile may request proof of purchase or additional information in its discretion and certain other exceptions may
apply.
 
Military and Other Exceptions:   Deployed military personnel who are customers in good standing are eligible to have
their devices unlocked upon provision of deployment papers. Exceptions to some or all requirements may apply in other
circumstances for Business and Government Accounts. Please contact us  for more details.
 
 
Request an unlock
If a device meets the eligibility requirements, contact T-Mobile Customer Service  to request an unlock code, and steps to
unlock your device. Keep in mind, this policy is subject to T-Mobile’s Terms and Conditions of service and may change
without notice. T-Mobile may deny any request for a mobile device unlock code at our sole discretion if the request is an
eﬀort to defraud the company.
 
 
Related pages
 
Bring Your Own Device
Mobile Device Unlock App
Upgrade your device
Upgrade FAQs
2669809 Views  Categories:  Tags: sim , sim subsidy , unlock code , unlock sim , sim unlock , sim unlock code
 ►  ►
Click to Chat Button
Unlock your mobile wireless device | T-Mobile Support https://support.t-mobile.com/docs/DOC-1588
2 of 3 1/29/15, 9:21 AM
[PAGE 68]
ABOUTABOUT INVESTOR RELATIONSINVESTOR RELATIONS PRESSPRESS JOBSJOBS DEUTSCHE TELEKOMDEUTSCHE TELEKOM PUERTO RICOPUERTO RICO
PRIVACY POLICYPRIVACY POLICY PRIVACY & SECURITY RESOURCESPRIVACY & SECURITY RESOURCES CONSUMER INFORMATIONCONSUMER INFORMATION
PUBLIC SAFETY/911PUBLIC SAFETY/911 TERMS & CONDITIONSTERMS & CONDITIONS TERMS OF USETERMS OF USE ACCESSIBILITYACCESSIBILITY OPEN INTERNETOPEN INTERNET
   
ESPAÑOL
©2002-2014 T-MOBILE USA, INC.©2002-2014 T-MOBILE USA, INC.
Click to Chat Button
Unlock your mobile wireless device | T-Mobile Support https://support.t-mobile.com/docs/DOC-1588
3 of 3 1/29/15, 9:21 AM
[PAGE 69]
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit G 
  
[PAGE 70]
Legal / Regulatory & Consumer Resources
Legal/regulatory &
consumer resources
Terms and Conditions
Sprint Prepaid Terms and
Conditions
Open Internet Information
Privacy Policy
CTIA Checklist
CTIA Code of Conduct
Account Management
Tools & Usage Alerts
Lost / Stolen Phones
Legal Notifications
Taxes and Surcharges
Tariffs
Customer Resources
Acceptable Use Policy
Visitors Agreement
Copyright Notice
Social Contests and
Promotions
Unlocking Policy
Signal Boosters
Electronic Billing Terms
and Conditions
Secure Online Use
Many Sprint phones or tablets ('devices') have been programmed with a master subsidy lock or 'MSL' that locks the device to certain operational
parameters for use on Sprint's network and prevents the device from attempting to be activated on other carriers' networks. Sprint will provide any
applicable MSL code, upon request, provided you have met the unlocking requirements provided below.
Not all Sprint devices have an MSL code or a locking function that can be unlocked by Sprint (e.g., Apple devices cannot be unlocked to accept
another domestic carrier's SIM card). On certain devices, not all functionality may be unlocked (e.g., for some smartphone devices, Sprint may be
able to unlock the CDMA/voice functionality of the device but unable to unlock the GSM/UMTS/LTE portion of the device). Even if unlocked, Sprint
devices will not necessarily work on another carrier's network.
Whether an unlocked Sprint device can be used on another carrier's network is subject to that carrier's policies and network compatibilities. Even if a
different carrier will activate a Sprint device on its network, Sprint does not make any guarantees as to a Sprint device's performance on another
carrier's network or that any or all device features or functionalities will be fully or partially operational. Although a phone manufacturer may
manufacture the same device model and name for different wireless carriers offering wireless service in the United States, Sprint devices are
specifically designed to function on Sprint's network and Sprint's frequencies and technologies. Sprint generally will not be able to activate non-Sprint
branded phones on its network, including devices purchased through Boost Mobile, Virgin Mobile or Assurance Wireless.
Requesting the Master Subsidy Lock code
Sprint will provide the MSL code on a Sprint device under the following circumstances:
The person requesting the MSL code is an authenticated current or former Sprint customer or an individual owner who can provide the
phone number or account number for the account last associated with the device.
The account associated with the device is in good standing, including but not limited to:
Service Agreement or Installment Billing Agreement is fulfilled
Current Sprint customers still subject to an unfulfilled Service Agreement or Installment Billing Agreement can fulfill this requirement
by paying the applicable early termination fee or "ETF" or the remaining device balance, respectively.
Sprint reserves the right to refrain from providing the MSL code until any ETF/installment billing payments have cleared any
pending status.
The person requesting the MSL code may be required to call back into Sprint Customer Care once any ETF/installment billing
payments have cleared any pending status.
Payments are current.
No write-off balance.
Not associated with a phone sent to collections
The device has not been reported as lost or stolen
If you meet the above requirements and would like to request the MSL code for your Sprint device, contact Sprint Customer Care by dialing *2 from
your Sprint mobile device or call 888-211-4727.
Unlocking for international travel
Traveling abroad? Sprint customers traveling abroad for a short period of time can have their Sprint service provisioned to allow for international
roaming. See sprint.com/international for full details. 
Sprint customers remaining abroad for an extended period of time may want to try to use their Sprint device with a foreign carrier.  For certain
devices engineered to include a SIM slot, Sprint may be able to unlock the device's SIM slot in order for a foreign carrier's SIM card to be inserted.
Sprint will unlock, or facilitate the unlock of, the SIM slot of an applicable device for international travel under the following circumstances:
The person requesting the unlock is a current Sprint customer who can provide the phone number or account number for the account.
The person requesting the unlock can authenticate as the Account Holder or an Authorized Contact
If the account is an ASL account:
There is no unfulfilled Service Agreement associated with the line of service.
There is no outstanding Installment Billing Agreement balance associated with the device.
The account is in good standing (including but not limited to: payments are current, no write-off balance, not associated with a phone sent to
collections, etc.).
The subscriber with which the device is associated has not previously unlocked another device within the past 12 months.
The applicable device has been active on the associated line of service for at least 90 days.
The device is currently active on a Sprint account.
The device is capable of international SIM unlock.
Please note that unlocking the SIM slot does not allow for use with domestic (U.S.) SIMs. When using a foreign carrier's SIM it is important to note
that all information, service and support must be provided by that carrier. You remain responsible for any charges to your Sprint account, as well as
any charges from the foreign provider. Upon returning to the U.S., you may need to remove the foreign carrier's SIM to be able to acquire the Sprint
network.
If you elect to use a foreign carrier's SIM in a locked device for use on international GSM networks, please contact Sprint Worldwide Care to unlock
the device SIM slot. Sprint Worldwide Care can be reached via chat or email from sprint.com/swwsupport  or by calling 6s888-226-7212.
Unlock your Sprint device
My Sprint Shop Digital Lounge Community Support Sign in/Register
En español Join Sprint Coverage Find a store Shopping Cart
Personal Business
Legal / Regulatory & Consumer Resources http://www.sprint.com/legal/unlocking_policy.html
1 of 3 1/29/15, 9:16 AM
[PAGE 71]
Unlocking for military personnel
Military personnel traveling abroad for a short period of time may wish to have their Sprint service provisioned to allow for international roaming. See
sprint.com/international for full details.
Military personnel deployed overseas for extended periods of time may prefer to try to use their Sprint device with a foreign carrier. For certain
devices engineered to include a SIM slot, Sprint may be able to unlock the device's SIM slot in order for a foreign carrier's SIM card to be inserted.
Sprint will unlock, or facilitate the unlock of, the SIM slot of an applicable device under the following circumstances:
The subscriber is an active member of a branch of the United States military
The subscriber has been issued overseas deployment papers.
The person requesting the unlock is a current Sprint customer who can provide the phone number or account number for the account.
The person requesting the unlock can authenticate as the Account Holder or an Authorized Contact.
The account is in good standing (including but not limited to: payments are current, no write-off balance, not associated with a phone sent to
collections, etc.).
The subscriber with which the device is associated has not previously unlocked another device within the past 12 months.
The device is capable of international SIM unlock.
Please note that unlocking the SIM slot does not allow for use with domestic (U.S.) SIMs. When using a foreign carrier's SIM it is important to note
that all information, service and support must be provided by that carrier. You remain responsible for any charges to your Sprint account, as well as
any charges from the foreign carrier. Upon returning to the U.S., you may need to remove the foreign carrier's SIM to be able to acquire the Sprint
network.
Military personnel deployed overseas can contact Sprint Worldwide Care to unlock the device SIM slot. Sprint Worldwide Care can be reached via
chat or email from sprint.com/swwsupport  or by calling 888-226-7212.
Important note
Sprint may refuse any unlock request that would result in an abuse of this policy or is part of an effort to defraud Sprint or its customers. This
unlocking policy is subject to change at Sprint's discretion without advance notice.
Unlocking FAQs
What does it mean for my device to be 'locked'?
The term 'locked' means that either Sprint software or the manufacturers' device designs tie the device to Sprint's network, such that the device can
only be used on Sprint's network.
Why does Sprint lock its devices?
Most Sprint devices are sold at a discounted price, often in exchange for a customer entering into a term service commitment, or pursuant to an
installment billing agreement, which enables a customer to pay off the price of the device over a period of time. Locking software protects Sprint by
ensuring that those discounted devices remain on Sprint's network until our customers have either fulfilled their term service commitment or their
installment billing agreement.
How can I unlock my device?
For devices that qualify under Sprint's Unlocking Policy, Sprint will provide any applicable MSL code, and/or unlock the device, to the extent that a
device is capable of being unlocked. Generally, to qualify under Sprint's Unlocking Policy, the device must be associated with an account in good
standing and not be subject to an outstanding term service agreement or installment billing agreement.
I have the MSL code for my device. Does that mean that my device is unlocked?
The MSL code may be used to override operational parameters restricting the device to operating on Sprint's network; however, the MSL code alone
will not enable certain devices to operate on a different carrier's network. Enabling a device to work on another carrier's network may necessitate the
carrier or party attempting to unlock the device to address the firmware hardcoded into the device at the time the device was manufactured, which in
turn requires extensive technological knowledge and skill. Whether another carrier is able to or will unlock a device is subject to that carrier's policies
and practices.
I've been told by another carrier that Sprint needs to unlock my SIM slot in order to use my phone on the other carrier's network.
For eligible devices, Sprint will unlock the SIM slot, to the extent that a device SIM slot is capable of being unlocked. It is important to note that not all
devices are capable of being unlocked, often because of the manufacturers' device designs, and that even for those devices capable of being
unlocked, not all device functionality may be capable of being unlocked. Specifically, devices manufactured with a SIM slot within the past three
years (including, but not limited to, all Apple iPhone devices), cannot be unlocked to accept a different domestic carrier's SIM for use on
another domestic carrier's network. Sprint has no technological process available to do this.  In accordance with Sprint's voluntary
commitment contained within CTIA's Consumer Code for Wireless Service ("Unlocking Commitment"), Sprint is working to ensure that all devices
developed and launched on or after February 11, 2015 , are capable of being unlocked domestically.
If my device is unlocked, does that mean I will be able to use it with a different carrier?
Even if unlocked, Sprint devices will not necessarily work on another carrier's network. Whether an unlocked Sprint device can be used on another
carrier's network is subject to that carrier's policies and network compatibilities. Even if a different carrier will activate a Sprint device on its
network, Sprint does not make any guarantees as to a Sprint device's performance on another carrier's network or that any or all device
features or functionalities will be fully or partially operational. Although a phone manufacturer may manufacture the same device model and
name for different wireless carriers offering wireless service in the United States, Sprint devices are specifically designed to function on Sprint's
network and Sprint's frequencies and technologies.
I have been told that my device is not capable of being unlocked and/or does not have a corresponding MSL code. What can I do?
Many devices that have been manufactured for Sprint simply are not capable of being unlocked, or will not have a corresponding MSL code. For
example, Sprint-branded iPhones have been manufactured in a way that prevents them from being unlocked to allow the device to activate on a
different carrier's network in the United States. This is because, prior to the development of the voluntary commitment contained in CTIA's Consumer
Code for Wireless Service ("Unlocking Commitment") carriers were not required to, and many carriers did not, develop their devices to be capable of
being unlocked. Sprint strongly encourages owners of such devices to consider Sprint's Buyback Program, which may enable them to trade in their
old devices to receive an in-store credit toward the purchase of a new device or to receive an account credit. For more information, visit
sprint.com/buyback. To help resolve this problem, Sprint has committed to ensure that all of its devices produced after February 11, 2015, are
capable of being unlocked.
I am a former Sprint customer or was never a Sprint customer but have purchased a Sprint device from a third party other than Sprint. Can
I get the MSL code?
For individuals owners who can provide the telephone number last associated with the device, Sprint may be able to provide the applicable MSL
Code if the account associated with the device is in good standing (service or installment contract fulfilled, payments are current, no write-off
balance, not associated with a phone sent to collections, phone not reported lost or stolen, etc.).
I see that Sprint has a separate unlocking policy for international travel. Why is that?
For Sprint customers traveling abroad for a short period of time, often their Sprint service can be provisioned to allow for international roaming. See
sprint.com/international for full details. However, Sprint customers remaining overseas for extended periods of time may prefer to try to use their
Sprint device to receive service from a foreign carrier. Certain newer devices have been engineered to include a SIM slot, which may be capable of
being unlocked to allow a foreign carrier's SIM card to be inserted, thus allowing the device to be used on a foreign carrier's network.  Unlocking the
international SIM slot will not allow the device to be used on another domestic carrier's network.
The international unlock policy says that Account Spending Limit ('ASL') customers are not eligible to have their devices unlocked for
international travel.  Why is that and is there any way to get around that requirement?
Legal / Regulatory & Consumer Resources http://www.sprint.com/legal/unlocking_policy.html
2 of 3 1/29/15, 9:16 AM
[PAGE 72]
I want to
Get my saved cart
Track my order
Check rebate status
Send a text message
See web offers
Get an employee discount
Order by phone
1 866 866-7509
Sprint
Sign up for eBill
Earn up to $300 for your old phone
Help make us better
Corporate responsibility
Accessibility
CTIA/regulatory
Careers with Sprint
Sign up for Sprint news and exclusive o ﬀ ers 
 Your email  
Become an insider About us  Contact us  Mobile site  Legal  Privacy  Ad choices © 2015 Sprint.com All rights reserved.
Sprint's systems were originally hardcoded to restrict ASL customers from unlocking their devices for international travel, though Sprint is working to
update its systems to allow ASL customers who have completed their Service Agreement or Installment Billing Agreement to unlock their devices for
international travel and will have those updates in place by February 11, 2015, per the Unlocking Commitment.  After 18 months of service and
responsible payment, Sprint may remove your spending limit and you may then be eligible to have your device unlocked for international travel.
I am a member of the military and am set to be deployed overseas. Can I have my device unlocked for international travel?
Military personnel traveling abroad for a short period of time may wish to have their Sprint service provisioned to allow for international roaming. See
sprint.com/international for full details. However, military personnel remaining overseas for extended periods of time may prefer to try to use their
Sprint device with a foreign carrier. If you have a capable device, you may be eligible to have your device unlocked for international usage.
Sprint's unlocking policy appears to apply only to postpaid customers. I am a prepaid customer. Am I eligible to have my device
unlocked?
Neither Sprint nor its prepaid affiliates (Virgin Mobile, Boost Mobile, and Assurance Wireless) currently unlock devices for prepaid customers.
However, in accordance with the Unlocking Commitment, Sprint and its prepaid affiliates are working to create new policies and procedures in order
to unlock prepaid devices, or to provide the information necessary to unlock the devices, after certain eligibility requirements to be established are
met. Consistent with the Unlocking Commitment, Sprint and its prepaid affiliates will implement these new policies and procedures no later than
February 11, 2015.
Legal / Regulatory & Consumer Resources http://www.sprint.com/legal/unlocking_policy.html
3 of 3 1/29/15, 9:16 AM
[PAGE 73]
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit H 
  
[PAGE 74]
Consumer Device Unlock Portal
Are you a business customer? Switch to our Business Portal ( http://www.att.com/bizdeviceunlock )
Device Unlock Support | Check Your Unlock Status ( /deviceunlock/status.html )
 I have read and agree to the eligibility requirements to unlock my device.
ContinueContinue
Request to Unlock an AT&T Wireless Phone or Tablet
Your device is designed to work on the AT&T wireless network, and may require a device unlock to operate on another compatible wireless network.
AT&T can send you unlock instructions upon request, provided that we can reasonably obtain them from the manufacturer and that you meet the requirements below. You
should receive a response within two business days.
Note: AT&T cannot unlock devices from other wireless carriers.
General Requirements for All Unlock Requests
The device must be designed for use on, and locked to, the AT&T wireless network. (For help see Device Unlock Support )
It must not be reported lost or stolen.
It’s not associated with fraudulent activity.
All the device’s service commitments and installment plans are completed, and all early termination fees are paid in full.
The device is not currently active on a different AT&T customer’s account.
If you performed an early upgrade, you must wait the 14-day buyer’s remorse period before you can request to unlock your previous device.
Postpaid Customers
Your account must be active for at least 60 days, with no past due or unpaid balance.
Prepaid / GoPhone
The device must be active for at least six months of paid service.
Non-AT&T Mobility Customers
You’ve never had an AT&T wireless account and you meet the General Requirements for unlock requests.
Deployed Military Personnel (Current AT&T Customers Only)
Current AT&T customers who are active and deployed military personnel, and have provided deployment veriﬁcation, need to meet all the General Requirements, except
those related to the device's service commitments, installment plans and early termination fees.
AT&T, at its sole discretion, may limit the number of devices military personnel can unlock.
Important:
AT&T reserves the right to deny any unlock request that it concludes would result in an abuse of this policy or is part of an effort to defraud AT&T or its customers. AT& T
further reserves the right to alter this unlocking policy at its discretion without advance notice.
®
Personal Business About AT&T Wireless Coverage Maps Store Locations & Appointments Language
AT&T Wireless Consumer Device Unlock Request https://www.att.com/deviceunlock/#/
1 of 1 1/29/15, 9:22 AM
[PAGE 75]
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[PAGE 76]
Device Unlocking Policy
Postpay Device Unlocking Policy:
We do not lock most phones or tablets that are activated with our postpay service, either during or
after the term of your service contract or Edge installment sales agreement.
We do not lock our 4G LTE devices, and no code is needed to program them for use with another
carrier.
We do not lock our 3G devices, other than our Global Ready 3G phones, and the simple code to
program such 3G devices for use with another carrier is either “000000” or “123456.”  If the user guide
for your device does not provide instructions to access the programming menu, you can contact us at
*611 from your Verizon Wireless phone, or (800)922-0204, for assistance.
The SIM cards used in our 3G Global Ready phones are locked.  By the end of January, 2015, we will
unlock those SIM cards at your request once you have fulfilled the term of your service contract or
Edge installment sales agreement and your balance is current.
Prepaid Device Unlocking Policy:
We do not lock our 4G LTE Prepaid devices, and no code is needed to program them for use with
another carrier.
We do not lock our 3G Prepaid devices, other than our 3G Phone-in-the-Box Prepaid phones, and the
simple code to program such 3G Prepaid devices for use with another carrier is either “000000” or
“123456.” If the user guide for your device does not provide instructions to access the programming
menu, you can contact us at *611 from your Verizon Wireless phone, or (888)294-6804, for assistance.
Our 3G Prepaid Phone-in-the-Box phones are restricted for use with our Prepaid service for six
months after activation, and are locked to the Verizon Wireless network for 12 months after activation.
After six months, the restriction to our Prepaid service is automatically removed. After 12 months, you
can contact us at *611 from your Verizon Wireless Prepaid phone, or (888)294-6804, and we will
provide you with the programming code so that you can unlock your phone. If the user guide for your
phone does not provide instructions to access the programming menu, we can help you with that as
well.
Unlocking policy for Deployed Military Personnel:
If you are a Verizon Wireless customer in good standing who is in the military and you
are deployed, we will unlock your device, if necessary.
Postpay Devices
We do not lock our 4G LTE devices, and no code is needed to program them for use with another
carrier.
We do not lock our 3G devices, other than our Global Ready 3G phones, and the simple code to
program such 3G devices for use with another carrier is either “000000” or “123456.”  If the user guide
for your device does not provide instructions to access the programming menu, you can contact us at
*611 from your Verizon Wireless phone, or (800)922-0204, for assistance.
The SIM cards used in our 3G Global Ready phones are locked.  We will unlock the SIM card for you if
Device Unlocking Policy | Verizon Wireless http://www.verizonwireless.com/aboutus/commitment/safety-se...
1 of 2 1/29/15, 9:24 AM
[PAGE 77]
you provide us with information from your military/blanket orders.
Prepaid Devices
We do not lock our Prepaid devices, other than our Phone-in-the-Box Prepaid phones, and the simple
code to program such Prepaid devices for use with another carrier is either “000000” or “123456.”  If
the user guide for your device does not provide instructions to access the programming menu, you can
contact us at *611 from your Verizon Wireless phone, or (888)294-6804, for assistance.
Our Prepaid Phone-in-the-Box phones are restricted for use with our Prepaid service for six months
after activation, and are locked to the Verizon Wireless network for 12 months after activation.  We will
remove the restriction and unlock the device if you provide us with information from your
military/blanket orders.
PLEASE NOTE:  Carriers typically use different frequencies and air interface
technologies to provide wireless network access.  Accordingly, a device that works on
one carrier’s network may not be technologically compatible with another carrier’s
network.  “Unlocking” a device refers only to disabling software that would prevent a
consumer from attempting to activate a device designed for one carrier’s network on
another carrier’s network, even if that network is technologically compatible.  In other
words, “unlocking” a device will not necessarily make a device interoperable with other
networks – a device designed for one network is not made technologically compatible
with another network merely by “unlocking” it.  Additionally, unlocking a device may
enable some functionality of the device but not all (e.g., an unlocked device may
support voice services but not data services when activated on a different network).
Device Unlocking Policy | Verizon Wireless http://www.verizonwireless.com/aboutus/commitment/safety-se...
2 of 2 1/29/15, 9:24 AM
