[PAGE 1]
 Juelsgaard Intellectual Property  
and Innovation Clinic 
Mills Legal Clinic 
Stanford Law School 
Crown Quadrangle 
559 Nathan Abbott Way 
Stanford, CA 94305-8610 
jipic@law.stanford.edu 
650.724.1900 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Before the 
 
 U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE  
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 
 
In the matter of exemption to prohibition on circumvention  
of copyright protection systems for access control technologies 
 
Docket No. 2014-07  
 
 
 
Submitted on Behalf of Petitioner Institute of Scrap Recycling Industries, Inc.  
 
 
 
Proposed Class 11: 
Unlocking—Wireless Telephone Handsets 
  
 
 
 
 
 Joseph Dollin 
Brian Weissenberg 
 Certified Law Students 
Phil Malone 
Jef Pearlman  
 Counsel for Petitioners 
 
  
[PAGE 2]
Table of Contents 
I. Commenter Information ........................................................................................................ 1 
II. Proposed Class 11: Unlocking—Wireless Telephone Handsets ........................................... 2 
III. Overview of Proposed Exemption ......................................................................................... 2 
IV. Technological Protection Measure and Methods of Circumvention ..................................... 4 
V. Noninfringing Uses: Unlocking, Including Bulk Unlocking, Does Not Implicate any 
Copyright Interests, Is a Fair Use Under § 107, and Is Noninfringing Under § 117 ............. 5 
A. Accessing a Device’s Firmware to Unlock the Device Does Not Implicate § 106 
Rights ........................................................................................................................... 6 
B. Unlocking a Mobile Device is a Fair Use Under § 107 ............................................... 7 
C. Unlocking, Including Bulk Unlocking, Is Permitted Under 17 U.S.C. § 117 
Because Consumers Own Their Phone Software and Accessing the Software Is 
an “Essential Step” ....................................................................................................... 9
 
D. Legitimate Bulk Unlocking of Used Devices Is Equally Noninfringing and 
Warrants Equal Coverage Under the Requested Exemption ..................................... 12
 
E. Petitioner Seeks an Exemption for “Used” Devices .................................................. 14 
VI. Adverse Impact .................................................................................................................... 15 
A. The Absence of an Unlocking Exemption Has Forced Consumers to Resell 
Their Devices for Significantly Lower Prices, Has Reduced Consumer Choice 
and Wireless Competition, and Has Adversely Affected Recyclers’ Ability to 
Meet Consumer Demand and Obtain the Full Value of the Devices They Resell ..... 16
 
B. Current Carrier Unlock Policies Do Not Obviate, But Rather Highlight, the 
Need for an Exemption for Bulk Circumvention ....................................................... 17 
C. Availability of Unlocked Mobile Phones Is Not a Viable Alternative to 
Circumvention ............................................................................................................ 20
 
VII. All Relevant Statutory Factors Weigh in Favor of Granting an Exemption for Bulk 
Unlocking ............................................................................................................................ 21
 
A. (i) The Availability for Use of Copyrighted Works ................................................... 21 
B. (ii) The Availability for Use of Works for Nonprofit Archival, Preservation, and 
Educational Purposes ................................................................................................. 22
 
C. (iii) The Impact That the Prohibition on the Circumvention of Technological 
Measures Applied to Copyrighted Works Has on Criticism, Comment, News 
Reporting, Teaching, Scholarship, or Research ......................................................... 22
 
D. (iv) The Effect of Circumvention of Technological Measures on the Market for 
or Value of Copyrighted Works ................................................................................. 22
 
E. (v) Such Other Factors as the Librarian Considers Appropriate ................................ 23 
VIII. Conclusion ........................................................................................................................... 24 
 
   ii 
[PAGE 3]
Petitioner Institute of Scrap Recycling, Inc. (“ISRI”) submits this comment in response to the 
Copyright Office’s Notice of Proposed Rule Making1 (“NPRM”) in support of Proposed Class 11 
and respectfully asks the Librarian of Congress to exempt this class of works from 17 U.S.C. 
§ 1201(a)(1)’s prohibition on the circumvention of access control technologies for the period 2015-
2018.  
I. Commenter Information 
 
Petitioner ISRI is a Washington, DC-based trade association representing more than 1,600 
companies—ranging from small, family-owned businesses to large, multi-national corporations—
operating at more than 3,500 facilities in the United States and 34 countries worldwide. ISRI 
members are manufacturers and processors, brokers, and industrial consumers of scrap 
commodities, including ferrous and nonferrous metals, paper, electronics, rubber, plastics, glass, 
and textiles. 
 
The U.S. electronics recycling industry has shown tremendous growth over the past 10 years. This 
maturing segment of the scrap recycling industry provides a boost of approximately $19.2 billion, 
including exports of $1.45 billion, to the U.S. economy (up from less than $1 billion in 2002) and 
employs more than 45,000 full time employees (up from 6,000 in 2002).
2In 2011, the U.S. 
electronics recycling industry processed more than 4.4 million tons of used and end-of-life 
electronics equipment.3 More than 70 percent of the collected equipment is manufactured into 
specification grade commodities—including scrap steel, aluminum, copper, lead, circuit boards, 
plastics, and glass. These valuable commodities are then sold to basic materials manufacturers in 
the United States and globally as raw material feedstock for new products, such as steel, copper, 
aluminum, plastic, and glass. 
 
Electronics recyclers also repair, refurbish, and resell (recyclers) functioning electronics equipment 
as used products into domestic and international markets. Recyclers also provide a number of 
logistical services, like collection, storage, and transportation, as well as scrubbing hard drives of 
sensitive personal and commercial data. While only 20-30% of the overall volume of devices 
received by recyclers is sent for reuse, repair, and remanufacturing, the majority of revenue stems 
from such use. According to a U.S. International Trade Commission report,
4 in 2011, the total 
domestic market was valued at $19.2 billion with reused technological devices, such as wireless 
cellphones and tablets, accounting for $14.9 billion.  
 
The industry is driven not only by cell phones originally purchased by individuals, but also by 
equipment collected from businesses and commercial interests, comprising up to 75 percent of the 
market on a volume basis. The electronics recycling industry is poised to meet the anticipated 
increased demand for more used products and specification grade commodities. 
 
1 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 79 
Fed. Reg. 73,856 (Dec. 12, 2014) (to be codified at 37 C.F.R. pt. 201).  
2 See The Scrap Recycling Industry: Electronics, ISRI, http://www.isri.org/docs/default-source/commodities/fact-sheet--
-electronics.pdf?sfvrsn=6 (last visited Feb. 4, 2015). 
3 Id. 
4 Used Electronics Products: An Examination of U.S. Exports, Inv. No. 332-528, USITC Pub. 4,379 (February 2013) 
(Final). 
   1 
                                                 
[PAGE 4]
ISRI advocates on behalf of its members on a variety of important issues directly and indirectly 
impacting the recycling industry in Washington, DC, state capitals across the U.S., and 
internationally.  
 
Petitioner may be contacted through the above-identified counsel. 
 
II. Proposed Class 11: Unlocking—Wireless Telephone Handsets 
 
Proposed Class: Computer programs, in the form of firmware or software, that enable wireless 
telephone handsets to connect to a wireless telecommunications network, when circumvention, 
including individual and bulk circumvention for used devices, is initiated by the owner of any such 
handset, by another person at the direction of the owner, or by a provider of a commercial mobile 
radio service or a commercial mobile data service at the direction of such owner or other person, 
solely in order to enable such owner, family member of such owner, or subsequent owner or 
purchaser of such handset to connect to a wireless telecommunications network when such 
connection is authorized by the operator of such network.
5  
 
This copyrighted work sought to be accessed, “computer programs, in the form of firmware or 
software, that enable wireless mobile devices to connect to a wireless telecommunications 
network,” is, like other computer programs, a “literary work” under 17 U.S.C. § 102. 
 
III. Overview of Proposed Exemption 
 
Petitioner seeks an exemption to the DMCA’s prohibition against circumvention of technological 
measures that control access to computer programs that enable wireless devices to connect to 
wireless communications networks—a process commonly referred to as “unlocking.”
6 These 
computer programs can be used, reprogrammed, adapted, or replaced in order to allow the device to 
connect to the network of a different provider. However, mobile devices typically contain a 
technological measure that prevents access to these programs and thereby “lock” the device onto an 
initial provider’s network and prevent it from being connected to another network. 
  
Without a 1201 exemption, owners of mobile devices, including consumers, family members, and 
legitimate recyclers, refurbishers, and remanufacturers (collectively, “recyclers”) of used devices 
are substantially adversely affected in their ability to make a variety of noninfringing uses of those 
devices and the software they contain. Recyclers are unable to engage in noninfringing unlocking of 
devices for the benefit of consumers who are buying or selling used devices; consumers are denied 
the ability to use their devices on the network of their choice and denied the full benefit of choosing 
5 Petitioner notes that several other petitioners have included proposed class definitions. ISRI does not object to these 
other definitions, as long as it is clear that the final definition includes the features described herein, including 
permitting bulk unlocking and unlocking of unsubsidized devices.  
6 This comment seeks an exemption under Proposed Class 11 for wireless telephone handsets. Petitioner is submitting a 
separate, substantially similar comment for an exemption for all-purpose tablet computers (under Proposed Class 12), 
given the NPRM’s direction that each comment be limited to discussing one class of works. However, Petitioner 
believes that the substance of the noninfringing uses, adverse effects, and other components of the requests for 
exemptions for both categories of devices are substantially similar and could properly be combined in a single class and 
comment. 
   2 
                                                 
[PAGE 5]
or selling used devices; consumers have more difficulty using their devices when they travel; and 
competition between new and used devices and between networks is reduced.  
 
In each of the last three § 1201 rulemakings, the Register has recommended and the Librarian has 
approved exemptions for phone unlocking, though each has been increasingly narrow. After public 
outcry regarding the very limited 2012 exemption, Congress responded by enacting the Unlocking 
Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act (“Unlocking Act”),7 which repealed that 
exemption, substituted the 2010 exemption, and directed the Register to consider proposals for cell 
phone and other device unlocking as part of this current rulemaking.8 The Unlocking Act also 
specified, and made permanent, that the circumvention it restored, as well as future unlocking 
exemptions, may be initiated by “the owner of the handset or device, by another person at the 
direction of the owner, or by a provider of commercial mobile radio or data services to enable such 
owner or a family member to connect to a wireless network when authorized by the network 
operator.”
9  
 
Petitioner’s requested exemption is substantially similar to that specified by Congress in the 
Unlocking Act. Circumvention “by the owner” of a mobile device or by another “person at the 
direction of the owner” includes by circumvention by recyclers of used devices, who are themselves 
lawful owners of those devices. These recyclers engage in individual or bulk circumvention for the 
purpose of unlocking those devices so they can then be connected to the wireless network chosen by 
the recycler or by a subsequent owner. To avoid confusion on this point, the proposed class 
requested in this comment explicitly states that the circumvention permitted includes individual and 
bulk circumvention of used devices in order to enable the owner, and subsequent owners, to connect 
to a network of their choice, although Petitioner believes this authority is already fully encompassed 
by the language of the Unlocking Act. 
 
In response to a 2013 “We The People” petition asking that unlocking be again made legal,
10 the 
White House concluded that using a mobile device on another network is “common sense, crucial 
for protecting consumer choice, and important for ensuring we continue to have the vibrant, 
competitive wireless market that delivers innovative products and solid service to meet consumers’ 
needs.”
11 More importantly, the response stressed that this common sense approach is “particularly 
important for secondhand or other mobile devices that you might buy or receive as a gift, and want 
to activate on the wireless network that meets your needs—even if it isn’t the one on which the 
device was first activated. All consumers deserve that flexibility.”12 Congress, in passing the 
Unlocking Act, contemplated that the exemption it restored would include bulk unlocking of used 
devices, with the bill’s House sponsor, Rep. Goodlatte, stating, “this legislation is not intended to 
7 Pub. L. No. 113-144, 128 Stat. 1751 (Aug. 1, 2014); see Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright 
Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 79 Fed. Reg. 55687 (September 17, 2014) [hereinafter NOI] at 
55689 n.8 (“Congress enacted the Unlocking Act after public calls for a broader exemption than that provided in the 
2012 rule.”). 
8 Unlocking Act § 2(a); see NOI at 55688-89. 
9 Unlocking Act §§ 2(a), (c); see NOI at 55688. 
10 Make Unlocking Cell Phones Legal petition (January 24, 2013), available at 
https://petitions.whitehouse.gov/petition/make-unlocking-cell-phones-legal/1g9KhZG7. 
11 Official White House Response to “It’s Time to Legalize Cell Phone Unlocking”, available at 
https://petitions.whitehouse.gov/response/its-time-legalize-cell-phone-unlocking. 
12 Id. (emphasis added). 
   3 
                                                 
[PAGE 6]
impair unlocking related to . . . used phones by legitimate recyclers or resellers,”13 and the final 
version of the Act removing prior language that had appeared to exclude bulk unlocking.14  
 
IV. Technological Protection Measure and Methods of Circumvention 
 
The Register has recognized in each of the last three rulemakings that computer programs, in the 
form of software or firmware, that enable wireless devices to connect to a wireless 
telecommunications network typically are protected by a technological protection measure (“TPM”) 
or “lock.” Those basic facts have not changed and remain true today. These locks, embedded in the 
device’s firmware or software, prevent the mobile device owner from gaining access to the settings 
that control the networks to which the device will connect, thereby preventing the device from 
being unlocked for the purpose of connecting to a different wireless telecommunications network 
than the one for which the device was originally used.15 
 
The wireless telecommunication network providers use various types of locks to restrict the device 
to the respective network. There are at least four commonly used phone locks: 
 
1. Service provider code (SPC) lock is typically used on code division multiple access 
(CDMA) devices. The SPC is unique to the device and is generated by using the device’s 
electronic serial number and the carrier’s algorithm. Unless the code is obtained, the user is 
blocked from programming the device to work on another network.  
2. System operator code (SOC) lock is assigned to a carrier. Unless the code programmed 
into the device matches the code of the carrier, the devices remain locked and the code 
cannot be reprogrammed for use on a different network.  
3. Band order locking restricts devices to operate on certain frequencies.  
4. Subscriber identity module (SIM) lock is built into the devices and restricts the devices to 
only accept certain international mobile subscriber identities (ISMI). ISMIs can be restricted 
by country code, network code, or device. 
 
The primary purpose of these locks is to keep the wireless device locked to its original carrier and 
prevent its owner from using it to access alternative, competing carriers’ networks. The specific 
type of device lock in place does not alter the analysis in this comment; for any device locks 
protected by a TPM, lawful circumvention is necessary to allow the device’s owner to unlock the 
device and use it on another carrier. 
 
The NPRM asks commenters also to describe the methods of circumvention to show their nature 
and basic operation. First, it is important to recognize that while there are multiple ways locked 
devices may unlocked, as described below, the circumvention methods remain fundamentally the 
same for each. 
 
13 See 160 Cong. Rec., H1910 (daily ed. Feb. 25, 2014) (colloquy on House floor just before passage of H.R. 1123) 
(emphasis added).  
14 Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act, H.R. 1123, 113th Cong. § 2(c)(2) (2014) (“Nothing in 
this subsection shall be construed in any rulemaking commenced on or after the date of enactment to permit the 
unlocking of wireless handsets or other wireless devices, for the purpose of bulk resale, . . .”).  
15 See, e.g., Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, 75 Fed. Reg. 43,825, 43,830 (July 27, 2010) (codified at 37 C.F.R. 201.40) [hereinafter 2010 Final Rule]. 
   4 
                                                 
[PAGE 7]
Devices may be unlocked without circumvention in several ways: First, a device may be unlocked 
with a model-specific code. By entering this code, a user can access built-in settings that control the 
network lock and make appropriate changes to disable the lock. This type of unlocking is only 
available in the less-common case where the device’s operating system has this functionality built 
in and the codes for a given model are publicly available. Second, devices may be unlocked with a 
device-specific code. This involves the cooperation of the original carrier, as the user must obtain 
permission to unlock his or her individual device. As discussed in Section VI.B, carriers may apply 
their own policies (or make arbitrary choices) in deciding whether to grant such permission. 
Historically, this type of unlocking was performed by the user entering a device-specific unlocking 
code, obtained from the carrier, into the device itself. More recently, carriers and manufacturers 
have been shifting to “cloud locks,” in which the device contacts a server, owned by the carrier or 
manufacturer, which provides the unlocking code directly if and only if approval has been given.
16 
For example, most iPhones can be unlocked by connecting the device to iTunes and receiving from 
Apple (if it so chooses, consistent with its policies) a token to decrypt an encrypted token that 
controls the lock on the device, thus permitting the user to connect to other networks. Finally, as 
noted below in Section VII.B, the software on some devices simply does not have the built-in 
capability to perform carrier unlocking. 
  
At a fundamental level, unlocking without using the above methods—which generally require the 
assistance of (and are subject to interference from) the carrier or manufacturer—is the same for each 
of the above types of locks: the device owner uses software tools to alter the settings that keep the 
device restricting to a single carrier. Occasionally, this software does not need to circumvent any 
TPMs in order to change the device settings. Many phones, however, contain TPMs designed to 
make it difficult to access these settings without carrier assistance. In these cases, the tools must 
circumvent these TPMs in order to get access to the locking settings. This can be accomplished in a 
number of ways.
17 In some cases, external software can circumvent the TPM and directly change 
the relevant setting or cause the device to run code to change the setting—usually by modifying a 
variable or replacing a short piece of code. In others, the operating system of the device must be 
temporarily altered to permit new software to run on the device itself and modify the relevant 
setting; typically, the software is then returned to its original condition. In either case, the software 
often must make use of security defects in the device in order to run software or make changes that 
the carrier and manufacturer have not approved. But it does not matter whether the device would 
“normally” be unlocked via a device-specific code or cloud-based permissions, or even whether the 
phone does not come with software to control the locking; for the purposes of § 1201, the 
circumvention process remains the same. 
  
V. Noninfringing Uses: Unlocking, Including Bulk Unlocking, Does Not Implicate any 
Copyright Interests, Is a Fair Use Under § 107, and Is Noninfringing Under § 117  
 
16 Separately, some manufacturers implement “device locks” that prevents access to the entire device, typically if it is 
lost or stolen or if it is resold without being first unlocked. See, e.g., Find My iPhone Activation lock, 
http://support.apple.com/en-us/HT201365. 
17 Examples of third-party tools include ultraSn0w and Universal Advance Unlocker. See, e.g., Cody Lee, Ultra Sn0w 
Update for iOS 6.1, IDOWNLOADINGBLOG.COM (Feb. 7, 2013), http://www.idownloadblog.com/2013/02/07/ultrasn0w-
updated-for-ios-6; Informer Technologies Inc., Universal Advance Unlocker, SOFTWARE.INFORMER.COM, 
http://universal-advance-unlocker.software.informer.com. 
   5 
                                                 
[PAGE 8]
Modifying the software within a mobile device for the purpose of unlocking the device for use on 
another carrier involves a process that generally does not infringe the copyright in any 
copyrightable work. Unlocking also qualifies as a noninfringing fair use under 17 U.S.C. § 107. 
Unlocking also is noninfringing under 17 U.S.C. § 117.  
  
A. Accessing a Device’s Firmware to Unlock the Device Does Not Implicate § 106 Rights 
 
As the Register and Librarian determined in previous rulemakings, and Congress effectively 
concurred in the Unlocking Act, using the software or firmware on a telephone handset to unlock 
that device does not infringe any rights under 17 U.S.C. § 106, and the purpose of the TPM is to 
lock consumers into a particular network rather than to protect copyright interests. Thus, modifying 
the locking software is not a use that infringes or implicates copyright in the first instance. Although 
Petitioner’s comment addresses each of the issues and answers each of the questions specified in the 
NPRM, we note that the absence of “copyright infringement or . . . an activity that in any way 
implicates copyright infringement or the interests of the copyright holder”
18 in unlocking should 
alone constitute sufficient grounds for the proposed exemption without any further showing. 
Unlocking simply is not a copyright issue and should not be a § 1201 issue. 
 
As the Register correctly recognized in her 2010 recommendation: 
 
[T]he primary purpose of the locks is to keep consumers bound to their existing 
networks, rather than to protect the rights of copyright owners in their capacity as 
copyright owners. . . . Because there appear to be no copyright-based reasons why 
circumvention under these circumstances should not be permitted, the Register 
recommends that the Librarian designate a class of works similar to the class 
designated in 2006. The designated classes, both [2006 and 2009], simply reflect a 
conclusion that unlocking a mobile phone to be used on another wireless network 
does not ordinarily constitute copyright infringement and that Section 1201(a)(1), a 
statute intended to protect copyright interests, should not be used to prevent mobile 
phone owners from engaging in such noninfringing activity.
19 
 
The Librarian, in the 2006 Final Rule, reached a similar conclusion about the non-copyright 
purposes of handset locks, technology protection measures (“TPMs”) that have “nothing 
whatsoever to do with the interests protected by copyright,” finding that a user who unlocks a 
wireless handset to connect is not  
 
engaging in copyright infringement or in an activity that in any way implicates 
copyright infringement or the interests of the copyright holder [and that] the access 
controls do not appear to actually be deployed in order to protect the interests of the 
copyright owner or the value or integrity of the copyrighted work; rather, they are 
used by wireless carriers to limit the ability of subscribers to switch to other carriers, 
18 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies , 71 
Fed. Reg. 68472, 68476 (Nov. 20, 2006) (formerly codified at 37 C.F.R. 201.40) [hereinafter 2006 Final Rule]. 
19 Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights in RM 2008-8, Rulemaking on Exemptions from Prohibition on 
Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 152-153 (June 11, 2010) (emphasis 
added) [hereinafter 2010 Recommendation], available at www.copyright.gov/1201/2010/initialed- registers-
recommendation-june-11-2010.pdf. 
   6 
                                                 
[PAGE 9]
a business decision that has nothing whatsoever to do with the interests protected by 
copyright.20 
 
These conclusions reflect that software or firmware modifications necessary to unlock a device are, 
by their nature, noninfringing. For instance, unlocking via modification of a few digits in the 
underlying firmware to make a device operable on another network does not implicate protectable 
work. Those functional portions of the firmware are “uncopyrightable data that the computer 
program interacts with in order to perform a particular task . . . [and] such changes do not constitute 
copyright infringement.”
21 The Register in 2010 aptly characterized these digits as functional 
variables and analogized those variables to the song “Happy Birthday”—while the name used in the 
song, like the variables or digits, may change, the underlying, protectable song (firmware) remains 
unchanged and continues to function.22  
 
B. Unlocking a Mobile Device is a Fair Use Under § 107 
 
To the extent a circumvention method implicates any § 106 rights, accessing and altering the 
firmware on a mobile device for the purpose of switching carriers qualifies as a fair use and is 
therefore noninfringing under 17 U.S.C. § 107. The Copyright Act requires consideration of four 
factors to determine if a use is fair use, including: (1) the purpose and character of the use, including 
whether such use is of a commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational purposes; (2) the nature 
of the copyrighted work; (3) the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the 
copyrighted work as a whole; and (4) the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of 
the copyrighted work.
23 All four fair use factors weigh strongly in favor of mobile device unlocking 
being a fair use.  
 
First, the purpose of the use is simply to make nominal, functional changes to the carrier locking 
firmware or software, or to replace it, for the sole purpose of allowing a user to connect the mobile 
device to another carrier’s network. Several courts have recognized fair use where a party copied 
software merely to enable software and device interoperability.
24 These courts recognize that while 
software may have expressive (protected) content, modification of that expressive content may be 
necessary to enable public access to the software’s functional (unprotected) content.
25 Moreover, 
such an alteration is transformative and does not “merely supersede the objects of the original 
creation”
26 because the alteration only changes certain functional portions of the original work and 
thereafter works with, not supersedes, the original software. Such an alteration is transformative 
20 2006 Final Rule at 68476. 
21 See 2010 Recommendation at 134. 
22 See id. 
23 17 U.S.C. § 107(1)-(4). 
24 See Sega Enterprises Ltd. v. Accolade, Inc., 977 F.2d 1510, 1520 (9th Cir. 1992) (“Because . . . disassembly is the 
only means of gaining access to those unprotected aspects of the program, and because Accolade has a legitimate 
interest in gaining such access (in order to determine how to make its cartridges compatible with the Genesis console), 
we agree with Accolade.”); see also Sony Computer Entm't, Inc. v. Connectix Corp., 203 F.3d 596, 602-03 (9th Cir. 
2000) (“We conclude that, under the facts of this case and our precedent, Connectix's intermediate copying and use of 
Sony's copyrighted BIOS was a fair use for the purpose of gaining access to the unprotected elements of Sony's 
software.”). 
25 See, e.g., Atari Games Corp. v. Nintendo of Am. Inc., 975 F.2d 832, 843 (Fed. Cir. 1992) (Any reproduction of 
protectable expression must be strictly necessary to ascertain the bounds of protected information within the work. ). 
26 Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 579 (1994). 
   7 
                                                 
[PAGE 10]
because it “adds something new, with a further purpose or different character, altering the first with 
new expression, meaning, or message.”27  
 
Here, unlocking “alters the first” software, which locks the phone to a particular mobile carriers, 
“with a further purpose” of allowing the device to connect to other mobile carriers. Essentially the 
use that is made has the opposite purpose of the original purpose, a highly transformative action. 
Even if an unlocking method required making an exact copy of the firmware, “making an exact 
copy of a work may be transformative so long as the copy serves a different function than the 
original work.”
28 Finally, while the proposed use may be related to a commercial purpose—selling 
or recycling unlocked phones—that commercial aspect is fairly attenuated from the unlocking use 
of the firmware or software and does not involve selling copies or derivative works of it other than 
as a tiny component of a used phone,
29 and the public benefit of unlocking is substantial.30 
 
Second, the nature of the copyrighted work is functional software. Works that have strong 
functional or practical elements are subject to less copyright protection than more creative works.31 
Indeed, most unlocking methods only involve the highly functional portions of the software—such 
as carrier code variables—which are not eligible for copyright protection in the first place. With 
regard to computer programs, “fair use doctrine preserves public access to the ideas and functional 
elements embedded in copyrighted computer software programs.”32 
Third, unlocking methods, such as reflashing, only interact with certain codes or variables that 
represent a tiny component of the software stored or embedded on the phone. To the extent an 
unlocking method creates a derivative work of parts of the software, the changes are limited to the 
portion of the software that prevents unlocking—while the vast remainder of the software remains 
undisturbed and allows the device to continue functioning as intended. Moreover, even if an 
unlocking method must create an interim copy of the software, creating such a copy is a fair use 
because it is “‘necessary’ to gain access to the functional elements of the software itself.”
33 This 
factor favors fair use because “no more was taken than necessary.”34 
 
Fourth, unlocking has no negative effect on the market or value for the mobile device’s carrier 
locking software. Quite the opposite: the ability to lawfully unlock mobile devices likely increases 
the value of those devices (including the embedded software) because the owner gains the ability to 
switch to a preferred carrier and because the resale value of the device increases. The modified 
software at issue here is in no way being offered to the market of phone makers such that it could 
usurp the original market. Even if unlocking somehow threatened the carriers’ business model of 
27 Id. 
28 Perfect 10, Inc. v. Amazon.com, Inc., 508 F.3d 1146, 1165 (9th Cir. 2007). 
29 See Sega Enters. Ltd., 977 F.2d at 1523-1524 (“[W]e conclude that Accolade copied Sega's code for a legitimate, 
essentially non-exploitative purpose, and that the commercial aspect of its use can best be described as of minimal 
significance.”). 
30 Id. at 1523 (“[W]e are free to consider the public benefit resulting from a particular use notwithstanding the fact that 
the alleged infringer may gain commercially.”). 
31 See id. at 1524, citing Baker v. Selden, 101 U.S. 99, 104 (1879). 
32 Lexmark Int’l Inc. v. Static Control Components, Inc., 387 F.3d 522, 537 (6th Cir. 2004), citing Sony Computer 
Entm't, Inc. at 603. 
33 Sony Computer Entm't, Inc., 203 F.3d at 602-03, citing Sega Enters. Ltd., 977 F.2d at 1524-26 (amended opinion). 
34 Authors Guild, Inc. v. HathiTrust, 755 F.3d 87, 98 (2d Cir. 2014), citing Campbell, 510 U.S. at 589. 
   8 
                                                 
[PAGE 11]
controlling when—and if—they will unlock mobile devices and allow consumers the choice of 
using their phones on competing networks, “copyright law . . . does not confer such a monopoly.”35 
  
C. Unlocking, Including Bulk Unlocking, Is Permitted Under 17 U.S.C. § 117 Because 
Consumers Own Their Phone Software and Accessing the Software Is an “Essential 
Step” 
 
Even if the unlocking at issue here did implicate copyright interests and was not noninfringing fair 
use, it would be lawful under 17 U.S.C. § 117. Specifically § 117(a)(1) permits the owner of a copy 
of a program to make such a copy or adaptation if it is created “as an essential step in the utilization 
of the computer program in conjunction with a machine.”
36  
 
A mobile device owner, whether they are an individual or a recycler (both of whom own the devices 
they possess), falls within the § 117 exception when they are the owner of the copy of the software 
within that mobile device. As the Register recognized in 2012, and as continues to be the case, at 
least some significant portion of cellular wireless network users own the copies of the software 
contained within their mobile devices and accessed in the course of unlocking those devices.
37 
While there remains no uniform legal standard for distinguishing licenses from sales of software, if 
anything, more mobile device-owners today own their mobile software copies than in 2012. The 
existence of a substantial subset of mobile device users who clearly own the software on their 
phones is sufficient to again conclude, as the Register did in 2012, that § 117 permits unlocking.
38  
 
Since the most recent DMCA triennial proceeding, several district courts in different circuits have 
adopted the Second Circuit approach from Krause v. Titleserv, Inc. and rejected the more restrictive 
Vernor approach.39 Indeed, the “better view,” endorsed by Nimmer on Copyright, is the Second 
Circuit’s common-sense observation in Krause:  
 
[I]t seems anomalous for a user whose degree of ownership of a copy is so complete 
that he may lawfully use it and keep it forever, or if so disposed, throw it in the trash, 
35 Sony Computer Entm't, Inc., 203 F.3d at 607, citing Sega Enters. Ltd., 977 F.2d at 1523-1524 (“[A]n attempt to 
monopolize the market by making it impossible for others to compete runs counter to the statutory purpose of 
promoting creative expression and cannot constitute a strong equitable basis for resisting the invocation of the fair use 
doctrine.”); see also Lexmark Int'l Inc., 387 F.3d at 545 (“Lexmark's market for its toner cartridges and the profitability 
of its Prebate program may well be diminished by the SMARTEK chip, but that is not the sort of market or value that 
copyright law protects.”). 
36 See, e.g., 2010 Final Rule at 43831. 
37 Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights in RM 2011-7, Rulemaking on Exemptions from Prohibition on 
Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 93 (Oct. 28, 2012) [hereinafter 2012 
Recommendation], available at 
http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2012/Section_1201_Rulemaking_2012_Recommendation.pdf .  
38 Bulk recyclers are owners in the same way as are individual consumers. 2012 Recommendation at 93 ( “in view of the 
legal uncertainty, the record compels a finding that some subset of wireless customers—that is, anyone considered to 
own the software on their phones under applicable precedent—is entitled to exercise the Section 117 privilege.”).  
39 See, e.g., Princeton Payment Solutions, LLC v. ACI Worldwide, Inc., No. 1:13-CV-852, 2014 WL 4104170 at *7 
(E.D. Va. Aug. 15, 2014) (“Although the Fourth Circuit has not announced a test for copyright ownership under §  117, 
the Second Circuit's reasoning in Krause v. Titleserv, Inc., is persuasive.”); ZilYen, Inc. v. Rubber Mfrs. Ass'n, 935 F. 
Supp. 2d 211, 219 (D.D.C. 2013) (“This Court finds the Second Circuit's reasoning persuasive.”).  
   9 
                                                 
[PAGE 12]
to be nonetheless unauthorized to fix it when it develops a bug, or to make an 
archival copy as backup security.40 
 
While Krause addressed ownership in a discrete software program, the same logic applies even 
more strongly to ownership of the copy of software in a mobile device because that software is 
essential to the functioning of the device and there is no question that the user or recycler owns the 
device.  
 
Krause: The non-exclusive factors articulated in Krause support this common-sense observation for 
mobile device software or firmware. These factors, noted in the Register’s 2010 Recommendation, 
include: (1) whether substantial consideration was paid for the copy; (2) whether the copy was 
created for the sole benefit of the purchaser; (3) whether the copy was customized to serve the 
purchaser’s use; (4) whether the copy was stored on property owned by the purchaser; (5) whether 
the creator reserved the right to repossess the copy; (6) whether the creator agreed that the purchaser 
had the right to possess and use the programs forever regardless of whether the relationship between 
the parties terminated; and (7) whether the purchaser was free to discard or destroy the copy 
anytime it wished.
41 
 
First, purchasers of mobile devices pay considerable prices, such as in up-front and/or monthly 
subsidy payments, to mobile carriers for ownership of their devices, which includes the underlying 
software and firmware the devices require to be operable; no one would spend hundreds of dollars 
for an inoperable piece of hardware.
42 Second, each copy of the software is created for the sole 
benefit of the owner of the mobile device on which it is stored since it is used only on that device by 
that owner to connect to the network; that particular copy could not benefit anyone else. Third, it 
does not appear that carriers customize software for particular owners or users of a mobile device. 
Fourth, the copies of the software are stored on the mobile device owned by the user or recycler, not 
on some remote server controlled by the carriers.  
 
Fifth, there is no credible evidence that carriers reserve in any meaningful way the right to repossess 
the copy of the software because purchasers remain free to—and do, by the millions—discard, 
destroy, give away or sell their mobile device and, along with them, the copy of the software 
embedded or stored on them. Indeed, while the boilerplate terms and conditions of some carriers 
purport to reserve the right to revoke a user’s software license,
43 there is no indication that any 
carrier requires or has ever required a subsequent purchaser—before transfer—to wipe the device’s 
software, return the phone to the carrier for software extraction, or otherwise deactivate the copy of 
the software on the mobile device. Instead, millions of phones are sold or transferred without any 
relicensing or replacement of their software whatsoever.  
 
Sixth, it appears that no carrier agreement suggests that a device owner would not be able to keep 
and use the software indefinitely. While some carriers reserve the right to terminate service to a 
40 Melville B. Nimmer, Nimmer on Copyright, 2-8 § 8.08, citing Krause v. Titleserv, Inc., 402 F.3d 119, 123 (2d Cir. 
2005). 
41 2010 Recommendation at 126; Krause, 402 F.3d at 124. 
42 While some handsets may be subsidized by the carriers compared to unlocked versions, carriers recoup this subsidy 
either through a purchaser’s (a) completion of his contract or (b) payment of early termination fees.  
43 See, e.g., Sprint Terms & Conditions, Software License, SPRINT, 
https://shop2.sprint.com/en/legal/os_general_terms_conditions_popup.shtml (last visited Jan. 27, 2015).  
   10 
                                                 
[PAGE 13]
purchaser, Petitioner is not aware of any reported case or instance where, upon service termination, 
the copy of the firmware or software on the device was requested for return, deleted, deactivated, or 
otherwise made inoperable. Seventh, there is simply no evidence and no reason to believe that any 
carriers actually restrict, or have ever interfered with, a purchaser’s freedom to discard or destroy 
her phone and the software on it. 
 
Thus, six of the seven Krause factors support the conclusion that a device’s owner also owns the 
software or firmware on that device. 
 
Vernor: Even if the more restrictive standard articulated by the Ninth Circuit in Vernor v. Autodesk, 
Inc.,44 were to be applied, the licenses offered by the mobile carriers do not meet the three required 
criteria and the device owner should remain the owner of the software on that device. First, it is far 
from clear that all U.S. carriers specify that a user is granted a license to the software in their mobile 
device. While some major carriers’ terms of use specify that a license is granted, there are over 100 
U.S. carriers
45 that may offer different terms of use. Under any scenario, similar to the finding of 
the Register in 2012, at least a subset of mobile device owners will own the copies of the software 
in their devices.
46 Second, the purported licenses do not significantly restrict the user's ability to 
transfer the software;47 in practice purchasers remain free to sell or otherwise dispose of their 
devices on which the software resides and millions have done so.48 Third, at least some carriers do 
not impose “notable” use restrictions beyond general prohibitions of infringement of intellectual 
property rights or use of their services for abusive or illegal activity.49 Such use restrictions can 
hardly be called “notable,” especially since the remaining uses allowed are expansive.50 Indeed, just 
as the Register noted in 2012, “none of the agreements cited appear to contain restrictions as 
stringent as those in Vernor.”
51  
 
Essential step: The second prong of § 117(a)(1) is easily satisfied by unlocking. Even if accessing 
the software or firmware to unlock the device onto another mobile service provider were deemed to 
require making an “adaptation,” of the copy of that software, such adaptation plainly is an “essential 
44 621 F.3d 1102, 1111 (9th Cir. 2010). 
45 Derek Khana, Unlocking Petition Makes Legislative History, TECHCRUNCH (Aug. 5, 2014), 
http://techcrunch.com/2014/08/05/unlocking-petition-makes-legislative-history; see also List of GSM and CDMA 
Networks and Carriers in the US, http://www.ebay.com/gds/GSM-and-CDMA-Guide-/10000000009189079/g.html (last 
visited Feb. 3, 2015). 
46 2012 Recommendation at 93. 
47 Id. (emphasis added). 
48 For example, while Verizon purports to own the software copy on the devices it sells, it freely offers a program reset 
code if a user wishes to use his non-SIM card device on another carrier. Verizon Customer Agreement, VERIZON 
WIRELESS, 
https://www.verizonwireless.com/b2c/globalText?textName=CUSTOMER_AGREEMENT&jspName=footer/customer
Agreement.jsp (last visited Jan. 27, 2015). 
49 T-Mobile Terms & Conditions, 18. * Misuse of Service or Device; 20. * Intellectual Property, T -MOBILE, 
https://www.t-mobile.com/Templates/Popup.aspx?PAsset=Ftr_Ftr_TermsAndConditions&print=true (last visited Jan. 
27, 2015); Sprint Terms & Conditions, Prohibited Network Uses, SPRINT, 
https://shop2.sprint.com/en/legal/os_general_terms_conditions_popup.shtml (last visited Jan. 27, 2015).  
50 See, e.g., Sprint Terms & Conditions, Prohibited Network Uses, SPRINT, 
https://shop2.sprint.com/en/legal/os_general_terms_conditions_popup.shtml (last visited Jan. 27, 2015) . 
51 2012 Recommendation at 92 fn. 504, citing 621 F.3d at 1104-05 (describing activation codes and license tracking); 
id. at 1105 (describing “required destruction of copies of previous versions” of the software).  
   11 
                                                 
[PAGE 14]
step in the utilization of the computer program in conjunction with a machine.”52 There is no other 
way to unlock the firmware for use with another mobile service provider besides circumventing the 
TPM and making appropriate changes to the software to unlock the device. Thus, any temporary 
adaptations made during the unlocking process are an “essential step” to use the computer program 
(device software) in conjunction with a machine (the device) to unlock the device.  
 
As the Register correctly concluded in 2012—for the second time:  
 
[m]odifications to the firmware or software on the phone may be necessary to make 
the device functional with another service and better serve the legitimate needs of the 
consumer. From a copyright perspective, these individual changes benefit the 
purchaser despite the fact that some wireless carriers would like to have complete 
control over the device by restricting its use to their service. But this was precisely 
the concern that was expressed in many parts of the CONTU Report – that protection 
for computer programs had the capacity to lead to anti-competitive practices and that 
the use of copyright in computer programs was a means to that anti-competitive 
end.
53 
 
The conditions that warranted this conclusion continue to exist today and it remains true and 
persuasive. 
 
Thus, § 117 plainly applies to consumers or recyclers unlocking the wireless devices they own, 
individually or in bulk. To the extent the process of unlocking makes an exact copy of the carrier 
locking software or firmware, or simply “flips (uncopyrightable) switches” built into the software to 
remove the carrier lock and unlock the phone, the phone can be resold or otherwise transferred by 
the owner consistent with § 117(b). Further, to the extent that any adaptations made during the 
process of unlocking are temporary—as is often the case—they are not transferred and do not 
interfere with the phone owner’s ability to lawfully resell the device under that section. 
 
Unlocking Act: Finally, the Unlocking Act expressly provides that circumvention of a TPM to 
unlock a mobile device “may be initiated by the owner of any such handset or other device.”54 This 
language demonstrates Congress’s recognition that lawful owners of a mobile device or their agents 
have the legal right to circumvent a technological measure to unlock their phone for use on the 
carrier of their choice. The Unlocking Act makes no mention of the owner of the device’s 
underlying software. The Act should properly be read as Congress’ determination that the unlocking 
that Petitioner seeks here should be lawful, whatever the precise legal ownership status of software 
and firmware on the unlocked devices.  
 
D. Legitimate Bulk Unlocking of Used Devices Is Equally Noninfringing and Warrants 
Equal Coverage Under the Requested Exemption 
 
The NPRM asks commenters to address the practice and market effects of “bulk circumvention” (or 
unlocking), and whether the exemption should address “bulk circumvention.”  
52 17 U.S.C. § 117(a)(1). 
53 2012 Recommendation at 93, citing 2010 Recommendation at 137. 
54 Unlocking Act § 2(c)(2). 
   12 
                                                 
[PAGE 15]
The requested exemption should apply equally to circumvention carried out by individual owners 
and that carried out in bulk by recyclers such as ISRI’s members.  
 
Bulk unlocking is no different than individual consumer unlocking at the copyright level,
55 but is 
significantly different on the level of consumer benefit. Bulk unlocking allows recyclers to increase 
the prices consumers receive when they sell their used mobile devices, removing the current price 
disparity between locked versus unlocked devices, without burdening consumers with the 
cumbersome, frustrating, often-unsuccessful, and sometimes-impossible task of unlocking the 
phones themselves.56 This results in a greater variety and number of unlocked devices for 
consumers to choose from and more devices remaining operational and available in the 
marketplace. It also results in increased valuable competition between new and used devices and 
between wireless networks. As the White House noted upon passage of the Unlocking Act, its goal 
in reinstating the unlocking exemption was “to ensure copyright law does not undermine wireless 
competition.”57  
 
Treating bulk unlocking by legitimate recyclers as lawful to the same extent as individual unlocking 
is an important means of ensuring these goals. The exemption proposed here is necessary to permit 
recyclers to engage in bulk unlocking of lawfully acquired devices without the uncertain and 
difficult process of trying to obtain carrier permission or requiring each individual or corporate 
seller to navigate complex and burdensome carrier procedures or technical workarounds as 
prerequisites to accepting the device. Without a § 1201 exemption, wireless network providers can 
thwart these consumer benefits and restrain competition by refusing to unlock devices, unlocking 
devices only for individuals, or imposing significant limits on how many devices can be unlocked 
and under what circumstances.
58  
 
The Librarian of Congress explained under the 2010 determination, which approved the exemption 
that was later reinstated by the Unlocking Act, that: 
 
The type of commercial activity that would be permitted would be the resale of used 
handsets after the owners of the handsets have used them and then given or sold 
them to somebody else, who then resells them just as a used bookstore sells used 
books.
59  
 
55 It would generally involve the same methods used to unlock a single mobile device, just on a larger scale.  
56 Declaration of Chris Sullivan, President & Chief Executive Officer, Gazelle (attached to comment of eBay, Inc., and 
Gazelle, Inc.) at ¶8-10 [hereinafter Sullivan Declaration].  
57 Office of the Press Secretary, Statement from the President on Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless 
Competition Act, WHITEHOUSE.GOV, http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/07/25/statement-president-
unlocking-consumer-choice-and-wireless-competition-a (last visited Jan. 27, 2015) (emphasis added). 
58 For example, prior to October 2013, AT&T limited the total number of devices an individual could unlock to five, 
and stipulated that an individual could not unlock more than one device in twelve month s. See, e.g., Request a Device 
Unlock for Your AT&T Mobile Devices (Phones and Tablets), AT&T, 
http://wayback.archive.org/web/20141118085611/ https://www.att.com/deviceunlock/client/en_US  (November 18, 
2014). Similarly, T-Mobile currently limits the number of devices that can be unlocked to two per line in twelve 
months. See, e.g., Unlock Your Mobile Wireless Device, T-MOBILE, https://support.t-mobile.com/docs/DOC-1588 (last 
visited Jan. 22, 2015). 
59 2010 Final Rule at 43,831-32. 
   13 
                                                 
[PAGE 16]
Recyclers must be free to circumvent wireless device carrier locks in bulk in order to most 
efficiently buy and sell used devices, like used bookstores buy and sell books, without the 
need to rely on carriers.  
 
Congress, for its part, contemplated that the exemption it restored would include bulk 
unlocking of used devices. In the final wording of the version of the Unlocking Act that 
became law, negotiators removed strongly criticized language
60 from the House bill that 
might appear to limit bulk unlocking61 and replaced that language with a general savings 
clause that contained no suggestion of precluding bulk unlocking by resellers.62 It is 
essential to ensure that any new unlocking exemption permits legitimate recyclers to unlock 
lawfully acquired wireless devices for the benefit of consumers and the recyclers businesses, 
whether it is done individually or in bulk. 
 
E. Petitioner Seeks an Exemption for “Used” Devices 
 
The NPRM also asks whether the exemption should be limited to “used” handsets, and, if so, what 
would qualify a handset as “used.” 
 
Petitioner’s member companies purchase or receive donated used handsets. They seek to prolong 
the life of mobile devices through refurbishing, resale, or recycling. Importantly, ISRI members do 
not purchase new, unused handsets from carriers or retailers, but rather only used handsets from 
prior individual or corporate owners. While Petitioner’s comment seeks only an exemption for 
unlocking of used devices, Petitioner would not oppose a broader exemption that permitted 
unlocking of new devices under appropriate circumstances. 
 
Petitioner proposes that “used” be defined for purposes of this proposed exemption as: 
 
a wireless telephone handset that has been lawfully acquired and activated on the 
wireless telecommunications network
63 of a carrier. 
 
The Register’s 2010 Recommendation defined “used” somewhat more narrowly, as: 
 
a mobile phone that has been activated with the carrier or provider that sold the 
phone at a subsidized price and that the person activating the phone must actually 
have used on the carrier’s network.
64 
60 See Corynne McSherry, The Wrong Tool for the Job: Cell Phone Unlocking Bill Creates New Problems, ELECTRONIC 
FRONTIER FOUNDATION (Feb. 23, 2014), https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2014/02/wrong-tool-job-cell-phone-unlocking-
bill-fixes-wrong-problem-and-creates-new-ones. 
61 See Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act, H.R. 1123 § 2(c)(2), 113th Cong. (2014) (“Nothing 
in this subsection shall be construed in any rulemaking commenced on or after the date of enactment to permit the 
unlocking of wireless handsets or other wireless devices, for the purpose of bulk resale, . . . ”); but see 160 Cong. Rec., 
H1910 (daily ed. Feb. 25, 2014) (in colloquy on House floor just before passage of H.R. 1123, the bill’s sponsor Rep. 
Goodlatte stated that “this legislation is not intended to impair unlocking related to family plans consisting of a small 
number of handsets or of used phones by legitimate recyclers or resellers.”) (emphasis added).  
62 Unlocking Act § (d)(1) (“Except as expressly provided herein, nothing in this Act shall be construed to alter the scope 
of any party’s right under existing law.”). 
63 “Wireless telecommunications network” as defined in S.517—Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless 
Competition Act § (e)(2). 
   14 
                                                 
[PAGE 17]
 
This definition, however, is too limited for current wireless device market conditions. It does not 
include instances where a carrier has sold a device at full price rather than at a subsidized price and 
the lawful purchaser of that device subsequently chooses to sell or give it away.65 The four largest 
U.S. carriers, AT&T, Verizon, T-Mobile, and Sprint, all now offer handsets at a non-subsidized 
rate. T-Mobile was the first to announce this in December 2012,66 and more recently AT&T has 
confirmed that 40% of their customers are not part of a subsidy model.67 As pricing models shift but 
carrier locks persist, the definition of “used” handsets must be adapted to reflect that shift.  
 
Importantly, Petitioner’s focus on unlocking of used mobile devices, and the proposed definition of 
“used” above, eliminates any concern about phone traffickers misusing the proposed exemption. 
Traffickers purchase new, typically low cost handsets that are either subsidized or prepaid,
68 then 
unlock the handsets and sell them in the United States and or other countries without the handset 
ever being activated on a network or the subsidy being repaid. Petitioner and its members do not 
condone this type of activity. The definition of “used” proposed here includes the requirement that a 
phone have been “activated on the wireless network” in order to exclude this sort of arbitrage from 
the scope of the requested exemption.69 The Register in 2010 concluded that similar limitations 
“ensure that the designation of this class will not benefit those who . . . purchase new mobile phone 
handsets at subsidized prices and, without actually using them on the networks of the carriers who 
market those handsets, resell them for profit.”
70  
VI.  Adverse Impact 
 
Without a § 1201 exemption, owners of mobile devices, including consumers and legitimate 
recyclers and remanufacturers of used devices, have been and are substantially adversely affected in 
their ability to make what are legitimate noninfringing uses. Recyclers are unable to engage in 
noninfringing individual or bulk unlocking of devices for the benefit of consumers who are selling 
or buying used devices, consumers are denied the ability to use their devices on the network of their 
choice and denied the full benefit of choosing or selling used devices, and competition between new 
and used devices and between networks is reduced.  
 
At worst, recyclers have no option but to purchase, possibly refurbish, and then resell handsets that 
remain locked to a particular carrier, reducing consumer choice and lowering the value of the 
64 See 2010 Recommendation at 169. 
65 See, e.g., http://www.att.com/wireless/iphone/#fbid=Bf31b70t7eQ (last visited Feb. 5, 2015). 
66 See Phillip Dampier, Wireless Carriers’ Dream Come True: The End of the Phone Subsidy; T-Mobile May Start 
Trend, STOPTHECAP.COM (Dec. 11, 2012), http://stopthecap.com/2012/12/11/wireless-carriers-dream-come-true-the-
end-of-the-phone-subsidy-t-mobile-may-start-trend. 
67 See AT&T's Management Discusses Q1 2014 Results—Earnings Call Transcript at 7, SEEKINGALPHA.COM (Apr. 22, 
2014), http://seekingalpha.com/article/2155773-at-and-ts-management-discusses-q1-2014-results-earnings-call-
transcript. 
68 See, e.g., http://www.tracfone.com. 
69 Petitioners also note that there is no reason for concern under this definition for phones initially sold at lower prices 
where the full cost is subsidized through a fixed-period contract with the carrier, even where the initial owner of the 
phone chooses to sell or give it away before the expiration of the contract. While the requested exemption would allow 
such used phones to be unlocked, the carrier would still recover the full price of the phone through enforcement of its 
contract with the initial buyer, related early termination fees, and similar mechanisms. 
70 2010 Recommendation at 43,831-82 (emphasis added). 
   15 
                                                                                                                                                                  
[PAGE 18]
handsets to the seller and the recyclers. At best, recyclers, or the consumers from whom they 
lawfully obtain used devices, are forced to depend on the whims of carriers to assist in unlocking 
those devices or to provide unlocking codes so the devices can be used on other networks. This is a 
highly inferior alternative to the ability to unlock in bulk, since such carrier cooperation is voluntary 
and cannot be counted on; is uncertain, often expensive and time-consuming; and is frequently 
unsuccessful. The lack of an exemption allowing unlocking has thus had, and will continue to have, 
significant adverse impacts on recyclers and consumers. 
 
A. The Absence of an Unlocking Exemption Has Forced Consumers to Resell Their Devices 
for Significantly Lower Prices, Has Reduced Consumer Choice and Wireless 
Competition, and Has Adversely Affected Recyclers’ Ability to Meet Consumer Demand 
and Obtain the Full Value of the Devices They Resell  
 
Without an exemption allowing unlocking of wireless devices, recyclers’ only option for unlocking 
since 2012 has been to rely on voluntary unlocking by carriers. But while some carriers provided 
some assistance with unlocking requests when the previous exemption was in place, that 
cooperation decreased after the Copyright Office narrowed the unlocking exemption in 2012. A 
striking example is a policy change by AT&T after the last triennial. In response to the Copyright 
Office’s decision—and public push back—AT&T noted that the decision would have “very little 
impact on AT&T customers,” but reminded the public that the Librarian did not exempt unlocking 
for bulk recyclers.71 Then, in early October 2013, AT&T abruptly changed its unlocking policies to 
make it even more difficult or impossible for bulk recyclers to obtain unlock codes.72 Not 
surprisingly, this policy change reportedly caused at least one lawful reseller to close its business.73 
The policy and its adverse impacts have continued since 2013, as lawful recyclers continue to 
struggle to receive unlock codes for used AT&T mobile devices.74  
 
Recycler Gazelle, Inc.,75 for example, reports that, “in the fourth quarter of 2013 alone, the change 
in the AT&T unlocking practices had a severe negative impact on Gazelle’s revenue and Net 
Income. The lower prices being paid for our pre-owned phones led directly to lower payments being 
made to the customers who sold us their phones.”76 Gazelle also reports that the prices it and its 
competitors are able to offer to consumers selling their devices “have declined sharply, and have 
remained significantly lower than the price Gazelle can offer for an unlocked phone, or for a phone 
that Gazelle knows it can unlock upon the request of the selling consumer.”77 
 
Another recycler, HOBI International, Inc., reports that the company previously worked with two 
carriers to gain unlocking of mobile devices. After the 2012 exemption, one carrier refused to 
71 Joan Marsh, Bottom Line: We Unlock Our Customer’s Devices, ATT PUBLIC POLICY BLOG (Mar. 8, 2013), 
http://www.attpublicpolicy.com/wireless/bottom-line-we-unlock-our-customers%E2%80%99-devices. 
72 Sullivan Declaration at ¶ 6; Ben Lovejoy, Apparent Block on Mass Unlocking of AT&T iPhones Hits Resale Industry, 
9TO5MAC.COM (Nov. 14, 2013), http://9to5mac.com/2013/11/14/apparent-block-on-mass-unlocking-of-att-iphones-
hits-resale-industry. 
73 Lovejoy, Apparent Block on Mass Unlocking of AT&T iPhones Hits Resale Industry. 
74 Sullivan Declaration at ¶ 6. 
75 Gazelle purchases phones and other mobile devices that, pursuant to carrier agreements with consumers, are eligible 
for resale by that consumer. See www.gazelle.com. 
76 Sullivan Declaration at ¶ 2. 
77 Id. at ¶ 7. 
   16 
                                                 
[PAGE 19]
continue unlocking HOBI’s used mobile devices for resale. Because those devices remained locked 
to a particular carrier, HOBI found that prices for mobile devices dropped $25 across the board, 
reducing the price that individual owners could receive for their used devices, harming consumers 
and bulk recyclers alike. HOBI reports one example of a deal it had secured to resell over 10,000 
used, lawfully acquired mobile devices; after the carrier began refusing to provide HOBI unlock 
codes, HOBI was forced the sell the locked devices for only $85 each instead of the $125 it would 
have received for an unlocked phone. HOBI lost roughly $400,000 on this deal alone.78 
 
Recyclers such as ISRI member companies have worked in the past with carriers to unlock mobile 
devices and remain willing to do so going forward. 79 Their efforts to do so, however, are largely 
unsuccessful and their customers and their business are being directly harmed as a result. Recyclers 
uniformly report that they cannot resell a mobile device for its full value, since devices locked to 
certain carriers are worth less. Without the ability readily to unlock those lawfully purchased 
devices, recyclers must pay less to the large portion of consumers who sell their mobile devices in a 
locked state and must receive less when they resell those devices.  
 
B. Current Carrier Unlock Policies Do Not Obviate, But Rather Highlight, the Need for an 
Exemption for Bulk Circumvention 
 
While the four major wireless carriers in 2013 adopted voluntary unlocking policies
80 under 
pressure from the public and the FCC,81 those policies leave major obstacles to bulk and individual 
unlocking and do not obviate the need for an unlocking exemption. American wireless providers 
other than these four are not parties to the CTIA letter, and the large majority of them do not offer 
unlocking services, particularly for popular mobile devices like Apple’s iPhone.
82 Some key 
unlocking policies of the four major carriers include: 
  
78 In addition to the impact of carrier locks, manufacturer device locks such as the Apple's Find My iPhone Activation 
lock (http://support.apple.com/en-us/HT201365) are increasingly problematic for legitimate recyclers. One recycler, 
The Wireless Alliance (http://www.thewirelessalliance.com), reports that the number of device-locked iPhones it has 
received recently has grown exponentially. While almost none have been reported stolen, and most are in working 
condition, Wireless Alliance is unable to access the devices at all due to the lock and so is unable to refurbish or resell 
them. Where sellers or donors to charitable entities or other drop off programs do not first disable the device lock, the 
lock renders the device unusable and unable to be resold for anything other than scrap.  
79 See, e.g., Sullivan Declaration at ¶ 7. 
80 See, e.g., CTIA—The Wireless Association, Letter re Carrier Unlocking Voluntary Commitment (Dec. 12, 2013)  
[hereinafter CTIA letter], available at http://www.ctia.org/docs/default-source/fcc-filings/ctia-letter-on-unlocking.pdf. 
81 Jon Brodkin, US Carriers Agree to Unlock Customers’ Phones After Pressure from FCC, ARS TECHNICA (Dec. 12, 
2013), http://arstechnica.com/business/2013/12/us-carriers-agree-to-unlock-customers-phones-after-pressure-from-fcc. 
82 Wireless Carrier Support and Features for iPhone, APPLE, http://support.apple.com/en-us/ht1937 (last visited Jan. 29, 
2015) (see USA: “Carrier Offers Unlocking” column). 
   17 
                                                 
[PAGE 20]
  AT&T83 T-Mobile84 Verizon85 Sprint86 
Required 
Delay 
Postpaid: account 
active for at least 
60 days.  
Prepaid: account 
active for at least 6 
months. 
Early Upgrade: 
must wait 14 days 
“buyer remorse” 
period. 
Monthly plan: 
active for at least 
40 days.  
Prepaid: active 
for more than 1 
year (subject to 
some exceptions). 
3G Prepaid 
Phone-in-the-Box:  
• restricted for use 
with Verizon’s 
Prepaid service 
for 6 months, 
and  
• locked to Verizon 
for 12 months 
after activation. 
 
Restrictions 
on Bulk 
Unlocking 
 User has requested 
no more than 2 
mobile device 
unlock codes per 
line of service in 
the last 12 months. 
 Current or 
former Sprint 
customer can 
provide the 
phone number 
or account 
number for the 
device. 
“Escape 
Hatch” 
“[R]eserves the 
right to alter this 
unlocking policy at 
its discretion 
without advance 
notice.” 
“[M]ay request 
proof of purchase 
or additional 
information in its 
discretion and 
certain other 
exceptions may 
apply.” 
 “This unlocking 
policy is subject 
to change at 
Sprint's 
discretion 
without advance 
notice.” 
 
Other 
Notable 
Restrictions 
   Sprint cannot 
unlock many 
devices, 
including 
iPhones. 
 
Critically, none of these policies accommodate bulk unlocking. The CTIA letter explicitly limits the 
carriers’ voluntary unlocking to their “customers, former customers and individual owners of 
eligible devices.”
87 T-Mobile effectively prohibits bulk unlocking by limiting mobile device unlock 
codes to two devices per line per year. AT&T’s current practices, have made it much more 
difficult—if not impossible—for bulk recyclers to obtain unlock codes for lawfully acquired 
83 Mobile Device Unlock Support Guide, AT&T, http://www.att.com/esupport/article.jsp?sid=KB425914 (last visited 
Jan. 22, 2015). 
84 Unlock Your Mobile Wireless Device, T-MOBILE, https://support.t-mobile.com/docs/DOC-1588 (last visited Jan. 22, 
2015). 
85 Device Unlock Policy, VERIZON WIRELESS, http://www.verizonwireless.com/aboutus/commitment/safety-
security/device-unlocking-policy.html (last visited Jan 22, 2015). 
86 Unlock your Sprint Device, SPRINT, http://www.sprint.com/legal/unlocking_policy.html (last visited Jan. 22, 2015).  
87 CTIA letter at 3 (preamble). 
   18 
                                                 
[PAGE 21]
devices.88 Thus, rather than obviating the need for circumvention for bulk unlocking, these policies 
increase that need. 
 
Second, these policies are voluntary and presumably can be revoked or changed at any time. Some 
carriers even include explicit disclaimers to that effect: for instance, AT&T provides that it 
“reserves the right to alter this unlocking policy at its discretion without advance notice.”89 Without 
an unlocking exemption, carriers are free to make their policies more restrictive, or to eliminate 
them altogether, with little or no consequence, leaving Petitioners and others without the ability to 
unlock for another three years.
90 Indeed, the Unlocking Act demonstrates that Congress recognizes 
that mobile device unlocking is a lawful consumer right, not an unreliable “privilege” subject to the 
whims of each carrier. 
 
Third, there is no guarantee that, even if an owner of a device meets all stated requirements, the 
carrier will unlock the device. Each major carrier policy charted above includes an “escape hatch” 
that likely permits the carrier to refuse to unlock a phone for any reason. For example, even if an 
owner meets all of T-Mobile’s unlocking requirements, “T-Mobile may request proof of purchase 
or additional information in its discretion and certain other exceptions may apply.”
91 Likewise, 
AT&T and Sprint may unlock devices purchased by third parties, but may not—they offer no 
guarantees.  
 
Fourth, these policies are often complex, cumbersome, and unreliable to navigate in practice, 
preventing even individual consumers from succeeding in unlocking their mobile devices. Gazelle 
estimates that in 2014 “29 percent of customers who began the process of selling a phone to Gazelle 
failed to complete it because of the complexities of the unlocking process.”
92 As one frustrated 
AT&T customer put it to Gazelle, “AT&T says the device IS unlocked but I am tired of the 
hassle.”93 “In addition to direct costs to the consumer,” declares Gazelle President Chris Sullivan, 
“Gazelle’s extensive efforts and outreach to encourage customers to complete the process and to 
help them to do so add to Gazelle’s costs overall, unnecessarily impacting Gazelle’s ability to offer 
prices competitive with those offered by carriers for trade-in.”
94 At least ten percent of customers 
who attempt to unlock their phones and sell their devices to Gazelle contact Gazelle for assistance 
with the unlocking process.
95  
 
88 Id. at ¶ 6. 
89 Consumer Device Unlock Portal, AT&T, https://www.att.com/deviceunlock (last visited Jan. 27, 2015). 
90 For instance, Sprint’s unlocking policies were not publically available—if at all—on its “Legal/Regulatory & 
Consumer Resources” site in 2012 and 2013, after the previous exemption was not renewed. Compare  Unlock Your 
Sprint Device, SPRINT, http://www.sprint.com/legal/unlocking_policy.html (last visited Jan. 22, 2015)  with 
Legal/Regulatory & Consumer Resources, ARCHIVE.ORG, 
https://web.archive.org/web/20121027110959/http://www.sprint.com/legal/index.html (Oct. 27, 2012) and  
Legal/Regulatory & Consumer Resources, ARCHIVE.ORG, 
https://web.archive.org/web/20130118060816/http://www.sprint.com/legal/index.html (Jan. 18, 2013).  
91 Unlock Your Mobile Wireless Device, T-MOBILE, https://support.t-mobile.com/docs/DOC-1588 (last visited Jan. 27, 
2015). 
92 Sullivan declaration at ¶ 8. 
93 Id. at ¶ 10, #10819. 
94 Id. at ¶ 8. 
95 Id. at ¶ 8; note that the carrier unlocking process for phones and tablets is the same. 
   19 
                                                 
[PAGE 22]
Fifth, carrier unlocking, even when it happens, also is unpredictable and slow. While many carriers 
advertise quick unlocking, Gazelle finds that actual carrier unlocking times range from two to 60 
days.96 Moreover, there is a strong presence of dissatisfied customers trying unsuccessfully to 
unlock their phones. Gazelle estimates that “[f]orty percent of customers contacting Gazelle for 
assistance report failure and /or belief that their phone remains locked due to an error by AT&T.”
97 
“This is incredibly frustrating,” wrote one AT&T customer, “as I followed the exact procedures 
outlined by AT&T and seconded by Gazelle. The phone said it had been unlocked successfully. 
After waiting for two weeks to get it unlocked in the first place from AT&T now it is for some 
reason still locked.”
98 Likewise, one T-Mobile customer bemoaned that “I’ve done everything they 
said, they’ve put the request through and then I got an email stating they can’t process the request. 
The email doesn’t say why not and nor can any rep.”99  
 
Finally, these policies often do not apply to certain consumers who are willing to fully repay the 
subsidized price of their devices through paying Early Termination Fees or otherwise. Both AT&T 
and T-Mobile appear to require certain devices to remain on the carriers’ network for a minimum 
period of time before switching carrier networks regardless of when or how the device was paid for. 
Once the carrier has been paid for its device subsidy, there is no reason the phone should not be able 
to be unlocked, and the consumer free to choose a new carrier—yet some policies prevent exactly 
that. The Unlocking Act had it right: as long as customers “have complied with their contracts,” the 
White House declared in announcing the Act, “consumers will now be able to enjoy the freedom of 
taking their mobile service -- and a phone they already own -- to the carrier that best fits their 
needs.”
100 That freedom must be maintained for both consumers and bulk recyclers. 
 
C. Availability of Unlocked Mobile Phones Is Not a Viable Alternative to Circumvention  
An increasing number of wireless devices—though far from all—are now being sold unlocked.101 
The gradual emergence of this option, however, does not reduce or eliminate at all the need for 
consumers and bulk recyclers to be able to lawfully unlock the millions of devices previously sold 
that are currently locked, or the large number that will continue to be sold locked. ISRI members 
currently receive hundreds of thousands of devices that were previously owned and are locked. For 
example, Gazelle reports that in 2014 alone they received nearly a half million phones, 74% of 
which were locked to a carrier.
102  
The fact that unlocked devices are beginning to appear on the new device market does nothing to 
eliminate the loss of choice and value caused by the inability to unlock the millions of recent-model 
devices that have already been sold to consumers and could be resold on the secondary market. This 
dramatic imbalance of locked to unlocked devices will not change significantly over the next three 
96 Id. at ¶ 9. 
97 Id. at ¶ 8. 
98 Id. at ¶ 9, #000377. 
99 Codycarreras, Questions Regarding a T-Mobile Unlock, 
http://www.reddit.com/r/tmobile/comments/2srixy/questions_regarding_a_tmobile_unlock (last visited Feb. 4, 2015).  
100 Answering the Public’s Call, THE WHITE HOUSE BLOG (Aug. 1, 2014 12:28 PM EST), 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2014/08/01/answering-publics-call. 
101 Apple, for example, was recently reported to begin selling unlocked versions of its newest mobile devices. See 
Stephanie Mlot, Apple Now Selling Unlocked iPhone 6, 6 Plus, PCMAG (Jan. 6, 2015 9:33 AM), 
http://www.pcmag.com/article2/0,2817,2474654,00.asp. 
102 See, e.g., Sullivan Declaration at ¶6. 
   20 
                                                 
[PAGE 23]
years before the next Triennial. Thus, the unlocking exemption remains essential to consumers and 
recyclers.103 
 
VII. All Relevant Statutory Factors Weigh in Favor of Granting an Exemption for Bulk 
Unlocking 
 
17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C) directs the Copyright Office to evaluate the following factors when 
considering an exemption: 
 
(i) the availability for use of copyrighted works;  
(ii) the availability for use of works for nonprofit, archival, preservation, and educational purposes;
  
(iii) the impact that the prohibition on the circumvention of technological measures applied to 
copyrighted works has on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or 
research; 
(iv) the effect of circumvention of technological measures on the market for or value of copyrighted 
works; and  
(v) such other factors as the Librarian considers appropriate. 
 
On balance, these factors weigh strongly in favor of granting the proposed exemption. 
  
A. (i) The Availability for Use of Copyrighted Works 
 
The exemption would not make copyrighted works—in particular, software on a mobile device—
less available. Mobile device manufacturers did not stop manufacturing mobile devices embedded 
with this software as a result of past unlocking exemptions, and they will not do so in response to a 
new exemption. Rather, consumers will have access to more new and used devices, which will 
contain and use an increasing number and variety of software programs and applications. In fact, the 
proposed exemption may actually increase lawful access to copyrighted works, since unlocking—
especially bulk unlocking—makes more wireless devices and their software available to a broader 
range of purchasers. Some of these purchasers might not have bought a new device or been able to 
afford to keep using their existing device with their original carrier. Indeed, one study found that 
overall mobile app usage recently increased 76% in one year alone.
104 Likewise, use of apps on 
mobile devices in 2014 continued to vastly surpass general Internet use on mobile devices by 86% 
to 14%.105  
 
Third, an unlocking exemption—a bulk unlocking exemption in particular—will open up access to 
mobile software and devices for those who otherwise cannot afford newer models with additional 
103 In the extremely unlikely event that carriers and manufacturers were to begin selling all devices unlocked, an 
exemption would have no negative effects, as there would be no devices in need of unlocking.  
104 Simon Khalaf, Shopping, Productivity and Messaging Give Mobile Another Stunning Growth Year , FLURRY.COM 
(Jan. 6, 2015), http://www.flurry.com/blog/flurry-insights/shopping-productivity-and-messaging-give-mobile-another-
stunning-growth-year#.VMaPHWR4rzE. 
105 Sarah Perez, Mobile App Usage Increases in 2014, As Mobile Web Surfing Declines, TECHCRUNCH (Apr. 4, 
2014), http://techcrunch.com/2014/04/01/mobile-app-usage-increases-in-2014-as-mobile-web-surfing-declines. 
 
   21 
                                                 
[PAGE 24]
software capabilities. Petitioner’s clients regularly recycle and resell older model or legacy phones, 
many of which remain locked by carriers. The ability to circumvent the locking mechanism on a 
larger scale would allow Petitioner’s clients to sell more unlocked phones, effectively increasing 
lawful access to mobile devices and their underlying mobile software.  
 
B. (ii) The Availability for Use of Works for Nonprofit Archival, Preservation, and 
Educational Purposes 
 
The lack on the proposed exemption does not directly bear on the listed activities in factor (ii), but 
the proposed exemption will not decrease availability of the underlying mobile software for 
nonprofit archival, preservation, or educational purposes. As discussed in factors (i) and (iv), the 
proposed exemption may actually increase lawful access to the underlying software for all purposes, 
including those listed in factor (ii). 
 
C. (iii) The Impact That the Prohibition on the Circumvention of Technological Measures 
Applied to Copyrighted Works Has on Criticism, Comment, News Reporting, Teaching, 
Scholarship, or Research  
 
The prohibition on the proposed exemption does not directly bear on the listed activities in factor 
(iii), except to the extent that broader device and software availability will result in more 
engagement in the listed activities.  
 
D. (iv) The Effect of Circumvention of Technological Measures on the Market for or Value 
of Copyrighted Works  
 
The proposed exemption will have no negative effect on the market for mobile software. Device 
manufacturers are not likely to slow or halt production of mobile software or devices simply 
because purchasers have greater flexibility to unlock their mobile devices and switch carriers. To 
the contrary, the proposed exemption may actually increase the value and market for the underlying 
software. This is because mobile devices—previously locked to certain carriers—will have longer 
lifetimes as their owners can activate their devices on their preferred carrier, or additional value as 
they can resell the used devices for higher prices. Use of a device on a new carrier or by a new 
buyer may increase the market value of the underlying software since the owner is likely to 
purchase more apps or other software to operate in conjunction with the underlying software.
106 
This also increases the value of other copyrighted works—namely, the additional apps.  
 
  
106 Simon Khalaf, Shopping, Productivity and Messaging Give Mobile Another Stunning Growth Year , FLURRY.COM 
(Jan. 6, 2015), http://www.flurry.com/blog/flurry-insights/shopping-productivity-and-messaging-give-mobile-another-
stunning-growth-year#.VMaPHWR4rzE. 
   22 
                                                 
[PAGE 25]
Second, individuals may choose to 
purchase more mobile devices, each with 
embedded copyrighted software, if the 
freedom to unlock is available. This is 
particularly true because consumers will 
be more inclined to sell their used 
devices to recyclers because they will 
receive higher prices—before purchasing 
new mobile devices. Indeed, sales of 
mobile smartphones in the United States 
increased by $5 billion in 2013, and are 
predicted to increase by $20 billion this 
year alone.
107 As the accompanying 
graph illustrates, mobile device 
ownership—including smartphones and 
tablets—has continued to increase dramatically since prior similar exemptions were granted.
108 
   
Finally, there is no indication that the ability to lawfully unlock mobile devices under previous 
exemptions had any adverse effect on wireless carriers or the availability of copyrighted works. 
Wireless carrier revenues have steadily increased despite previous similar exemptions.109 CTIA 
hails the growth of wireless services, noting that U.S. “mobile data use doubled from 2012 to 2013, 
and will increase about 650% by 2018.”110 All told, U.S. wireless data use is set to increase by a 
factor of 400 from 2008 to 2014.111 Since 2012 smartphone use in the United States has increased 
by roughly 40 million users and is estimated to increase by 60 million users to 182 million by the 
end of 2015.112 Likewise, U.S. smartphone traffic is predicted to increase by 325% by 2018.113 
 
E. (v) Such Other Factors as the Librarian Considers Appropriate 
 
Unlocking mobile devices is about consumer choice, not copyright. The Register recognized this 
basic truth in the past,114 as did Congress and the White House by enacting the “common sense” 
Unlocking Act115 in response to the Register’s 2012 determination and narrower exemptions. As the 
107 Smartphone Sales in the United States from 2005 to 2015, STATISTA, http://www.statista.com/statistics/191985/sales-
of-smartphones-in-the-us-since-2005 (Jan. 2015). 
108 The State of the Mobile Industry, COMSCORE, https://www.comscore.com/Insights/Presentations-and-
Whitepapers/2014/The-State-of-the-Mobile-Industry (Sept. 25, 2014). 
109 Revenue of the Wireless Telecommunications Industry in the United States from 2008 to 2018,  STATISTA, 
http://www.statista.com/forecasts/311158/us-wireless-telecommunications-carrier-industry-revenue-forecast-naics-5172 
(July 2014). 
110 Demand, Wireless Quick Facts, CTIA.ORG, http://www.ctia.org/your-wireless-life/how-wireless-works/wireless-
quick-facts (last visited Jan. 27, 2015). 
111 Id.  
112 See Number of Smartphone Users in the U.S. from 2010 to 2018, STATISA (Apr. 2014), 
http://www.statista.com/statistics/201182/forecast-of-smartphone-users-in-the-us. 
113 See Demand, Wireless Quick Facts, CTIA.ORG, http://www.ctia.org/your-wireless-life/how-wireless-works/wireless-
quick-facts (last visited Jan. 27, 2015). 
114 See, e.g., 2012 Recommendation at 93, citing 2010 Recommendation at 137. 
115 Answering the Public’s Call, THE WHITE HOUSE BLOG (Aug. 1, 2014 12:28 PM EST), 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2014/08/01/answering-publics-call. 
   23 
                                                 
[PAGE 26]
White House noted in endorsing the Unlocking Act, the Act—like the unlocking sought here —was 
necessary “to ensure copyright law does not undermine wireless competition.”116 According to the 
White House, this is a “basic consumer freedom,” and the Unlocking Act represents “another step 
toward giving ordinary Americans more flexibility and choice, so that they can find a cell phone 
carrier that meets their needs and their budget.”117 Even CTIA praised the Unlocking Act “for 
providing consumer flexibility.”118 The Unlocking Act was one critical step forward; the Register 
should not take two steps back.  
 
Promotion of consumer choice is a factor that the Librarian should consider appropriate. The 
proposed exemption provides that in bulk. 
 
VIII. Conclusion 
 
Petitioner’s members and other recyclers provide important public and economic benefits by 
efficiently buying, refurbishing, reselling, and recycling devices that they lawfully acquired 
individually from consumers and in bulk from organizations. In each of the last three § 1201 
rulemakings, the exemption for device unlocking has become increasingly narrower, resulting in 
significant adverse impacts on both consumers and recyclers. Congress and the White House 
sharply corrected this overly narrow approach through the Unlocking Act. Granting the unlocking 
exemption proposed here is essential and is warranted by current market conditions and the legal 
arguments presented in the petition. The exemption will effectuate Congress’s clear intent, promote 
competition in the wireless device and carrier marketplaces, increase the choices available to 
consumers, and enable recyclers to again efficiently and economically enable those choices, all 
without negatively impacting legitimate copyright interests. 
  
 
116 Office of the Press Secretary, Statement from the President on Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless 
Competition Act, http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/07/25/statement-president-unlocking-consumer-
choice-and-wireless-competition-a (last visited Jan. 27, 2015) (emphasis added). 
117 Id. 
118 See CTIA, CTIA Statement After President Obama Signed the Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless 
Competition Act into Law (Aug. 1, 2014), http://www.ctia.org/resource-library/press-releases/archive/unlocking-obama 
(last visited Feb. 6, 2015). 
   24 
                                                 
