[PAGE 1]
Short Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption
Under 17 U.S.C. 1201
Item 1. Commenter Information 
Blinky X
Item 2. Proposed Class Addressed
Proposed Class 16: Jailbreaking—Wireless Telephone Handsets
Item 3. Statement Regarding Proposed Exemption
Explain why you support or oppose the relevant proposed exemption.  
As ablind, free-lance Assistive Technology Specialist, I am submitting this correspondence in 
support of extending the DMCA's exemption on Jailbreaking speciﬁcly pertaining to "Proposed 
class 16."  While I could elaborate on how Jailbreaking has been a hub of innovation and 
advances in the development and security of Apple's mobile operating system, "IOS," I sincerely 
hope my sharing some of my experiences as a blind jailbreaker will provide you with a greater 
insight as to why I strongly believe the exemption should be extended.
Initially from a tactile perspective, the iPhone with its touch screen design is somewhat 
intimidating  to a blind person.  Fortunately, once the user has become proﬁcient in the operation 
of Apple's built-in screen reader, "V oice Over" and can navigate the device as well as a sighted 
person can, the experience is life changing.  My iPhone has literally become, "the eyes in my 
hands."
When considering the high cost of these devices and the fact that Apple offers a wide variety of 
apps designed especially for the blind, it is difﬁcult for some to understand the logic of 
jailbreaking which essentially voids the warranty and to some extent compromises the phone's 
integrity.
Some have argued that an Android smart phone which also comes with a built-in screen-reader 
"Talk Back," ease of modiﬁcation via, "rooting" and substantially cheaper price is a good 
alternative. Unfortunately, the cheaper parts, clunkiness of Talk Back and fragmentation of its 
OS for me makes it less than an acceptable user experience.  Additionally, most developers 
creating apps for the blind choose to do so on IOS's more stable OS  rather than deal with the 
fragmentation of the Android platform.
Though I could give you dozens of examples as to why I've chosen to jailbreak my iPhone in 
spite of the aforementioned concerns, the two major reasons are functionality and maintenance.
An example of functionality could be found in how a blind person tells time.  In most cases this 
involves some form of auditory feedback and is difﬁcult to do discreetly.  My jailbroken iPhone 
however gives me the ability to tell the time by a series of vibrations and therefore allows me to 
tell the time without drawing attention to the fact that I and doing so.  I've had this ability for 
four years while the Apple Store has no such app to this day.
[PAGE 2]
Regarding maintenance, though Apple continues to make innovations, one of its drawbacks has 
been its increased reliance on the home button which has resulted in higher incidents of 
mechanical failure due to excessive use. Being jailbroken, I am able to activate the springboard, 
Siri, the app switcher and the spotlight search (all requiring pressing of the home button) simply 
by tapping sections of the touch screen rather than the button itself.  This helps to preserve the 
life of the button by greatly reducing the need to continuously press it.
Individually, these tweaks may appear trivial, however in my case, their combination has resulted 
in a level of accessibility and freedom which at present is unmatched. To criminalize my ability 
to modify a device I've paid for in order to be more independent would in my opinion be the real 
crime. I therefore would urge you to support extending the exemptions and to seriously consider 
the ramiﬁcations upon those like myself if you don't.
