[PAGE 1]
  
1 
 
Long Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption 
Under 17 U.S.C. 1201 
  
[  ]   Check here if multimedia evidence is being provided in connection with this 
comment 
Please note that such evidence must be separately submitted on a disc or flash drive.  See the Notice of 
Proposed Rulemaking for detailed instructions. 
  
Item 1. Commenter Information  
Identify the commenting party and, if desired, provide a means for others to contact the commenter or an 
authorized representative of the commenter by email and/or telephone.  (Please keep in mind that any 
private, confidential, or personally identifiable information in this document will be accessible to the 
public.) 
 
Commenting Party: Competitive Carriers Association (“CCA”)  
 
CCA is the nation’s leading association for competitive wireless providers and 
stakeholders across the United States. CCA’s membership includes more than 100 competitive 
wireless providers ranging from small, rural carriers serving fewer than 5,000 customers to 
regional and national providers serving millions of customers. The licensed service area of 
CCA’s carrier members covers more than 95 percent of the nation. CCA also represents 
approximately 200 associate members consisting of small businesses, vendors, and suppliers that 
serve carriers of all sizes.  
 
Contact:  Rebecca Murphy Thompson, General Counsel  
  C. Sean Spivey, Assistant General Counsel 
Email:  sean.spivey@competitivecarriers.org  
Telephone:  (800) 722-1872 
 
Item 2.  Proposed Class Addressed 
Identify the proposed exemption that your comment addresses by the number and name of the class set 
forth in the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (e.g., “Proposed Class 7: Audiovisual works – derivative uses  
– noncommercial remix videos”).  
 
 Proposed Class 15: Unlocking—Consumer Machines.1  As noted in the NPRM, these 
devices allow encompass “the Internet of Things . . . which would encompass a diverse range of 
                                                 
1 CCA originally sought four separate exemptions addressing the following categories: (i) 
wireless handsets; (ii) all-purpose tablet computers; (iii) mobile hotspots and MiFi devices; and 
(iv) connected wearables and consumer machines (the Internet of Things).  For consistency and 
efficiency, however, CCA reiterates its request that these exemptions, and other similar 
exemptions, should be consolidated into a single “wireless device” exemption, as they all involve 
computer programs used in devices that connect to a telecommunications and/or broadband 
network.  Consumers do not distinguish among categories of connected devices, and having an 
exemption only applicable to a subset of wireless devices is likely to cause consumer confusion 
and frustration.  
[PAGE 2]
 2 
 
devices and equipment.”2  The Internet of Things should be defined, for the purposes of this 
proceeding, as “any ‘smart’ device that utilizes a data connection to connect to the Internet or to 
interact with other ‘smart’ devices.”  Only if defined broadly will this exemption cover the true 
scope of Internet of Things devices.  For simplicity, these devices will be referred to throughout 
these comments as “consumer machines.” 
 
 CCA has proposed the following exemption for Proposed Class 15:3 
 
Computer programs, in the form of firmwar e or software, or data 
used by firmware or software, that enables . . . consumer machines 
to connect to a wireless network that offers  telecommunications 
and/or information services, when circumvention is initiated by the 
owner of the device, or by another  person at the direction of the 
owner of the device, in order to connect to a wireless network that 
offers telecommunications and/or information services, and access 
to the network is authorized by the operator of the network. 
 
 CCA believes that this exemption properly enables users to take control over the use of 
their consumer machines, and permits them the choice of which network they will be connected 
to.  Rather than relying on the presumed goodwill of wireless carriers and the availability of 
unlocking codes from manufacturers, with this exemption consumers will be empowered to 
retain their current consumer machines when selecting the wireless service provider of their 
choice. 
 
 Given the growing importance of data as a form of wireless communication among 
consumers, CCA believes that the most appropriate exemption language is for devices that 
connect to “telecommunications and/or information services.”  At present, very few wireless 
providers offer significant numbers of voice-only plans, and the ever-increasing demand by 
consumers for data weighs in favor of the Copyright Office clarifying the exemption in this 
proceeding to confirm that consumers have right to unlock their devices for the purpose of 
connecting to wireless networks for both telecommunications and information service uses. 
 
Item 3. Overview 
Provide a brief summary of the circumvention activity sought to be exempted or opposed and why. 
 
CCA proposes to circumvent software or firmware locks on a consumer machine that 
prevent the consumer machine from accessing the wireless network of the owner’s choosing. 
 
The exemption is being sought because consumer machine owners have a clear 
ownership interest in the consumer machine itself, as well as the underlying operating system 
software, and should be afforded the ability to make non-infringing uses of these products.  
                                                 
2 Exemption to Prohibition of Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, Docket No. 2014-07, 79 FR 73856, 73866 (Dec. 
12, 2014) (“NPRM”). 
3 NPRM at 73866, fn. 55; see also CCA Consumer Machines Unlocking Pet. at 1-2. 
[PAGE 3]
 3 
 
Absent an exemption, consumer machine owners may be forced to purchase replacement 
machines in order to change service providers and connect to the wireless network of their 
choice.  This may result in substantial and unnecessary costs to the consumer. 
 
CCA’s proposed exemption is not only consistent with the Copyright Office’s mandate to 
allow circumvention where the public interest is served by permitting non-infringing use of the 
copyrighted material, but also will promote competition and consumer choice in an increasingly 
consolidated wireless industry.4 
 
Item 4. Technological Protection Measure(s) and Method(s) of 
Circumvention 
Describe the TPM(s) that control access to the work and the relevant method(s) of circumvention. The 
description should provide sufficient information to allow the Office to understand the nature of the 
relevant technologies, as well as how they are disabled or bypassed. 
 
The Copyright Office seeks information regarding the “extent to which devices 
understood to be in this class use mobile telecommunications or data networks (e.g., HSPA+ or 
LTE networks) for wireless connections, rather than Wi-Fi or Bluetooth, or some other 
technology, and whether parties are seeking to circumvent access controls on devices that use 
such other technologies.”5  
 
With regards to the first question, many consumer machines and machine-to-machine 
(M2M) communications already use integrated mobile telecommunications and/or data 
networks.  For example, Verizon boasts that its “Smart Cities solutions are built on the largest 
4G LTE network in the nation and our portfolio of technology solutions.”6  In a clear indication 
that such devices are intended to be firmly controlled by the wireless provider, Verizon notes that 
it has “built a tightly integrated ecosystem of M2M and wireless network technologies that allow 
you to create a smarter city.”7  Similarly, in a discussion of connected machines, AT&T offers 
customers the ability to “[d]eploy and control connected devices easily and quickly using a 
                                                 
4 The Federal Communications Commission’s recently-released Seventeenth Report on mobile 
wireless competition found that the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (“HHI”), a measure of market 
concentration, averaged 3,027 across the country—more than 20% above the level at which a 
market is considered “highly concentrated.”  The HHI numbers for the wireless industry have 
consistently been on the rise over the last five years or more.  See Annual Report and Analysis of 
Competitive Market Conditions With Respect to Mobile Wireless, Including Commercial Mobile 
Services, Seventeenth Report, WT Docket No. 13-135, DA 14-1862, ¶¶ 32-33 (rel. Dec. 18, 
2014). 
5 NPRM at 73866. 
6 Verizon Smart Cities Factsheet, p. 2, available at 
http://www.verizonenterprise.com/resources/factsheets/fs_verizon-smart-cities-
solutions_en_xg.pdf.  
7 Id. (emphasis added). 
[PAGE 4]
 4 
 
single, global SIM that automatically and remotely connects to the network”8 – certainly not 
language that suggests the ability to move your connected machines among different providers.  
AT&T similar extols the virtue of a customer’s M2M platform having a “[r]elationship with a 
single global carrier.”9 
 
Given what is already occurring in the Internet of Things space, it is probably that “in the 
next three years [consumer machines will be] adversely affected by the prohibition on 
circumvention”10 of software locks on such devices.   
  
Consumer machines could be hardware or software-locked using a using a variety of 
methods, including service provider code locking, system operator code locking, band order 
locking and Subscriber Identity Module locking or Universal Integrated Circuit Card locking. 
These locking mechanisms would bind the device to specific wireless networks and prevent 
consumers from accessing the wireless network of their choice. Only by circumventing these 
various TPMs could a consumer machine owner transfer the use of the consumer machine to a 
network and provider of one’s choosing. 
 
Consumer machines would be unlocked using a variety of methods currently used to 
unlock other devices, typically by changing the variables in certain memory locations and 
updating the preferred roaming list (“PRL”) to make the consumer machine compatible with a 
new network.  These variables would effectively be a “blank slate” when the consumer machine 
comes off the assembly line, and then updated to make them compatible with the network with 
which the consumer machine is intended to be used.  Thus, these variables are and would be 
intended by the copyright owner to be changed based on which network a particular consumer 
machine will be connected to.  In this respect, no unusual or unexpected alterations are being 
made to the underlying operating system code – instead, anticipated changes are being made that 
will permit the consumer machine to operate. 
 
Item 5. Asserted Noninfringing Use(s)  
Explain the asserted noninfringing use(s) of copyrighted works said to be facilitated by the proposed 
exemption, including all legal (statutory or doctrinal) bases for the claim that the uses are or are likely 
noninfringing. Commenters should provide an evidentiary basis to support their contentions, including 
discussion or refutation of specific examples of such uses and, if available, documenta ry and/or 
separately submitted multimedia evidence.  
 
Consumers who unlock consumer machines may engage in one or more of several 
noninfringing uses of the copyrighted software or firmware that resides on their consumer 
machine and permits it to connect to networks.  Typically, the circumvention of the TPM allows 
an owner, who has fulfilled all obligations to the original provider, to operate the device on the 
                                                 
8 AT&T Global SIM fact sheet, available at 
http://www.business.att.com/enterprise/Service/mobility-services/machine-to-machine/global-
sim/.  
9 Id. 
10 NPRM at 73857. 
[PAGE 5]
 5 
 
network of a new, compatible wireless provider of one’s choosing.  Noninfringing use of these 
copyrighted works is supported under multiple legal theories, three of which are explained here. 
 
Unlocking Constitutes “Fair Use” Under 17 U.S.C. Section 107 
 
Consumer machine unlocking constitutes “fair use” under Section 107 of Title 17 of the 
United States Code.  When most consumer machines are unlocked, the device owner is simply 
changing the variables in certain memory locations and updating the PRL to make the consumer 
machine useable on the new network.  Carriers regularly update the PRL on their customers’ 
consumer machines, so the original author of the copyrighted work intended these variables to be 
changed without constituting a copyright violation.  Further, unlocking a consumer machine 
meets all four factors of the “fair use” test set forth in Section 107: (1) the purpose of the use is 
to allow the lawful owner of the consumer machine to connect to a wireless network of their 
choice, a reasonable and noninfringing use; (2) the copyrighted work is intended to be changed 
in this manner and is necessary for the consumer machine owner to derive any continued value 
from the copyrighted work; (3) the amount of the code used in an altered state is extremely small 
compared to the consumer machine operating system as a whole; and (4) the market for and 
value of the copyrighted work actually increases, as it allows the consumer machine to be 
transferred on the secondary market more easily and to a broader array of buyers. 
 
Unlocking a Consumer Machine Does Not Create an Infringing Derivative Work 
 
Unlocking a consumer machine does not create an infringing “derivative work.”  This is 
because, in most instances, unlocking a consumer machine does not change the underlying 
consumer machine software, but rather it merely changes underlying variables accessed by the 
program.  As discussed above, these variables are intended by the software designer to be 
changed, and their change, therefore, does not create an infringing derivative work.  Instead, the 
software is merely being operated by the consumer machine owners as intended. 
 
Any Derivative Work Created is Protected Under 17 U.S.C. Section 117(a)(1) 
 
If, however, a derivative work is, in fact, created, it falls within the exception set forth in 
17 U.S.C. Section 117(a)(1). This subsection states that a derivative work may be created by the 
owner of a copyrighted work if the “new copy or adaptation is created as an essential step in the 
utilization of the computer program in conjunction with a machine and that it is used in no other 
manner.” Since the changes being made to the copyright work are the same ones that need to be 
made by the underlying carrier in order for the consumer machine to operate properly on its 
wireless network, such adaptations are inherently “essential step[s] in the utilization of the 
computer program in conjunction with [the device].” Indeed, in 2012, the Register agreed that 
unlocking was an “essential step” in the utilization of the device, finding again that 
“[m]odifications to the firmware or software on the [device] may be necessary to make the 
device functional with another service and better serve the legitimate needs of the consumer.”11 
 
                                                 
11 2012 Recommendation at 93. 
[PAGE 6]
 6 
 
Relevant Case Law Demonstrates That Consumer Machine Owners are Owners of the 
Underlying Operating System Software for Section 117(a)(1) Exemption Purposes 
 
In order to fall within the exception set forth in 17 U.S.C. Section 117(a)(1), the party 
creating the derivative work must also be the owner of the software – that is, if a device owner is 
a mere licensee of the software, Section 117(a)(1) protections are unavailable to him or her.12  
Although the Supreme Court has not articulated a national framework on this issue, the two 
leading cases on licensing vs. ownership are Krause v. Titleserv, Inc. 402 F.3d 119 (2d Cir. 
2005) and Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc., 621 F.3d 1102 (9th Cir. 2010).  In the 2012 
Recommendation, the Register concluded that the state of the law was sufficiently unclear as to 
make it impossible to determine whether all device owners were licensees or owners of the 
software.13  Despite this determination, the current state of the market and the terms on which 
much of the operating system software is provided to consumers in connection with a consumer 
machine purchase make it clear that consumer machine owners are the also the owners of the 
operating system software under either the Krause or the Vernor tests. 
 
In Krause, the Second Circuit held that ownership of a copyrighted work, as opposed to 
license, is indicated by balancing seven factors:  
 
(1) whether substantial consideration was paid for the copy; (2) whether the copy 
was created for the sole benefit of the purchaser; (3) whether the copy was 
customized to serve the purchaser’s use; (4) whether the copy was stored on 
property ow ned by the purchaser; (5) whether the creator reserved the right to 
repossess the copy; (6) whether the creator agreed that the purchaser had the right 
to possess and use the programs forever regardless of whether the relationship 
between the parties termi nated; and (7) whether the purchaser was free to discard 
or destroy the copy anytime it wished.14 
   
With respect to consumer machines, consumer machine owners pay substantial 
consideration for the copy of the software as part of the consumer machine price.  The copy of 
the software is stored on property owned, namely the physical consumer machine, and the 
software creator permits the underlying operating system software to be used by the consumer 
machine owner indefinitely (and in some cases, even longer due to transfer rights).  Further, the 
consumer machine owner is free to discard or destroy the copy (along with the physical 
consumer machine) anytime that he or she wishes.  On balance, these Krause factors strongly 
                                                 
12 Contrary to the arguments raised by CTIA in the 2012 proceeding, simply stating that a piece 
of software is being provided under “license” does not make it so.  See Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc., 
621 F.3d 1102, 1180 (9th Cir. 2010) (holding that simply labeling a software agreement as a 
license is not “dispositive”). 
13 2012 Recommendation at 92 (“The Register concludes that the state of the law remains 
unclear. Although Vernor and Krause are useful guideposts in considering the status of software 
ownership, they are controlling precedent in only two circuits and are inconsistent in their 
approach; whether and how those standards would be applied in other circuits is unknown.”) 
14 Krause, 402 F.3d at 124. 
[PAGE 7]
 7 
 
favor a finding of ownership of the copyrighted operating system software by the wireless device 
owner. 
 
In Vernor, the Ninth Circuit held that “a software user is a licensee rather than an owner 
of a copy where the copyright owner (1) specifies that the user is granted a license; (2) 
significantly restricts the user’s ability to transfer the software; and (3) imposes notable use 
restrictions.”15  These factors can be seen as more stringent, and it has been argued by some that 
they favor the view that the device owner is a licensee.  Nevertheless, the test for ownership of a 
consumer machine’s underlying operating system is met under the Vernor test as well.  
Importantly, the Vernor test is a conjunctive test, and therefore demands that all three elements 
be met if a software user is to be considered a licensee, rather than an owner.16 
 
As applied to the facts at hand, consumer machines do not have “notable use 
restrictions.”  Customers are permitted to use their consumer machines for any lawful purpose, 
and as the Register stated in the 2012 Recommendation, “no wireless provider has taken the 
position that customers are unable to sell devices that they no longer use, or transfer them to a 
spouse, child or friend.”17  Accordingly, consumer machine operating system software fails one 
element of the Vernor test, and on this basis alone a court could conclude that an owner of a 
consumer machine is also an owner of the copy of the operating system software. 
 
Given the evidence above, it is clear that consumer machine owners should be considered 
owners of a copy of the operating system software, and therefore entitled to the protections of 
Section 117(a)(1), and be permitted to create a derivative work in order to allow the consumer 
machine to connect to a wireless network of the consumer machine owners choice. 
 
Item 6. Asserted Adverse Effects 
Explain whether the inability to circumvent the TPM(s) at issue has or is likely to have adverse effects on 
the asserted noninfringing use(s), including any relevant legal (statutory or doctrinal) considerations. 
Commenters should also address any potential alternatives that permit the asserted noninfringing use(s) 
without the need for circumvention. Commenters should provide an evidentiary basis to support their 
contentions, including discussion or refutation of specific examples of such uses and, if available, 
documentary and/or separately submitted multimedia evidence.  
 
The most clear, and most immediate, adverse effect that the TPMs that lock consumer 
machines have is to prevent consumers from easily switching their consumer machines to the 
competing network of their choice. Although carriers may unlock under certain circumstances, 
owners should not be beholden to the carrier after completion of service agreement 
commitments.  As the Senate has noted, there are also “circumstances in which additional 
                                                 
15 Vernor, 621 F.3d at 1111.   
16 See YULE KIM, CONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH SERVICE, STATUTORY INTERPRETATION: GENERAL 
PRINCIPLES AND RECENT TRENDS, Order Code 97-589 at 8 (updated Aug. 31, 2008) (“Ordinarily, 
as in everyday English, use of the conjunctive ‘and’ in a list means that all of the listed 
requirements must be satisfied . . . .”). 
17 2012 Recommendation at 92 (quoting MetroPCS Comments at 17). 
[PAGE 8]
 8 
 
avenues for unlocking may be preferable over attempting to unlock through the carrier.”18  
Absent an exemption, TPMs used to lock consumer machines to a particular network will 
foreclose the ability to exercise preferable, and in some cases, the only, avenues to unlock 
devices. Since circumvention to connect to an alternative network would be a noninfringing use 
of the copyrighted work, consumers should have the freedom to unlock their consumer machines 
on their own or through an agent of their choosing. 
 
Consumer Machines are Not Subject to the Current CTIA “Voluntary” Unlocking 
Agreement, and Individual Carrier Policies are Insufficient to Protect Consumer Interests 
 
As discussed above, it is likely that wireless providers already are asserting proprietary 
control over consumer machines and will increasingly do so during the exemption period.  
AT&T, one of the largest wireless carriers in the nation, makes their locking policy for all 
devices clear, stating that the company “locks all devices, as of November 11, 2004.”19   
 
Critically, the CTIA “voluntary” agreement currently in place to unlock certain wireless 
devices does not include consumer machines, but instead only “phones and tablets . . . that are 
locked by or at the direction of the carrier.”20  While carriers may provide unlock codes at their 
own discretion, there is presently nothing preventing them from refusing to unlock these 
important devices. This lack of commitment presents a significant problem for consumers. 
 
Even if a carrier were to have a “voluntary” unlocking policy for consumer machines, the 
exemption would remain necessary.  As NTIA noted in the last triennial review, and the 
voluntary agreement confirms, oftentimes carriers must have the necessary code or the ability to 
reasonably obtain it to unlock the device.21  Where a voluntary agreement only requires that a 
carrier “initiate a request to the [original equipment manufacturer (“OEM”)] to unlock the 
eligible device” it is possible for the carrier to comply with the agreement in a manner that does 
not ultimately result in the consumer’s device being unlocked.   
 
This also highlights the fact that OEMs (or third-party software developers) often 
consider themselves to be the owners of the copyrighted software, which is provided under a 
purported license to carriers.  So, there remains the possibility an OEM or software developer 
may refuse to allow carriers to alter their software in any respect, which would eliminate the 
ability of carriers to implement their voluntary unlocking promises.  In such a circumstance, a 
                                                 
18 Senate Report 113-212, available at http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CRPT-
113srpt212/html/CRPT-113srpt212.htm.  
19 See 
http://www.att.com/media/att/2014/support/pdf/ATTMobilityDeviceUnlockCodeInstructions.pdf
. 
20 CTIA Consumer Code for Wireless Service, Section 12, available at 
http://www.ctia.org/policy-initiatives/voluntary-guidelines/consumer-code-for-wireless-service.  
21 NTIA Reply Comments at 16, available at 
http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2012/2012_NTIA_Letter.pdf; CTIA Consumer Code of Conduct 
§ 12. 
[PAGE 9]
 9 
 
consumer unlocking exemption granted in this proceeding would be the only path to allowing 
customers to switch wireless providers with their devices in hand.  And, this circumstance is not 
farfetched or theoretical.  Indeed, in a recent discussion of the company’s post-sale transition 
plan, Cincinnati Bell Wireless (“CBW”) stated that it would only be allowing customers to 
unlock their handsets to move to another carrier if the handsets were “one year old or newer.”22  
Even with this significant restriction, CBW would only permit customers to “transition to 
another provider by providing unlock codes (if available),” suggesting that there are a sufficient 
number of circumstances in which unlock codes are not available to warrant a specific 
disclosure.23  Although this was in the context of wireless handsets, it is not a significant leap to 
assume that the same is or would be the case for similarly-situated consumer machine customers. 
 
Thus there is clear evidence that voluntary unlocking policies do not obviate the need for 
an exemption.  As a result, customers must have the option and the right to unlock their 
consumer machines in order to realize their full utility, and without unwarranted interference 
from their original wireless provider.   
 
Substantial Evidence of Likely Adverse Effects Exists, and Consumers Have No 
Reasonable Alternatives to Circumvention 
 
The Internet of Things, which includes devices such as wearable consumer products, 
appliances, in-home connected devices and smart meters, represents the next step in the 
evolution of the Internet by allowing objects to communicate with other objects. A recent Senate 
letter estimated that the Internet of Things is expected “to generate global revenues of $8.9 
trillion – with over 200 billion connected objects – by 2020.”24  Congress has shown a great 
interest in this new category of connected devices, forming a congressional caucus on the 
Internet of Things.  Representative Darrell Issa stated, “It’s critical that lawmakers remain 
educated about the fast-paced evolution of the Internet of Things, and have informed policy 
discussions about the government’s role in access and use of these devices” and has pledged to 
“ensure federal policy spurs, rather than stifles, our innovation economy.”25 
 
After the previous unlocking exemption was allowed to expire, Congress saw sufficient 
current adverse effects, as well as the potential for adverse effects, to immediately reinstate and 
expand the exemption in the “Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act.” 
Even with other voluntary unlocking policies in place, Congress saw sufficient harm in the 
                                                 
22 Phil Goldstein, “Cincinnati Bell customers frustrated by transition amid network shutdown,” 
FierceWireless (Jan. 12, 2015), available at http://www.fiercewireless.com/story/cincinnati-bell-
customers-frustrated-transition-amid-network-shutdown/2015-01-12.  
23 Id. (emphasis added). 
24 Letter dated October 20, 2014 from Deb Fischer, Cory A. Booker, Kelly Ayotte and Brian 
Schatz, U.S. Senators to The Honorable Jay Rockefeller, Chairman, U.S. Senate Committee on 
Commerce, Science & Transportation and The Honorable John Thune, Ranking Member, U.S. 
Senate Committee on Commerce, Science & Transportation, at 1. 
25 Erin Mershon, “Issa, DelBene for Internet of Things caucus,” POLITICO (Jan. 13, 2015), 
available at https://www.politicopro.com/tech/whiteboard/?wbid=46507.  
[PAGE 10]
 10 
 
marketplace to adopt legislation.  And, in this respect, Congress was performing the will of the 
people.  A White House petition garnered more than 114,000 signatures from concerned 
consumers who demonstrated the likely adverse effects of the rejection of the unlocking 
exemption.26  Indeed, this consumer outcry extended not only to the original exemption or 
wireless handsets, but also to other wireless devices as well.  As part of the “Unlocking 
Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act,” Congress directed the Copyright Office to 
expand its inquiry into other wireless devices, such as consumer machines, to ensure that anti-
competitive locking policies were not harming the market for these important consumer products 
as well.  Even with voluntary unlocking policies for handsets and tablets already in place, 
Congress saw sufficient harm in the marketplace to adopt legislation directing the Copyright 
Office to undertake this new examination. 
 
Additionally, NTIA petitioned the FCC to commence a rulemaking to require carriers to 
unlock devices upon request.27  NTIA stated that a rule would “increase competition in the 
mobile service market and enhance consumer welfare.”28  While the enactment of the Unlocking 
Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act foreclosed the need for rulemaking, not 
extending an exemption would have the adverse effects of decreased competition and consumer 
welfare. 
 
CCA is not aware of any on viable alternatives to potential locks on consumer machines 
the horizon.  As a result, the Copyright Office remains consumers’ best hope for a continued 
ability to lawfully unlock their consumer machines.  The Copyright Office should heed the 
outcry from consumers, Congress and the Administration about the current and potential anti-
consumer harms that failing to adopt a consumer machine unlocking exemption would bring, and 
adopt CCA’s proposed exemption. 
 
Item 7. Statutory Factors  
Evaluate the proposed exemption in light of each of the statutory factors set forth in 17 U.S.C. 
1201(a)(1)(C): 
(i) the availability for use of copyrighted works;  
Without question locks on consumer machines would reduce the availability for use and 
usability of the copyrighted software operating system.  A customer who would otherwise be 
technically able to use his or her device on a competing network is prevented from doing so by 
artificial locks.  Thus, the ability to use the copyrighted operating system software that powers 
the consumer machine is substantially limited; if a customer switches networks and has a 
                                                 
26 See R. David Edelman, “It’s Time to Legalize Cell Phone Unlocking,” Official White House 
Response to Make Unlocking Cell Phones Legal, available at 
https://petitions.whitehouse.gov/response/its-time-legalize-cell-phone-unlocking. 
27 NTIA, Petition for Rulemaking of the National Telecommunications and Information 
Administration (filed Sept. 17, 2013), available at 
http://www.ntia.doc.gov/files/ntia/publications/ntia_mobile_devices_unlocking_petition_091720
13.pdf.   
28 Id. at 1.  
[PAGE 11]
 11 
 
consumer machine that cannot be unlocked, he or she is no longer able to use the copyrighted 
operating system. 
 
Importantly, as the Register found during the prior proceeding: 
 
There is n o indication that mobile . . .  firmware is sold in any way other 
than with the [device] for which it is developed, and no indication that there 
are alternative “formats” available that would not require circumvention – 
that is, there is no evidence that users of locked legacy [devices] can simply 
install an alternative operating system that does not include carrier locks. 
Accordingly, the first factor favors an exemption.29 
 
 These facts remain as true today as they did in 2012.  CCA is unaware of consumer 
machine firmware being sold in any other way than bundled with the consumer machine for 
which it was developed, and is aware of no other formats of such operating system software 
available that would not require circumvention.  As such, the Register should make the same 
finding in this proceeding that the first statutory favor favors an exemption. 
 
(ii) the availability for use of works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational purposes;  
An exemption permitting the unlocking of consumer machines increases the availability 
of the copyrighted operating system works for use for nonprofit archival, preservation, and 
educational purposes.  As an initial matter, a significant number of nonprofit organizations fund 
their operations through the collection, unlocking and resale of wireless devices.  In addition, 
artificial locks on consumer machine software may prevent those operating systems from being 
studied in the classroom or archived for future study.  An exemption to the prohibition on 
circumvention of consumer machine locks certainly will not negatively impact, and may in fact 
promote, the use of these works for such purposes. 
 
(iii) the impact that the prohibition on the circumvention of technological measures applied to 
copyrighted works has on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or 
research;  
Similar to the use of the works for nonprofit and educational purposes, there should be no 
concern that a consumer machine unlocking exemption will have any negative impact on 
criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship or research.  In fact, there may be 
positive benefits for these fields that flow from an unlocking exemption.  For example, 
journalists can improve consumer awareness by writing about the behavior of an unlocked 
devices moving from one network to another.  Similarly, this would allow industry commenters 
to review the performance of a single consumer machine on multiple wireless networks. 
 
(iv) the effect of circumvention of technological measures on the market for or value of 
copyrighted works; and  
If anything, the circumvention of consumer machine locks actually improves the market 
value of the copyrighted work.  Since the operating system conveys with the wireless device, the 
                                                 
29 2012 Recommendation at 97. 
[PAGE 12]
 12 
 
creator of the copyrighted work is actually benefited by being able to reach the widest possible 
audience.  If a consumer machine is locked to a particular network, it inherently has a smaller 
base of customers on the secondary market, and is therefore worth less to the original purchaser.  
The operating system is a large part of the value of the fully operational consumer machine, and 
customers will be willing to pay more for a consumer machine (and the underlying operating 
system) that is worth more, and can be transferred more easily, on the secondary market. 
 
Although the Register found that the market for mobile device operating system software 
was “unlikely to be affected by enabling consumers to alter that software for the purpose of using 
the handset on another carrier,” this was coupled with the finding that “[t]here is nothing in the 
record to suggest that the market for firmware has declined in the six years following the first 
granting of an unlocking exemption.”30  CCA agrees with the Register’s prior determination.  In 
fact, the market for firmware (and the consumer machines with which it is sold) has only 
increased since the Register made that determination in 2012.  A recent CTIA survey cited by the 
Federal Communications Commission found that “the number of connections grew . . . from 
326.5 million at the end of 2012, to 335.7 million at the end of 2013 [or 3 percent].”31  Thus, it 
can be demonstrated that the market for firmware (and the wireless devices with which it is sold) 
has only increased since the Register made the determination in 2012.  Accordingly, the Register 
should again draw the same conclusion, based on the same or stronger current evidence, that “the 
fourth factor . . . favors an exemption.”32 
 
(v) any other factor that may be appropriate for the Librarian to consider in evaluating the 
proposed exemption. 
 
The Librarian should consider the positive impact that an unlocking exemption will have 
on consumer choice and competition in the wireless industry.  By allowing customers to have 
control over their own wireless devices, and to put them on the network of their choosing, the 
Librarian is conferring a significant social benefit.  The Librarian should empower consumers to 
make informed choices about wireless services. 
 
Item 8. Documentary Evidence  
Commenters are encouraged to submit documentary evidence to support their arguments or illustrate 
pertinent points concerning the proposed exemption. Any such documentary evidence should be attached 
to the comment and uploaded through the Office’s website (though it does not count toward the 25-page 
limit).   
None submitted. 
                                                 
30 2012 Recommendation at 98. 
31 Seventeenth Report at para. 20 (citing CTIA Wireless Industry Indices at 7). 
32 2012 Recommendation at 98. 
