[PAGE 1]
Short Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption
Under 17 U.S.C. 1201
Item 1. Commenter Information 
Verified Voting Foundation
Item 2. Proposed Class Addressed
Proposed Class 25: Software—Security Research 
Item 3. Statement Regarding Proposed Exemption
The Verified Voting Foundation supports the proposal of Professors Bellovin, Blaze, Felten, 
Halderman, and Heninger (the “Security Researchers”) and strongly urges the Copyright Office
to establish their proposed exemption to Section 1201 of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act 
under Proposed Class 25.
All computer code is likely to suffer from malfunctions, security flaws, or vulnerabilities.  While 
companies and developers strive to write error-free code, code is written by humans, and all 
humans make errors. Security researchers in general function as auditors. Their goal is to find, 
disclose, and help correct errors before malicious attackers exploit these defects to harm 
society.  When the software and hardware at issue run critical infrastructure, social systems, 
and democratic decision-making tools, such as our voting infrastructure, finding these defects is 
crucial to the national security interests of the United States.  
In particular, security researchers believe that the DMCA currently prevents them from 
conducting in depth investigations of voting system software.  Without a security research 
exemption, the DMCA threatens to undermine our national electoral system by preventing 
independent audits of the safety and integrity of the code that runs our voting systems and 
tabulates our votes.  The inability of security researchers to check and verify the code that runs 
our elections means that the outcome of a local, state, Congressional, or Presidential election 
could be wrongly reported because of either software bugs or hidden election-rigging malware.
We would expect no negative repercussions to arise with respect to the safety or security of 
software from granting this exemption.  Indeed, to the contrary, if the exemption is granted, 
security researchers will be better able to find those flaws that currently exist and may already 
have been detected or exploited by attackers.  In this way, security researchers defend our 
country. Granting this exemption would be a significant step toward strengthening our national 
security in general and – something that should be of concern to us all – defending the integrity 
of our elections in particular.
