[PAGE 1]
Short Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption
Under 17 U.S.C. 1201
Item 1. Commenter Information 
I am a disabled veteran that is visually impaired. The iPhone is by far the most accessible device and 
is issued to visually impaired veterans by the Veteran administration.
Item 2. Proposed Class Addressed
Software That Restricts the Use of Lawfully Obtained Software (“Jailbreaking”)
Proposed Class 16: Jailbreaking—Wireless Telephone Handsets
Item 3. Statement Regarding Proposed Exemption
It has always been a little confusing to me as to why a computer that sits on your lap is open to install 
software freely. A computer from the same company that fits in your pocket is restricted only to 
applications that it sells. In 2012, I contacted an attorney about 17 tweaks that help me with my 
visual impairment. I contacted Apple and they did fix the issue of the Skype keyboard not working 
with VoiceOver a week later. Jailbreaking is about freedom. Freedom for someone like me to install 
tweaks and add ons that help me not rely on the tiny screen as much. The developers in the 
community are very helpful. The creator of Cydia made it compatible with VoiceOver with in two 
weeks of me writing him. Below is a small list of tweaks that help me out daily.
DisplayOut: Shows taps on external display. Crucial in using with Airplay mirroring. It is very difficult 
in knowing where your finger is at when the iPhone is being projected to a big screen. 
LittleBrother: This tweak allows the display zoom to be much bigger than default.
Bigify+: This allows the user to set the size of the icons to a desired size.
Aloud: Allows for the speaking of all notifications in earphones with extensive settings.
   
AlarmVolume: Without this, I was required to turn my volume up all the way every night before bed. I 
forgot a few times and my alarm was so quiet that it did not wake me up. This lets you set the alarm 
volume to a specified level.
Controls for Spotify: This makes it so I don’t even need to take my phone out of my pocket to save a 
song I like on the radio. I can just click the up then down volume on the remote.
ActIf: I can skip next and previous chapters in audio books by holding the volume buttons. This means 
that I can pause it by clicking both buttons at the same time with out the need to turn it on and use 
VoiceOver to navigate to the next or previous icon on the screen.
IntelliScreenX: Puts almost all of the information that one would check daily on the lock screen.
Portrait Lock: I can choose which applications to automatically load in portrait mode.
 
Smart 3G + LTE: Turns off LTE when on WiFi thus saving battery.
Slumber: Can set timer to “stop now playing” and applies to all audio players and not just the stock 
music app.
[PAGE 2]
Wake With Weather: Speaks the weather for today or anything like stocks after the alarm goes off.
ZoomTouch Flipswitch: Enables turning zoom on or off with chosen action.
AppButton: Much simpler app switching and closing.
UntetheredHeySiri: Allows “asking Siri” hands free when not connected to power.
LockSafety: This prevents powering down the device when on the lock screen. Great theft protection 
when used in combination with a pass code. I left my iPhone five on a bus and when I realized that it 
was gone, I called it. Who ever had it simply turned it off since it was not Jailbroken at the time. I 
was not able to track it with find my iPhone since it was off, ATT could not do anything either and I 
lost out $950 that day.
                                       
