[PAGE 1]
  
PRIVACY ACT ADVISORY STATEMENT Required by the Privacy Act of 1974 (P.L. 93-579) 
The authority for requesting this information is 17 U.S.C. §§ 1201(a)(1) and 705. Furnishing the requested information is voluntary. 
The principal use of the requested information is publication on the Copyright Office website and use by Copyright Office sta ff for 
purposes of the rulemaking proceeding conducted under 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1). NOTE: No other advisory statement will be given 
in connection with this submission. Please keep this statement and refer to it if we communicate with you regarding this subm ission. 
 1 
 
Long Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption 
Under 17 U.S.C. 1201 
  
  
Item 1. Commenter Information  
 
Mike Battilana 
m cloanto.com 
 
 
Item 2.  Proposed Class Addressed 
 
This comment addresses matters shared in large part between, and a possible merger of, two 
proposed classes: 
 23: Abandoned software – video games requiring server communication 
 24: Abandoned software – music recording software 
As such, this same document is being submitted twice (once for each class). 
 
Item 3. Overview 
 
This comment, written from the dual perspective of a software developer and retrocomputing 
preservationist, supports the circumvention activity sought to be exempted under both classes 23 
and 24, but considers the boundaries drawn by the proposed class definitions to be too narrow. 
Some specific examples are provided as test cases for possible evolutions of the wording. 
 
This comment further aims to address the fact that petition 26 by Richard Kelley and petition 30 
by James McCloskey appeared to aim towards a broader definition that could potentially 
encompass both the proposed classes 23 and 24: 
 Richard Kelley’s petition 26 defined the proposed classes of works as “Obsolete 
software/hardware combinations protected by a software based copy protection 
mechanism (software dongle)”; 
 James McCloskey’s petition 30 included a direct proposal of broadening a previous 
exemption, namely “Computer programs protected by dongles that prevent access due to 
malfunction or damage and which are obsolete”. 
 
In light of the above, this comment proposes to merge the proposed classes 23 and 24 into one 
new class, which could be described as: 
 
Software – abandoned TPMs 
Computer programs protected by TPMs that prevent access due to malfunction or obsolescence 
of a required part, and where support for those TPMs has ended. A required part shall be 
considered obsolete if it is no longer manufactured or if a replacement or repair is no longer 
reasonably available in the commercial marketplace. 

[PAGE 2]
2 
 
Item 4. Technological Protection Measure(s) and Method(s) of 
Circumvention 
 
The following TPMs were considered: 
 Authentication or matchmaking servers as described in petition 15 by the Electronic 
Frontier Foundation and Kendra Albert; 
 The PACE content protection system as detailed in Richard Kelley’s petition 26, in James 
McCloskey’s petition 30, and in Michael Yanoska's petition 44; 
 Additional mechanisms described below (which were referenced in the above, but 
possibly lacked a required factual level of detail). 
 
Before describing additional TPMs, the following comments aim to provide a better 
understanding of the TPMs as in the already proposed classes 23 and 24: 
 Authentication servers are employed by software in general, not only by gaming 
software. Applications that require communication with a server include well-known 
productivity applications by Microsoft Corporation, Adobe Systems Incorporated, and 
numerous other publishers. There is a marketplace of ready-made software components 
used by software developers of any size to connect to authentication servers without 
needing to write their own code. As these implementations become more pervasive, 
almost omnipresent, specificity becomes increasingly difficult to document. 
 Authentication servers may stop functioning not only because developer support for those 
server communications has ended, or because the software was abandoned by the 
developer (or publisher, or other agent). For example, an internet domain used to connect 
to the authentication servers may be lost after an inadvertent lack of renewal leads to 
registration by an unrelated party. The developer may even be willing to remedy the 
situation, however lack of source code or development tools to modify the old code may 
make it necessary to resort to “circumvention” of the originally implemented mechanisms 
in order to continue to use the legitimately acquired software. 
 
Additional TPMs that are directly or indirectly related to the proposed classes and to the 
underlying petitions: 
 Dongles, which were discussed in great length in previous rulemaking processes, and 
which helped define TPMs in general not only in terms of obsolescence, but also in terms 
of actual loss of access due to damage or malfunction. In order to satisfy a de novo 
consideration of exemptions, this comment would like to stress how technological 
evolution is increasing the need to circumvent a growing number of dongle types, 
specifically because many types of computer ports that were used to connect dongles are 
disappearing due to being replaced by other, newer but incompatible connectors, and for 
space reasons, as desktop computers are replaced by notebooks, tablets and smartphones, 
and many connectors cannot be attached or retrofitted. For example, the next three years 
are expected to see the new, small and reversible USB “Type C” connector become 
pervasive across devices. While a simple adapter should allow “legacy” USB dongles to 
be attached to the new interface, ISA slot dongles cannot be attached outside of a 
computer, and parallel port dongles are increasingly failing due to lack of driver 
compatibility on modern 64-bit operating systems. Not to mention older systems like the 
Commodore PET/CBM, 64 and Amiga computers, which also employed a variety of 
[PAGE 3]
3 
 
dongles (attached to the cassette port, to the mouse/joystick port, and to other expansion 
and I/O ports). Retrocomputing is a growing trend, and thousands of software titles exist 
for these “classic” systems, which systems can be emulated on modern hardware, and 
which software titles may be legitimately purchased or downloaded from preservation 
sites, but for which increasing harm is caused by the legal uncertainty surrounding 
emulating a dongle (like the WinUAE emulation software can do) or circumventing the 
need for a dongle (like “cracked” versions of software do). This harm is increasing, as 
interest in “retro gaming” is growing (also due to better emulation made possible by more 
powerful hardware, which follows Moore’s Law), while the hardware gap between 
legacy dongle interfaces and modern devices is widening. In these cases, even if a dongle 
is not broken per se, it may not be possible to connect it to modern, functioning hardware. 
 The function of a “dongle” is sometimes provided by expansion cartridges or peripheral 
cards which may also serve purposes other than as a pure TPM. For example, the Opal 
Paint software for the Amiga required the OpalVision graphics card as a TPM 
mechanism (the software otherwise worked well also without the hardware). Similarly, 
some versions of the Lightwave software for the Amiga used the Video Toaster 
expansion board as a TPM (again, the software otherwise worked well also without said 
board). 
 Physical magnetic (floppy, tape) or optical media (CD, DVD) can be specially prepared 
by using dedicated replication hardware, normally not available to the software or 
computer user, to write magnetic or optical signals in a way that can be used as a TPM 
mechanism by software applications. Yet, even without considering the urgency induced 
by the decay of the media, the 2009-2011 timeframe saw the ending of the production of 
both floppy disk drives (with Sony Corporation being the last known manufacturer) and 
DD 3.5” floppy disks. Computer manufacturers have not been using floppy drives for 
more than 10 years, and “new old stock” is increasingly difficult to find. Optical drives 
seem to be following a similar trend, last but not least because of the larger form factor. 
This is causing an increased need for the “protected” media to be converted in a way that 
either preserves or circumvents the TPM mechanisms. Even when the mechanisms are 
preserved at the media image level, they are de facto circumvented by means of software 
emulation. 
 
Disabling or bypassing of the TPMs may occur in several ways, including: 
 Removal or modification of the software code relating to the implementation of the TPM 
(e.g. code that verifies for the presence of a dongle or other hardware device or magnetic 
or optical media characteristics); 
 Emulation of the TPM (i.e. creation of a synthetic device or medium which satisfies the 
requirements of the TPM-protected software), whereby the TPM code does not need to be 
removed or modified, but the ultimate result is that the original TPM is bypassed; 
 Emulation of an authentication server. 
 
 
Item 5. Asserted Noninfringing Use(s)  
 
In as far as this comment relates to and is focused on computer software, which it does, it draws 
on previous rulemaking processes and discussions that led to repeat confirmations of the 
[PAGE 4]
4 
 
exemptions for dongles, in similar scenarios. Where a magnetic or optical drive is no longer 
manufactured, or a computer interface is no longer available or no longer supported by modern 
operating systems, or an authentication or activation server becomes unavailable, the resulting 
obsolescence and loss of access due to malfunction or damage of a required part is the same as 
the one resulting from the loss of access to a “dongle”. 
 
This comment proposes a shift of perspective from “Abandoned Software” to software with 
“Abandoned TPM” which retains a limited scope to a proven narrow and focused subset of 
copyrighted works. 
 
As discussed here, increasing computing performance, decreasing form factors, and the emerging 
obsolescence of TPM technologies that were not common in early computer environments, but 
which gained popularity in the systems that now increasingly need to be preserved (and can be 
both imaged and emulated well) seems to be causing an increasing burden for comment 
submission, as thousands of titles would require providing specific, factual support, combined 
with a de novo requirement that does not seem to take into account the unidirectional 
obsolescence of TPMs. 
 
Additional considerations: 
 Legal uncertainty does not affect only end users who “lawfully acquired” a piece of 
software, or researchers, archivists or libraries. Under a literal interpretation test, 
developers, publishers and online service providers may be affected too. Example: a 
preservation site (e.g. hosting 8-bit software from the 1980s) receives a game purported 
to be uploaded by its original author, with the TPM removed with the help of a third 
party. 
 As projects and organizations increase in complexity, and developers change workplaces, 
loss of source code is a far more common scenario that might be expected. 
 Loss of ability to edit the original source code is also a common scenario. For example, 
since the 2005 version Microsoft’s Visual Studio development environment dropped the 
ability to create or modify software for systems older than Windows XP. 
 
Item 6. Asserted Adverse Effects  
 
The proposed definition was carefully written in an attempt to avoid adverse effects. 
 
Further clarification on the legal aspects of emulation may be helpful. Increasingly, “everything 
can be emulated”: “copy-protected” media can be imaged reliably, and TPM mechanisms can be 
emulated. Where does “circumvention” begin? 
 
