[PAGE 1]
 
PRIVACY ACT ADVISORY STATEMENT Required by the Privacy Act of 1974 (P.L. 93-579) 
The authority for requesting this information is 17 U.S.C. §§ 1201(a)(1) and 705. Furnishing the requested information is voluntary. 
The principal use of the requested information is publication on the Copyright Office website and use by Copyright Office staff for 
purposes of the rulemaking proceeding conducted under 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1). NOTE: No other advisory statement will be given 
in connection with this submission. Please keep this statement and refer to it if we communicate with you regarding this submission. 
Short Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption 
Under 17 U.S.C. 1201 
  
Item 1. Commenter Information  
 
Kyle Moschell 
 
Item 2.  Proposed Class Addressed 
 
Proposed Class 17: Jailbreaking—All-Purpose Mobile Computing Devices 
 
Item 3. Statement Regarding Proposed Exemption 
 
I am writing in support of Proposed Class 17, extending the existing exemption allowing jailbreaking of 
wireless telephones to other all-purpose mobile computing devices. Jailbreaking wireless telephones has 
become a more common and widely-accepted practice due to the limitations that are continually imposed 
on wireless telephones by their manufacturers. The restrictions included on wireless telephones may be 
designed for ease of use or to prevent accidental changes however, for the more connected and tech-
savvy owners, these limitations prevent using the device to its full potential and have negative 
consequences which cannot be disabled by default. Since 2010, wireless telephone manufacturers have 
expanded their product lines to include all-purpose mobile computing devices, such as tablets and touch-
screen MP3 players. These devices commonly run the same Operating System as a wireless telephone 
and have inherently the same limitations and restrictions imposed on them by their manufacturers. 
Therefore owners of mobile computing devices feel the need to jailbreak these devices in the same 
manner as their mobile telephones, in order to unlock the full capabilities of their device and have more 
control over what information is being shared with others from that device.  
 
It is my opinion that there are no relevant differences between “wireless telephone handset” and “all-
purpose mobile computing device” for the purposes of considering a jailbreaking exemption. These 
devices are becoming integrated with internet services and perform very much the same functions with 
differences in form factor, cost, and individual performance characteristics. As stated earlier, nearly all-
purpose computing devices run the same base software, or Operating System, as their wireless 
telephone counterparts (i.e. Apple iPad and Apple iPhone). These devices are easily distinguished from 
laptop or desktop computers by their size, shape, and operating system. Laptop and desktop computers 
are much larger and more expensive, using an advanced operating system, and are designed to be 
modified and changed by their owners. Jailbreaking in the sense of mobile devices has never been 
necessary on laptop or desktop computers due to their open and unrestricted nature by default. 
