[PAGE 1]
Short Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption Under 17 U.S.C. 1201 
  
Item 1.Commenter Information: Catherine R. Gellis, on behalf of herself and the Digital Age 
Defense project, a project focused on governmental efforts to control the use and development of 
technology.  (See http://digitalagedefense.org for contact information.)  
 
Item 2. Proposed Class Addressed:  
 Proposed Class 11: Unlocking – wireless telephone handsets 
 
Item 3.Statement Regarding Proposed Exemption 
Exemptions for all proposed classes, including this one, should be liberally granted for 
many reasons but particularly in light of the relationship Chapter 12 of Title 17 has with the 
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986 (“CFAA”).  See 18 U.S.C. § 1030.   
It is a close relationship.  For instance, the built-in exemptions from Chapter 12 for 
encryption and security research reference it directly.  See § 1201(g)(2)(D) and § 1201(j).  These 
exemptions remove this research from Chapter 12’s general prohibition against circumvention of 
technical measures, provided that the research does not violate the CFAA.  But this statutory 
language is circular: research is acceptable under Chapter 12 so long as it does not violate the 
CFAA, but without being authorized pursuant to Chapter 12, the research may be construed as 
the kind of access of a computer the CFAA is often presently interpreted to bar. 
There have been numerous legal actions, including criminal prosecutions, targeting 
people’s interactions with computers, even ones they were generally entitled to interact with, 
because it was interpreted that this interaction was either without authorization or in excess of 
what was authorized.  See 18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(2)(C).  Notable examples from the past three 
years include the prosecutions of Andrew Auernheimer, who had accessed material publicly 
(albeit unintentionally) available on a web site (which consequently led to the site owner being 
alerted to the security defect), and Aaron Swartz, who was prosecuted for accessing academic 
content he was entitled to access on a computer network was entitled to access as well.
1  
However one feels about these or other CFAA defendants, the prosecutions reveal a truth 
the Copyright Office cannot ignore: the CFAA has been a powerful weapon against people who 
have used computing devices in ways that some have thought they shouldn’t, regardless of 
whether those uses were consistent with promoting the progress of the arts and sciences, or even 
whether the people targeted otherwise had the right to use the computing device as they chose.  
While assessing the correctness of these CFAA interpretations is beyond the remit of this Office, 
the Office works in a universe where the threat to punish the use of computing technology not 
explicitly permitted is a very real one, and one that stands to chill the sorts of activities the Office 
is charged with protecting under § 1201(a)(1)(C)(iii).  Without these exemptions there is 
significant legal uncertainty for people who want to research, or even just modify in the course 
of ordinary use, the types of computing devices described in proposed classes 11-27, if the ways 
they seek to interact with these devices are ways the technical measures built into them do not 
allow.  If this Office is to protect these activities it must therefore issue the petitioned-for 
exemptions in order to remove the uncertainty that these activities will be sanctioned. 
                                                           
1 Auernheimer’s conviction was ultimately set aside for reasons not directly related to the CFAA 
itself.  See, e.g., 748 F.3d 525, 532-535 (2014). For Swartz the specter of felony conviction and 
imprisonment zealous federal prosecutors threatened him with drove him to take his own life.  
See, e.g., http://unhandled.com/2013/01/12/the-truth-about-aaron-swartzs-crime/ 
