[PAGE 1]
 
 
Short Comment Regarding Proposed Exemptions 
Under 17 U.S.C. 1201 
  
Item 1. Commenter Information  
 
Andrew Shore, on behalf of the Owners’ Rights Initiative (ORI) 
ashore@ownersrightsinitiative.org  
 
Item 2.  Proposed Classes Addressed 
 
We support exemptions for all the proposed classes. 
 
Item 3. Statement Regarding Proposed Exemptions 
 
ORI is an organization of over 20 companies and associations that have joined together to protect 
ownership rights in the United States. We believe in the fundamental premise that if you bought 
it, you own it, and should have the right to use, sell, lend, or give away your personal property. 
ORI formed when the Kirtsaeng v. Wiley case was pending before the Supreme Court. We now 
are dedicated to preserving that holding, and to making sure that the rights of intellectual 
property owners do not inappropriately interfere with the personal property rights of consumers, 
businesses, and non-profit institutions that own products incorporating intellectual property.  
 
The proposed exemptions all address situations where the Digital Millennium Copyright Act’s 
prohibition on the circumvention of technological protection measures (TPMs) unnecessarily 
interferes with personal property rights. The 27 proposed exemptions fall into two broad 
categories: 1) the TPM protected work is a software component of a hardware device; and 2) the 
TPM protected work represents all or virtually all of the value of the product. The exemptions in 
the first category would allow: the “unlocking” of a device such as a telephone handset or tablet 
in order to connect it to a wireless network; the “jailbreaking” of a mobile computing device so 
that it can access lawful content; the diagnosis, repair, or modification of vehicles; the use of 
alternative feedstock for 3D printers; and research into the safety, security, and effectiveness of 
medical devices. Congress did not enact the DMCA to prevent these sorts of uses; it did not 
intend to restrict owners of hardware products from making full use of their personal property. 
These exemptions should be granted to prevent the misuse of the DMCA. 
 
The second category of exemptions would allow: using clips from audiovisual works on DVDs 
or Blu-ray for education, derivative works, and space- and format-shifting; making ebooks 
accessible to the print-disabled; playing video games abandoned by their developers who no 
 
1100 H Street, NW #410 
Washington, DC 20005 
202.290.1120 
 
[PAGE 2]
 
 
longer provide the necessary services; and researching software security flaws. The uses enabled 
by this category of exemptions fall comfortably within the scope of fair use or other exceptions 
to the Copyright Act, and pose no meaningful risk of infringement. Owners of lawfully 
purchased copies must be allowed to make legitimate uses of their copies. Accordingly, we 
support the granting of the exemptions in this second category.  
 
 
1100 H Street, NW #410 
Washington, DC 20005 
202.290.1120 
 
