[PAGE 1]
Friday,
October 27, 2000
Part V
Library of Congress
Copyright Office
37 CFR Part 201
Exemption to Prohibition on
Circumvention of Copyright Protection
Systems for Access Control Technologies;
Final Rule
VerDate 11<MAY>2000 17:09 Oct 26, 2000 Jkt 194001 PO 00000 Frm 00001 Fmt 4717 Sfmt 4717 E:\FR\FM\27OCR3.SGM pfrm01 PsN: 27OCR3

[PAGE 2]
64556 Federal Register / Vol. 65, No. 209 / Friday, October 27, 2000 / Rules and Regulations
1 The treaties were adopted on December 20, 1996
at a World Intellectual Property Organization
(WIPO) Diplomatic Conference on Certain
Copyright and Neighboring Rights Questions. The
United States ratified the treaties in September,
1999. The treaties will go into effect after 30
instruments of ratification or accession by States
have been deposited with the Director General of
WIPO.
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS
Copyright Office
37 CFR Part 201
[Docket No. RM 99±7D]
Exemption to Prohibition on
Circumvention of Copyright Protection
Systems for Access Control
Technologies
AGENCY: Copyright Office, Library of
Congress.
ACTION: Final Rule.
SUMMARY: This rule designates the
classes of copyrighted works that the
Librarian of Congress has determined
shall be subject to exemption from the
prohibition against circumvention of a
technological measure that effectively
controls access to a work protected
under title 17 of the U.S. Code. In title
I of the Digital Millennium Copyright
Act, Congress established that this
prohibition against circumvention will
become effective October 28, 2000. The
same legislation directed the Register of
Copyrights to conduct a rulemaking
procedure and to make
recommendations to the Librarian as to
whether any classes of works should be
subject to exemptions from the
prohibition against circumvention. The
exemptions set forth in this rule will be
in effect until October 28, 2003.
EFFECTIVE DATE: October 28, 2000.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT :
Charlotte Douglass or Robert Kasunic,
Office of the General Counsel, Copyright
GC/I&R, P.O. Box 70400, Southwest
Station, Washington, DC 20024.
Telephone (202) 707±8380; telefax (202)
707±8366.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
Recommendation of the Register of
Copyrights
I. Background
A. Legislative Requirements for
Rulemaking Proceeding
The WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT)
and the WIPO Performances and
Phonograms Treaty (WPPT) require that
Contracting Parties provide adequate
legal protection and effective legal
remedies against the circumvention of
effective technological measures that
authors or other copyright owners (or, in
the case of the WPPT, performers and
producers of phonograms) use in
connection with the exercise of their
rights and that restrict acts which they
have not authorized and are not
permitted by law.
1
In fulfillment of these treaty
obligations, on October 28, 1998, the
United States enacted the Digital
Millennium Copyright Act (``DMCA''),
Pub. L. 105±304 (1998). Title I of the Act
added a new Chapter 12 to Title 17
U.S.C., which among other things
prohibits circumvention of access
control technologies employed by or on
behalf of copyright owners to protect
their works. Specifically, new
subsection 1201(a)(1)(A) provides, inter
alia, that ``No person shall circumvent a
technological measure that effectively
controls access to a work protected
under this title.'' Congress found it
appropriate to modify the prohibition to
assure that the public will have
continued ability to engage in
noninfringing uses of copyrighted
works, such as fair use. See the Report
of the House Committee on Commerce
on the Digital Millennium Copyright
Act of 1998, H.R. Rep. No. 105±551, pt.
2, at 36 (1998) (hereinafter Commerce
Comm. Report). Subparagraph (B) limits
this prohibition. It provides that the
prohibition against circumvention
``shall not apply to persons who are
users of a copyrighted work which is in
a particular class of works, if such
persons are, or are likely to be in the
succeeding 3-year period, adversely
affected by virtue of such prohibition in
their ability to make noninfringing uses
of that particular class of works under
this title'' as determined in this
rulemaking. This prohibition on
circumvention becomes effective on
October 28, 2000, two years after the
date of enactment of the DMCA.
During the 2-year period between the
enactment and the effective date of the
provision, the Librarian of Congress
must make a determination as to classes
of works exempted from the prohibition.
This determination is to be made upon
the recommendation of the Register of
Copyrights in a rulemaking proceeding.
The determination thus made will
remain in effect during the succeeding
three years. In making her
recommendation, the Register of
Copyrights is to consult with the
Assistant Secretary for Communications
and Information of the Department of
Commerce and report and comment on
the Assistant Secretary's views. 17
U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C).
A more complete explanation of the
development of the legislative
requirements is set out in the Notice of
Inquiry published on November 24,
1999, 64 FR 66139, and is also available
on the Copyright Office's website at :
http://www.loc.gov/copyright/1201/
anticirc.html. See also the discussion in
section III.A. below.
B. Responsibilities of Register of
Copyrights and Librarian of Congress
The prohibition against
circumvention is subject to delayed
implementation in order to permit a
determination whether users of
particular classes of copyrighted works
are likely to be adversely affected by the
prohibition in their ability to make
noninfringing uses. By October 28,
2000, upon the recommendation of the
Register of Copyrights in a rulemaking
proceeding, the Librarian of Congress
must determine whether to exempt
certain classes of works (which he must
identify) from the application of the
prohibition against circumvention
during the next three years because of
such adverse effects.
The Register was directed to conduct
a rulemaking proceeding, soliciting
public comment and consulting with
the Assistant Secretary of Commerce for
Communications and Information, and
then to make a recommendation to the
Librarian, who must make a
determination whether any classes of
copyrighted works should be exempt
from the statutory prohibition against
circumvention during the three years
commencing on that date.
The primary responsibility of the
Register and the Librarian in this respect
is to assess whether the implementation
of technological protection measures
that effectively control access to
copyrighted works (hereinafter ``access
control measures'') is diminishing the
ability of individuals to use copyrighted
works in ways that are otherwise lawful.
Commerce Comm. Report, at 37. As
examples of technological protection
measures in effect today, the Commerce
Committee offered the use of ``password
codes'' to control authorized access to
computer programs and encryption or
scrambling of cable programming,
videocassettes, and CD±ROMs. Id.
The prohibition becomes effective on
October 28, 2000, and any exemptions
to that prohibition must be in place by
that time. Although it is difficult to
measure the effect of a future
prohibition, Congress intended that the
Register solicit input that would enable
consideration of a broad range of current
or likely future adverse impacts. The
VerDate 11<MAY>2000 17:09 Oct 26, 2000 Jkt 194001 PO 00000 Frm 00002 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27OCR3.SGM pfrm01 PsN: 27OCR3

[PAGE 3]
64557Federal Register / Vol. 65, No. 209 / Friday, October 27, 2000 / Rules and Regulations
2 In referring to the comments and hearing
materials, the Office will use the following
abbreviations: C-Comment, R-Reply Comment, PHPost Hearing Comments, T + speaker and dateÐ
Transcript (ex. ``T Laura Gasaway, 5/18/00'') and
WS + speakerÐWritten statements (ex. ``WS
Vaidhyanathan''). Citations to page numbers in
hearing transcripts are to the hard copy transcripts
at the Copyright Office. For the hearings in
Washington, DC, the pagination of those transcripts
differs from the pagination of the versions of the
transcript available on the Copyright Office website.
nature of the inquiry is delineated in the
statutory areas to be examined, as set
forth in section 1201(a)(1)(C):
(i) The availability for use of copyrighted
works;
(ii) The availability for use of works for
nonprofit archival, preservation, and
educational purposes;
(iii) The impact that the prohibition on the
circumvention of technological measures
applied to copyrighted works has on
criticism, comment, news reporting,
teaching, scholarship, or research;
(iv) The effect of circumvention of
technological measures on the market for or
value of copyrighted works; and
(v) Such other factors as the Librarian
considers appropriate.
II. Solicitation of Public Comments and
Hearings
On November 24, 1999, the Office
initiated the rulemaking procedure with
publication of a Notice of Inquiry. 64 FR
66139. The Notice of Inquiry requested
written comments from all interested
parties, including representatives of
copyright owners, educational
institutions, libraries and archives,
scholars, researchers and members of
the public. The Office devoted a great
deal of attention in this Notice to setting
out the legislative parameters and
developing questions related to the
criteria Congress had established. The
Office was determined to make the
comments it received available
immediately in order to elicit a broad
range of public comment; therefore, it
stated a preference for submission of
comments in certain electronic formats.
Id. In response to some commenters'
views that the formats permitted were
not sufficient, the Office expanded the
list of formats in which comments could
be submitted. 65 FR 6573 (February 10,
2000). In the same document, the Office
extended the comment period:
comments would be due by February
17, 2000 and reply comments by March
20, 2000. On March 17, the Office
extended the reply comment period to
March 31; scheduled hearings to take
place in Washington, DC on May 2±4
and in Palo Alto, California, at Stanford
University on May 18±19; and set a June
23, 2000 deadline for submission of
post-hearing comments. 65 FR 14505
(March 17, 2000). All of these notices
were published not only in the Federal
Register, but also on the Office's
website.
In response to the Notice of Inquiry,
the Office received 235 initial comments
and 129 reply comments. Thirty-four
witnesses representing over 50 groups
testified at five days of hearings held in
either Washington, DC or Palo Alto,
California. The Office placed all initial
comments, reply comments, optional
written statements of the witnesses and
the transcripts of the two hearings on its
website shortly after their receipt.
Following the hearings, the Office
received 28 post-hearing comments,
which were also posted on the website.
All of these commenters and witnesses
are identified in the indexes that appear
on the Office's website.
The comments received represent a
broad perspective of views ranging from
representatives or individuals who
urged there should be broad exemptions
to those who opposed any exemption;
they also included a number of
comments about various other aspects of
the Digital Millennium Copyright Act.
The Copyright Office has now
exhaustively reviewed and analyzed the
entire record, including all of the
comments and the transcripts of the
hearings in order to determine whether
any class of copyrighted works should
be exempt from the prohibition against
circumvention during the next three
years.
2
III. Discussion
A. The Purpose and Focus of the
Rulemaking
1. Purpose of the Rulemaking
As originally reported out of the
Senate Judiciary Committee on May 11,
1998, S. Rep. No. 105±190 (1998), and
the House Judiciary Committee on May
22, 1998, H.R. Rep. No. 105±551, pt. I
(1998), section 1201(a)(1) consisted of
only one sentenceÐwhat is now the
first sentence of section 1201(a)(1): ``No
person shall circumvent a technological
measure that effectively controls access
to a work protected under this title.''
Section 1201(a)(2), like the provision
finally enacted, prohibited the
manufacture, importation, offering to
the public, providing or otherwise
trafficking in any technology, product,
service, device, or component to
circumvent access control measures.
Section 1201(a) thus addressed ``access
control'' measures, prohibiting both the
conduct of circumventing those
measures and devices that circumvent
them. Thus, section 1201(a) prohibits
both the conduct of circumventing
access control measures and trafficking
in products, services and devices that
circumvent access control measures.
In addition to section 1201(a)(1)'s
prohibition on circumvention of access
control measures, section 1201 also
addressed circumvention of a different
type of technological measure. Section
1201(b), in the versions originally
reported by the House and Senate
Judiciary Committees and in the statute
finally enacted, prohibited the
manufacture, importation, offering to
the public, providing or otherwise
trafficking in any technology, product,
service, device, or component to
circumvent protection afforded by a
technological measure that effectively
protects a right of a copyright owner
under title 17 in a copyrighted work.
The type of technological measure
addressed in section 1201(b) includes
copy-control measures and other
measures that control uses of works that
would infringe the exclusive rights of
the copyright owner. They will
frequently be referred to herein as copy
controls. But unlike section 1201(a),
which prohibits both the conduct of
circumvention and devices that
circumvent, section 1201(b) does not
prohibit the conduct of circumventing
copy control measures. The prohibition
in section 1201(b) extends only to
devices that circumvent copy control
measures. The decision not to prohibit
the conduct of circumventing copy
controls was made, in part, because it
would penalize some noninfringing
conduct such as fair use.
In the House of Representatives, the
DMCA was sequentially referred to the
Committee on Commerce after it was
reported out of the Judiciary Committee.
The Commerce Committee was
concerned that section 1201, in its
original form, might undermine
Congress' commitment to fair use.
Commerce Comm. Report, at 35. While
acknowledging that the growth and
development of the Internet has had a
significant positive impact on the access
of students, researchers, consumers, and
the public at large to information and
that a ``plethora of information, most of
it embodied in materials subject to
copyright protection, is available to
individuals, often for free, that just a
few years ago could have been located
and acquired only through the
expenditure of considerable time,
resources, and money,'' Id., the
Committee was concerned that
``marketplace realities may someday
dictate a different outcome, resulting in
less access, rather than more, to
copyrighted materials that are important
to education, scholarship, and other
socially vital endeavors.'' Id. at 36.
Possible measures that might lead to
VerDate 11<MAY>2000 17:24 Oct 26, 2000 Jkt 194001 PO 00000 Frm 00003 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27OCR3.SGM pfrm01 PsN: 27OCR3

[PAGE 4]
64558 Federal Register / Vol. 65, No. 209 / Friday, October 27, 2000 / Rules and Regulations
3 The Commerce Committee proposal would have
placed responsibility for the rulemaking in the
hands of the Secretary of Commerce. As finally
enacted, the DMCA shifted that responsibility to the
Librarian, upon the recommendation of the
Register.
4 Some commenters have suggested that the
House Manager's Report is entitled to little
deference as legislative history. See, e.g., PH18, p.
3. However, because that report is consistent with
the Commerce Committee Report, there is no need
in this rulemaking to determine whether the
Manager's Report is entitled to less weight than the
Commerce Committee Report. Some critics of the
Manager's Report have objected to its statement that
the focus of this proceeding should be on whether
there is a ``substantial adverse impact'' on
noninfringing uses. However, they have failed to
explain how this statement is anything other than
another way of saying what the Commerce
Committee said when it said the determination
should be based on ``distinct, verifiable, and
measurable impacts, and should not be based upon
de minimis impacts.''
such an outcome included the
elimination of print or other hard-copy
versions, permanent encryption of all
electronic copies and adoption of
business models that restrict
distribution and availability of works.
The Committee concluded that ``[i]n this
scenario, it could be appropriate to
modify the flat prohibition against the
circumvention of effective technological
measures that control access to
copyrighted materials, in order to
ensure that access for lawful purposes is
not unjustifiably diminished.'' Id.
In order to address such possible
developments, the Commerce
Committee proposed a modification of
section 1201 which it characterized as a
`` `fail-safe' mechanism.'' Id. As the
Committee Report describes it, ``This
mechanism would monitor
developments in the marketplace for
copyrighted materials, and allow the
enforceability of the prohibition against
the act of circumvention to be
selectively waived, for limited time
periods, if necessary to prevent a
diminution in the availability to
individual users of a particular category
of copyrighted materials.'' Id.
The ``fail-safe'' mechanism is this
rulemaking. In its final form as enacted
by Congress, slightly modified from the
mechanism that appeared in the version
of the DMCA reported out of the
Commerce Committee, the Register is to
conduct a rulemaking proceeding and,
after consulting with the Assistant
Secretary for Communications and
Information of the Department of
Commerce, recommend to the Librarian
whether he should conclude ``that
persons who are users of a copyrighted
work are, or are likely to be in the
succeeding 3-year period, adversely
affected by the prohibition under
[section 1201(a)(1)(A)] in their ability to
make noninfringing uses under [Title
17] of a particular class of copyrighted
works.'' 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C). ``The
Librarian shall publish any class of
copyrighted works for which the
Librarian has determined, pursuant to
the rulemaking conducted under
subparagraph (C), that noninfringing
uses by persons who are users of a
copyrighted work are, or are likely to be,
adversely affected, and the prohibition
contained in subparagraph (A) shall not
apply to such users with respect to such
class of works for the ensuing 3-year
period.'' 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C).
The Commerce Committee offered
additional guidance as to the task of the
Register and the Librarian in this
rulemaking. ``The goal of the proceeding
is to assess whether the implementation
of technological protection measures
that effectively control access to
copyrighted works is adversely affecting
the ability of individual users to make
lawful uses of copyrighted works * * *.
The primary goal of the rulemaking
proceeding is to assess whether the
prevalence of these technological
protections, with respect to particular
categories of copyrighted materials, is
diminishing the ability of individuals to
use these works in ways that are
otherwise lawful.'' Commerce Comm.
Report, at 37. Accord: Staff of House
Committee on the Judiciary, 105th
Cong., Section-By-Section Analysis of
H.R. 2281 as Passed by the United States
House of Representatives on August 4,
1998, (hereinafter House Manager's
Report) (Rep. Coble)(Comm. Print 1998),
at 6. The Committee observed that the
effective date of section 1201(a)(1) was
delayed for two years in order ``to allow
the development of a sufficient record
as to how the implementation of these
technologies is affecting availability of
works in the marketplace for lawful
uses.'' Commerce Comm. Report, at 37.
Thus, the task of this rulemaking
appears to be to determine whether the
availability and use of access control
measures has already diminished or is
about to diminish the ability of the
public to engage in the lawful uses of
copyrighted works that the public had
traditionally been able to make prior to
the enactment of the DMCA. As the
Commerce Committee Report stated, in
examining the factors set forth in
section 1201(a)(1)(C), the focus must be
on ``whether the implementation of
technological protection measures (such
as encryption or scrambling) has caused
adverse impact on the ability of users to
make lawful uses.'' Id.
2. The Necessary Showing
The language of section 1201(a)(1)
does not offer much guidance as to the
respective burdens of proponents and
opponents of any classes of works to be
exempted from the prohibition on
circumvention. Of course, it is a general
rule of statutory construction that
exemptions must be construed narrowly
in order to preserve the purpose of a
statutory provision, and that rule is
applied in interpreting the copyright
law. Tasini v. New York Times Co., 206
F.3d 161, 168 (2d Cir. 2000). Moreover,
the burden is on the proponent of the
exemption to make the case for
exempting any particular class of works
from the operation of section 1201(a)(1).
See 73 Am. Jur. 2d 313 (1991)
(``[s]tatutes granting exemptions from
their general operation [to] be strictly
construed, and any doubt must be
resolved against the one asserting the
exemption.'') Indeed, the House
Commerce Committee stated that ``The
regulatory prohibition is presumed to
apply to any and all kinds of works,
including those as to which a waiver of
applicability was previously in effect,
unless, and until, the Secretary makes a
new determination that the adverse
impact criteria have been met with
respect to a particular class and
therefore issues a new waiver.''
Commerce Comm. Report, at 37
(emphasis added).
3
The legislative history makes clear
that a determination to exempt a class
of works from the prohibition on
circumvention must be based on a
determination that the prohibition has a
substantial adverse effect on
noninfringing use of that particular class
of works. The Commerce Committee
noted that the rulemaking proceeding is
to focus on ``distinct, verifiable, and
measurable impacts, and should not be
based upon de minimis impacts.''
Commerce Comm. Report, at 37. ``If the
rulemaking has produced insufficient
evidence to determine whether there
have been adverse impacts with respect
to particular classes of copyrighted
works, the circumvention prohibition
should go into effect with respect to
those classes.'' Id. at 38. Similarly, the
House Manager's Report stated that
``[t]he focus of the rulemaking
proceeding must remain on whether the
prohibition on circumvention of
technological protection measures (such
as encryption or scrambling) has caused
any substantial adverse impact on the
ability of users to make non-infringing
uses,'' and suggested that ``mere
inconveniences, or individual cases
* * * do not rise to the level of a
substantial adverse impact.'' House
Manager's Report, at 6.
4 See also
Connecticut Department of Public
Utility Control v. Federal
Communications Commission, 78 F.3d
842, 851 (2d Cir. 1996) (``It is reasonable
VerDate 11<MAY>2000 17:09 Oct 26, 2000 Jkt 194001 PO 00000 Frm 00004 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27OCR3.SGM pfrm01 PsN: 27OCR3

[PAGE 5]
64559Federal Register / Vol. 65, No. 209 / Friday, October 27, 2000 / Rules and Regulations
to characterize as `substantial' the
burden faced by a party seeking an
exemption from a general statutory
rule'').
Although future adverse impacts may
also be considered, the Manager's
Report states that ``the determination
should be based upon anticipated,
rather than actual, adverse impacts only
in extraordinary circumstances in which
the evidence of likelihood of future
adverse impact during that time period
is highly specific, strong and persuasive.
Otherwise, the prohibition would be
unduly undermined.'' Id. Although the
Commerce Committee Report does not
state how future adverse impacts are to
be evaluated (apart from a single
reference stating that in categories
where adverse impacts have occurred or
``are likely to occur,'' an exemption
should be made, Commerce Comm.
Report at 38), the Committee's
discussion of ``distinct, verifiable and
measurable impacts'' suggests that it
would require a similar showing with
respect to future adverse impact.
The legislative history also requires
the Register and Librarian to disregard
any adverse effects that are caused by
factors other than the prohibition
against circumvention. The House
Manager's Report is instructive:
The focus of the rulemaking proceeding
must remain on whether the prohibition on
circumvention of technological protection
measures (such as encryption or scrambling)
has caused any substantial adverse impact on
the ability of users to make non-infringing
uses. Adverse impacts that flow from other
sources * * * or that are not clearly
attributable to such a prohibition, are outside
the scope of the rulemaking.
House Manager's Report, at 6. The
House Commerce Committee came to a
similar conclusion, using similar
language. Commerce Comm. Report, at
37.
In fact, some technological protection
measures may mitigate adverse effects.
The House Manager's Report notes that:
In assessing the impact of the
implementation of technological measures,
and of the law against their circumvention,
the rule-making proceedings should consider
the positive as well as the adverse effects of
these technologies on the availability of
copyrighted materials. The technological
measuresÐsuch as encryption, scrambling,
and electronic envelopesÐthat this bill
protects can be deployed, not only to prevent
piracy and other economically harmful
unauthorized uses of copyrighted materials,
but also to support new ways of
disseminating copyrighted materials to users,
and to safeguard the availability of legitimate
uses of those materials by individuals.
House Manager's Report, at 6.
Another mitigating factor may arise
when a work as to which the copyright
owner has instituted a technological
control is also available in formats that
are not subject to technological
protections. For example, a work may be
available in electronic format only in
encrypted form, but may also be
available in traditional hard copy format
which has no such technological
restrictions on access. The availability
without restriction in the latter format
may alleviate any adverse effect that
would otherwise result from the
technological controls utilized in the
electronic format. The availability of
works in such other formats is to be
considered when exemptions are
fashioned. Id. at 7.
3. Determination of ``Class of Works''
One of the key issues discussed in
comments and testimony was how a
``class'' of works is to be defined. The
Office's initial notice of inquiry
highlighted this issue, asking for
comments from the public on the
criteria to be used in determining what
a ``class of works'' is and on whether
works could be classified in part based
on the way in which they are being
used. See questions 16, 17 and 23, 64 FR
at 66143. A joint submission by a
number of library associations took the
position that the Librarian should adopt
a ``'function-based'' definition of classes
of works.'' C162, p. 32. The same
submission stated that ``the class of
works should be defined, in part,
according to the ways they are being
used because that is precisely how the
limitations on the otherwise exclusive
rights of copyright holders are phrased,''
Id., p. 36, and concluded that ``all
categories of copyrighted works should
be covered by this rulemaking.'' Id., p.
38. In contrast, a coalition of
organizations representing copyright
owners argued for a narrower approach,
rejecting a focus on particular types of
uses of works or on particular access
control technologies. R112, p. 10. One
association of copyright owners argued
that a ``class'' should not be defined by
reference to any particular medium
(such as digital versatile discs, or
DVD's), but rather by reference to ``a
type or types of works.'' R59, p. 8. Many
representatives of copyright owners
repeated the legislative history that ``the
`particular class of copyrighted works'
be a narrow and focused subset of the
broad categories of works of authorship
than is [sic] identified in section 102 of
the Copyright Act (17 U.S.C. 102).'' See,
e.g., Id., (quoting Commerce Comm.
Report, at 38). A representative of a
major copyright owner took the position
that ``defining `classes' of works is
neither feasible nor appropriate'' and
that ``[b]efore there is any movement in
the direction of exempting certain works
or `classes' of works from the
prohibition against circumvention,
those who support such exemption
should come forward with proof that
users who desire to make non-infringing
uses or avail themselves of the fair use
defense are prevented from doing so by
the technological protections.'' C43, p.6.
Based on a review of the statutory
language and the legislative history, the
view that a ``class'' of works can be
defined in terms of the status of the user
or the nature of the intended use
appears to be untenable. Section
1201(a)(1)(B) refers to ``a copyrighted
work which is in a particular class of
works.'' Section 1201(a)(1)(C) refers to
``a particular class of copyrighted
works.'' Section 1201(a)(1)(D) ``any class
of copyrighted works.'' This statutory
language appears to require that the
Librarian identify a ``class of works''
based upon attributes of the works
themselves, and not by reference to
some external criteria such as the
intended use or users of the works. The
dictionary defines ``class'' as ``a group,
set or kind sharing common attributes.''
Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary
211 (1995).
Moreover, the phrase ``class of works''
connotes that the common attributes
relate to the nature of authorship in the
works. Although the Copyright Act does
not define ``work,'' the term is used
throughout the copyright law to refer to
a work of authorship, rather than to a
material object on which the work
appears or to the readers or users of the
work. See, e.g., 17 U.S.C. 102(a)
(``Copyright protection subsists, in
accordance with this title, in original
works of authorship fixed in any
tangible medium of expression, * * *)
(emphasis added) and the catalog of the
types of works protected by copyright
set forth in section 102(a)(1)±(8)
(``literary works,'' ``musical works,''
``dramatic works,'' etc.).
Nevertheless, the statutory language is
arguably ambiguous, and one could
imagine an interpretation of section
1201(a)(1) that permitted a class of
works to be defined in terms of criteria
having nothing to do with the intrinsic
qualities of the works. In such a case,
resort to legislative history might clarify
the meaning of the statute. In this case,
the legislative history appears to leave
no other alternative than to interpret the
statute as requiring a ``class'' to be
defined primarily, if not exclusively, by
reference to attributes of the works
themselves.
The Commerce Committee Report
addressed the issue of determining a
class of works:
VerDate 11<MAY>2000 17:24 Oct 26, 2000 Jkt 194001 PO 00000 Frm 00005 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27OCR3.SGM pfrm01 PsN: 27OCR3

[PAGE 6]
64560 Federal Register / Vol. 65, No. 209 / Friday, October 27, 2000 / Rules and Regulations
5 A leading treatise draws the following
conclusion from this language:
It would seem, therefore, that the language should
be applied to discrete subgroups. If users of physics
textbooks or listeners to Baroque concerti, for
example, find themselves constricted in the new
Internet environment, then some relief will lie. If,
on the other hand, the only unifying feature shared
by numerous disgruntled users is that each is
having trouble accessing copyrighted works, albeit
of different genres, then no relief is warranted. 1
Nimmer on Copyright § 12A.03[A][[2][b] (Copyright
Protection Systems Special Pamphlet).
6 The legislative history of the Copyright Act of
1976 supports the conclusion that there is a close
relation between the section 102 categories and a
``class'' of work. The authoritative report of the
House Judiciary Committee, in discussing the
section 102 categories of works, used the term
``class'' as a synonym for ``category.'' See H.R. Rep.
No. 94±1476, at 53 (1976).
The issue of defining the scope or
boundaries of a ``particular class'' of
copyrighted works as to which the
implementation of technological protection
measures has been shown to have had an
adverse impact is an important one to be
determined during the rulemaking
proceedings. In assessing whether users of
copyrighted works have been, or are likely to
be adversely affected, the Secretary shall
assess users' ability to make lawful uses of
works ``within each particular class of
copyrighted works specified in the
rulemaking.'' The Committee intends that the
``particular class of copyrighted works'' be a
narrow and focused subset of the broad
categories of works of authorship than [sic]
is identified in section 102 of the Copyright
Act (17 U.S.C. 102).
Commerce Comm. Report, at 38.5
A ``narrow and focused subset of the
broad categories of works of authorship
* * * identified in section 102''
presumably must use, as its starting
point, the categories of authorship set
forth in section 102: literary works;
musical works; dramatic works;
pantomimes and choreographic works;
pictorial, graphic, and sculptural works;
motion pictures and other audiovisual
works; sound recordings; and
architectural works.
Moreover, the Commerce Committee
Report states that the task in this
rulemaking proceeding is to determine
whether the prevalence of access control
measures, ``with respect to particular
categories of copyrighted materials, is
diminishing the ability of individuals to
use these works in ways that are
otherwise lawful.'' Commerce Comm.
Report, at 37 (emphasis added). In fact,
the Report refers repeatedly to
``categories'' of works in connection
with the findings to be made in this
rulemaking. See Id., at 36 (``individual
users of a particular category of
copyrighted materials'') (``whether
enforcement of the regulation should be
temporarily waived with regard to
particular categories of works'') (``any
particular category of copyrighted
materials'') (``assessment of adverse
impacts on particular categories of
works''), and 38 (``Only in categories as
to which the Secretary finds that
adverse impacts have occurred'').
Because the term ``category'' of works
has a well-understood meaning in the
copyright law, referring to the categories
set forth in section 102, the conclusion
is inescapable that the starting point for
any definition of a ``particular class'' of
works in this rulemaking must be one of
the section 102 categories.
6
The views of the Judiciary Committee
are in accord with those expressed in
the Commerce Committee Report. The
House Manager's Report uses very
similar words to describe how a ``class
of works'' is to be determined:
Deciding the scope or boundaries of a
``particular class'' of copyrighted works as to
which the prohibition contained in section
1201(a)(1) has been shown to have had an
adverse impact is an important issue to be
determined during the rulemaking
proceedings. The illustrative list of categories
appearing in section 102 of Title 17 is only
a starting point for this decision. For
example, the category of ``literary works'' (17
USC 102(a)(1)) embraces both prose creations
such as journals, periodicals or books, and
computer programs of all kinds. It is
exceedingly unlikely that the impact of the
prohibition on circumvention of access
control technologies will be the same for
scientific journals as it is for computer
operating systems; thus, these two categories
of works, while both ``literary works,'' do not
constitute a single ``particular class'' for
purposes of this legislation. Even within the
category of computer programs, the
availability for fair use purposes of PC-based
business productivity applications is
unlikely to be affected by laws against
circumvention of technological protection
measures in the same way as the availability
for those purposes of videogames distributed
in formats playable only on dedicated
platforms, so it is probably appropriate to
recognize different ``classes'' here as well.
House Manager's Report, at 7.
The House Manager's Report
continues:
At the same time, the Secretary should not
draw the boundaries of ``particular classes''
too narrowly. For instance, the section 102
category ``motion pictures and other
audiovisual works'' may appropriately be
subdivided, for purposes of the rulemaking,
into classes such as ``motion pictures,''
``television programs,'' and other rubrics of
similar breadth. However, it would be
inappropriate, for example, to subdivide
overly narrowly into particular genres of
motion pictures, such as Westerns, comedies,
or live action dramas. Singling out specific
types of works by creating in the rulemaking
process ``particular classes'' that are too
narrow would be inconsistent with the intent
of this bill.
Id.
The conclusion to be drawn from the
legislative history is that the section 102
categories of works are, at the very least,
the starting point for any determination
of what a ``particular class of work''
might be. That is not to say that a
``class'' of works must be identical to a
``category.'' In fact, that usually will not
be the case. A ``class'' of works might
include works from more than one
category of works; one could imagine a
``class'' of works consisting of certain
sound recordings and musical
compositions, for example. More
frequently, a ``class'' would constitute
some subset of a section 102 category,
such as the Judiciary Committee's
example of ``television programs.''
A rigid adherence to defining ``class''
solely by reference to section 102
categories or even to inherent attributes
of the works themselves might lead to
unjust results in light of the fact that the
entire ``class'' must be exempted from
section 1201(a)(1)'s anticircumvention
provision if the required adverse impact
is demonstrated. For example, if a
showing had been made that users of
motion pictures released on DVD's are
adversely affected in their ability to
make noninfringing uses of those works,
it would be unfortunate if the
Librarian's only choice were to exempt
motion pictures. Limiting the class to
``motion pictures distributed on DVD's,''
or more narrowly to ``motion pictures
distributed on DVD's using the content
scrambling system of access control''
would be a more just `` and permissible
`` classification. Such a classification
would begin by reference to attributes of
the works themselves, but could then be
narrowed by reference to the medium
on which the works are distributed, or
even to the access control measures
applied to them. But classifying a work
solely by reference to the medium on
which the work appears, or the access
control measures applied to the work,
seems to be beyond the scope of what
``particular class of work'' is intended to
be. And classifying a work by reference
to the type of user or use (e.g., libraries,
or scholarly research) seems totally
impermissible when administering a
statute that requires the Librarian to
create exemptions based on a
``particular class of works.'' If Congress
had wished to provide for exemptions
based on the status of the user or the
nature of the useÐcriteria that would be
very sensibleÐCongress could have said
so clearly. The fact that the issue of
noninfringing uses was before Congress
and the fact that Congress clearly was
seeking, in section 1201, to create
exemptions that would permit
noninfringing uses, make it clear that
VerDate 11<MAY>2000 17:24 Oct 26, 2000 Jkt 194001 PO 00000 Frm 00006 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27OCR3.SGM pfrm01 PsN: 27OCR3

[PAGE 7]
64561Federal Register / Vol. 65, No. 209 / Friday, October 27, 2000 / Rules and Regulations
Congress had every opportunity and
motive to clarify that such uses could be
ingredients of the definition of ``class''
if that was what Congress intended. Yet
the fact that Congress selected language
in the statute and legislative history that
avoided suggesting that classes of works
could be defined by reference to users
or uses is strong evidence that such
classification was not within Congress'
contemplation.
In this rulemaking, exemptions for
two classes of works are recommended.
The first class, ``Compilations consisting
of lists of websites blocked by filtering
software applications,'' fits comfortably
within the approach to classification
outlined herein. The second class,
``Literary works, including computer
programs and databases, protected by
access control mechanisms that fail to
permit access because of malfunction,
damage or obsoleteness,'' is a somewhat
less comfortable fit. It includes all
literary works (a section 102 category)
and specifically mentions two
subclasses of literary works, but narrows
the exemption by reference to attributes
of the technological measures that
control access to the works. Such
classification probably reaches the outer
limits of a permissible definition of
``class'' under the approach adopted
herein.
B. Consultation With Assistant Secretary
of Commerce for Communications and
Information
As is required by section
1201(a)(1)(C), the Register has consulted
with the Assistant Secretary for
Communications and Information in the
Department of Commerce. The Assistant
Secretary is the Administrator of the
National Telecommunciations and
Information Administration (NTIA).
Discussions with the Assistant Secretary
and the NTIA staff have taken place
throughout this rulemaking process. In
furtherance of the consultative process,
on September 29, 2000, the Assistant
Secretary presented a letter to the
Register detailing his views. That letter
has been forwarded to the Librarian.
After full and thorough consideration of
and discussions with the Assistant
Secretary's office on these views, the
Register includes the following report
and comment on the Assistant
Secretary's perspective in this
recommendation to the Librarian.
The Assistant Secretary stated that his
principal concern is to ensure that the
Librarian will preserve fair use
principles in this new digital age. The
concerns expressed in his letter quoted
from and restated many of the concerns
that were presented in the House
Commerce Committee Report. The
Assistant Secretary noted that the
Commerce Committee was concerned
that the anticircumvention prohibition
of section 1201(a)(1) might have adverse
consequences on fair uses of
copyrighted works protected by
technological protection measures,
particularly by librarians and educators.
He echoed the fears of the Commerce
Committee that a legal framework may
be developing that would ``inexorably
create a pay-per-use society.'' He stated
that the ``right'' to prohibit
circumvention should be qualified in
order to maintain a balance between the
interests of content creators and
information users, by means of carefully
drawn exemptions from the
anticircumvention provision.
Since fair use, as codified in 17 U.S.C.
107, is not a defense to the cause of
action created by the anticircumvention
prohibition of section 1201, the
Assistant Secretary urges the Register to
follow the House Commerce
Committee's intent to provide for
exemptions analogous to fair use. He
advises the Register to preserve fair use
principles by crafting exemptions that
are grounded in these principles in
order to promote inclusion of all parts
of society in the digital economy and
prevent a situation in which
information crucial to supporting
scholarship, research, comment,
criticism, news reporting, life-long
learning, and other related lawful uses
of copyrighted information is available
only to those with the ability to pay or
the expertise to negotiate advantageous
licensing terms.
The Assistant Secretary expresses
support for commenters in this
proceeding who believed that the term
``class'' should not be interpreted as
``coextensive'' with categories of
original works of authorship, as that
term is used in section 102(a) of the
Copyright Act. He states that since the
statute and legislative history provide
little guidance on the meaning of the
term ``class of works'' and since section
1201(a)(1)(C) instructs the Librarian to
examine considerations of use that are
similar to fair use analysis, the classes
of exempted works should be fashioned
based on a factual examination of the
uses to which copyrighted materials are
put.
In order to craft an exemption that
will preserve fair uses, he concludes
that the determination of exempted
classes of works should include a
factual examination of the uses to which
copyrighted materials are put. With this
in mind, he endorses, ``as a starting
point, the exception proposed by the
library and academic communities.'' In
particular, he would support the
crafting of the following exemption:
``Works embodied in copies that have
been lawfully acquired by users or their
institutions who subsequently seek to
make noninfringing uses thereof.''
The Register has subsequently sought
and received clarification of some of the
points made in the Assistant Secretary's
letter. In particular, the Register has
asked (1) for the Assistant Secretary's
views on whether a ``class of works'' can
be defined or determined by reference to
the uses of the works in that class,
rather than by reference to attributes of
the works themselves, and (2) that the
Assistant Secretary identify any
comments or testimony in the record of
this rulemaking proceeding that he
believes presented any evidence that
technological measures that control
access to copyrighted works actually
have caused or in the next three years
will cause substantial adverse impacts
on the ability of users to make
noninfringing uses of works in the
proposed class of works that he has
endorsed.
With respect to how a ``class of
works'' is to be defined or determined,
NTIA responded by stating that fair use
has to be a part of any discussion
focusing on exemptions to the DMCA's
anticircumvention prohibition, and that
because the principle of fair use is
grounded in a factual examination of the
use to which copyrighted materials are
put, it would be reasonable to include
a similar examination in fashioning a
class of excepted works under
1201(a)(1)(C).
In response to the request to identify
comments and testimony that present
evidence of substantial adverse impacts
on the ability of users to make
noninfringing uses of ``works embodied
in copies that have been lawfully
acquired by users or their institutions
who subsequently seek to make
noninfringing uses thereof,'' NTIA cited
one comment and the testimony of
several witnesses. NTIA also questioned
whether a showing of ``substantial''
adverse impact is required, observing
that ``Nowhere in section 1201(a)(1)(C)
does the word ``substantial'' appear''
and asserting that a showing of
``reasonably anticipated impacts''
should be sufficient.
The views of the Assistant Secretary
have been seriously considered in the
preparation of these recommendations
to the Librarian. Because the exemption
endorsed by the Assistant Secretary (see
discussion above) is not supported in
this recommendation, an explanation of
the reasons is in order.
At the outset of these comments on
the Assistant Secretary's views, it
should be understood that there is no
VerDate 11<MAY>2000 17:09 Oct 26, 2000 Jkt 194001 PO 00000 Frm 00007 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27OCR3.SGM pfrm01 PsN: 27OCR3

[PAGE 8]
64562 Federal Register / Vol. 65, No. 209 / Friday, October 27, 2000 / Rules and Regulations
disagreement with the Assistant
Secretary or the Commerce Committee
on the need to preserve the principles
of fair use and other noninfringing uses
in the digital age. The Register's
disagreement with the Assistant
Secretary's proposals arises from the
interpretation of both the statutory
language of section 1201(a)(1)(C) and a
review of the record in this proceeding.
First, the Assistant Secretary's
proposals are based onÐand necessarily
require adoption ofÐan interpretation
of the statutory phrase ``particular class
of copyrighted works'' that the Register
cannot support. As stated above in
section III.A.3, a ``particular class of
copyrighted works'' must relate
primarily to attributes of the
copyrighted works themselves and not
to factors that are external to the works,
e.g., the material objects on which they
are fixed or the particular technology
employed on the works. Similarly,
neither the language of the statute nor
the legislative history provide a basis for
an interpretation of an exemption of a
class of works that is ``use-oriented.''
While the Register was required to
``examine'' the present or likely adverse
effects on uses, and in particular
noninfringing uses, that inquiry had the
express goal of designating exemptions
that were based on classes of
copyrighted works. The only examples
cited and guidance provided in the
legislative history lead the Register to
conclude that a class must be defined
primarily by reference to attributes of
the works themselves, typically based
upon the categories set forth in section
102(a) or some subset thereof, e.g.,
motion pictures or video games.
As NTIA observes, it is appropriate to
examine the impact of access control
measures on fair use in determining
what classes of works, if any, should be
subject to an exemption. But the
Assistant Secretary has not explained
how a ``class of works'' can be defined
or determined without any reference
whatsoever to attributes of the works
themselves, and solely by reference to
the status of the persons who acquire
copies of those works. While fair use is
relevant in determining what classes
should be exempted, its relevance
relates to the inquiry whether users of
a particular class of works (as defined
above, in section III.A.3.) are adversely
affected in their ability to make
noninfringing uses (such as fair use) of
works in that class.
The specific exemption endorsed by
the Assistant Secretary, and the reasons
why that exemption cannot be adopted,
are discussed below. See section III.E.9.
Those reasons will not be repeated at
length here. As already noted, the
proposal does not constitute a
``particular class of copyrighted work''
as required by the statute. Moreover, the
record does not reveal that there have
been adverse effects on noninfringing
uses that such an exemption would
remedy. Finally, this approach would,
in effect, revive a version of section
1201(a)(1) focusing on persons who
have gained initial lawful access that
was initially enacted by the House of
Representatives but ultimately rejected
by Congress.
NTIA's observation that the word
``substantial'' does not appear in section
1201(a)(1)(C) does not require the
conclusion, suggested by NTIA, that a
showing of substantial harm is not
required. As noted above (section
III.A.2) the House Manager's Report
states that the focus of this rulemaking
should be on whether the prohibition on
circumvention of technological
protection measures has had a
substantial adverse impact on the ability
of users to make non-infringing uses.
Although the Commerce Committee
Report does not use the word
substantial, its direction to make
exemptions based upon ``distinct,
verifiable, and measurable impacts, and
* * * not * * * upon de minimis
impacts' requires a similar showing.
Moreover, while NTIA asserts that an
exemption may be made based on a
finding of ``likely adverse effects'' or
``reasonably anticipated impacts,'' it
appears that a similar showing of
substantial likelihood is required with
respect to such future harm. See section
III.A.2 above. ``Likely''Ðthe term used
in section 1201 to describe the showing
of future harm that must be madeÐ
means ``probable,'' ``in all probability,''
or ``having a better chance of existing or
occurring than not.'' Black's Law
Dictionary 638 (Abridged 6th ed. 1991).
The comments and testimony
identified by NTIA in support of the
exemption are discussed below in
section III.E.9.
For the foregoing reasons, the
Assistant Secretary, in supporting this
exemption proposed by libraries and
educators, endorses an exemption that
is beyond the scope of the Librarian's
authority. While the proposed
exemption addresses important
concerns, it is a proposal that would be
more appropriately suited for legislative
action rather than for the regulatory
process set forth in section 1201(a)(1)(C)
and (D). In the absence of clarification
by Congress, a ``particular class of
works'' cannot be interpreted so
expansively.
Some of the issues raised by the
Assistant Secretary are also likely to be
addressed in a joint study by the
Assistant Secretary and the Register
pursuant to section 104 of the DMCA.
See 65 FR 35673 (June 5, 2000). It is
possible that this study will result in
legislative recommendations that might
more appropriately resolve the issues
raised by the Assistant Secretary.
C. Conclusions Regarding This
Rulemaking and Summary of
Recommendations
After reviewing all of the comments
and the testimony of the witnesses who
appeared at the hearings, the Register
concludes that a case has been made for
exemptions relating to two classes of
works:
(1) Compilations consisting of lists of
websites blocked by filtering software
applications; and
(2) Literary works, including
computer programs and databases,
protected by access control mechanisms
that fail to permit access because of
malfunction, damage or obsoleteness.
These recommendations may seem
modest in light of the sweeping
exemptions proposed by many
commenters and witnesses, but they are
based on a careful review of the record
and an application of the standards
governing this rulemaking procedure.
While many commenters and witnesses
made eloquent policy arguments in
support of exemptions for certain types
of works or certain uses of works, such
arguments in most cases are more
appropriately directed to the legislator
rather than to the regulator who is
operating under the constraints imposed
by section 1201(a)(1).
Many of the proposed classes do not
qualify for exemption because they are
not true ``classes of works'' as described
above in section III.A.3. The proposed
exemptions discussed below in section
III.E.2, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 all suffer from
that frailty to varying degrees. In many
cases, proponents attempted to define
classes of works by reference to the
intended uses to be made of the works,
or the intended user. These criteria do
not define a ``particular class of
copyrighted work.''
For almost all of the proposed classes,
the proponents failed to demonstrate
that there have been or are about to be
adverse effects on noninfringing uses
that have ``distinct, verifiable, and
measurable impacts.'' See Commerce
Comm. Report, at 37. In most cases,
those proponents who presented actual
examples or experiences with access
control measures presented, at best,
cases of ``mere inconveniences, or
individual cases, that do not rise to the
level of a substantial adverse impact.''
See House Manager's Report, at 6. As
one leading proponent of exemptions
VerDate 11<MAY>2000 17:09 Oct 26, 2000 Jkt 194001 PO 00000 Frm 00008 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27OCR3.SGM pfrm01 PsN: 27OCR3

[PAGE 9]
64563Federal Register / Vol. 65, No. 209 / Friday, October 27, 2000 / Rules and Regulations
7 One witness testified that ``there have been
times that we've had to circumvent,'' but on
examination, it appears that the example the
witness gave would not constitute circumvention of
an access control measure. See T Gasaway, 5/18/00,
pp. 49±50.
admitted, the inquiry into whether users
of copyrighted works are likely to be
adversely effected by the full
implementation of section 1201(a)(1) is
necessarily ``speculative since it entails
a prediction about the future.'' T Jaszi,
5/2/00, pp. 11±12.
It should come as no surprise that the
record supports so few exemptions. The
prohibition on circumventing access
control measures is not yet even in
effect. Witnesses who asserted the need
to circumvent access control measures
were unable to cite any actual cases in
which they or others had circumvented
access controls despite the fact that such
circumvention will not be unlawful
until October 28, 2000. T Neal, 5/4/00,
p. 103; T Cohen, 5/4/00, pp. 100±01.
7
The legislative history reveals that
Congress anticipated that exemptions
would be made only in exceptional
cases. See House Manager's Report, at 8
(it is ``not required to make a
determination under the statute with
respect to any class of copyrighted
works. In any particular 3-year period,
it may be determined that the
conditions for the exemption do not
exist. Such an outcome would reflect
that the digital information marketplace
is developing in the manner which is
most likely to occur, with the
availability of copyrighted materials for
lawful uses being enhanced, not
diminished, by the implementation of
technological measures and the
establishment of carefully targeted legal
prohibitions against acts of
circumvention.''); Commerce Comm.
Report, at 36 (``Still, the Committee is
concerned that marketplace realities
may someday dictate a different
outcome, resulting in less access * * *.
In this scenario, it could be appropriate
to modify the flat prohibition against the
circumvention of effective technological
measures that control access to
copyrighted materials * * *.''; ``a `` failsafe mechanism'' is required'; ``This
mechanism would * * * allow the
enforceability of the prohibition against
the act of circumvention to be
selectively waived, for limited time
periods, if necessary to prevent a
diminution in the availability to
individual users of a particular category
of copyrighted materials.'') (emphasis
added).
The two recommended exemptions do
constitute ``particular classes of
copyrighted works,'' and genuine harm
to the ability to engage in noninfringing
activity has been demonstrated. These
exemptions will remain in effect for
three years. In the next rulemaking, they
will be examined de novo, as will any
other proposed exemption including
exemptions that were rejected in this
proceeding. If, in the next three years,
copyright owners impose access
controls in unreasonable ways that
adversely affect the ability of users to
engage in noninfringing uses, it is likely
that the next rulemaking will result in
more substantial exemptions.
Ultimately, the task in this
rulemaking proceeding is to balance the
benefits of technological measures that
control access to copyrighted works
against the harm caused to users of
those works, and to determine, with
respect to any particular class of works,
whether an exemption is warranted
because users of that class of works have
suffered significant harm in their ability
to engage in noninfringing uses. See
House Managers Report at 7 (decision
``should give appropriate weight to the
deployment of such technologies in
evaluating whether, on balance, the
prohibition against circumvention of
technological measures has caused an
adverse impact on the specified
categories of users of any particular
class of copyrighted materials''). The
four factors specified in section
1201(a)(1)(C) reflect some of the
significant considerations that must be
balanced: Are access control measures
increasing or restricting the availability
of works to the public in general? What
impact are they having on the nonprofit
archival, preservation, and educational
activities? What impact are they having
on the ability to engage in fair use? To
what extent is circumvention of access
controls affecting the market for and
value of copyrighted works?
The information submitted in this, the
first rulemaking proceeding under
section 1201(a)(1), indicates that in most
cases thus far the use of access control
measures has sometimes enhanced the
availability of copyrighted works and
has rarely impeded the ability of users
of particular classes of works to make
noninfringing uses. With the exception
of the two classes recommended for
exemption, the balance of all relevant
considerations favors permitting the
prohibition against circumvention to go
into effect as scheduled.
Licensing
Many of the complaints aired in this
rulemaking actually related primarily to
licensing practices rather than
technological measures that control
access to works. Some witnesses
expressed concerns about overly
restrictive licenses, unwieldy licensing
terms, restrictions against use by
unauthorized users, undesirable terms
and prices, and other licensing
restrictions enforced by technological
protection measures. See, e.g., T
Gasaway, 5/18/00; T Coyle, 5/18/00; T
Weingarten, 5/19/00. One of these
witnesses admitted that ``some of the
concerns today are just pure licensing
concerns.'' T Gasaway, 5/18/00, p. 65.
It appears that in those cases, the
licensees often had the choice of
negotiating licenses for broader use, but
did not choose to do so. See T. Clark,
5/3/00, p. 99, T Neal, 5/4/00, p. 133, T
Gasaway, 5/18/00, p. 38. Commenters
and witnesses who complained about
licensing terms did not demonstrate that
negotiating less restrictive licenses that
would accommodate their needs has
been or will be prohibitively expensive
or burdensome. Nor has there been a
showing that unserved persons not
permitted to gain access under a
particular license (e.g., a member of the
public wishing to gain access to material
at a university library when the library's
license restricts access to students and
faculty) could not obtain access to the
restricted material in some other way or
place.
It is appropriate to consider harm
emanating from licensing in
determining whether users of works
have been adversely affected by the
prohibition on circumvention in their
ability to make noninfringing uses. This
triennial rulemaking is to ``monitor
developments in the marketplace for
copyrighted materials,'' Commerce
Comm. Report, at 36, and developments
in licensing practices are certainly
relevant to that inquiry. If, for example,
licensing practices with respect to
particular classes of works make it
prohibitively burdensome or expensive
for users, such as libraries and
educational institutions, to negotiate
terms that will permit the noninfringing
uses, and if the effect of such practices
is to diminish unjustifiably access for
lawful purposes, see Commerce Comm.
Report, at 36, exemptions for such
classes may be justified. If copyright
owners flatly refuse to negotiate
licensing terms that users need in order
to engage in noninfringing uses, an
exemption may be justified. But such a
case has not been made in this
proceeding.
Many commenters expressed
concerns that, in the words of one
witness, we are ``on the brink of a payper-use universe.'' T Jaszi, 5/2/00, p. 70.
The Assistant Secretary for
Communications and Information
shares that concern, observing that the
Commerce Committee Report had
warned against the development of a
VerDate 11<MAY>2000 17:09 Oct 26, 2000 Jkt 194001 PO 00000 Frm 00009 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27OCR3.SGM pfrm01 PsN: 27OCR3

[PAGE 10]
64564 Federal Register / Vol. 65, No. 209 / Friday, October 27, 2000 / Rules and Regulations
``legal framework that would inexorably
create a `pay-per-use' society.'' See
Commerce Comm. Report, at 26.
However, a ``pay-per-use'' business
model may be, in the words of the
House Manager's Report, ``usefacilitating.'' House Manager's Report, at
7. The Manager's Report refers to access
control technologies that are ``designed
to allow access during a limited time
period, such as during a period of
library borrowing'' or that allow ``a
consumer to purchase a copy of a single
article from an electronic database,
rather than having to pay more for a
subscription to a journal containing
many articles the consumer does not
want.'' Id. For example, if consumers
are given a choice between paying $100
for permanent access to a work or $2 for
each individual occasion on which they
access the work, many will probably
find it advantageous to elect the ``payper-use'' option, which may make
access to the work much more widely
available than it would be in the
absence of such an option. The
comments and testimony of
SilverPlatter Information Inc.,
demonstrate that the flexibility offered
by such ``persistent'' access controls can
actually enhance use. Of course, one can
imagine pay-per-use scenarios that are
likely to make works less widely
available as well.
The record in this proceeding does
not reveal that ``pay-per-use'' business
models have, thus far, created the
adverse impacts on the ability of users
to make noninfringing uses of
copyrighted works that would justify
any exemptions from the prohibition on
circumvention. If such adverse impacts
occur in the future, they can be
addressed in a future rulemaking
proceeding.
D. The Two Exemptions
1. Compilations Consisting of Lists of
Websites Blocked by Filtering Software
Applications
Certain software products, often
known as ``filtering software'' or
``blocking software,'' restrict users from
visiting certain internet websites. These
software products include compilations
consisting of lists of websites to which
the software will deny access. Schools,
libraries, and parents may choose to use
such software for the purpose of
preventing juveniles' access to
pornography or other explicit or
inappropriate materials on their
computers. R56. At least one court that
has addressed the use of such software
has concluded that requiring use of the
software in public libraries offends the
First Amendment. See, e.g., Mainstream
Loudoun v. Board of Trustees of the
Loudoun County Library, 24 F. Supp. 2d
552 (E.D. Va. 1998). See also Tenn. Op.
Atty. Gen. No. 00±030 (2000). On the
other hand, the Supreme Court has
suggested that availability of such
software for use by parents to prevent
their children from gaining access to
objectionable websites is a positive
development. Reno v. American Civil
Liberties Union, 521 U.S. 844, 876±77
(1997); United States v. Playboy
Entertainment Group, Inc., 120 S.Ct.
1878, 1887 (2000).
Critics charge that some filtering
programs unfairly block sites that do not
contain undesirable material and
therefore should not be filtered. One
commenter alleged that such programs
have an error rate of 76%. R56 at 6.
Another commenter described the ``long
history of errors in blocking sites,'' and
asserted that the software manufacturers
have not responded appropriately. R26.
The names of blocked websites are
compiled into lists which are protected
by copyright as compilations. Several
commenters assert that manufacturers of
filtering software encrypt the lists
naming the targeted sites and that they
are not made available to others,
including the operators of the targeted
sites themselves. R56. These
commenters assert that they have no
alternative but to decrypt the encrypted
lists in order to learn what websites are
included in those lists. Persons have
already decrypted the lists for the
purpose of commenting on or criticizing
them. R56. One commenter cites an
injunction against authors of a program
decrypting the list of blocked websites.
R26. See Microsystems Software, Inc. v.
Scandinavia Online AB, No. 00±1503
(1st Cir. Sept. 27, 2000). Such acts of
decryption would appear to violate
1201(a)(1) if it took effect without an
exemption for these activities.
This does appear to present a problem
for users who want to make
noninfringing uses of such
compilations, because reproduction or
display of the lists for the purpose of
criticizing them could constitute fair
use. The interest in accessing the lists in
order to critique them is demonstrated
by court cases, websites devoted to the
issue, and a fair number of commenters.
See generally R73 (Computer
Professionals for Social Responsibility);
R38; PH20; and PH5 (California
Association of Library Trustees and
Commissioners, reverse filtering); WS
Vaidhyanathan. There is uncontroverted
evidence in this record that the lists are
not available elsewhere. No evidence
has been presented that there is not a
problem with respect to lists of websites
blocked by filtering software, or that
permitting circumvention of
technological measures that control
access to such lists would have a
negative impact on any of the factors set
forth in section 1201(A)(1)(C). The
commenters assert that there is no other
legitimate way to obtain access to this
information. No one else on the record
has asserted otherwise.
A review of the factors listed in
1201(a)(1)(C) supports the creation of
this exemption. Although one can
speculate that the availability of
technological protection measures that
deny access to the lists of blocked
websites might be of benefit to the
proprietors of filtering software, and
might even increase the willingness of
those proprietors to make the software
available for use by the public, no
commenters or witnesses came forward
to make such an assertion. No
information was presented relating to
the use of either the filtering software or
the lists of blocked websites for
nonprofit archival, preservation and
educational purposes. Nor was any
information presented relating to
whether the circumvention of
technological measures preventing
access to the lists has had an impact on
the market for or value of filtering
software or the compilations of
objectionable websites contained
therein. However, a persuasive case was
made that the existence of access
control measures has had an adverse
effect on criticism and comment, and
most likely news reporting, and that the
prohibition on circumvention of access
control measures will have an adverse
effect.
Thus, it appears that the prohibition
on circumvention of technological
measures that control access to these
lists of blocked sites will cause an
adverse effect on noninfringing users
since persons who wish to criticize and
comment on them cannot ascertain
which sites are contained in the lists
unless they circumvent. The case has
been made for an exemption for
compilations consisting of lists of
websites blocked by filtering software
applications.
2. Literary Works, Including Computer
Programs and Databases, Protected by
Access Control Mechanisms That Fail to
Permit Access Because of Malfunction,
Damage or Obsoleteness
This designation of class of works is
intended to exempt users of software,
databases and other literary works in
digital formats who are prevented from
accessing such works because the access
control protections are not functioning
in the way that they were intended. In
the course of this rulemaking
VerDate 11<MAY>2000 17:09 Oct 26, 2000 Jkt 194001 PO 00000 Frm 00010 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27OCR3.SGM pfrm01 PsN: 27OCR3

[PAGE 11]
64565Federal Register / Vol. 65, No. 209 / Friday, October 27, 2000 / Rules and Regulations
proceeding, a number of users, and in
particular consumers of software and
users of compilations, expressed
concerns about works which they could
not access even though they were
authorized users, due to the failure of
access control mechanisms to function
properly.
Substantial evidence was presented
on this issue, in particular relating to
the use of ``dongles,'' hardware locks
attached to a computer that interact
with software programs to prevent
unauthorized access to that software.
C199. One commenter attached
numerous letters and news articles to
his submission and testimony,
documenting the experience of users
whose dongles become damaged or
malfunction. It appears that in such
instances, the vendors of the software
may be nonresponsive to requests to
replace or repair the dongle, or may
require the user to purchase either a
new dongle or an entirely new software
package, usually at a substantial cost. In
some cases, the vendors have gone out
of business, and the user has had no
recourse for repair or replacement of the
dongle.
Libraries and educational institutions
also stated that they have experienced
instances where materials they obtained
were protected by access controls that
subsequently malfunctioned, and they
could not obtain timely relief from the
copyright owner. R34, R75 (National
Library of Medicine), R111 (National
Agricultural Library). Similarly,
libraries stated that there have been
instances where material has been
protected by technological access
protections that are obsolete or are no
longer supported by the copyright
owner. Id.
No evidence has been presented to
contradict the evidence of problems
with malfunctioning, damaged or
obsolete technological measures. Nor
has evidence been presented that the
marketplace is likely to correct this
problem in the next three years.
This appears to be a genuine problem
that the market has not adequately
addressed, either because companies go
out of business or because they have
insufficient incentive to support access
controls on their products at some point
after the initial sale or license. In cases
where legitimate users are unable to
access works because of damaged,
malfunctioning or obsolete access
controls, the access controls are not
furthering the purpose of protecting the
work from unauthorized users. Rather,
they are preventing authorized users
from getting the access to which they
are entitled. This prevents them from
making the noninfringing uses they
could otherwise make. This situation is
particularly troubling in the context of
libraries and educational institutions,
who may be prevented from engaging in
noninfringing uses of archiving and
preservation of works protected by
access controls that are obsolete or
malfunctioning. In effect, it puts such
users in a position where they cannot
obtain access; nor, under 1201(a)(1),
would they be permitted to circumvent
the access controls to make noninfringing uses of the work unless they
fall within an exemption.
Not only does such a result have an
adverse impact on noninfringing uses,
but it also does not serve the interests
of copyright owners that 1201(a)(1) was
meant to protect. In almost all cases
where this exemption will apply, the
copyright owner will already have been
compensated for access to the work. It
is only when the access controls
malfunction that the exemption will
come into effect. This does not cause
significant harm to the copyright owner.
Moreover, authorized users of such
works are unlikely to circumvent the
access controls unless they have first
sought but failed to receive assistance
from the copyright owner, since
circumvention is likely to be more
difficult and time-consuming than
obtaining assistance from a copyright
owner who is responsive to the needs of
customers. Only as a fallback will most
users attempt to circumvent the access
controls themselves.
Although it might be tempting to
describe this class as ``works protected
by access control mechanisms that fail
to permit access because of malfunction,
damage or obsoleteness,'' that would not
appear to be a legitimate class under
section 1201 because it would be
defined only by reference to the
technological measures that are applied
to the works, and not by reference to
any intrinsic qualities of the works
themselves. See the discussion of
``works'' above in section III.A.3. The
evidence in this rulemaking of
malfunctioning, damaged or obsolete
technological protection measures has
related to software (dongles) and, in the
cases raised by representatives of
libraries, to compilations of literary
works and databases. Therefore, this
class of works is defined primarily in
terms of such literary works, and
secondarily by reference to the faulty
technological protection measures.
Although this exemption fits within
the parameters of the term ``class of
works'' as described by Congress, it
probably reaches the limits of those
parameters. The definition of the class
does start with a section 102 category of
worksÐliterary works. It then narrows
that definition by reference to attributes
of access controls that sometimes
protect those worksÐi.e., the failure of
those access controls to function as
intended. But in reality, this exemption
addresses a problem that could be
experienced by users in accessing all
classes of copyrighted works. This
subject matter is probably more suitable
for a legislative exemption, and the
Register recommends that Congress
consider amending section 1201 to
provide a statutory exemption for all
works, regardless of what class of work
is involved, that are protected by access
control mechanisms that fail to permit
access because of malfunction, damage
or obsoleteness. Meanwhile, because
genuine harm has been demonstrated in
this rulemaking proceeding and because
it is possible to define a class of works
that fits within the framework of section
1201(a)(1)(B), (C) and (D), the Register
recommends that the Librarian exempt
this class of works during the first three
years in which section 1201(a)(1) is in
effect. But the fact that sufficient harm
has been found to justify this exemption
for this three-year period will not
automatically justify a similar
exemption in the next triennial
rulemaking. In fact, if there were a
showing in the next rulemaking
proceeding that faulty access controls
create adverse impacts on noninfringing
uses of all categories of works, such a
showing could, parodoxically, result in
the conclusion that the problem is not
one that can be resolved pursuant to
section 1201(a)(1)(C) and (D), which
anticipates exemptions only for ``a
particular class of works.'' A legislative
resolution of this problem is preferable
to a repetition of the somewhat ill-fitting
regulatory approach adopted herein.
The class of works covers literary
worksÐand is applicable in particular
to computer programs, databases and
other compilationsÐprotected by access
controls that fail to permit access
because of damage, malfunction or
obsoleteness. The terms ``damage'' and
``malfunction'' are fairly selfexplanatory, and would apply to any
situation in which the access control
mechanism does not function in the
way in which it was intended to
function. For definition of the term
``obsolete,'' it is instructive to look to
section 108(c), which also addresses the
issue of obsoleteness. For the purposes
of section 108, ``a format shall be
considered obsolete if the machine or
device necessary to render perceptible a
work stored in that format is no longer
manufactured or is no longer reasonably
available in the commercial
marketplace.'' In the context of this
VerDate 11<MAY>2000 17:09 Oct 26, 2000 Jkt 194001 PO 00000 Frm 00011 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27OCR3.SGM pfrm01 PsN: 27OCR3

[PAGE 12]
64566 Federal Register / Vol. 65, No. 209 / Friday, October 27, 2000 / Rules and Regulations
8 One commenter suggested an exemption for
``compilations and other works that incorporate
works in the public domain, unless the compilation
or work was marked in such a way as to allow
identification of public domain elements and
separate circumvention of the technological
measures that controlled access to those elements.''
PH4 (Ginsburg). While this approach could address
some of the concerns raised by proponents, it is
unclear whether it would be technologically
feasible for copyright owners to implement.
Furthermore, as discussed below, the Register has
not yet been presented with evidence that there
have been or are likely to be adverse impacts in this
area.
rulemaking, an access control should be
considered obsolete in analogous
circumstances.
An exemption for this class, however,
would not cover several other types of
problems that commenters presented.
For example, a commenter describing
the problems experienced by users of
damaged or malfunctioning dongles
noted that similar problems occur when
dongles become lost or are stolen. C199.
That is, vendors of the software are
often reluctant to replace the dongle, or
insist that the user purchase a new
dongle at a high cost. While this may be
a problem, exempting works in this
situation could unfairly prejudice the
interests of copyright owners, who have
no way of ascertaining whether the
dongle was in fact lost or stolen, or
whether it has been passed on to
another user along with an
unauthorized copy of the software,
while the original user obtains a
replacement by claiming the original
dongle was lost. This exemption also
would not cover situations such as those
described by certain libraries, who
expressed the fear that they would be
prevented by 1201(a)(1) from
reformatting materials that are in
obsolete formats. If the materials did not
contain access control protections, but
were merely in an obsolete format,
1201(a)(1) would not be implicated. To
the extent that technological protections
prevented the library from converting
the format, those protections would
seem to be copy controls, the act of
circumvention of which is not
prohibited by section 1201.
The factors listed in 1201(a)(1)(C)
support the creation of this exemption.
In cases such as those described above,
access controls actually decrease the
availibility of works for any use, since
works that were intended to be available
become unavailable due to damage,
malfunction or obsoleteness. This
decrease in availability is felt
particularly by the library and
educational communities, who have
been prevented from making noninfringing uses, including archiving and
preservation, by malfunctioning or
obsolete access controls. Circumvention
of access controls in these instances
should not have a significant effect on
the market for or value of the works,
since copyright owners typically will
already have been compensated for the
use of the work.
E. Other Exemptions Considered, But
Not Recommended
A number of other proposed
exemptions were considered, but for the
reasons set forth below the Register does
not recommend that any of them be
adopted.
1. ``Thin Copyright'' Works
Many commenters have urged the
exemption of a class of works consisting
of what they term ``thin copyright
works.'' These are works consisting
primarily (but not entirely) of matter
unprotected by copyright, such as U.S.
government works or works whose term
of copyright protection has expired, or
works for which copyright protection is
``thin,'' such as factual works. As one
proponent, the Association of American
Universities, described the class, it
includes ``works such as scholarly
journals, databases, maps, and
newspapers [which] are primarily
valuable for the information they
contain, information that is not
protected by copyright under Section
102(b) of the Copyright Act.'' C161.
Most often this argument is made in the
context of databases that contain a
significant amount of uncopyrightable
material. These databases may
nonetheless be covered by copyright
protection by virtue of the selection,
coordination and arrangement of the
materials. They may also incorporate
copyrightable works or elements, such
as a search engine, headnotes,
explanatory texts or other contributions
that represent original, creative
authorship. While this proposal is
frequently made with reference to
databases, it is not limited to them, and
would apply to any works that contain
a mixture of copyrightable and
uncopyrightable elements.
Proponents of such an exemption
make two related arguments. First, some
commenters argue that using Section
1201(a)(1) to prohibit circumvention of
access controls on works that are
primarily factual, or in the public
domain, bootstraps protection for
material that otherwise would be
outside the scope of protection. It
would, in effect, create legal protection
for even the uncopyrightable elements
of the database, and go beyond the
scope of what Section 1201(a)(1) was
meant to cover. An exemption for these
kinds of works, proponents argue, is
necessary to preserve an essential
element of the copyright balance `` that
copyright does not protect facts, U.S.
government works, or other works in the
public domain. Without such an
exemption, users will be legally
prevented from circumventing access
controls to, and subsequently making
noninfringing uses of, material
unprotected by copyright.
A related worry of commenters is that,
in practice, section 1201(a)(1) will be
used to ``lock up'' works unprotected by
copyright. They predict that compilers
of factual databases will have an
incentive to impose a thin veneer of
copyright on a database, by adding, for
example, some graphics or an
introduction, and thus take unfair
advantage of the protection afforded by
Section 1201. In addition, they fear that
access to works such as databases,
encyclopedias, and statistical reports,
which are a mainstay of the educational
and library communities, will become
increasingly and prohibitively
expensive.
On the record developed in this
proceeding, the need for such an
exemption has not been demonstrated.
First, although proponents argue that
1201(a)(1)(A) bootstraps protection for
uncopyrightable elements in
copyrightable databases, the
copyrightable elements in databases and
compilations usually create significant
added value. Indeed, in most cases the
uncopyrightable material is available
elsewhere in ``raw'' form, but it is the
inclusion of that material in a
copyrightable database that renders it
easier to use. Search engines, headnotes,
selection, and arrangement, far from
being a thin addition to the database, are
often precisely the elements that
database users utilize, and which make
the database the preferred means to
access and use the uncopyrightable
material it contains. Because it is the
utility of those added features that most
users wish to access, it is appropriate to
protect them under Section
1201(a)(1)(A). Moreover, all
copyrightable works are likely to
contain some uncopyrightable elements,
factual or otherwise. This does not
undermine their protection under
copyright or under 1201(a)(1)(A).
8
Second, the fear that 1201(a)(1)(A)
will disadvantage users by ``locking up''
uncopyrightable material, while
understandable, does not seem to be
borne out in the record of this
proceeding. Commenters have not
provided evidence that uncopyrightable
material is becoming more expensive or
difficult to access since the enactment of
Section 1201, nor have they shown that
works of minimal copyright authorship
VerDate 11<MAY>2000 17:09 Oct 26, 2000 Jkt 194001 PO 00000 Frm 00012 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27OCR3.SGM pfrm01 PsN: 27OCR3

[PAGE 13]
64567Federal Register / Vol. 65, No. 209 / Friday, October 27, 2000 / Rules and Regulations
9 This subject has been discussed briefly above,
in reference to databases that contain
uncopyrightable material not available elsewhere.
This section, however, refers mainly to
copyrightable sole source works.
10 The DVD issue is addressed below, Section
III.E.3.
11 Nonetheless, that evidence would have to be
balanced against an author's right to grant access to
a work. By definition, any unpublished creative
work is almost certain to be available only from a
single sourceÐthe author. Historically, there has
never been a right to access an unpublished work,
and the law has guarded an author's right to control
first publication. Even when material has already
been published, there is no absolute right of access.
Even with nondigital formats, one must either
purchase a copy of the work or go to someone who
has purchased a copy (e.g., a library) in order to
obtain access to it.
are being attached to otherwise
unprotectible material to take advantage
of the 1201 prohibitions. The examples
presented in this rulemaking proceeding
of databases that mix copyrightable and
uncopyrightable elements seem to be
operating in a way that minimizes the
impact on noninfringing uses, such as
the LEXIS/NEXIS database and
databases produced by a witness in the
Washington DC hearings, SilverPlatter
Information Inc. These databases
provide business models that allow
users to pay for different levels of
access, and to choose different payment
schedules depending on the way they
would like to use the database. Finally,
although the fear that material will be
``locked up'' is most compelling with
respect to works that are the ``sole
source'' of uncopyrightable material,
most of the uncopyrightable material in
these databases can be found elsewhere,
albeit not with the access and useenhancing features provided by the
copyrightable contributions. Where
users can reasonably find these
materials in other places, their fears that
it will be ``locked up'' are unwarranted.
In applying the four factors in Section
(a)(1)(C), the impact of access control
technologies on the availability of works
in general, and their impact on the
library and educational communities in
particular, must be evaluated. In
general, it appears that the advent of
access control protections has increased
the availability of databases and
compilations. Access controls provide
an increased incentive for database
producers to create and maintain
databases. Often, the most valuable
commodity of a database producer is
access to the database itself. If a
database producer could not control
access, it would be difficult to profit
from exploitation of the database. Fewer
databases would be created, resulting in
diminished availability for use. If there
were evidence that technological access
protections made access to these works
prohibitively expensive or burdensome,
it would weigh against increased
availability. However, as discussed
above, such evidence has not been
presented in this proceeding. Nor has
there been a showing of any significant
adverse impact thus far on nonprofit
archival, preservation and educational
activities or on criticism, comment,
news reporting, teaching, scholarship or
research. There is no evidence that the
use of technological measures that
control access to ``thin copyright'' works
has made those works less accessible for
such purposes than they were prior to
the introduction of such measures.
Finally, in assessing the effect of
circumvention on the market for or
value of the works, it appears likely that
if circumvention were permitted, the
ability of database producers to protect
their investment would be seriously
undermined and the market would be
harmed.
2. Sole Source Works
A number of commenters proposed an
exemption for a class of ``sole source
works,'' that is, works that are available
from a single source, which makes the
works available only in a form protected
by access controls.
9 C162 (American
Library Association et al.); C213; C234.
Proponents fear that works will
increasingly become available only in
digital form, which will be subject to
access controls that prohibit users who
want to make noninfringing uses from
accessing the work, either because
access will be too costly or will be
refused. In such cases, where there is no
other way to get access to the work, all
noninfringing uses of the work will be
adversely impacted.
Again, it is questionable whether
proponents of an exemption have
identified a genuine ``class'' of works.
The only thing the works in this
proposed class have in common is that
each is available from a single source.
Moreover, the case has not been made
for an exemption for this proposed
class.
Commenters submitted different
examples of works that were available
only in digital form. These included a
number of databases and indexes. C162
(ALA). In addition, several commenters
noted that digital versions of works,
such as motion pictures in DVD format,
often contain material, such as
interviews, film clips or search engines,
not found in the analog versions of the
same works. C162, C234.
10
The concerns of proponents of this
type of exemption are understandable.
However, there has been no evidence
submitted in this rulemaking that access
to works available only in a secured
format is being denied or has become
prohibitively difficult. Even considering
the examples presented by various
commenters, they merely establish that
there are works that exist only in digital
form. They have not established that
access controls on those works have
adversely impacted their ability to make
noninfringing uses, or, indeed, that
access controls impede their use of
those works at all. In the case of
databases and indexes, the Register
heard no evidence that licenses to those
works were not available or were
available only on unreasonable and
burdensome terms. For example, in the
case of motion pictures on DVDs,
anyone with the proper equipment can
access (view) the work. If there were
evidence that technological access
controls were being used to lock up
material in such a way that there was
effectively no means for a user wanting
to make a noninfringing use to get
access, it could have a substantial
adverse impact on users.
11 No such
evidence has been presented in this
proceeding. If such evidence is
presented in a subsequent proceeding,
the case for an exemption may be made.
With respect to this proposed class,
little evidence has been presented
relating to any of the factors set forth in
Section 1201(a)(1)(C). However, a
review of those factors confirms that no
exemption is justified in this case. If, as
the proponents of this exemption assert,
there are works that are available only
in digital form and only with access
control protections, many if not most of
those works presumably would not have
been made available at all if access
control measures had not been
available. Indeed, it appears that many
of the ``sole source'' works identified by
the American Library Association are
works that most likely did not exist in
the predigital era. See C162, p. 24. As
with ``thin copyright'' works, no
showing has been made of an adverse
impact on the purposes set forth in
1201(a)(1)(C)(ii) and (iii).
3. Audiovisual Works on Digital
Versatile Discs (DVDs)
More comments and testimony were
submitted on the subject of motion
pictures on digital versatile discs
(DVDs) and the technological measures
employed on DVDs, primarily Content
Scrambling System (``CSS''), than on
any other subject in this rulemaking.
DVDs are digital media, similar to
compact discs but with greater capacity,
on which motion pictures and other
audiovisual and other works may be
stored. DVDs have recently become a
VerDate 11<MAY>2000 17:09 Oct 26, 2000 Jkt 194001 PO 00000 Frm 00013 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27OCR3.SGM pfrm01 PsN: 27OCR3

[PAGE 14]
64568 Federal Register / Vol. 65, No. 209 / Friday, October 27, 2000 / Rules and Regulations
12 In this discussion, the term ``use controls'' is
used as a shorthand term for technological
measures that effectively protect rights of copyright
owners under title 17 (e.g., copy controls)Ðthe
controls that are the subject of the prohibition
against certain technologies, products, services,
devices and components found in section
1201(b)(1).
13 Perhaps the best case for actual harm in this
context was made with respect to matter that is
available along with the motion picture in DVD
format but not available in videotape format, such
as outtakes, interviews with actors and directors,
additional language features, etc. See C204, p. 4.
However, this ancillary material traditionally has
not been available in copies for distribution to the
general public, and it appears that it is only with
the advent of the DVD format that motion picture
producers have been willing or able to include such
material along with copies of the motion pictures
themselves. Because of this and because motion
picture producers are generally unwilling to release
their works in DVD format unless they are protected
by access control measures, it cannot be said that
enforcing section 1201(a)(1) would, in the words of
the Commerce Committee, result ``in less access,
rather than more, to copyrighted materials that are
important to education, scholarship, and other
socially vital endeavors.'' See Commerce Comm.
Report, at 35. Thus, it appears that the availability
of access control measures has resulted in greater
availability of these materials.
14 However, CSS was already in development in
1998 when the DMCA was enacted. It cannot be
presumed that the drafters of section 1201(a) were
unaware of CSS. If CSS does involve a merger of
access controls and copy controls, it is conceivable
that the drafters of section 1201(a)(1) were aware of
that. And it is quite possible that they anticipated
that CSS would be a ``technological measure that
effectively controls access to a work.''
major medium, although not yet the
predominant medium, for the
distribution of motion pictures in the
``home video'' market. CSS is an
encryption system used on most
commercially distributed DVDs of
motion pictures. DVDs with CSS may be
viewed only on equipment licensed by
the DVD Copy Control Association
(DVD CCA). PH25. The terms of the
DVD CCA license permits licensed
devices to decrypt and playÐbut not to
copyÐthe films. For a more complete
discussion of DVDs and CSS, see
Universal City Studios, Inc. v.
Reimerdes, 111 F. Supp.2d 294
(S.D.N.Y. 2000), 55 U.S.P.Q.2d 1873
(S.D.N.Y. 2000).
Proponents of an exemption for
motion pictures on DVDs raised four
general arguments. First, they asserted
that CSS represents a merger of access
and use controls,
12 such that one of
those two control functions of the
technology cannot be circumvented
without also circumventing the other.
PH11. Since Congress prohibited only
the conduct of circumventing access
measures and declined to enact a
comparable prohibition against
circumvention of measures that protect
the rights of the copyright owner under
§ 1201(b), they argued that a merger of
controls exceeds the scope of the
congressional grant. In this view, the
merger of access and use controls would
effectively bootstrap the legal
prohibition against circumvention of
access controls to include copy controls
and thereby prevents a user from
making otherwise noninfringing uses of
lawfully acquired copies, such as
excerpting parts of the material on a
DVD for a film class, which might be a
fair use.
While this is a significant concern,
there are a number of considerations to
be balanced. From the comments and
testimony presented, it is clear that, at
present, most works available in DVD
format are also available in analog
format (VHS tape) as well. R123, T
Marks, 5/19/00, p. 301. When
distributed in analog formatsÐformats
in which distribution is likely to
continue for the foreseeable futureÐ
these works are not protected by any
technological measures controlling
access. WS Sorkin, p. 5. Therefore, any
harm caused by the existence of access
control measures used in DVDs can be
avoided by obtaining a copy of the work
in analog format. See House Manager's
Report, at 7 (``in assessing the impact of
the prohibition on the ability to make
noninfringing uses, the Secretary should
take into consideration the availability
of works in the particular class in other
formats that are not subject to
technological protections.'').
13
Thus far, no proponents of this
argument for an exemption have come
forward with evidence of any
substantial or concrete harm. Aside
from broad concerns, there have been
very few specific problems alleged. The
allegations of harm raised were
generally hypothetical in nature,
involved relatively insignificant uses, or
involved circumstances in which the
noninfringing nature of the desired use
was questionable (e.g., backup copies of
the DVD) or unclear. T Robin Gross, 5/
19/00, pp. 314±15. This failure to
demonstrate actual harm in the years
since the implementation of the CSS
measures tends to undermine the fears
of proponents of an exemption.
Similarly, in all of the comments and
testimony on this issue, no explanation
has been offered of the technological
necessity for circumventing the access
controls associated with DVDs in order
to circumvent the copy controls. If the
copy control aspects of CSS may be
circumvented without circumventing its
access controls, this is clearly not a
violation of Section 1201(a)(1)(A). There
was no showing that copy or use
controls could not be circumvented
without violating Section 1201(a)(1). In
contrast, there was specific testimony
that an analog output copy control on
DVD players, Macrovision, could be
circumvented by an individual without
circumventing the CSS protection
measures and without violating section
1201(a)(1). T Marks, 5/19/00, pp.345±
46. It would appear that circumvention
of the Macrovision control, conduct not
prohibited by any of the provisions of
section 1201, would enable many of the
noninfringing uses alleged to be
prevented. If in a subsequent
rulemaking proceeding one could show
that a particular ``copy'' or ``use'' control
could not in fact be circumvented on a
legitimately acquired copy without also
circumventing the access measure, one
might meet the required burden on this
issue.
The merger of technological measures
that protect access and copying does not
appear to have been anticipated by
Congress.
14 Congress did create a
distinction between the conduct of
circumvention of access controls and
the conduct of circumvention of use
controls by prohibiting the former while
permitting the latter, but neither the
language of section 1201 nor the
legislative history addresses the
possibility of access controls that also
restrict use. It is unclear how a court
might address this issue. It would be
helpful if Congress were to clarify its
intent, since the implementation of
merged technological measures arguably
would undermine Congress's decision
to offer disparate treatment for access
controls and use controls in section
1201.
At present, on the current record, it
would be imprudent to venture too far
on this issue in the absence of
congressional guidance. The issue of
merged access and use measures may
become a significant problem. The
Copyright Office intends to monitor this
issue during the next three years and
hopes to have the benefit of a clearer
record and guidance from Congress at
the time of the next rulemaking
proceeding.
Another argument raised in the
comments and testimony regarding
DVDs is that users of Linux and other
operating systems who own computers
with DVD drives and who purchase
legitimate copies of audiovisual works
on DVDs should be able to view these
works. Many Linux users have
complained that they are unable to view
the works on their computers because a
licensed player has not yet been
developed for the Linux OS platform.
R56, PH11, PH3. While this situation
created frustration for legitimate users,
VerDate 11<MAY>2000 17:09 Oct 26, 2000 Jkt 194001 PO 00000 Frm 00014 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27OCR3.SGM pfrm01 PsN: 27OCR3

[PAGE 15]
64569Federal Register / Vol. 65, No. 209 / Friday, October 27, 2000 / Rules and Regulations
15 Among other purposes, it prevents the
marketing of DVDs of a motion picture in a region
of the world where the motion picture has not yet
been released in theatres, or is still being exhibited
in theatres. See PH12, pp. 3±4.
the problem requires balancing of other
considerations.
The reasonable availability of
alternate operating systems (dual
bootable) or dedicated players for
televisions suggests that the problem is
one of preference and inconvenience,
and leads to the conclusion that an
exemption is not warranted. T Metalitz,
5/19/00, pp. 298±99. Moreover, with the
rapidly growing market of Linux users,
it is commercially viable to create a
player for this particular operating
system. T Metalitz, 5/19/00, pp. 297±98.
DVD CSS has expressed its willingness
to license such players, and in fact has
licensed such players. PH25. There is
evidence that Linux players are
currently being developed (Sigma
Designs and Intervideo) and should be
available in the near future. It appears
likely that the market place will soon
resolve this particular concern. PH123
(MPAA).
While it does not appear that
Congress anticipated that persons who
legitimately acquired copies of works
should be denied the ability to access
these works, there is no unqualified
right to access works on any particular
machine or device of the user's
choosing. There are also commercially
available options for owners of DVD
ROM drives and legitimate DVD discs.
Given the market alternatives, an
exemption to benefit individuals who
wish to play their DVDs on computers
using the Linux operating system does
not appear to be warranted.
It appears from the comments and
testimony presented in this proceeding
that the motion picture industry relied
on CSS in order to make motion
pictures available in digital format.
R123. An exemption for motion pictures
on DVDs would lead to a decreased
incentive to distribute these works on
this very popular new medium. It
appears that technological measures on
DVDs have increased the availability of
audiovisual works to the general public,
even though some portions of the public
have been inconvenienced.
A third argument raised relating to
DVDs was the asserted need to reverse
engineer DVDs in order to allow them
to be interoperable with other devices or
operating systems. C10, C18, C221.
While there has been limited judicial
recognition of a right to reverse engineer
for purposes of interoperability of
computer programs in the video game
industry, see Sega Enterprises, Inc. v.
Accolade, Inc., 977 F.2d 1510 (9th Cir.
1992); Sony Computer Entertainment,
Inc. v. Connectix, 203 F.3d 596 (9th Cir.
2000), this rulemaking proceeding is not
an appropriate forum in which to
extend the recognition of such a right
beyond the scope recognized thus far by
the courts or by Congress in section
1201(f). In section 1201 itself, Congress
addressed the issue of reverse
engineering with respect to computer
programs that are reverse engineered for
the purpose of interoperability under
certain circumstances to the ``extent any
such acts of identification and analysis
do not constitute infringement under
this title.'' One court has rejected the
applicability of section 1201(f) to
reverse engineering of DVDs. Universal
City Studios, Inc. v. Reimerdes, 82
F.Supp.2d 211, 217±18 (S.D.N.Y. 2000);
see also Universal City Studios, Inc. v.
Reimerdes, 111 F. Supp.2d 294
(S.D.N.Y. 2000), 55 U.S.P.Q.2d 1873
(S.D.N.Y. 2000). That decision is on
appeal. If subsequent developments in
that case or future cases lead to judicial
recognition that section 1201(f) does
apply to a case such as this, then
presumably there would be no need to
fashion an exemption pursuant to
section 1201(a)(1)(C). If, as the
Reimerdes court has held, section
1201(f) does not apply in such a
situation, an agency fashioning
exemptions pursuant to section
1201(a)(1)(C) should proceed with
caution before creating an exemption to
accommodate reverse engineering that
goes beyond the scope of a related
exemption enacted by Congress
expressly for the purpose of reverse
engineering in another subsection of the
same section of the DMCA. In any event,
a more compelling case must be made
before an exemption for reverse
engineering of DVDs could be justified
pursuant to section 1201(a)(1)(C).
The final argument in support of an
exemption for audiovisual works on
DVDs was based on the motion picture
industry's use of region coding as an
access control measure. Proponents of
an exemption argued that region coding
prevents legitimate users from playing
foreign films on DVDs which were
purchased abroad on their machines
that are encoded to play only DVDs with
region coding for the region that
includes the United States. C133, C231,
C234, R92, PH11. There was also some
showing that foreign releases of
American and foreign motion pictures
may contain content that is not available
on the American releases and that
circumvention may be necessary in
order to access this material. T Gross, 5/
19/00, p. 314.
While the use of region coding may
restrict unqualified access to all movies,
the comments and testimony presented
on this issue did not demonstrate that
this restriction rises to the level of a
substantial adverse effect. The problem
appears to be confined to a relatively
small number of users. The region
coding also seems to result in
inconvenience rather than actual or
likely harm, because there are numerous
options available to individuals seeking
access to this foreign content (PAL
converters to view foreign videotapes,
limited reset of region code option on
DVD players, or purchase of players set
to different codes). Since the region
coding of audiovisual works on DVDs
serves legitimate purposes as an access
control,
15 and since this coding
encourages the distribution and
availability of digital audiovisual works,
on balance, the benefit to the public
exceeds the de minimis harm alleged at
this time. If, at some time in the future,
material is available only in digital
format protected by region codes and
the availability of alternative players is
restricted, a more compelling case for an
exemption might be made.
Consideration of the factors
enumerated in subsection 1201(a)(1)(C)
supports the conclusion that no
exemption is warranted for this
proposed class. The release of
audiovisual works on DVDs was
predicated on the ability to limit piracy
through the use of technological access
control measures. R123. These works
are widely available in digital format
and are also readily available in analog
format. R123 and WS Sorkin, p. 5. The
digital release of motion pictures has
benefitted the public by providing better
quality and enhanced features on DVDs.
While Linux users represent a
significant and growing segment of the
population and while these users have
experienced inconveniences, the market
is likely to remedy this problem soon.
PH25. See the discussion of the Linux
players being developed by Sigma
Designs and Intervideo, above.
Moreover, there are commercially
reasonable alternatives available to
these users. R123. The restrictions on
DVDs are presently offset by the overall
benefit to the public resulting from
digital release of audiovisual works.
Therefore, at present the existence of
technological measures that control
access to motion pictures on DVDs has
not had a significant adverse impact on
the availability of those works to the
public at large.
On the question of the availability for
use of works for nonprofit archival,
preservation, and educational purposes,
there was minimal evidence presented
that these uses have been or are likely
to be adversely affected during the
VerDate 11<MAY>2000 17:09 Oct 26, 2000 Jkt 194001 PO 00000 Frm 00015 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27OCR3.SGM pfrm01 PsN: 27OCR3

[PAGE 16]
64570 Federal Register / Vol. 65, No. 209 / Friday, October 27, 2000 / Rules and Regulations
ensuing three year period. As stated
above, facts relating to the issue of the
existence of merged access and use
controls may be presented in the next
triennial rulemaking proceeding to
determine whether the prohibition on
circumvention of access controls is
being employed in such a manner that
it also restricts noninfringing uses.
The impact that the prohibition on the
circumvention of technological
measures applied to copyrighted works
has had or is likely to have on criticism,
comment news reporting, teaching,
scholarship, or research is uncertain. At
present, the concerns expressed were
speculative and the examples of the
prohibition's likely adverse effects were
minimal. At this time it appears likely
that these concerns will be tempered by
the market. If the market does not
effectively resolve problems and
sufficient evidence of substantial
adverse effects are presented in the next
triennial rulemaking proceeding, the
Register will re-assess the need for an
exemption.
At this time it appears clear from the
evidence that the circumvention of
technological protection measures
would be likely to have an adverse
effect on the availability of digital works
on DVDs to the public. The music
industry's reluctance to distribute works
on DVDs as a consequence of
circumvention of CSS is a specific
example of the potential effect on
availability: ``In fact, it was the very
hack of CSS that caused a delay in
introduction of DVD audio into the
marketplace.'' T Sherman, 5/3/2000, p.
18. Since the circumvention of
technological access control measures
will delay the availability of ``usefacilitating'' digital formats that will
benefit the public and that are proving
to be popular with the public, the
promulgation of an exemption must be
carefully considered after a balancing of
all the foregoing considerations. At
present, the evidence weighs against an
exemption for audiovisual works on
DVDs.
4. Video Games in Formats Playable
Only on Dedicated Platforms
A number of comments and one
witness at the hearings sought an
exemption for video games that are
playable only on proprietary players. T
Hangartner, 5/17/00, p. 247, R73, R109.
The arguments in support of an
exemption for video games included
three issues: reverse engineering of the
games for interoperability to other
platforms, merger of access and use
controls, and region coding of the
games.
The existence of video games playable
on dedicated platforms is not a new
phenomenon in the marketplace. The
Computer Software Rental Amendments
Act of 1990 expressly provides for
different treatment of video games sold
only for use with proprietary platforms
and those licensed for use on a
computer capable of reproduction,
recognizing the lower risk that the
former will be copied to the detriment
of the copyright owner. 17 U.S.C.
109(b)(1)(B)(ii). In the few comments
addressing the need for interoperability
of video games, there was very little
evidentiary support for this alleged
need. In fact, the testimony on behalf of
Bleem, Inc. demonstrated that in cases
involving interoperability of video
games, courts have held either that
section 1201 is inapplicable or that the
exemption in 1201(f) shields this
activity for purposes of discovering
functional elements necessary for
interoperability. T Hangartner, 5/19/00,
p. 250; T Russell, 5/19/00, p. 332. Since
the Basic Input Output System (BIOS) in
these dedicated platforms is a computer
program, section 1201(f) would appear
to address the problem. To the extent
that an identifiable problem exists that
is outside the scope of section 1201(f),
and therefore potentially within the
scope of this rulemaking, its existence
has not been sufficiently articulated to
support the recommendation for an
exemption. See also the discussion of
reverse engineering below in Section
III.E.5.
The claim that the technological
measures protecting access to video
games also restrict noninfringing uses of
the games also has not been supported
by any verifiable evidence. For example,
while the backup of such a work may
be a noninfringing use, no evidence has
been presented that access control
measures, as distinguished from copy
control measures, have caused an
inability to make a backup, and the
latter is the more likely cause. Nor has
there been any showing that any copy
or use control has been merged with an
access control, such that the former
cannot be circumvented without the
latter.
The paucity of evidence supporting
an exemption on the basis of region
coding similarly precludes a
recommendation for an exemption. The
few comments that mentioned this issue
do not rise to the level of substantial
adverse affect that would warrant an
exemption for video games.
The factors set forth in section
1201(a)(1)(C) do not support an
exemption. There is no reason to believe
that there has been any reduction in the
availability of video games for use
despite the fact that video games have
incorporated access controls and
dedicated platforms for many years. To
the extent there has been a need for
interoperability, it appears that section
1201(f) will allow functional features to
be determined as the courts have
allowed in the past. There has been
insufficient evidence presented to
indicate that video games have or will
become less available after § 1201(a)(1)
goes into effect. There was no evidence
offered that the prohibition on
circumvention will adversely effect
nonprofit archival, preservation, or
educational uses of these works. There
was also no evidence presented that the
prohibition would have an adverse
effect on criticism, comment, news
reporting, teaching, scholarship, or
research. On the other hand, there was
little evidence that circumvention
would have a negative impact on the
market for or value of these copyrighted
works, but this is of little consequence
given the de minimis showing of any
adverse impact access control measures
have had on availability of the works for
noninfringing uses.
5. Computer Programs and Other Digital
Works for Purposes of Reverse
Engineering
A number of commenters asserted
that reverse engineering is a
noninfringing use that should be
exempted for all classes of digital works.
C143, R82. As already noted, reverse
engineering was also raised as a basis
for an exemption in relation to
audiovisual works on DVDs and video
games. C221. The arguments raised in
support of a reverse engineering
exemption for such works are addressed
above. To the extent that reverse
engineering is proposed for all classes of
digital works, it does not meet the
criteria of a class. A ``class of works''
cannot be defined simply in terms of the
purpose for which circumvention is
desired. See the discussion above,
Section III.A.3.
Moreover, to the extent that
commenters seek an exemption to
permit reverse engineering of computer
programs, the case has not been made
even if it is permissible to designate a
class of ``computer programs for the
purpose of reverse engineering.'' When
it enacted section 1201, Congress carved
out a specific exemption for reverse
engineering of computer programs,
section 1201(f). That exemption permits
circumvention of an access control
measure in order to engage in reverse
engineering of a computer program with
the purpose of achieving
interoperability of an independently
created computer program with other
VerDate 11<MAY>2000 17:09 Oct 26, 2000 Jkt 194001 PO 00000 Frm 00016 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27OCR3.SGM pfrm01 PsN: 27OCR3

[PAGE 17]
64571Federal Register / Vol. 65, No. 209 / Friday, October 27, 2000 / Rules and Regulations
programs, under certain circumstances
set forth in the statute. When Congress
has specifically addressed the issue by
creating a statutory exemption for
reverse engineering in the same
legislation that established this
rulemaking process, the Librarian
should proceed cautiously before, in
effect, expanding the section 1201(f)
statutory exemption by creating a
broader exemption pursuant to section
1201(a)(1)(C).
The proponents of an exemption for
reverse engineering have expressed their
dissatisfaction with the limited
circumstances under which section
1201(f) permits reverse engineering
(C13, C30), but the case they have made
is for the legislator rather than for the
Librarian. If, in the next three years,
there is evidence that access control
measures are actually impeding
noninfringing uses of works that should
be permitted, that evidence can be
presented in the next triennial
rulemaking proceeding. Such evidence
was not presented in the current
proceeding.
To the extent that commenters have
sought an exemption to permit reverse
engineering for purposes of making
digitally formatted works other than
computer programs interoperable (i.e.,
accessible on a device other than the
device selected by the copyright owner),
it seems likely that the work will
incorporate a computer program or
reside on a medium along with a
computer program and that it will be the
computer program that must be reverse
engineered in order to make the work
interoperable. In such cases, section
1201(f) would appear to resolve the
issue. To the extent that reverse
engineering of something other than a
computer program may be necessary,
proponents of a reverse engineering
exemption would be asking the
Librarian to do what no court has ever
done: to find that reverse engineering of
something other than a computer
program constitutes fair use or some
other noninfringing use. It is
conceivable that the courts may address
that issue one day, but it is not
appropriate to address that issue of first
impression in this rulemaking
proceeding without the benefit of
judicial or statutory guidance.
The factors set forth in section
1201(a)(1)(C) have already been
discussed in the context of audiovisual
works on DVDs and video games, the
two specific classes of works for which
a reverse engineering exemption has
been sought. Those factors do not
support an exemption for reverse
engineering.
6. Encryption Research Purposes
A number of commenters urged that
a broader encryption research
exemption is needed than is contained
in section 1201(g). See, e.g., C185, C30,
R55, R70. Dissatisfaction was expressed
with the restrictiveness of the
requirement to attempt to secure the
copyright owner's permission before
circumventing. C153. See 17 U.S.C.
1201(g)(2)(C). Most of the references to
statutory deficiencies regarding
encryption research, however, merely
state that the provisions are too narrow.
See, e.g., PH20.
As with reverse engineering,
proponents of an exemption for
encryption research are asking the
Librarian to give them a broader
exemption than Congress was willing to
enact. But they have not carried their
burden of demonstrating that the
limitations of section 1201(g) have
prevented them or are likely in the next
three years to prevent them from
engaging in noninfringing uses. With
respect to encryption research, the
DMCA required the Copyright Office
and the National Telecommunications
and Information Administration of the
Department of Commerce to submit a
joint report to Congress on the effect the
exemption in section 1201(g) has had on
encryption research and the
development of encryption technology,
the adequacy and effectiveness of
technological measures designed to
protect copyrighted works; and
protection of copyright owners against
the unauthorized access to their
encrypted copyrighted works. The
Copyright Office and NTIA submitted
that report in May, 2000. Report to
Congress: Joint Study of Section 1201(g)
of The Digital Millennium Copyright
Act (posted at http://www.loc.gov/
copyright/reports/studies/
dmca_report.html and http://
www.ntia.doc.gov/reports/dmca). In that
report, NTIA and the Copyright Office
concluded that ``[o]f the 13 comments
received in response to the Copyright
Office's and NTIA's solicitation, not one
identified a current, discernable impact
on encryption research and the
development of encryption technology;
the adequacy and effectiveness of
technological protection for copyrighted
works; or protection of copyright
owners against the unauthorized access
to their encrypted copyrighted works,
engendered by Section 1201(g).'' That
conclusion is equally applicable to the
comments on encryption research
submitted in this proceeding.
Moreover, an exemption for
encryption research is not focused on a
class of works. See discussion above,
Section III.A.3.
7. ``Fair Use'' Works
A large number of commenters urged
the Register to recommend an
exemption to circumvent access control
measures for fair use purposes.
Responding to the statutory requirement
of designating a ``particular classes of
works,'' the Higher Education
Associations (the Association of
American Universities, the National
Association of State Universities and
Land Grant Colleges, and the American
Council on Education) put forth within
a broad class of ``fair use works'' the
specific classes that are most likely to be
used by libraries and educational
institutions for purposes of fair use.
PH24. The classes are scientific and
social databases, textbooks, scholarly
journals, academic monographs and
treatises, law reports and educational
audio/visual works. A witness testifying
on behalf of the Higher Education
Associations explained that these works
should be exempted where the purpose
of using the works is fair use. T
Gasaway, 5/18/00, p. 74. The Higher
Education Associations also suggested
that the exemption could be further
limited to specific classes of persons
who were likely to be fair users. PH24,
at 12.
To the extent that proponents of such
an exemption seek to limit its
applicability to certain classes of users
or uses, or to certain purposes, such
limitations are beyond the scope of this
rulemaking. It is the Librarian's task to
determine whether to exempt any
``particular class of works.'' 17 U.S.C.
1201(a)(1)(B), (C) (emphasis added). See
the discussion above, Section III.A.3.
The merits of an exemption for
scientific and social databases have
already been discussed to some extent
in the treatment of ``thin copyright''
works and sole source works. To the
extent that these works are not in these
previously addressed classes, even
though scientific and social databases
can be seen to present an appropriate
class, the case for an exemption has not
been presented. No evidence was
submitted that specific works in these
named classes have been or are likely to
be inaccessible because educational
institutions or libraries have been
prevented from circumventing them.
Although the proponents of this
exemption allege that if they are
prevented from circumventing these
particular classes of works, they and
those they represent will not be able to
exercise fair use as to this class of
works, they have not demonstrated that
VerDate 11<MAY>2000 17:09 Oct 26, 2000 Jkt 194001 PO 00000 Frm 00017 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27OCR3.SGM pfrm01 PsN: 27OCR3

[PAGE 18]
64572 Federal Register / Vol. 65, No. 209 / Friday, October 27, 2000 / Rules and Regulations
16 The National Digital Library and the Motion
Picture Broadcasting and Recorded Sound Division
of the Library of Congress addressed the class of
audiovisual works when it stated that, to carry out
their mission, they may need to circumvent access
controls to preserve these materials for the long
term. However, they did not state that they have
thus far had such a need or that they are aware of
circumstances likely to require them to engage in
such circumvention in the next three years.
17 A related issue, CD±ROMS with faulty access
controls that erroneously exclude authorized users
from access, is addressed in the second exemption
recommended by the Register.
they have been unable to engage in such
uses because of access control measures.
Many of the concerns raised by
proponents of such an exemption are
actually related to copy control
measures rather than access control
measures. See, e.g., R75 (National
Library of Medicine). If a library or
higher education institution has access
to a work, section 1201 does not prevent
the conduct of circumventing
technological measures that prevent the
copying of the work.
Although textbooks, scholarly
journals, academic monographs and
treatises, law reports and educational
audiovisual works have been mentioned
as candidates for this proposed class of
``fair use'' works, proponents have failed
to demonstrate how technological
measures that control access to such
works are preventing noninfringing uses
or will in the next three years prevent
such uses. In fact, it is not even clear
whether technological measures that
control access are actually used with
respect to some of these types of works,
e.g., textbooks. While it is easy to agree
that if access control measures were
creating serious difficulties in making
lawful uses of these works, an
exemption would be justified, the case
has not been made that this is a problem
or is about to be a problem.
Application of the factors set forth in
section 1201(a)(1)(C) to this proposed
class of works is identical to the
analysis of those factors with respect to
``thin copyright'' works discussed above
(Section III.E.1) and will not be repeated
here.
8. Material that Cannot be Archived or
Preserved
A number of library associations
expressed concern about the general
impact of the prohibition against
circumvention on the future of
archiving and preservation. See, e.g.,
C175, R75, R80, C162, p.26±29, 31±32;
R83, p. 2±4; PH18, p.5. To some extent,
these concerns may be addressed in the
second of the two recommended
exemptions, to the degree that faulty or
obsolete access control measures may be
preventing libraries and others from
gaining authorized access to works in
order to archive them. But more
generally, libraries expressed concerns
that digital works for which there are no
established non-digital alternatives may
not be archived. C162, p.26±29.
Because materials that libraries and
others desire to archive or preserve cut
across all classes of works, these works
do not constitute a particular class.
16
See the discussion above, Section
III.A.3. The Office is limited to
recommending only particular classes,
and then only when it has been
established that actual harm has
occurred, or that harm will likely occur.
Such a showing of adverse effect on all
materials that may need to be archived
or preserved has not been made.
Demonstration of the inability to archive
or preserve materials tied to a more
particular class of works would be
needed to establish an adverse effect in
this rulemaking. Application of the
relevant factors cannot take place in
gross, without reference to a specified
class of works.
Even if such materials were to
constitute a particular class, and harm
were shown, adverse causes other than
circumvention must be discounted in
balancing the relevant factors. House
Manager's Report, at 6. The libraries and
Higher Education Associations provided
examples of problems due to numerous
other factorsÐlicensing restrictions,
cost, lack of technological storage space,
and uncertainty whether publishers will
preserve their own materials. These are
adverse effects caused by something
other than the prohibition on
circumvention of access control
measures.
The Higher Education Associations
cite the frequent phenomenon of
``disappearing'' worksÐthose appearing
online or on disk today that may be
gone tomorrow, e.g., because they may
be removed from an online database or
because the library or institution has
access to them only during the term of
its license to use the work. See T
Gasaway, 5/18/00, p. 38. This
rulemaking proceeding cannot force
copyright owners to archive their own
works. Moreover, assuming that
libraries and other institutions are
unable to engage in such archiving
themselves today, they have not
explained how technological measures
that control access to those works are
preventing them from doing so. Rather,
it would appear that restrictions on
copying are more likely to be
responsible for the problem. See R75
(National Library of Medicine's inability
to preserve Online Journal of Current
Clinical Trials and videotapes,
apparently because of restrictions on
copying); C162, pp. 25±29 (American
Library Association et al.). Section 1201
does not prohibit libraries and archives
from the conduct of circumventing copy
controls. Therefore, it is difficult to
understand how an exemption from the
prohibition on circumvention of access
controls would resolve this problem.
Some commenters have also
complained that licensing terms have
required them to return CD±ROMs to
vendors in order to obtain updated
versions, thereby losing the ability to
retain the exchanged CD±ROM as an
archival copy. See, e.g., C162, p. 27. But
they have failed to explain how
technological measures that control
access to the works on the CD±ROMS
play any role in their inability to archive
something that they have returned to the
vendor.
17 In a future rulemaking
proceeding, libraries and archives may
be able to identify particular classes of
works that they are unable to archive or
preserve because of access control
measures, and thereby establish the
requisite harm.
Because this proposed exemption
does not really address a particular class
of works, application of the factors set
forth in section 1201(a)(1)(C) is difficult.
If particular classes of works were in
danger of disappearing due to access
control measures, then presumably all
of the factors (with the possible
exception of the factor relating to the
effect of circumvention on the market
for or value of the copyrighted works)
would favor such an exemption. But the
current record does not support an
exemption.
9. Works Embodied in Copies Which
Have Been Lawfully Acquired by Users
Who Subsequently Seek to Make Noninfringing Uses Thereof
An exemption for ``works embodied
in copies which have been lawfully
acquired by users who subsequently
seek to make non-infringing uses
thereof'' was put forward by Peter Jaszi,
a witness representing the Digital Future
Coalition, and was subsequently
endorsed by many members of the
academic and library communities. T
Peter Jaszi, 5/3/00; T Julie Cohen, 5/4/
00, PH22, T Diana Vogelsong, 5/3/00. In
addition, it was endorsed by the
comments of the Assistant Secretary of
Commerce for Communications and
Information. See discussion above,
Section III.B. Similar exemptions were
independently proposed by other
commenters. PH24 (AAU); PH18 (ALA),
PH21. These proposed exemptions focus
on allowing circumvention by users for
VerDate 11<MAY>2000 17:24 Oct 26, 2000 Jkt 194001 PO 00000 Frm 00018 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27OCR3.SGM pfrm01 PsN: 27OCR3

[PAGE 19]
64573Federal Register / Vol. 65, No. 209 / Friday, October 27, 2000 / Rules and Regulations
18 In fact, one of those witnesses admitted that
``the law has caused little harm yet'' and that ``my
fears are speculative and alarmist.'' T
Vaidyanathan, 5/18/00, p. 11. Another of the
witnesses admitted that librarians have not yet
experienced the ``persistent access controls'' feared
by proponents of this exemption. T Neal, 5/4/00, p.
42.
noninfringing purposes after they have
gained initial lawful access, although
the Association of American
Universities' proposal would limit the
ability to circumvent after the period of
lawful access to users possessing a
physical copy of the work.
The proponents for this exemption
fear that pay-per-use business models
(using what are sometimes called
``persistent access controls'') will be
used to lock up works, forcing payment
for each time the work is accessed. In
addition, they fear that persistent access
controls will be used to constrain the
ability of users, subsequent to initial
access, to make uses that would
otherwise be permissible, including fair
uses. Without this exemption, they
assert, the traditional balance of
copyright would be upset, tipping it
drastically in favor of the copyright
owners and making it more difficult
and/or expensive for users to engage in
uses that are permitted today.
Therefore, these commenters propose
an exemption for a class of ``works
embodied in copies which have been
lawfully acquired by users who
subsequently seek to make noninfringing uses thereof.'' In substance,
the proposal would exempt all users
who wish to make noninfringing uses,
regardless of the type of work, provided
that they either lawfully acquire a copy
or, in some versions of the proposal,
lawfully acquire access privileges. This
exemption, commenters argue, will
equitably maintain the copyright
balance. It would allow copyright
owners to control the distribution of,
and initial authorization of access to,
copies of their works, while allowing
users to circumvent those access
controls for noninfringing uses after
they have lawfully accessed or acquired
them.
However, for several reasons, the
``class'' they propose is not within the
scope of this rulemaking. First, none of
the proposals adequately define a
``class'' of the type this rulemaking
allows the Librarian to exempt. As
discussed above in Section III.A.3, ``a
particular class of work'' must be
determined primarily by reference to
qualities of the work itself. It cannot be
defined by reference to the class of users
or uses of the work, as these proposals
suggest. Second, although the
commenters have persuasively
articulated their fears about how these
business models will develop and affect
their ability to engage in noninfringing
uses, they have not made the case that
these fears are now being realized, or
that they are likely be realized in the
next three years.
The Assistant Secretary for
Communications and Information has
endorsed this proposed exemption. In
support of this proposal, NTIA made
only general references to one comment,
RC113, and to the testimony of Julie
Cohen, Siva Vaidyanathan, Sarah Wiant,
James Neal, Frederick Weingarten, and
the Consortiums of College and
University Media Centers (CCUMC).
NTIA did not specifically identify what
evidence these witnesses and
commenters had provided, apart from
noting that they provided ``numerous
examples regarding the manner in
which persistent access controls restrict
the flow of information'' and testimony
about ``impediments to archiving and
preservation of digital works, teaching,
and digital divide concerns.'' The latter
concern is addressed in Section III.E.8.
The one comment cited by NTIA
related to medical records that are
stored in proprietary formats. RC113. It
does not appear from that single
commentÐthe only comment or
testimony submitted on the issueÐthat
the problem identified by the
commenter related to technological
measures that control access to
copyrighted works. The commenter
raised legitimate concerns about
difficulties in converting data from one
format to another. One can speculate
that in the future, access control
measures might be applied to medical
data and prevent health care workers
from obtaining needed access, but the
commenter did not make the case that
this is happening or is likely to happen
in the next three years.
The testimony cited by NTIA relating
to access controls that restrict the flow
of information raised many fears and
concerns but minimal distinct,
verifiable, or measurable impacts. Of
course, it is a tautology that any
measure that controls access to a work
will, by definition, at least to some
degree restrict the flow of the
information in the work. But although
many of the witnesses complained
about ``persistent access controls,'' they
did not present specific examples of any
evidence of present or likely nontrivial
adverse effects causally related to such
controls.
18 The testimony relating to
noninfringing uses that could be
adversely affected has not been
specifically shown to be caused by
access controls as opposed to other
technological or licensing measures.
There appears to be no support in the
record for a finding that the cited
testimony rises to the level of distinct,
verifiable and measurable impacts
justifying an exemption at this time.
Finally, the proposed exemption
parallels elements of an approach that
was considered, and ultimately rejected,
by Congress during the drafting of the
law. The version of the DMCA that was
passed by the House of Representatives
on August 4, 1998, contained a
provision that required a rulemaking
proceeding that would determine
classes of works for which, inter alia,
users ``who have gained lawful initial
access to a copyrighted work'' would be
adversely affected in their ability to
make noninfringing uses. HR 2281 EH,
Section 1201(a)(1)(B):
The prohibition contained in subparagraph
(A) shall not apply to persons with respect
to a copyrighted work which is in a
particular class of works and to which such
persons have gained initial lawful access, if
such persons are, or are likely to be in the
succeeding 3-year period, adversely affected
by virtue of such prohibition in their ability
to make noninfringing uses of that particular
class of works under this title, as determined
under subparagraph (C).''
See also section 1201(a)(1)(D).
Thus, when it first passed the DMCA
the House of Representatives appears to
have agreed with much of the approach
taken by the proponents of this
exemption. But the fact that Congress
ultimately rejected this approach when
it enacted the DMCA and, instead,
deleted the provision that had limited
the applicability of the exemptions to
persons who have gained initial lawful
access, is clear indication that the
Librarian does not have the power to
fashion a class of works based upon
such a limitation. Such an exemption is
more properly a subject of legislation,
rather than of a rulemaking the object of
which is to determine what classes of
works are to be exempted from the
prohibition on circumvention of access
controls.
10. Exemption for Public Broadcasting
Entities
The Public Broadcasting Service,
National Public Radio, and the
Association of America's Public
Television Stations described the public
broadcasting entities' need to use sound
recordings, published musical works
and published pictorial, graphic and
sculptural works in accordance with
exemptions and statutory licenses under
section 114(b) and 118(d) of the
Copyright Act. R106. They observe that
if copyright owners encrypted these
classes of works, they would not be able
VerDate 11<MAY>2000 17:09 Oct 26, 2000 Jkt 194001 PO 00000 Frm 00019 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27OCR3.SGM pfrm01 PsN: 27OCR3

[PAGE 20]
64574 Federal Register / Vol. 65, No. 209 / Friday, October 27, 2000 / Rules and Regulations
to make noninfringing uses of them
pursuant to the statute. But their
submission addressed potential adverse
effects of the prohibition on
circumvention, not current or even
likely adverse effects. There has been no
allegation that public broadcasters have
encountered or are about to encounter
technological protection measures that
prevent them from exercising their
rights pursuant to sections 114 and 118.
If public broadcasting entities were
able to demonstrate such adverse
impact, a strong case might be made for
an exemption for sound recordings,
published musical works and published
pictorial, graphic and sculptural works.
In part for that very reason, public
broadcasters may not experience serious
adverse impacts on their ability to use
such works pursuant to the compulsory
licenses, because copyright owners will
have every incentive to facilitate those
permitted uses. Indeed, the public
broadcasters stated that they ``believe
that the developing methods of
technological protection will be
deployed ``to support new ways of
disseminating copyrighted materials to
users, and to safeguard the availability
of ``works to the public.'' Id.
In any event, there is no need at
present for an exemption to
accommodate the needs of public
broadcasters.
IV. Conclusion
Pursuant to the mandate of 17 U.S.C.
1201 (b) and having considered the
evidence in the record, the contentions
of the parties, and the statutory
objectives, the Register of Copyrights
recommends that the Librarian of
Congress publish two classes of
copyrighted works where the Register
has found that noninfringing uses by
users of such copyrighted works are, or
are likely to be, adversely affected, and
the prohibition found in 17 U.S.C. 1201
(a) should not apply to such users with
respect to such class of work for the
ensuing 3-year period. The classes of
work so identified are:
1. Compilations consisting of lists of
websites blocked by filtering software
applications; and
2. Literary works, including computer
programs and databases, protected by access
control mechanisms that fail to permit access
because of malfunction, damage or
obsoleteness.
The Register notes that any exemption
of classes of copyrighted works
published by the Librarian will be
effective only until October 28, 2003.
Before that period expires, the Register
will initiate a new rulemaking to
consider de novo what classes of
copyrighted works, if any, should be
exempt from § 1201(a)(1)(A)
commencing October 28, 2003.
Marybeth Peters,
Register of Copyrights.
Determination of the Librarian of
Congress
Having duly considered and accepted
the recommendation of the Register of
Copyrights concerning what classes of
copyrighted works should be exempt
from 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(A), the
Librarian of Congress is exercising his
authority under 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C)
and (D) and is publishing as a new rule
the two classes of copyrighted works
that shall be subject to the exemption
found in 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(B) from
the prohibition against circumvention of
technological measures that effectively
control access to copyrighted works set
forth in 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(A) for the
period from October 28, 2000 to October
28, 2003. The classes are:
1. Compilations consisting of lists of
websites blocked by filtering software
applications; and
2. Literary works, including computer
programs and databases, protected by access
control mechanisms that fail to permit access
because of malfunction, damage or
obsoleteness.
List of Subjects in 37 CFR Part 201
Copyright, Exemptions to prohibition
against circumvention.
For the reasons set forth in the
preamble, the Library amends 37 CFR
part 201 as follows:
PART 201ÐGENERAL PROVISIONS
1. The authority citation for part 201
continues to read as follows:
Authority: 17 U.S.C. 702.
2. A new § 201.40 is added to read as
follows:
§ 201.40 Exemption to prohibition against
circumvention.
(a) General. This section prescribes
the classes of copyrighted works for
which the Librarian of Congress has
determined, pursuant to 17 U.S.C.
1201(a)(1)(C) and (D), that noninfringing
uses by persons who are users of such
works are, or are likely to be, adversely
affected. The prohibition against
circumvention of technological
measures that control access to
copyrighted works set forth in 17 U.S.C.
1201(a)(1)(A) shall not apply to such
users of the prescribed classes of
copyrighted works.
(b) Classes of copyrighted works.
Pursuant to the authority set forth in 17
U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C) and (D), and upon
the recommendation of the Register of
copyrights, the Librarian has
determined that two classes of
copyrighted works shall be subject to
the exemption found in 17 U.S.C.
1201(a)(1)(B) from the prohibition
against circumvention of technological
measures that effectively control access
to copyrighted works set forth in 17
U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)A) for the period from
October 28, 2000 to October 28, 2003.
The exempted classes of works are:
(1) Compilations consisting of lists of
websites blocked by filtering software
applications; and
(2) Literary works, including
computer programs and databases,
protected by access control mechanisms
that fail to permit access because of
malfunction, damage or obsoleteness.
Dated: October 23, 2000.
James H. Billington,
The Librarian of Congress
[FR Doc. 00±27714 Filed 10±26±00; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 1410±30±P
VerDate 11<MAY>2000 17:30 Oct 26, 2000 Jkt 194001 PO 00000 Frm 00020 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27OCR3.SGM pfrm01 PsN: 27OCR3