[PAGE 1]
To: James H. Billington date:  October 27, 2003 
Librarian of Congress 
from: Marybeth Peters 
Register of Copyrights 
subject:	 Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights in RM 2002-4; 
Rulemaking on Exemptions from Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright 
Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies 
I am pleased to present my recommendation relating to the rulemaking on exemptions from 
the prohibition on circumvention of technological measures that control access to copyrighted 
works. 	This document constitutes my formal recommendation, as required pursuant to 17 U.S.C. 
§1201(a)(1(C), and elaborates upon the oral recommendations that I have presented during our 
discussions in recent weeks. 
Outline of the Recommendation 
I.	 Background 
A.	 Legislative Requirements for Rulemaking Proceeding 
B. 	 Responsibilities of Register of Copyrights and Librarian of Congress 
C. 	 The Purpose and Focus of the Rulemaking 
1. Purpose of the Rulemaking 
2. The Necessary Showing 
3. Determination of “Class of Works” 
D. Consultation with the Assistant Secretary for Communications and Information 
II. 	 Solicitation of Public Comments and Hearings 
III.	 Discussion 
A.	 The Four Exempted Classes 
1. Compilations consisting of lists of Internet locations blocked by 
commercially marketed filtering software applications that are 
intended to prevent access to domains, websites or portions of 
websites, but not including lists of Internet locations blocked by 
software applications that operate exclusively to protect against 
damage to a computer or computer network or lists of Internet 
locations blocked by software applications that operate exclusively to 
prevent receipt of email 

[PAGE 2]
 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003	 Page 2 
2.	 Computer programs protected by dongles that prevent access due to 
malfunction or damage and which are obsolete. 
3.	 Computer programs and video games distributed in formats that have become 
obsolete and which require the original media or hardware as a 
condition of access. A format shall be considered obsolete if the 
machine or system necessary to render perceptible a work stored in 
that format is no longer manufactured or is no longer reasonably 
available in the commercial marketplace. 
4.	  Literary works distributed in ebook format when all existing ebook editions 
of the work (including digital text editions made available by 
authorized entities) contain access controls that prevent the enabling of 
the ebook's read-aloud function and that prevent the enabling of screen 
readers to render the text into a specialized format. 
B. Other Exemptions Considered, But Not Recommended 
1.	 Proposed class: All works should be exempt for noninfringing uses, e.g., fair 
use and private uses, and other use-based proposals. 
2.	 Proposed classes: Several, including “Per se Educational Fair Use Works” and 
“Fair Use Works.” 
3.	 Proposed classes: (1) Musical recordings and audiovisual works protected by 
access control mechanisms whose circumvention is reasonably 
necessary to carry out a legitimate research project where the granted 
exemption applies only to acts of circumvention whose primary 
purpose is to further a legitimate research project; and (2) Musical 
recordings and audiovisual works protected by access control 
mechanisms whose circumvention is reasonably necessary to carry out 
a legitimate research project. 
4.	 Proposed class: Any work to which the user had lawful initial access (and 
variations). 
5.	 Proposed class: Copies of audiovisual works, including motion pictures, and 
phonorecords of musical sound recordings that have been previously 
licensed for reproduction but can no longer be reproduced for private 
performance after the lawful conditions for prior reproduction have 
been met. 
6. Proposed class: “Thin copyright” works. 
7.	 Proposed class: Public domain works or works distributed without 
restriction. 
8.	 Proposed class: Musical works, sound recordings, and audiovisual works 
embodied in media that are or may become inaccessible by possessors 
of lawfully-made copies due to malfunction, damage, or obsoleteness. 
9. Proposed class: Audiovisual works released on DVD that contain access 

[PAGE 3]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003	 Page 3 
control measures that interfere with the ability to defeat technology 
that prevents users from skipping promotional materials. 
10.	 Proposed class: Ancillary audiovisual works distributed on DVDs encrypted 
by CSS. 
11.	 Proposed class: Audiovisual works stored on DVDs that are not available in 
Region 1 DVD format and access to which is prevented by 
technological measures. 
12.	 Proposed class: Video games stored on DVDs that are not available in Region 
1 DVD format and access to which is prevented by technological 
measures. 
13. Proposed class: Audiovisual works embodied in DVDs encrypted by CSS. 
14. Proposed class: Software designed for use on dedicated video game players. 
15.	 Proposed class: Literary works (including ebooks), sound recordings, and 
audiovisual works protected by access controls that prevent post-sale 
uses of works; “tethered” works. 
16.	 Proposed class: Audiovisual works, including motion pictures, the DVD 
copies of which are tethered to operating systems that prevent 
rendering on alternative operating systems 
17.	 Proposed class: Sound recordings, audiovisual works and literary works 
(including computer programs) protected by access control 
mechanisms that require assent to End-User License Agreements as a 
condition of gaining access. 
18.	 Proposed class: Published sound recordings of musical works on compact 
discs that use technological measures that prevent access on certain 
playback devices. 
19.	 Proposed class: Sound recordings on copy-protected Red Book Audio format 
compact discs. 
20. Proposed exemption: Broadcast news monitoring. 
21.	 Proposed exemption: Reverse engineering for interoperability and the Static 
Control proposals. 
22.	 Proposed exemption:  Computer issues: encryption research, data file formats, 
recovery of passwords, personally identifying material. 
23. Proposed exemption: Conversion of data file formats and source code 
24. Proposed exemption: Privacy and personally identifying information 
25.	 Other comments beyond the scope of the rulemaking: Webcasting, 
Limitations of Liability for Online Service Providers and the 
Antitrafficking provisions of the DMCA 
IV. Proposed Regulatory Text 

[PAGE 4]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 4 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
I. Background 
A. Legislative Requirements for Rulemaking Proceeding 
The Digital Millennium Copyright Act (“DMCA”'), Pub. L. 105-304 (1998), was enacted  to 
comply with the WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT) and WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty 
(WPPT).  It established “a wide range of rules that will govern not only copyright owners in the 
marketplace for electronic commerce, but also consumers, manufacturers, distributors, libraries, 
educators, and on-line service providers” and “define[d] whether consumers and businesses may 
engage in certain conduct, or use certain devices, in the course of transacting electronic commerce.”1 
Title I of the Act, which added a new Chapter 12 to Title 17 U.S.C., prohibits circumvention 
of technological measures employed by or on behalf of copyright owners to protect their works 
(hereinafter “access controls”) . Specifically, §1201(a)(1)(A)2 provides, in part, that “No person shall 
circumvent a technological measure that effectively controls access to a work protected under this 
title.” In order to ensure that the public will have continued ability to engage in noninfringing uses 
of copyrighted works, such as fair use,3 subparagraph (B) limits this prohibition. It provides that the 
prohibition against circumvention “shall not apply to persons who are users of a copyrighted work 
which is in a particular class of works, if such persons are, or are likely to be in the succeeding 
three-year period, adversely affected by virtue of such prohibition in their ability to make 
1  Report of the House Committee on Commerce on the Digital Millennium Copyright 
Act of 1998, H.R. Rep. No. 105-551, pt. 2, at 22 (1998) (hereinafter “Commerce Comm. 
Report”). 
2  All statutory references hereinafter are to sections of Title 17, United States Code. 
3  See id. at 36. 

[PAGE 5]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 5 
noninfringing uses of that particular class of works under this title” as determined in a rulemaking 
proceeding. The rulemaking proceeding is conducted by the Register of Copyrights, who is to 
provide notice of the rulemaking, seek comments from the public, consult with the Assistant 
Secretary for Communications and Information of the Department of Commerce, and recommend 
final regulations to the Librarian of Congress.4  The regulations, to be issued by the Librarian of 
Congress, announce “any class of copyrighted works for which the Librarian has determined, 
pursuant to the rulemaking conducted under subparagraph (C), that noninfringing uses by persons 
who are users of a copyrighted work are, or are likely to be, adversely affected, and the prohibition 
contained in subparagraph (A) shall not apply to such users with respect to such class of works for 
the ensuing 3-year period.”5 
The first §1201 rulemaking took place three years ago, and on October 27, 2000, the 
Librarian announced noninfringing users of two classes of works would not be subject to the 
prohibition on circumvention of access controls.6  The regulations announced by the Librarian were 
effective for the period commencing October 28, 2000.  Exemptions to the prohibition on 
circumvention remain in force for a three-year period and expire at the end of that period.  The 
Librarian is required to make a determination on potential new exemptions every three years. 
4  Report of the Committee of Conference on the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, 
H.R. Rep. No. 105-796, at 64 (1998) (hereinafter “Conference Report”). 
5  §1201(a)(1)(D). 
6 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for
Access Control Technologies, 65 FR 64556 (Oct. 27, 2000); 
http://www.copyright.gov/fedreg/2000/65fr64555.pdf.The Federal Register notice contained the 
recommendation of the Register of Copyrights and the determination of the Librarian. 

[PAGE 6]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 6 
B. Responsibilities of Register of Copyrights and Librarian of Congress 
As noted above, the prohibition against circumvention is subject to triennial review by 
Register of Copyrights and the Librarian of Congress in order to permit a determination whether 
users of particular classes of copyrighted works are, or in the next three years are likely to be, 
adversely affected by the prohibition in their ability to make noninfringing uses of copyrighted 
works. The primary responsibility of the Register and the Librarian in this rulemaking proceeding is 
to assess whether the implementation of access control measures is diminishing the ability of 
individuals to use copyrighted works in ways that are otherwise lawful.7 As examples of 
technological protection measures in effect today, the Commerce Committee offered the use of 
``password codes'' to control authorized access to computer programs and encryption or scrambling 
of cable programming, videocassettes, and CD-ROMs.8 Congress intended that the Register solicit 
input that would enable consideration of a broad range of current or likely future adverse impacts. 
The nature of the inquiry for the rulemaking process as a whole is delineated in the statutory areas to 
be examined, as set forth in section 1201(a)(1)(C): (i) The availability for use of copyrighted works; 
(ii) The availability for use of works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational purposes; 
(iii) The impact that the prohibition on the circumvention of technological measures applied to 
copyrighted works has on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research; 
(iv) The effect of circumvention of technological measures on the market for or value of copyrighted 
works; and (v) Such other factors as the Librarian considers appropriate. These factors to be 
considered in the rulemaking process require the Register to carefully balance the availability of 
works for use, the effect of the prohibition on particular uses and the effect of circumvention on 
copyrighted works. 
7 Commerce Comm. Report, at 37. 
8 Id. 

[PAGE 7]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 7 
C. The Purpose and Focus of the Rulemaking 
1. Purpose of the Rulemaking 
As originally drafted, §1201(a)(1) consisted of only one sentence--what is now the first 
sentence of §1201(a)(1): “No person shall circumvent a technological measure that effectively 
controls access to a work protected under this title.”9 Section 1201(a)(2), like the provision finally 
enacted, prohibited the manufacture, importation, offering to the public, providing or otherwise 
trafficking in any technology, product, service, device, or component to circumvent access control 
measures. Section 1201(a) thus addressed “access control” measures, prohibiting both the conduct of 
circumventing those measures and devices that circumvent them. Thus, §1201(a) prohibits both the 
conduct of circumventing access control measures and trafficking in products, services and devices 
that circumvent access control measures. In addition to §1201(a)(1)'s prohibition on circumvention 
of access control measures, §1201 also addressed circumvention of a different type of technological 
measure. Section 1201(b) prohibits the manufacture, importation, offering to the public, providing or 
otherwise trafficking in any technology, product, service, device, or component to circumvent 
protection afforded by a technological measure that effectively protects a right of a copyright owner 
under title 17 in a copyrighted work. The type of technological measure addressed in §1201(b) 
includes copy-control measures and other measures that control uses of works that would infringe 
the exclusive rights of the copyright owner. They will frequently be referred to herein as copy 
controls. But unlike §1201(a), which prohibits both the conduct of circumvention and devices that 
circumvent, §1201(b) does not prohibit the conduct of circumventing copy control measures. The 
prohibition in §1201(b) extends only to devices that circumvent copy control measures. The decision 
not to prohibit the conduct of circumventing copy controls was made, in part, because it would 
penalize some noninfringing conduct such as fair use. In the House of Representatives, the DMCA 
was sequentially referred to the Committee on Commerce after it was reported out of the Judiciary 
Committee. The Commerce Committee was concerned that section 1201, in its original form, might 
9  See S. Rep. No. 105-190 (1998), and H.R. Rep. No. 105-551, pt. I (1998). 

[PAGE 8]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 8 
undermine Congress' commitment to fair use.10 While acknowledging that the growth and 
development of the Internet has had a significant positive impact on the access of students, 
researchers, consumers, and the public at large to information and that a “plethora of information, 
most of it embodied in materials subject to copyright protection, is available to individuals, often for 
free, that just a few years ago could have been located and acquired only through the expenditure of 
considerable time, resources, and money,”'11 the Committee was concerned that “marketplace 
realities may someday dictate a different outcome, resulting in less access, rather than more, to 
copyrighted materials that are important to education, scholarship, and other socially vital 
endeavors.”12 Possible measures that might lead to such an outcome included the elimination of print 
or other hard-copy versions, permanent encryption of all electronic copies and adoption of business 
models that restrict distribution and availability of works. The Committee concluded that “[i]n this 
scenario, it could be appropriate to modify the flat prohibition against the circumvention of effective 
technological measures that control access to copyrighted materials, in order to ensure that access 
for lawful purposes is not unjustifiably diminished.”13 In order to address such possible 
developments, the Commerce Committee proposed a modification of § 1201 which it characterized 
as a “‘fail-safe’ mechanism.”14 In the words of the Committee Report, “This mechanism would 
monitor developments in the marketplace for copyrighted materials, and allow the enforceability of 
the prohibition against the act of circumvention to be selectively waived, for limited time periods, if 
necessary to prevent a diminution in the availability to individual users of a particular category of 
copyrighted materials.”15 The “fail-safe” mechanism is this rulemaking. In its final form as enacted 
10 Commerce Comm. Report at 35.
11 Id.
12 Id. at 36. 
13 Id. 
14 Id. 
15 Id. 

[PAGE 9]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 9 
by Congress, slightly modified from the mechanism that appeared in the version of the DMCA 
reported out of the Commerce Committee, the Register is to conduct a rulemaking proceeding and, 
after consulting with the Assistant Secretary for Communications and Information of the Department 
of Commerce, recommend to the Librarian whether he should conclude “that persons who are users 
of a copyrighted work are, or are likely to be in the succeeding 3-year period, adversely affected by 
the prohibition under [§ 1201(a)(1)(A)] in their ability to make noninfringing uses under [Title 17] 
of a particular class of copyrighted works.”16 “The Librarian shall publish any class of copyrighted 
works for which the Librarian has determined, pursuant to the rulemaking conducted under 
subparagraph (C), that noninfringing uses by persons who are users of a copyrighted work are, or are 
likely to be, adversely affected, and the prohibition contained in subparagraph (A) shall not apply to 
such users with respect to such class of works for the ensuing 3-year period.”17 The Commerce 
Committee offered additional guidance as to the task of the Register and the Librarian in this 
rulemaking. “The goal of the proceeding is to assess whether the implementation of technological 
protection measures that effectively control access to copyrighted works is adversely affecting the 
ability of individual users to make lawful uses of copyrighted works .... The primary goal of the 
rulemaking proceeding is to assess whether the prevalence of these technological protections, with 
respect to particular categories of copyrighted materials, is diminishing the ability of individuals to 
use these works in ways that are otherwise lawful.”18 Thus, the task of this rulemaking appears to be 
to determine whether the availability and use of access control measures has already diminished or is 
about to diminish the ability of the public to engage in the lawful uses of copyrighted works that the 
public had traditionally been able to make prior to the enactment of the DMCA. As the Commerce 
16  17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C). 
17 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C). 
18 Commerce Comm. Report, at 37. Accord: Staff of House Committee on the Judiciary, 
105th Cong., Section-By-Section Analysis of H.R. 2281 as Passed by the United States House of 
Representatives on August 4, 1998, (hereinafter House Manager's Report) (Rep. Coble)(Comm. 
Print 1998), at 6. 

[PAGE 10]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 10 
Committee Report stated, in examining the factors set forth in section 1201(a)(1)(C), the focus must 
be on “whether the implementation of technological protection measures (such as encryption or 
scrambling) has caused adverse impact on the ability of users to make lawful uses.”19 
2. The Necessary Showing 
The language of section 1201(a)(1) does not offer much guidance as to the respective 
burdens of proponents and opponents of any classes of works to be exempted from the prohibition 
on circumvention. The Commerce Comm. Report stated that “[t]he regulatory prohibition is 
presumed to apply to any and all kinds of works, including those as to which a waiver of 
applicability was previously in effect, unless, and until, the Secretary makes a new determination 
that the adverse impact criteria have been met with respect to a particular class and therefore issues a 
new waiver.”20 
After reviewing the record and the legislative history of the section, the Register 
concluded that the burden of proof for proposed exemption was on the proponents of the 
exemption.21 In order to make a prima facie case for an exemption, proponents must show by a 
preponderance of the evidence that there has been or is likely to be a substantial adverse effect on 
noninfringing uses by users of copyrighted works.22 As the Copyright Office’s notice of inquiry 
19 Id. at 2. 
20 Commerce Comm. Report, at 37. The Commerce Committee proposal would have 
placed responsibility for the rulemaking in the hands of the Secretary of Commerce. As finally 
enacted, the DMCA shifted that responsibility to the Librarian, upon the recommendation of the 
Register. 
21 65 FR at 64558-64559. 
22 For additional discussion of the use and meaning of the term “substantial,” see the 
discussion below (section I.D.) of the Register’s consultation with the Assistant Secretary for 
Communications and Information of the Department of Commerce. 

[PAGE 11]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 11 
explained, de minimis problems, isolated harm or mere inconveniences would not suffice to provide 
the necessary showing.23 Similarly, for proof of “likely” adverse effects on noninfringing uses, the 
Register found that a proponent must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the harm 
alleged is more likely than not; a proponent may not rely on speculation alone to sustain a prima 
facie case of likely adverse effects on noninfringing uses.24 The Register also emphasized the 
requirement of showing a causal nexus between the prohibition on circumvention and the alleged 
harm.25 Adverse impacts that are the result of factors other than the prohibition are not within the 
scope of this rulemaking. 
The Register also makes it clear within this recommendation that the proposed exemptions 
are reviewed de novo. The existence of a previous exemption creates no presumption for 
consideration of a new exemption, but rather the proponent of such an exemption must make a prima 
facie case in each three-year period. 
3. Determination of “Class of Works” 
A major focus of the previous (and first) rulemaking proceeding was how a ``class'' of works 
is to be defined. The Register determined that the statutory language requires that the Librarian 
identify a “class of works” based upon attributes of the works themselves, and not by reference to 
some external criteria such as the intended use or users of the works. The Register also found that 
the legislative history appears to leave no other alternative than to interpret the statute as requiring a 
“class” to be defined primarily, if not exclusively, by reference to attributes of the works themselves. 
The Commerce Committee Report addressed the issue of determining a class of works: 
23 67 FR 63578, 63579-63580 (October 15, 2002).
24 Id.
25 65 FR at 64559.


[PAGE 12]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 12 
The issue of defining the scope or boundaries of a “particular class” of
copyrighted works as to which the implementation of technological
protection measures has been shown to have had an adverse impact is
an important one to be determined during the rulemaking proceedings.
In assessing whether users of copyrighted works have been, or are
likely to be adversely affected, the Secretary shall assess users' ability
to make lawful uses of works “within each particular class of
copyrighted works specified in the rulemaking.” The Committee
intends that the “particular class of copyrighted works” be a narrow
and focused subset of the broad categories of works of authorship than
[sic] is identified in section 102 of the Copyright Act (17 U.S.C.
102).26 
Because the term ``category'' of works has a well-understood meaning in the copyright law, 
referring to the categories set forth in section 102, the Register concluded that the starting point for 
any definition of a “particular class” of works in this rulemaking must be one of the section 102 
categories. The illustrative list of categories appearing in section 102 of Title 17 is only a starting 
point for this decision and a “class” will generally constitute some subset of a section 102 category. 
Crafting the appropriate scope of a “class” is one of the major functions of the rulemaking 
proceeding. The scope of any class will necessarily be determined by the evidence of the present or 
likely adverse effects on noninfringing uses. The determination of the appropriate scope of a “class 
of works” recommended for exemption will also take into account the adverse effects an exemption 
may have on the market for or value of copyrighted works.  While starting with a section 102 
category of works, or a subcategory thereof, the description of a “particular class” of works 
ordinarily should be further refined by reference to other factors that assist in ensuring that the scope 
of the class addresses the scope of the harm to noninfringing uses.  For example, the class might be 
defined in part by reference to the medium on which the works are distributed, or even to the access 
control measures applied to them. But classifying a work solely by reference to the medium on 
which the work appears, or the access control measures applied to the work, would be beyond the 
26 Commerce Comm. Report, at 38 

[PAGE 13]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 13 
scope of what “particular class of work” is intended to be. And it is not permissible to classify a 
work by reference to the type of user or use (e.g., libraries, or scholarly research).27 
D. Consultation with the Assistant Secretary for Communications and Information 
Section 1201(a)(1)(C) requires the Register of Copyrights to consult with the Assistant 
Secretary for Communications and Information of the Department of Commerce and report and 
comment on the Assistant Secretary’s views in the making of the recommendation to the Librarian 
of Congress. 
The Register of Copyrights met with Assistant Secretary Nancy Victory at the Department of 
Commerce in November, 2002 to discuss the rulemaking proceeding initiated by the Copyright 
Office. The Assistant Secretary, who is also the Administrator of the National Telecommunications 
and Information Administration (NTIA), was briefed on the rulemaking process established by the 
Register and was invited to provide input as early as possible so that such information could be fully 
considered by the Register in the course of this rulemaking proceeding. 
After this initial meeting, the Assistant Secretary and her staff were notified about 
developments in the rulemaking, such as the posting of comments and reply comments on the 
Copyright Office’s website, and were kept apprised of information about the hearings that would be 
held in Washington, D.C. and in Los Angeles, California.  Senior counsel for NTIA attended 
hearings at both locations. 
27 For a more detailed discussion of the term “class of works,” see, 65 FR at 64559 -
64561. 

[PAGE 14]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 14 
Following the hearings and prior to beginning deliberations on the record in the rulemaking, 
on June 6, 2003, the Register wrote to the Assistant Secretary requesting further consultation and 
offered to meet again to discuss the Assistant Secretary’s views or, alternatively, requesting the 
Assistant Secretary’s views and analysis in writing. Another meeting was held between the Register 
and the Assistant Secretary on July 28, 2003 at the Department of Commerce. At that time, the 
Assistant Secretary briefed the Register on her views and advised the Register that a letter 
elaborating on those views would be sent to the Register shortly. The Assistant Secretary advised the 
Register that rather than address any particular proposals for exemptions, NTIA would be 
commenting on the rulemaking process itself. 
In an August 11, 2003 letter to the Register, the Assistant Secretary addressed many of the 
points discussed at the previous meeting and which provided “advice to the Register that will inform 
her consideration of the record, and will help to ensure that both the underlying rulemaking 
proceeding and her recommendation to the Librarian of Congress comply with the intent of 
Congress as reflected in the statute and its legislative history.” 
The Assistant Secretary first addressed the appropriate standard for the burden of proof in the 
rulemaking process. The letter stated that “NTIA is concerned that the standard set forth in the 
Notice of Inquiry (the “NOI”) imposes a significantly heightened burden on proponents of an 
exemption, and is therefore inconsistent with the opportunity that Congress intended to afford the 
user community.” In particular, the letter expressed concern that the Copyright Office’s initial NOI 
of October 15, 2002 used the term “substantial” in relation to the quantum of evidence necessary to 
prove that the prohibition on circumvention has had an adverse effect on noninfringing uses of 
works by users of copyrighted works. The Assistant Secretary stated that since the word 
“substantial” does not appear in the statutory text, this “more stringent requirement thus appears to 
add a significant new term to the express language of the statute.” The Assistant Secretary stated that 

[PAGE 15]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 15 
“[g]iven the clarity of Section 1201(a)(1), no basis exists to justify insertion of a material modifier 
into its text.” 
The Assistant Secretary’s letter continued by opining that the NOI’s “requirement” that 
commenters provide “actual” and “first-hand” knowledge of problems in the marketplace resulting 
from the prohibition exceeds the plain language of the statute and thus raises the bar for proponents 
of exemptions. The letter stated that this “requirement” cannot logically be applied prospectively and 
that therefore this “refinement” should be abandoned “and a standard more consistent with the 
statutory language should be adopted.”28 Similarly, with respect to future “likely adverse impacts,” 
the letter objected that there is no basis for requiring a showing of “extraordinary circumstances in 
which the evidence of likelihood is highly specific, strong and persuasive,” and asserted that no 
requirements beyond “likely adverse effects” are warranted. 
The Assistant Secretary also stated that she agreed with the October 15, 2002 NOI that the 
burden of proof rests with proponents of exemptions and that the assessment of adverse impacts is to 
be determined de novo. The Assistant Secretary also agreed with the Register that the starting point 
for identifying a particular class of works to be exempted must be one of the section 102 categories, 
but suggested that the intended use of the work or the attributes of the user will sometimes be critical 
to that determination. 
The Register has carefully considered the views of the Assistant Secretary and can report 
that, despite any impression that might be drawn from the Assistant Secretary’s letter, the Register 
and the Assistant Secretary actually appear to view the legal criteria governing this rulemaking in 
much the same way.  The Assistant Secretary, like some other observers and commenters, appears to 
28 NTIA letter at 3. 

[PAGE 16]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 16 
have read the NOI as imposing a higher burden on proponents of exempted classes than was 
intended or than the Register believes was stated in the NOI. It had been the Register’s intent that 
the NOI, which was based upon the criteria set forth in the announcement of the final rule in the 
October 2000 rulemaking, would clarify the appropriate burden of proof and required showing by 
proponents. 
Because it appears that the Assistant Secretary (among others) has in some respects 
misapprehended what was said in the NOI, it is pertinent to offer some additional clarification. 
It appears that the use of the term “substantial” in the NOI and in the Register’s 
recommendation in 2000 has caused undue alarm.  A term that has one meaning in the context of a 
particular body of law may have different connotations for persons who do not specialize in that 
field. The phrase “substantial adverse impact,” as quoted from the House Manager’s Report in the 
previous recommendation and the NOI, has been mischaracterized by many commenters, including 
both proponents and opponents of exemptions, as requiring a high standard of proof.  The Register 
did not quote this term from the legislative history in order to impose a heightened standard for 
proposals for exemptions, but rather used the phrase, taken from the House Manager’s Report on the 
DMCA (at p. 6), as a shorthand phrase to supplement and clarify what both the House Manager’s 
Report and the House Commerce Committee Report stated about the necessary showing for 
proponents of exemptions. Read in context, the phrase “substantial adverse impact” – the words used 
by the House Manager’s Report – is the equivalent of what the Commerce Committee Report 
described as a requirement of a showing of “distinct, verifiable, and measurable impacts.”  See 
Commerce Comm. Report, at 37.  “Substantial,” after all, simply means the opposite of 
“insubstantial.” Surely an exemption would not be warranted if its proponents made a showing that 
the prohibition on circumvention was having an insubstantial adverse impact on users’ ability to 
engage in noninfringing uses of copyrighted works.  Stating that there is a requirement of 

[PAGE 17]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 17 
“substantial” adverse impact is another way of saying that a showing of more than “de minimis 
impacts” is required.  See id. (exemption “should not be based upon de minimis impacts”). 
The dictionary defines “substantial” as “consisting of or relating to substance;” “not 
imaginary or illusory.” Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary 1153 (1980).  Similarly, the Supreme 
Court has stated: “Substantial evidence is more than a mere scintilla. It means such relevant 
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion.”29 The Court’s use 
of “substantial” in that context is similar to the meaning that the Register intended to convey in her 
use of the term in this rulemaking and the previous rulemaking. The Register is confident that 
Congress did not intend that hypothetical or inadequate evidence could be the basis for an 
exemption.  The Assistant Secretary’s letter appears to agree with this view. It appears, therefore, 
that NTIA and many others have misunderstood the meaning of the term “substantial” in this 
context. The Register reaffirms that “substantial” is a reasonable description of the requisite 
showing when it is given its proper meaning. 
Further, the meaning of this term was clarified in the Register’s 2000 recommendation which 
highlighted the congruence between the language of the Commerce Committee’s Report and the 
House Manager’s Report.30 When the Commerce Committee and House Manager’s Reports are read 
together, it becomes clear that this burden of proof is not more stringent than the statutory text, but 
rather is a clarification that any showing must be based on real, verifiable, and reasonable evidence. 
Such a showing is equally applicable to present or likely harm. Substantial evidence of likely 
adverse impacts is more than mere speculative or theoretical harm. It requires more than “mere 
inconveniences, or individual cases.” With this further clarification, the Register hopes that this 
29 Metropolitan Stevedore Co. v. Rambo, 521 U.S. 121, 149 (1997). 
30 65 FR 64556, 64558 n.4 (October 27, 2000) 

[PAGE 18]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 18 
term will be accurately understood by all participants in future rulemakings. This is the meaning that 
has been consistently applied by the Register throughout the history of this rulemaking process, and 
the Register intends to apply it in the future. 
As the NOI stated, “[d]e minimis or isolated problems would be insufficient to warrant an 
exemption for a class of works. Similarly, mere inconveniences to noninfringing uses or theoretical 
critiques of section 1201 would not satisfy the requisite showing.” Despite the Register’s efforts to 
inform commenters about the proper composition of comments, a sizeable number of comments 
were again based on theoretical arguments, de minimis or completely absent proof of present or 
likely harm, and mere inconveniences. Nevertheless, even these comments were accepted, 
considered, put into the record in this rulemaking, and generally addressed in this recommendation. 
The Register must also clarify the record with respect to the NOI’s statements about “firsthand knowledge” and “actual instances of verifiable problems existing in the marketplace.” Both of 
these statements were clearly made in relation to evidence of existing adverse effects and did not 
refer to the required showing with respect to “likely adverse effects.” Proof that users “are adversely 
affected by the prohibition” can only be interpreted as requiring that users are “actually harmed.” To 
prove actual harm, a proponent must provide a factual basis. “Actual instances of verifiable 
problems” is a clear way of presenting this term to the public and is entirely consistent with a 
standard of actual harm. On the other hand, “first-hand knowledge” was not stated as a 
“requirement” in the NOI, but rather was an effort to encourage those with such knowledge to come 
forward. The NOI merely stated that “a compelling case will be based on first-hand knowledge” 
(emphasis added) and as will be revealed in the analysis of the exemptions recommended below, the 
majority included “first-hand knowledge.”  The Register stands by her preference to hear from 
persons with actual knowledge of the facts they are asserting as a basis for requesting an exemption. 
Experience with the first two rulemakings has confirmed that participants (or their representatives) 

[PAGE 19]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 19 
with no actual knowledge of the facts have been of little assistance in evaluating a proposed 
exemption.  The most compelling cases will be presented by those with the most thorough 
knowledge of the facts. 
The NOI was very clear in stating the Register’s view that proof of “likely adverse effects” 
during the next three years does not entail a heightened requirement involving “first-hand 
knowledge” and “actual instances of verifiable problems existing in the marketplace.” These 
statements in the NOI appeared in a sentence describing “the burden with respect to actual harm,” 
which the previous sentence in the NOI distinguished from harm “that it is ‘likely’ to occur in the 
ensuing 3-year period.” The Register therefore agrees with the Assistant Secretary (and has not 
stated otherwise) that “this requirement cannot logically be applied prospectively, as the refinement 
would mandate ‘first-hand knowledge’ of future problems in order to sustain a ‘compelling case’ for 
an exemption.” 
The Assistant Secretary’s letter states that the NOI seems to suggest that an exemption based 
on “likely” future adverse impacts during the applicable period should only be made “in 
extraordinary circumstances in which the evidence of likelihood is highly specific, strong and 
persuasive” because the NOI quoted the legislative history to that effect.31  Giving due regard to 
legislative history, the Register has not stated that she will require such a showing as a prerequisite 
for an exemption based on likely future harm.  The legislative history is certainly relevant on this 
point, and any proponent of an exemption based solely on a prediction of future harm should be 
prepared to address it. But the NOI did not state that such a requirement will be imposed with 
respect to a showing of likely future harm.  In fact, it stated (just after quoting the “highly specific, 
strong and persuasive” language) that “[w]hile such a statement could be interpreted as raising the 
31  House Manager’s Report at 6. 

[PAGE 20]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 20 
burden beyond a standard of a preponderance of the evidence, the statutory language enacted . . . 
does not specify a standard beyond more likely than not.”32 While speculation alone will not be 
sufficient, the NOI makes clear that proof of “likely adverse effects” requires only a showing of 
likelihood – i.e., more likely than not,  the traditional preponderance of the evidence standard. The 
burden of proof required by the Register is no more stringent than the statutory text. 
After this closer inspection, it is apparent that the Register and the Assistant Secretary are in 
agreement on most points raised in the NTIA’s August 11, 2003 letter. The Register also concurs 
with NTIA’s view that it would be useful for Congress to provide additional guidance on the term 
“class of works,” a view expressed by the Register in her recommendation three years ago.33 
II. Solicitation of Public Comments and Hearings 
On October 15, 2002, the Librarian and the Register initiated the second rulemaking 
proceeding pursuant to §1201(a)(1)(C) with publication of a Notice of Inquiry.34 The Notice of 
Inquiry requested written comments from all interested parties, including representatives of 
educational institutions, libraries and archives, scholars, researchers, copyright owners and other 
members of the public.  The Notice devoted a great deal of attention to setting out the legislative 
parameters and the scope of the rulemaking based on the determinations made in the first 
rulemaking. The Register was determined to make the comments she received publicly available as 
quickly as possible in order to elicit a broad range of public participation; therefore, the Notice 
32  67 FR at 63579 
33  65 FR at 64562. 
34  67 FR 63578; http://www.copyright.gov/fedreg/2002/67fr63578.html. 

[PAGE 21]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 21 
stated a preference for submission of comments in electronic format and created a web-based form 
to facilitate comment submission.35 
During the initial comment period that ended on December 18, 2002, the Copyright Office 
received 50 written comments, all of which were received electronically and posted on the Office’s 
website.36 Parties submitting comments during this period were asked to specify a class or classes of 
works proposed for exemption and to provide the factual and/or legal basis for each proposed 
exemption along with summaries of their arguments. Many of the fifty initial comments contained 
proposals for multiple classes of works proposed for exemption. 
During the reply comment period which ended on February 19, 2003, commenters were 
requested to provide either support or opposition to the proposals for exemption introduced in the 
initial comment period and to provide factual and/or legal arguments in support of their position. 
The Office received a total of 272 reply comments in response to the initial proposals for exemption. 
All of these reply comments were also received electronically and posted on the Copyright Office 
website.37 
Due to the fact that the established comment period necessarily ended many months before a 
final determination on the evidence was complete, the Office created a new process by which a 
petitioner could seek consideration for a newly proposed exemption for a class of works which could 
not reasonably have been offered during the formal comment period.38 This process was intended to 
35 Id. 
36 http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2003/comments/index.html. 
37 http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2003/reply/reply1.html. 
38 See, 67 FR at 63582. 

[PAGE 22]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 22 
provide some flexibility to take account of important unanticipated developments.  One such petition 
was received, and the Register granted the petition to consider the additional classes of works 
proposed in that petition.39 Since this petition was granted during the reply comment period, the 
Copyright Office created a new reply period for reply comments responsive to the proposed 
exemptions contained in the granted petition.40 This reply comment period ended on March 10, 2003 
and the Office received an additional 65 reply comments responsive to this proposal which were also 
posted on the Office’s website.41 
The Copyright Office also conducted public hearings on six separate days:  in Washington, 
DC on April 11, May 1, 2 and 4, 200342 and in Los Angeles, California, at the UCLA Law School on 
May 14 and 15, 2003.43 Forty-four witnesses representing over 60 groups testified at six days of 
hearings held in either Washington, DC or Los Angeles, California. The transcripts for all of these 
hearing were posted on the Copyright Office’s website shortly after their receipt.44 Following the 
hearings, the Office sent questions to certain witnesses participating in the hearings to clarify certain 
statements made during the hearings or to respond to questions resulting from particular testimony at 
the hearings. The questions and post-hearing responses received by the Copyright Office were made 
39 http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2003/petitions/index.html
40 68 FR 6678.
41 http://www.copyright.gov/fedreg/2003/68fr6678.html
42 68 FR 13652 and, see also, 68 FR 19966.
43 68 FR 15972.
44 http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2003/hearings/schedule.html


[PAGE 23]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003	 Page 23 
available on the Office’s website.45 The entire record in this and the previous §1201(a)(1)(C) 
rulemaking are available on the Office’s website.46 
The Register has now carefully reviewed and analyzed the entire record in this rulemaking 
proceeding, including all of the comments and the transcripts of the hearings in order to determine 
whether any class of copyrighted works should be exempt from the prohibition against 
circumvention during the next three years. The analysis of the record produced in this rulemaking, 
including the proposals recommended for exemption by the Register as well as those not 
recommended by the Register, is set forth herein.47 
III. Discussion 
A.	 The Four Exempted Classes 
1. 	 Compilations consisting of lists of Internet locations blocked by
commercially marketed filtering software applications that are intended
to prevent access to domains, websites or portions of websites, but not
including lists of Internet locations blocked by software applications that
operate exclusively to protect against damage to a computer or computer
network or lists of Internet locations blocked by software applications
that operate exclusively to prevent receipt of email. For purposes of this
exemption,“Internet locations” are defined to include “domains, uniform
resource locators (URLs), numeric IP addresses or any combination
thereof.” 
45 http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2003/post-hearing/index.html 
46 http://www.copyright.gov/1201/index.html 
47 In referring to the comments and hearing materials, the Register will use the 
following abbreviations and conventions: C - Initial Comment, R - Reply Comment, TTranscript, and PHR - Post Hearing Response. When comments or reply comments include a 
parenthetical number, e.g., C25(2), this refers to the number of the proposal referenced within 
the comment (e.g., Proposed Class No. 2 in Comment 25).  Citations to page numbers of the 
transcript refer to the pages of the official transcript that is currently posted on the Copyright 
Office website. References to post hearing responses will include the date only if there are 
multiple responses from the same individual or organization. 

[PAGE 24]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 24 
As in the previous rulemaking, initial comments proposed an exemption to the prohibition on 
circumvention in order to access the lists of blocked websites that are used in various filtering 
software programs sometimes referred to as “censorware.” These programs are intended to prevent 
children and other Internet users from viewing objectionable material while online. It was alleged 
that although the software is intended to serve a useful societal purpose, the emphasis of the 
programs is on blocking rather than accuracy. Critics contend that the result of this focus is that 
filtering software used to prevent access to objectionable material tends to over-block, thereby 
preventing access to legitimate information resources. 
Unlike the last rulemaking, where there was no opposition to the proposed exemption, in the 
current rulemaking the proposed exemption drew some objections.  Opponents to the exemption 
argued that filtering software companies serve a critical societal purpose and that an exemption 
would undermine the integrity of filtering software. They also argued that filtering software 
companies have responded to the concerns that led to the exemption in the previous rulemaking and 
now provide reasonable means for ascertaining the material or sites that a particular filtering 
software blocks. Opponents also argued that the proponents have not met their burden of showing 
substantial harm and that exemptions cannot be “renewed” in the absence of evidence that the 
conditions leading to a previous exemption have not been corrected. Such a “renewal,” it was 
argued, would shift the burden of proof to the opponents and undermine the de novo review intended 
by Congress in this triennial rulemaking.48 Opponents also stated that even if the Register found that 
an exemption was warranted, the particular class articulated in the previous rulemaking was overly 
48  R33, pp. 6, 11; R34, p. 9. 

[PAGE 25]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 25 
broad and that repeating an exemption for that class could create adverse consequences for other 
types of software, such as antivirus and spam software.49 
At the outset, the Register disagrees with the commenters who suggested that an exemption 
can be “renewed” if the opponents of an exemption do not prove that adverse effects identified in a 
previous rulemaking have not been cured. The burden of proof for an exemption rests with its 
proponents, and the fact that an exemption was granted in the previous rulemaking creates no 
presumptions. The exemptions in each rulemaking are considered de novo.50 Congress anticipated 
that market conditions would be constantly changing and that the market would be viewed anew in 
each triennial proceeding. 
While the Register rejects the argument that the previous exemption should be “renewed” in 
the absence of evidence that the adverse effects which led to the previous exemption have been 
cured in the marketplace, the Register finds that the record in the current rulemaking warrants a new 
exemption.  The previous exemption covered “Compilations consisting of lists of websites blocked 
by filtering software applications.”  For the reasons specified below, the Register recommends that 
the new class exempted should be designated as “compilations consisting of lists of Internet 
locations blocked by commercially marketed filtering software applications that are intended to 
prevent access to domains, websites or portions of websites, but not including lists of Internet 
locations blocked by software applications that operate exclusively to protect against damage to a 
computer or computer network or lists of Internet locations blocked by software applications that 
operate exclusively to prevent receipt of email.”  For purposes of this exemption,“Internet locations” 
49  See, e.g., R23, p. 13; T Steve Metalitz, May 14, 2003, p. 29; PHR Steve Metalitz, 
Joint Reply Commenters, June 30, 2003, p. 3-4; PHR David Burt, N2H2, Inc., et al., p. 4-7. 
50 Commerce Comm. Report at 37. Accord, NTIA letter. 

[PAGE 26]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 26 
are defined to include “domains, uniform resource locators (URLs), numeric IP addresses or any 
combination thereof.” 
The Register’s recommendation in favor of this exemption is based primarily on the evidence 
introduced in the comments and testimony by one person, Seth Finkelstein, a non-lawyer 
participating on his own behalf. In addition to identifying a class of works that related to the 
specific facts presented, he identified the qualitative nature of the noninfringing uses for which 
circumvention was necessary and generally identified the technological measure which controlled 
access to this class. There was no dispute that the lists of Internet locations blocked by filtering 
software are generally encrypted or otherwise protected by an access control measure. The remedy 
sought was causally related to the noninfringing uses that are necessary to conduct research, 
comment and criticism on the filtering software at issue. Mr. Finkelstein also anticipated objections 
to the exemption and proved that available alternatives to the exemption were insufficient to remedy 
the adverse effect caused by the prohibition. The insufficiency of alternatives was supported by 
testimony and demonstrative evidence at the hearing in California by James Tyre. Finally, Mr. 
Finkelstein’s succinct initial comment addressed the statutory requirements and thoughtfully 
analyzed each of the statutory factors required to be considered in this rulemaking. 
The case made by Mr. Finkelstein for this exemption is also instructive for the manner in 
which it met the requisite showing. The evidence produced did not prove that a substantial number 
of people have utilized or were likely to utilize an exemption. On the contrary, the evidence tended 
to prove that very few people have had the motivation or technological ability to circumvent this 
technological measure, to investigate the lists of blocked sites in filtering software or to report on, 
comment on or criticize such lists. Although there was little need for an exemption in quantitative 
terms (i.e., in terms of the number of persons likely to take advantage of it directly), it was the 
qualitative need for an exemption that was controlling in this case; absent the ability of a few to 

[PAGE 27]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 27 
carry out their noninfringing efforts notwithstanding the prohibition set forth in section 1201, the 
many would not reap the fruits of such efforts – the information, analysis, criticism and comment 
enabled by the quantitatively small number of acts of circumvention. The fact that the act of 
circumvention was unlikely to be widespread rebutted copyright owners’ concerns of abuse and 
further supported the conclusion that the potential adverse effects to copyright owners would be 
minimal. The showing that the particular noninfringing use prevented was a result of the prohibition 
on circumvention and that these uses were necessary to criticism, comment, news reporting, 
teaching, scholarship, or research, further strengthened the argument. 
Opponents argued that circumvention is not necessary because other alternative sources for 
the information sought to be obtained are available, but the proponents of the exemption 
successfully discredited this assertion. While it is true that limited “querying” of the databases is 
available on some of the filtering software companies’ sites, the circumscribed nature of this 
querying foreclosed comprehensive or meaningful results. Opponents produced evidence that many 
reviews of filtering software platforms reached conclusions based on these querying capabilities or 
by utilizing various sampling techniques, yet this evidence only  proved that some parties were 
willing to settle for the results produced by such superficial tests. In light of the millions (or more) of 
potential URLs, it is indisputable that actually viewing the entire list of blocked Internet locations 
will produce data much more comprehensive than querying about one hundred URLs. 
Had opponents been able to prove that the likely harm of an exemption would have 
outweighed the benefit of comprehensive testing, particularly given the availability of limited 
testing, a balancing of the interests might have favored opponents. Where, however, there is no 
indication of likely harm that would result from an exemption and where proponents have proven the 
inadequacy of existing alternatives (the limited queries that some filtering software providers permit) 
and the societal benefit of more extensive access that is available only through circumvention, the 

[PAGE 28]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 28 
balance favors the proponents of the exemption. The opponents’ arguments that circumvention 
would undermine the integrity of the filtering software or that an exemption could have an adverse 
effect on other types of protective software are unpersuasive. The societal benefit of preventing 
children or others from viewing objectionable sites is likely to be unaffected or even assisted by an 
exemption. A computer which has filtering software installed will continue to block sites within its 
blocking list even if one knows the URLs for the sites. Proponents of an exemption pointed out that 
in the fiercely competitive filtering software market, one filtering software company has actually 
posted the URLs of blocked sites on its company website as a form of comparative advertising, in 
order to reveal that it was blocking objectionable sites which another competitor was failing to 
block. Thus, exposing what filtering software does not block or exposing over-blocking or 
questionable blocking does not undermine the goal of protecting children and others from harmful or 
objectionable material. In fact, the evidence tended to show that the results only obtainable by means 
of circumvention may in fact improve  under- or over-blocking flaws in filtering software, thus 
furthering the potential benefit of such software. Since the end result of the circumvention is 
criticism, comment, and possibly news reporting on existing problems, filtering software companies 
may utilize the research to address problems revealed by such publicity. Given the competition in 
the filtering software market for market share, robust blocking currently appears to be more 
important than precision. The evidence tended to show that the incentive to continually verify the 
objectionable nature of the blocked sites appears lackluster at best – an important concern given the 
rapid pace and dynamic nature of the Internet – and is of less concern to filtering companies than is 
the concern for comprehensiveness.51  This may be understandable, but this focus on 
comprehensiveness does not alter the societal benefit of learning about over-blocking that may 
occur. Taken to an extreme, moreover, an obsession with comprehensiveness could lead to 
unnecessary or even harmful censorship of legitimate information that would adversely affect the 
usefulness of Internet research. While the marketplace might, in theory, limit excesses in the over-
51 T David Burt and Seth Finkelstein, April 11, 2003, p. 81-84. 

[PAGE 29]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 29 
blocking of legitimate information, the market can only correct problems that participants in the 
marketplace are aware of. That is at the heart of this exemption – allowing information to be made 
available to the public in a lawful manner. The exposure of alleged flaws by those with an incentive 
to learn about them can be utilized by the filtering companies themselves, if they so choose, to make 
their software more accurate. The exemption is likely to have the effect of encouraging legitimate 
public debate based on the information obtained through circumvention. 
The ability to engage in legitimate research, criticism and comment about filtering software 
is even more compelling as a result of the recent Supreme Court decision upholding the 
constitutionality of the Children’s Internet Protection Act (CIPA).52 Since CIPA requires libraries to 
install “filtering software” in order to block access to objectionable material as a condition of 
receiving federal funds, it becomes all the more important for the public to understand potential 
problems in particular filtering programs that may be installed in public facilities. Since the Court 
found that an important safety valve within CIPA was the ability of a library patron to request the 
disabling of such software, it appears all the more important that the public be able to obtain 
objective information about the performance or potential limitations of such software in order to 
make the determination whether to request such disabling. 
In contrast to the strength of the case in favor of an exemption, there was virtually no 
plausible evidence that such an exemption would have any relevant adverse effects on the market for 
or value of these copyrighted works.53 While it is obviously true that the exposure of substantial 
flaws in a program will adversely affect the filtering software’s value by affecting market demand, 
52 United States v. American Library Association, Inc., ___ U.S. ___, 123 S.Ct. 2297, 
156 L.Ed.2d 221 (2003). 
53 See e.g., T David Burt, Seth Finkelstein and Jonathan Band, April 11, 2003 p. 66-
72. 

[PAGE 30]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 30 
such an adverse market effect is not a relevant concern in this rulemaking.54 In assessing the 
likelihood of harm to filtering software that would result from an exemption, the absence of any 
identifiable harm that resulted from the previous exemption is informative. While there is no burden 
on the opponents of exemption to show that a similar preexisting exemption has caused harm, 
silence on the issue may raise inferences. While opponents raised the possibility that the lack of use 
of the prior exemption may have minimized the harm, they also claimed that such minimal or 
nonexistent use obviated the need for an exemption. As previously noted, however, this proposed 
exemption is not grounded on the need for widespread circumvention. In this factual setting, 
enabling the efforts of the few who will find sanctuary in the exemption will have the effect of 
remedying the adverse effects of the prohibition on the public generally by allowing those who 
circumvent measures that protect lists of blocked websites to comment publicly on their findings. 
In response to the concern that the designation of this class in the previous rulemaking was 
overbroad and had the capacity to create unintended consequences for other types of software, such 
as antivirus or spam filtering software, the Copyright Office posed a post-hearing question to seek 
further clarification from the witnesses who testified on this subject. After considering these 
responses in conjunction with the comments and the testimony, the Register finds that rather than 
being too broad, the class of works previously exempted may be too narrow to encompass the facts 
introduced in this rulemaking. 
In the previous rulemaking, the class was designated as “compilations consisting of lists of 
websites blocked by filtering software applications.” Despite the asserted concern that an unintended 
consequence of such a class designation could be that other forms of filtering software would be 
54Cf. Campbell v. Acuff-Rose, 510 U.S. 569, 591-592 (1994) (“We do not, of course, 
suggest that a parody may not harm the market at all, but when a lethal parody, like a scathing 
theater review, kills demand for the original, it does not produce a harm cognizable under the 
Copyright Act.”) 

[PAGE 31]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 31 
compromised by this class, the Register is skeptical of this argument.  The prior exemption was 
narrowly tailored to allow circumvention of “lists of websites blocked by filtering software.” Since it 
seems unlikely that spam filtering software which filters email or antivirus software which protects 
against malicious or suspicious file types necessarily contain “lists of websites,” it is unclear how 
such a class could affect such other types of filtering software. Unfortunately, there was little 
evidence produced on this issue. The Joint Reply Commenters’ response to the specific post-hearing 
question posed by the Copyright Office stated “[i]t is important to note the broad array of critical 
network security tools that may employ lists of websites protected by access controls. These include 
for example,  firewalls (which in effect filter traffic based on defined parameters contained in a 
compilation or database) and antivirus products (which perform a similar function using 
compilations or databases of virus definitions or characteristics).”55 The Register agrees that the 
proposed exemption is intended to be limited to the type of filtering software known as 
“censorware” and that there is no intention to affect spam filtering software, virus protection 
software or other security software such as firewalls. 
A representative of a number of the filtering software companies suggested that filtering 
software is often marketed in security “suites,” which are bundled packages of security software 
applications together with filtering software that provide a “layered” security approach. Filtering 
software companies attempted to create a circular argument that it would be unfair to exempt 
filtering software applications but then exclude such suites from the exemption, since this would 
provide the largest software companies with a market advantage; at the same time these same 
companies appear to argue that the Register could not recommend exempting the filtering software 
bundled in these suites, since such an exemption would compromise the integrity of the overall 
security suite. While the Register agrees that an exemption from the prohibition on circumvention 
for filtering software applications cannot distinguish between stand-alone programs and filtering 
55 PHR Steve Metalitz, Joint Reply Commenters, June 30, 2003, p. 3-4. 

[PAGE 32]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 32 
software incorporated into a suite, an exemption need not compromise the integrity of an entire suite 
in order to allow circumvention of the list of websites utilized by the filtering software program. The 
present exemption has existed for the past three years and would allow any person to circumvent any 
access control that bars access to the list of blocked websites, but no evidence has been introduced 
that there have been adverse effects on the filtering software market or the market for security 
software suites. Many of these suites have undergone development while the present exemption has 
been in place, thus making it implausible that such security suites relied primarily on the legal 
prohibitions of § 1201(a)(1) rather than robust technological protections. In addition, there appears 
to be no technological reason why the creators of suites must bundle their information behind only a 
single, omnibus access control measure. Since it  could be expected that a security software suite 
should be a technologically robust system, the lists of Internet locations related to the filtering 
software could be a segregated database or the access controls could be layered to provide 
independent security to various components of the suites. Not only would such redundancy appear to 
make technological sense, but it would appear to be prudent under the law since an exemption for 
one part of a suite would not necessarily adversely affect other parts of the suite. 
In an abundance of caution, however, the Register finds that some modification of the 
language of the previous exemption is compatible with the present record. The Register recommends 
exemption of “compilations consisting of lists of Internet locations blocked by commercially 
marketed filtering software applications that are intended to prevent access to domains, websites or 
portions of websites, but not including lists of Internet locations blocked by software applications 
that operate exclusively to protect against damage to a computer or computer network or lists of 
Internet locations blocked by software applications that operate exclusively to prevent receipt of 
email.”  For purposes of this exemption, “Internet locations” are defined to include “domains, 
uniform resource locators (URLs), numeric IP addresses or any combination thereof.” The changes 
in the wording are the result of two refinements in the record. First, the term “lists of websites” used 
in the previous exemption has been changed to “list of Internet locations” including domains, URLs, 

[PAGE 33]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 33 
numeric IP addresses. The record revealed that filtering software applications vary on how they 
block access – e.g., by blocking specific URLs, or IP addresses, or some combination – and on what 
they block – e.g., entire websites or individual pages, or some combination.56 It therefore is 
appropriate to broaden the scope of that particular term. 
Second, “filtering” is a term that may be used broadly, including filters for email or viruses. 
While there is no evidence in the record regarding how exempting lists of Internet addresses could 
implicate anti-virus filters or email addresses, the record created by proponents is limited to the need 
to circumvent filtering software that is commercially marketed to prevent access to Internet content. 
Using the term “commercially marketed filtering software” is an effort to limit the scope of the class 
of works to this particular type of filtering software without opening the door to other filtering 
systems. Although proponents have offered the term “censorware,” the Register finds that term 
pejorative and ambiguous.  “Commercially marketed filtering software” is a more objective 
description of the particular class. 
The analysis of the statutory factors in relation to this proposed exemption reveals: 
(1) The availability for use of the lists of blocked Internet locations is currently limited. While some 
querying and sampling is available, these methods do not allow a comprehensive means of 
determining what is being blocked and why these locations are being blocked. In addition, the 
market for filtering software has generally grown despite the fact that an exemption has been in 
place since the prohibition went into effect. There is no reason to believe that continuing the 
exemption will have an adverse effect on the availability of the software itself.  (2) The availability 
for use for archival, preservation or educational purposes has not been addressed in this rulemaking. 
(3) The impact of the prohibition on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or 
56T David Burt, April 11, 2003, p. 80. 

[PAGE 34]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003	 Page 34 
research in relation to these lists of blocked Internet locations is significant. If the prohibition were 
in effect for these works, the only criticism, comment, news reporting or research on these works 
that would be available would be the limited querying and sampling that was shown to be generally 
inadequate for more than superficial analysis. Given the broad use of such filtering software in 
schools and libraries, over-blocking could adversely affect scholarship and research performed on 
the Internet. (4) The effect of circumvention on the market for or value of these works appears to be 
minimal. The evidence of the past three years is instructive for the likelihood of future harm. The 
lack of harm is in part due to the fact that few took advantage of the exemption and in part due to the 
narrow scope of the exemption. While a new exemption requires taking into account of the present 
realities of the data assembled in these lists, e.g., IP addresses, URLs and combinations of these 
forms of addresses, it also requires limiting unintended consequences. Therefore, the new exemption 
exempts circumvention of lists of “Internet addresses” in commercially marketed filtering software 
rather than “lists of websites,” while at the same time excluding circumvention of lists of Internet 
addresses blocked by software applications that operate exclusively to protect against damage to a 
computer or computer network, e.g., antivirus or firewall applications, or lists of Internet addresses 
blocked by software application that operate exclusively to prevent receipt of email, e.g., spam 
filters. 
2.	 Computer programs protected by dongles that prevent access due to
malfunction or damage and which are obsolete. 
Many commenters supported a renewal of the exemption made in 2000 for “literary works, 
including computer programs and databases, protected by access control mechanisms that fail to 
permit access because of malfunction, damage or obsoleteness.”57 Few commenters, however, 
provided any factual support for such an exemption. There was a complete absence of specificity 
regarding what works are involved, what type of harm has occurred, or the scope of such present or 
57 E.g., C29(4), C30(6), C32, C33, R10, R12, R15, R21 

[PAGE 35]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 35 
likely harm in many of the comments. Instead, many commenters simply requested that the Librarian 
renew the exemption established in the previous rulemaking. They claimed that since there is no 
evidence that the conditions in the market have changed, the exemption should be renewed. Since 
such a claim for “renewal” is discussed extensively above, it suffices to restate that such burdenshifting is incompatible with the de novo nature of the triennial review.58 Allowing a presumption to 
be created based on a finding of likely harm made in a preceding rulemaking would effectively 
transform any exemption into a permanent exemption unless opponents satisfied a burden of going 
forward with new evidence. 
However, a few commenters and persons testifying at the hearings did provide some factual 
support, although such evidence focused on a narrower class of works.59  In particular, Joseph 
Montoro presented some evidence, albeit not abundant evidence, some significant and some only 
anecdotal, that the adverse effects related to “dongles” or hardware locks continue to exist. The 
Register has considered the totality of the evidence – including evidence of past harm, present needs, 
and likely future harm, as well as the concerns raised by opponents that the previous exemption was 
too broad – together with the absence of any evidence of an adverse effect on the market for or value 
of the class of works at issue. It is also instructive that an exemption has been in place for the past 
three years, but opponents did not cite any evidence of harm resulting from that exemption.60 
Viewed as a whole, the case was made for a new but more narrowly tailored exemption. 
58 Commerce Report, H.R. Rep. No. 105-551, pt.2, 37 (1998) and accord, letter from 
NTIA at 4. 
59 R15, T Joseph Montoro, May 2, 2003, p. 145 et seq.; T Brewster Kahle, May 
14,2003, p. 84ff; and PHR Brewster Kahle, The Internet Archive. 
60 See generally, T Emery Simon and Keith Kupferschmid, May 2, 2003, p. 224-229. 

[PAGE 36]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 36 
Because absolutely no facts were presented to the Register in support of this exemption 
relating to literary works other than computer programs, or to access control mechanisms other than 
dongles, consideration of the exemption in this rulemaking will be limited to computer programs 
protected by dongles.61 
A significant part of the evidence presented by Mr. Montoro in support of such an exemption 
was his testimony about a client’s concern about the potential malfunctioning of dongles which had 
failed in the past and which were manufactured by a company that was no longer in business. This 
client was the Nebraska Service Center of the Immigration and Naturalization Service office which 
was, at the time, a part of the U.S. Department of Justice.62 The letter received from the INS office 
stated: “[i]f those dongles had failed or become inoperable, there would have been an indefinite halt 
in travel document production.” The letter also added that the time and training that would have 
been necessary to change to new software would have been prohibitive. If a person purchased 
software that should still work but for the failure of the technological protection measure controlling 
access, the continued use of that software would appear to qualify as a noninfringing use. 
The letter submitted by Mr. Montoro presents a variation on the theme of damaged dongles, 
but the situation described does not appear to fall within the scope of the existing exemption. From 
the testimony and the letter, it does not appear that the technological measure was actually 
preventing access to the computer program, but rather that, based on experiences in the past, one 
61  As discussed in the previous rulemaking, dongles are hardware locks attached to a 
computer that interact with software programs to prevent unauthorized access to that software. 
65 FR at 64565. 
62 In addition to testimony about this client’s problem with dongles, Mr. Montoro 
supplemented the record at the hearing with documentary evidence which included a copy of a 
letter from a Program Analyst from the INS office. A public copy of this document is available 
for inspection at the United States Copyright Office. 

[PAGE 37]
 
 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 37 
might expect that it would prevent access at some time in the future.  While the access control may 
have been obsolete, in that the software vendor was no longer in business and no replacement could 
be obtained, the fact that it was obsolete was not causing it to fail to permit access. 
The exemption in place for the past three years did not include computer programs protected 
by dongles that might prevent access due to malfunction or damage, nor has any participant in this 
rulemaking proceeding suggested such an exemption.  It required that the access control actually 
“fail to permit access because of malfunction, damage, or obsoleteness.”  However, the principal 
example presented by Mr. Montoro related to a fact situation that would not be covered by the 
current exemption – nor, as will be seen, would it be covered by the exemption the Register is 
recommending.  Mr. Montoro’s testimony raises the question of whether access controls such as 
dongles which “may fail,” or which one fears might fail, have impeded or are likely to impede users 
of software in their ability to make noninfringing uses.  As a matter of logic, it does not appear that 
this can be so, and as a matter of fact, it has not been proven.  As long as a dongle is working 
properly, it is difficult to understand how it would be preventing noninfringing uses. The fear that it 
might cease to work properly does not adversely affect the user’s ability to engage in noninfringing 
uses; at most, it adversely affects the user’s confidence that he will be able to continue engaging in 
noninfringing uses. But section 1201(a)(1) (C) does not instruct the Librarian to take into account 
one’s fear that one will be unable to continue to engage in permitted uses.  Especially when no 
showing has been made of the likelihood of failure, the Register is unwilling to recommend an 
exemption that has no objective criteria as its basis.63  A claim that a dongle prevents access due to 
damage or malfunction is subject to verification, but no objective criteria have been suggested 
whereby one could establish whether dongles that currently work are likely to fail during the next 
three-year period. Indeed, because any dongle could fail within the next three years, an exemption 
63 Cf. 65 FR at 64566 (rejecting, in rulemaking proceeding in 2000, extension of 
exemption to situations involving lost dongles, due to difficulty in ascertaining whether a dongle 
has truly been lost – a claim that is easy to assert and virtually impossible to disprove). 

[PAGE 38]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 38 
that covered dongles that have not failed but may fail in the future would, in effect, cover all 
dongles. 
Thus, the record does not support an exemption for computer software protected by dongles 
that are working properly. Indeed, the record does not support an exemption that would cover all 
malfunctioning dongles, since in many cases the manufacturer will readily replace or repair the 
dongle.64  A limiting principle based on the evidence produced is warranted to avoid unnecessary 
harm to the market for or value of computer programs protected by dongles. 
The evidence suggests that qualification of the exemption is appropriate. In the INS situation, 
the most significant fact was that the company that manufactured the software and dongle was no 
longer in business. Even though an exemption for prospective failure is not supportable, the fact that 
no support would be available to the user in the event of the dongle’s failure is a critical concern to 
users of dongle-protected software. Other comments addressed this unavailability of support that 
was often the result of the sale or dissolution of the software company that originally marketed the 
software or the discontinuation of support by a software company or a successor company.65  In 
some other cases where the software manufacturer was still in business, lengthy time delays in 
responsiveness or excessively high costs for replacement, sometimes equivalent to the purchase 
price of the software, were experienced. 66 Numerous instances were presented of users of dongleprotected software expressing concern about the unavailability of replacement or repair.67 
64  T Keith Kupferschmid, May 2, 2003, p. 189-90. 
65 C32(5) and T Montoro, May 2, 2003, p. 156, and exhibits, e.g., p. 83 and 84.  
66 Montoro exhibit at 89. 
67 Montoro exhibits, e.g., INS letter and attached email. 

[PAGE 39]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 39 
There are at least four cited instances evidencing damaged or malfunctioning dongles for 
which repair or replacement was not reasonably available. In one case a user paid $12,000 for a 
software that was protected by a dongle, but the program would not run due to a “defective” dongle. 
This user stated that the software company would not help remedy the problem and redirected the 
user to a dealer who did not answer the phone. In another case, an ambulance company running 
software that was protected by a dongle experienced crashes every time a dial-up session was 
initiated. Although both the software company and the dongle manufacturer acknowledged that the 
problem was known for approximately two years, no solution for this malfunction was provided. In 
another case, a U.S. business licensed software from a company in England that eventually ceased 
support, in the form of dongle drivers, for a DOS based program and only offered the sale of a 
program upgrade to the software at considerable cost without any significant increase in 
functionality for the business. Another person claimed that a supplied dongle did not function 
properly and that after three months, a replacement has not yet materialized. None of these examples 
were contradicted in the comments or testimony of opponents of an exemption. 
After reviewing the record, the Register finds that the unavailability of dongle replacement or 
repair from the original vendor in and of itself is not sufficient to justify an exemption when the 
computer program and dongle are still providing access to the work. In this respect, the existing 
exemption is overbroad to the extent that it includes works “protected by access control mechanisms 
that fail to permit access because of ... obsoleteness.”  In considering obsoleteness, the Register is 
unable to think of any instances where the fact that a dongle is obsolete has caused the dongle to fail 
to permit access.  Certainly, no evidence has been presented of such a phenomenon.68 
68  See, however, section III.A.3. below. 

[PAGE 40]
 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 40 
Nor does the Register believe that an exemption is warranted simply when a dongle is 
malfunctioning or damaged, but where a replacement is reasonably available. Based on the evidence 
produced in this proceeding, an exemption is warranted when both access is prevented as a result of 
damage or malfunction and the  dongle is obsolete. As in the previous rulemaking, the Register 
believes that the definition of “obsolete” set forth in 17 U.S.C. 108(c) captures the circumstances 
under which an exemption is justified: “a [dongle] shall be considered obsolete if [it] is no longer 
manufactured or is no longer reasonably available in the commercial marketplace.”  For purposes of 
this exemption, a dongle would be considered “obsolete” if a replacement or repair are not 
reasonably available in the marketplace.  This refinement of the previous exemption addresses 
concerns raised by both proponents and opponents of an exemption and comports with common 
sense. If the replacement or repair of a malfunctioning or damaged dongle is reasonably available in 
the marketplace, circumvention will generally not be necessary.  In addition to encouraging 
reasonable support to be made available to users, the exemption will allow users who are denied 
access as a result of a damaged or malfunctioning dongle to circumvent when a reasonable 
alternative is unavailable. This exemption minimizes the adverse effects on noninfringing uses by 
users of software protected by these access control measures while also minimizing the adverse 
effects on copyright owners. 
In applying the statutory factors to the record, the balance weighs in favor of this more 
narrowly tailored exemption.  While the use of dongles, and the availability of legal remedies 
against those who unlawfully circumvent the protections offered by dongles, offers an incentive for 
software publishers (and, in particular, publishers of expensive software such as computer assisted 
design software) to make those works available, it is difficult to imagine that the limited exemption 
recommended here would adversely affect that incentive.  No evidence has been presented with 
respect to the extent to which such works are available for nonprofit archival, preservation, or 
educational activity, or with respect to the effect of the prohibition on criticism, comment, news 
reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research. However, in the case of damaged or malfunctioning 

[PAGE 41]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003	 Page 41 
dongles for which there is no reasonable availability of replacement or repair, it is evident that the 
availability for nonprofit archival, preservation or educational activity will be adversely affected and 
the prohibition will adversely affect those users in possession of such damaged or malfunctioning 
measures who seek to use the work for criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship or 
research. While the second and third factor logically appear to favor the exemption, the absence of 
clear guidance in the record does not allow these factors to weigh heavily in this case. The fourth 
factor is more instructive. An exemption for all computer programs protected by dongles would 
adversely affect the market for and value of software. Similarly, an exemption for computer 
programs protected by dongles that may fail in the future or, alternatively, for which reasonable 
replacement or repair is available would have the potential of adversely affecting the market for and 
value of a significant portion of the market for computer programs protected by dongles at a point in 
time when adverse effects are not yet occurring or when reasonable alternatives exist. Both of these 
would weigh against an exemption. Yet the recommended class – computer programs protected by 
dongles that are obsolete and that prevent access due to malfunction or damage – minimizes the 
potential for adverse effects to the market for or value of these copyrighted works, thus weighing in 
favor of an exemption. Finally, the absence of evidence that the existing exemption has resulted in 
adverse effects further bolsters the evidence that this factor weighs in favor of an exemption in 
regard for this more narrowly tailored class. The Register recommends the exemption of this class 
for the next three-year period. 
3.	 Computer programs and video games distributed in formats that have
become obsolete and which require the original media or hardware as a
condition of access. For purposes of this exemption, “formats that have
become obsolete” may refer to particular media or operating systems and
shall have the same meaning as in 17 U.S.C. 108(c): A format shall be 
considered obsolete if the machine or system necessary to render
perceptible a work stored in that format is no longer manufactured or is
no longer reasonably available in the commercial marketplace. 
The Internet Archive proposed an exemption for “Literary and audiovisual works embodied 
in software whose access control systems prohibit access to replicas of the works.” 

[PAGE 42]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 42 
It submitted comments and testified about problems associated with gaining access to archived 
digital works. The Internet Archive describes itself as a non-profit library that maintains a collection 
of websites, software and other works in digital formats in a digital archive.69  It has been given 
collections of copyrighted works in digital formats or media that are degrading and becoming 
obsolete with time.  Because “[p]reservation of digital works poses a unique challenge because of 
the quick deterioration of digital media and the rapid obsolescence of digital formats,”70 the Internet 
Archive desires to migrate the works to modern storage systems (e.g., by transferring a computer 
program from a floppy diskette to a hard drive) that are more stable and that will ensure continuing 
access to the works. Once a work has been copied to the new storage system, the Internet Archive 
must be able to gain access to the resulting reproduction in order to verify that the integrity of the 
transfer and backup was successful, complete, and functional. 
The Internet Archive stated that works distributed in digital formats on physical media (such 
as floppy diskettes, CD-ROMs, etc.) have sometimes been accompanied by technological measures 
that, while technically permitting copies to be made, prevent those copies from functioning (so that, 
for example, a copy of a computer program made from the original floppy diskette will not run, or a 
copy of an audiovisual game made from the original CD-ROM cannot be played).  Because of this, it 
asserts that archives should be permitted to circumvent those technological measures in order not 
only to load copies of the works into their storage systems, but also to be able to use those copies as 
though they were still on the original medium.  A copy of a computer program that will not run, or a 
copy of a video game that will not play, is a copy in name only. 
69  T Brewster Kahle, May 14, 2003, p.84-85; C25. 
70 C25, p.2. 

[PAGE 43]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 43 
The primary form of access control with which the Internet Archive is concerned is the 
“original only” access control. Long before the enactment of the DMCA, many works distributed in 
digital formats on physical media (such as floppy diskettes) were designed so that the original 
diskette must be inserted into the appropriate drive in the computer in order to enable access to the 
work. When these works have been migrated to digital archival systems, the “original only” 
protection measure built into the software or audiovisual work can no longer find the original 
diskette since the copy of the work being used is not on the original diskette. In some cases, the 
problem is that the software checks to see that an authorized CD-ROM or floppy diskette is installed 
in a particular drive. In other cases, the software may be checking for some features of the hardware 
for which it was designed., e.g., a floppy disk drive or a dongle to ensure that the copy is an 
authorized one. As a result of migrating these works to archival drives or media, the software’s builtin security check will fail because, inter alia, the work is not on the original diskette or because the 
computer is trying to access the work from a different location than the one in which it was 
originally stored. Verification of the integrity of the reproduction is important to the archival 
process, and verification requires access to the work.  Proponents of an exemption contend that in 
order to access the reproduction, circumvention of the original access protection measure is 
necessary. Circumvention is necessary to understand how the original access control operated so that 
it can be emulated to allow access to the reproduction of the work. 
The problem is particularly compelling when the physical format in which the copy was 
originally marketed has become obsolete.  If the Internet Archive is given computer software that 
was marketed on 5 1/4 inch floppy diskettes, it will not even be able to access the work in its 
original format on the typical computer sold in the marketplace today, because computers sold today 
are not equipped with 5 1/4 inch floppy drives. However, Internet Archive also desires an 
exemption that addresses the “original only” problem even when the medium on which the original 
copy was marketed (e.g., CD-ROM) is not yet obsolete, noting that it is crucial to archive digital 
works before they become inaccessible and before the information on the medium has degraded. 

[PAGE 44]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 44 
This proposal raises a host of questions. Is the specified preservation activity a noninfringing 
use? Is the “original only” check a technological measure that protects access to a work? If it is, 
would an exemption restricted to obsolete formats resolve the problem? Should the exemption 
extend beyond obsolete media to encompass media that are “becoming” obsolete? Should the class 
encompass all literary and audiovisual works? Is the proposed exemption merely another way of 
requesting a use-based exemption for preservation that would be more appropriately resolved by 
Congress?71 
At the hearing on this issue and in the reply comments, there was a great deal of discussion 
of the nature of the technological protection measures involved.  The Joint Reply Commenters stated 
that a “technology which allows copying but which renders the resulting copies less than fully 
functional should be classified, in DMCA terms, as a copy control subject to section 1201(b), not an 
access control,” and that it is “far from clear” that such technology is an access control.72  While it is 
true that the primary purpose of such technology appears to be to prevent copying, e.g., by allowing 
only nonfunctioning copies to be made, it does not follow that such a technology is not an access 
control.73  Indeed, the technology in question does allow copying. The problem is that the copy may 
be of limited or no use.  From the point of view of the user, there is a copy, but the user cannot get 
71 See R7 at 5. 
72 R23 at 41. 
73 Even the Joint Reply Commenters allowed that it is possible that it would be 
considered an access control. T Steve Metalitz, May 14, 2003, p. 149.  See also R23 at 41 
(“The submitter asserts that these are access controls, not copy controls, but that is far from 
clear,” an assertion that appears to allow the possibility that the technological measures in 
question are indeed access controls). 

[PAGE 45]
 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 45 
access to it.74  It therefore appears that the primary purpose of a protection system does not 
necessarily determine whether it is an access control, or a copy control, or both. 
Therefore, the Internet Archive appears to have identified technological measures that 
control access to works and that the Internet Archive claims have prevented it from engaging in 
noninfringing preservation activities. Before examining whether the Internet Archive has actually 
identified noninfringing activities affected by those access controls, however, we turn to whether it 
has identified a “particular class of works.” 
On its face, the Internet Archive’s proposal relates to “literary and audiovisual works,” two 
major categories of works enumerated in section 102.  While a “particular class of works” may 
include works from more than one section 102 category, designating such a class creates some 
tension with Congress’ instruction that a “particular class” be “a narrow and focused subset of the 
broad categories of works of authorship” identified in section 102. The starting point in determining 
a “class of works” may be a category of works, but usually the next step will be to narrow the class 
to some subset of that category.  And although a “particular class” might also include works from 
more than one section 102 category, it probably would not include two categories in their entirety.75 
74 By analogy, a CSS-encrypted DVD may be copied, yet in most situations, the copy 
of the DVD will not play in a DVD CCA-licensed DVD player.  Were the reasoning of the 
reply comment applied to the CSS situation (if it allows copying, but not access to the copies, 
the measure is not an access control in DMCA terms), one might have to conclude that a CSSencrypted DVD is not a technological measure that controls access, but rather was designed to 
prevent unauthorized duplication. While preventing unauthorized duplication may be the 
primary goal of such a technological scheme, the courts have held that CSS is a technological 
measure that “effectively controls access to a work.”  See, e.g., Universal City Studios v. 
Corley, 273 F.3d 429 (2d. Cir. 2001); Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Reimerdes, 111 F. 
Supp.2d 294, 317-18 (S.D>N.Y. 2000). 
75 See 65 FR at 64560. 

[PAGE 46]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 46 
Moreover, the nature of the problem identified by the Internet Archive would appear, as a 
matter of logic and common experience, to be one that is likely to occur with respect to virtually all 
categories of works. In fact, the class proposed by the Internet Archive appears dangerously close to 
being an indirect way of attempting to achieve a “use-based” exemption for preservation activity. 
Although, as a matter of policy, there may be merit to the notion that exemptions from the 
prohibition on circumvention should be based on the circumventor’s intended use, that is not an 
option that Congress has given to the Librarian in this rulemaking.  The statute requires that 
exemptions relate to “a particular class of copyrighted works,”76 and as the Register concluded in the 
previous rulemaking, “[b]ased on a review of the statutory language and the legislative history, the 
view that a ‘class’ of works can be defined in terms of the status of the user or the nature of the 
intended use appears to be untenable.”77  While, as discussed below in the discussion of the “other 
factors” that the Librarian may consider, consideration should be given to creating a statutory 
exemption permitting libraries and archives to circumvent access controls in particular 
circumstances for purposes of archiving and preservation, any exemption resulting from this 
rulemaking must relate to a “particular class” of works, and will be available to anyone engaging in 
a noninfringing use. 
In any event, the Internet Archive has not made the case for a broad class of works 
encompassing two section 102 categories in their entirety.  Rather, it has made the case for a class of 
works that is narrower in several respects: the class includes only works that are in formats that 
require the original media or hardware as a condition of access, that consists only of computer 
programs and video games, and only when they are in obsolete formats. The first two conditions are 
the consequences of the proof submitted by Internet Archive in making its case for an exemption; 
76  §1201(a)(1)(C). 
77  65 FR at 64559. 

[PAGE 47]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 47 
the final condition is the result of the Register’s analysis of the noninfringing uses the Internet 
Archive has been prevented from making. 
One of these limitations was suggested by the Internet Archive in its submissions to the 
Register, although not in so many words.  The proposed class consisted of “Literary and audiovisual 
works embodied in software whose access control systems prohibit access to replicas of the works.” 
(Emphasis added).  In proposing such a class, the Internet Archive appears to have been guided by 
the Register’s recommendation in the previous rulemaking, which stated that in determining the 
contours of a particular class of works, “the section 102 categories of works are, at the very least, the 
starting point for any determination of what a ‘particular class of work’ might be,” and that “[s]uch a 
classification would begin by reference to attributes of the works themselves, but could then be 
narrowed by reference to the medium on which the works are distributed, or even to the access 
control measures applied to them.”78 
The Register believes that a class defined, in part, by reference to “software whose access 
control systems prohibit access to replicas of the works” is ambiguous.  Indeed, the Register can 
fathom what the proposed class consists of only because the Internet Archive, in its comments, 
testimony and post-hearing responses, has elaborated on the nature of the access controls that have 
prevented it from making usable replacement copies.  The principal form of access control identified 
by the Internet Archive, as described above, is the “original-only” access control which requires use 
of the original, authorized copy obtained by the user.  The Internet Archive also identifies two other 
forms of access control that may prohibit access to archival copies: dongles and the “Lenslok lensbased access protection.” 
78  65 FR at 64560. 

[PAGE 48]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 48 
Dongles are discussed above, in connection with the second exemption recommended by the 
Register. For archives, however, dongles present a problem not only when they are damaged or 
malfunction, but also when “the peripheral ports to plug in the dongle do not exist on new computer 
models.”79  Lenslok is described by the Internet Archive as “an exotic access protection system for 
Sinclair Spectrum systems” that “works by holding a plastic lens up to the screen to decode a 
password that allows the user to access the title.” Internet Archive alleges that the password is 
“impossible to read” on modern equipment and that “it is very difficult to locate the Lenslock plastic 
lens.”80 
The Register believes that a class delimited, in part, by a requirement that the covered works 
were distributed in formats that “require the original media or hardware as a condition of access” 
addresses precisely the types of access controls that have created difficulties for the Internet 
Archive. While this exemption is crafted with original-only access controls in mind, it also happens 
to cover the situations described by the Internet Archive relating to dongles and Lenslok when the 
work is in an obsolete format.  The dongle and the Lenslok can fairly be described as “original 
hardware” that accompanied the original copy of the software and that must be used in order to gain 
access to the software. Thus, subject to the limitation to computer programs and video games and 
the requirement that the software be in an obsolete format, the recommended exemption addresses 
79  PHR Brewster Kahle, The Internet Archive, p. 2.  The Internet Archives also asserts 
that “hardware dongles are difficult to find.” Id.  While the Register would hesitate before 
recommending an exemption based only on the assertion that dongles are hard to find, just as 
she refrained from recommending an exemption in 2000 that would extend to “lost” dongles, 
see 65 FR at 64566, the additional difficulties Internet Archive has encountered with dongles, 
as well as the additional requirements included in the recommended exemption, make it 
unnecessary to decide whether difficulty in finding the appropriate dongle would by itself 
justify an exemption. 
80  Id., p. 2. 

[PAGE 49]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 49 
the works for which Internet Archive has sought an exemption. 
The Register recommends limiting the types of works exempted to computer programs and 
video games, rather than the Internet Archive’s requested class of literary and audiovisual works, 
because the evidence in the record of this rulemaking does not support such a broad class of works. 
The Internet Archive presented a great deal of evidence relating to computer programs.81 There is 
also evidence in the record showing that a significant number of computer and video games are 
available only in obsolete formats, a characteristic that, for reasons discussed below, is important for 
purposes of this exemption.82  The case for other types of literary or audiovisual works is far less 
clear. The Internet Archive has made passing references to works like “Shogun” and to “Ephemeral 
Films,” the “Voyager Archive,” and the “Macromedia Archive,” but there is virtually no explanation 
of how these references apply to the argument, the classes of works involved, the quantity of works 
for which there is a problem, or the technological protection measure applied to these works. For 
example, “Exhibit A” to the Internet Archive’s post-hearing response to questions is a list of 
numerous titles stated to be in the Voyager Archive, but no information is provided beyond the 
titles.83  A title such as “Beethoven: Symphony No. 9" suggests a sound recording, but its relevance 
is completely undecipherable. The lack of meaningful information about the nature of these works, 
the formats that they are on, or the technological measures preventing noninfringing uses frustrates 
the ability to evaluate these works and the need for an exemption for such works. Similarly, although 
one early computerized book was mentioned in the testimony,84 the scope of any problem relating to 
digital books is unknown; one example is insufficient to exempt an entire class of copyrighted works 
81 C25, R15, T Brewster Kahle, May 14, 2003, p. 88-90 and 124-39, and PHR 
Brewster Kahle, The Internet Archive. 
82 Id. 
83  PHR Brewster Kahle, The Internet Archive, p. 2 and 5. 
84 T Brewster Kahle, May 14, 2003, p. 88 (“Shogun”). 

[PAGE 50]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 50 
even if that class is limited to obsolete formats.  Accordingly, because Internet Archive was able to 
demonstrate more than de minimis problems only with respect to computer programs and video 
games, the Register recommends that the exempted class of works be limited to those two types of 
works. 
The final limitation recommended by the Register is that the works must have been 
“distributed in formats that have become obsolete.”  Obsolete formats include particular media,  as 
well as operating systems, that are no longer manufactured or reasonably available in the 
marketplace.  A likely example of an obsolete medium is the 5 1/4 inch floppy diskette;85 a likely 
example of an obsolete operating system is the Commodore Amiga operating system.  As with the 
exemption for computer programs protected by dongles, which is limited to damaged or 
malfunctioning dongles that are obsolete, the definition of “obsolete” is taken from 17 U.S.C. 
§108(c).86  Adapted to the context of this exemption, a format shall be considered obsolete if the 
machine or system necessary to render perceptible a work stored in that format is no longer 
85  Whether 5 1/4 inch floppy diskettes actually are obsolete today is unclear.  No 
commenters or witnesses have stated whether they are obsolete; it seems to have been tacitly 
assumed that they are. While the Register can take administrative notice that computers are 
not typically sold today with 5 1/4 inch floppy disk drives, see Nat’l Classification Comm. v. 
United States, 779 F.2d 687, 695 (D.C. Cir. 1985) (“[i]t is beyond dispute that an agency may 
provide the factual predicate for a finding by taking ‘official notice’ of matters of common 
knowledge”), nevertheless it may be that floppy disk drives are still manufactured or are still 
reasonably available in the commercial marketplace.  In any dispute in which a library or 
archive relies on the exemption recommended herein to justify circumvention of access 
controls on software fixed on a 5 1/4 inch floppy diskette, it would be a matter of proof 
whether 5 1/4 inch drives are indeed obsolete. 
86  “For purposes of this subsection, a format shall be considered obsolete if the 
machine or device necessary to render perceptible a work stored in that format is no longer 
manufactured or is no longer reasonably available in the commercial marketplace.” 

[PAGE 51]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 51 
manufactured or is no longer reasonably available in the commercial marketplace.  A work is not 
considered “reasonably available” if it can only be purchased in second-hand stores.87 
This final limitation to works distributed in formats that have become obsolete is based on 
the Register’s analysis of the noninfringing uses that original-only access controls have adversely 
affected. The Internet Archive asserts that its preservation activity is a noninfringing use under 
sections 107, 108, and 117(a)(2) of the Copyright Act. Section 117(a)(2) addresses the reproduction 
and adaptation of a copy of a computer program by its owner for archival purposes. Section 108 
specifically deals with recurring operations that are necessary for the certain preservation and other 
activities of libraries and archives. Section 107 is the codification of the fair use defense.
 Because §108 was enacted specifically to address reproduction by libraries and archives, and 
was amended by the Digital Millennium Copyright Act to address certain digital issues,88 analysis of 
noninfringing archival and preservation activities logically begins with that section. Since the 
proposed noninfringing use of these works relates to the making of replacement copies of published 
works for preservation and use by libraries and archives, the particular subsection of section 108 that 
would govern such activity is §108(c). Section 108(c) allows three copies or phonorecords of 
published works to be duplicated solely for the purpose of replacement of a copy or phonorecord 
that is damaged, deteriorating, lost, or stolen, or if the existing format in which the work is stored 
has become obsolete, if – 
(1) the library or archives has, after a reasonable effort, determined that an
unused replacement cannot be obtained at a fair price; and 
87 S. Rep. No. 105-190 at 62. (1998). See also House Manager’s Report 48. 
88  Pub. L. No. 105-304, §404 (1998). 

[PAGE 52]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 52 
(2) any such copy or phonorecord that is reproduced in digital format is not
made available to the public in that format outside the premises of the library
or archives in lawful possession of such copy. 
Section 108(c) does not authorize generalized preservation activities; it is limited by its 
terms.  While the Internet Archive appears to be in lawful possession of the digital copies of the 
works it seeks to preserve, the safe harbor of §108(c) does not encompass all of the works sought to 
be archived. The Internet Archive has not suggested that the original copies or phonorecords of the 
works it intends to reproduce have been damaged, lost or stolen. While it may be asserted that some 
of these works are “deteriorating,” that is a factual question that would have to be determined on a 
copy-by-copy basis. It would not be reasonable to interpret this term in the extremely broad sense 
that all works are, to a certain extent, deteriorating or in the process of becoming obsolete from the 
moment of creation, since this would be an interpretation that would swallow the rule. Some 
meaningful evidence of specific deterioration would appear to be necessary. The Internet Archive 
has not asserted that any work is deteriorating (apart from the broad sense discussed above), but 
rather that the formats are or are becoming obsolete. In its 1998 amendments to §108, Congress 
chose to exempt formats that have “become obsolete,” not to exempt formats that are becoming 
obsolete. Therefore, the only digital reproduction of published works that would be noninfringing 
under §108 relates to copies or phonorecords that are damaged, deteriorating, lost, or stolen, or those 
works distributed on formats that have already become obsolete. Based on the record in this 
rulemaking, only the last condition has been put before the Register in relation to preservation 
activity – works stored on existing formats that have become obsolete.89 
Even in cases where the format is obsolete, §108(c) imposes two additional requirements 
before a library or archive is permitted to make copies: (1) the library or archives must have 
89 Proposals and evidence for malfunctioning and damaged access controls (as opposed 
to works) on computer programs are dealt with separately.  See discussion supra, Section 
III.A.2. 

[PAGE 53]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 53 
determined that an unused replacement cannot be obtained at a fair price and (2) the digital 
reproduction of a copy or phonorecord may not be made available to the public “outside the 
premises of the library or archives in lawful possession of such copy.”90 For purposes of the inquiry 
in this rulemaking, the first condition is an important one for determining whether or not such 
activity is a noninfringing use.91  The proponents of the exemption have produced no evidence on 
this question, but this is understandable because even if a reasonably priced replacement were 
available, it would not satisfy the intended use by the Internet Archive – migration to a different 
medium, e.g, a hard drive. Still, to fall within the scope of permitted uses under §108(c), a library or 
archive must have determined that an unused replacement cannot be obtained at a fair price. 
Even though a library or archive must have determined that an unused replacement cannot be 
obtained at a fair price in order to qualify for the § 108(c) exemption, it can safely be assumed that 
there will be many occasions when an unused replacement will not be “reasonably available.”  For 
example, it is very likely that many early video games that were produced in now-obsolete formats 
are not available today. Similarly, twenty year old computer programs are highly unlikely to be 
available, in their original versions, in the marketplace.  Indeed, the Internet Archive’s testimony 
indicated that in many cases, the original producers of software no longer have any copies of old 
versions of the software that the Internet Archive has.92 
90 17 U.S.C. §108(c). 
91The latter condition is, of course, important to a determination of whether the 
circumvention was limited to a noninfringing use, e.g., on site use.  The proponent of the 
exemption, the Internet Archive, has stated that it limits access to its archive in conformance 
with this requirement. A library or archive that made copies of the archived material available 
to the public outside its premises would be exceeding the privilege afforded by §108 and, 
unless some other defense to infringement were available, would be unable to avail itself of the 
recommended exemption that would permit it to circumvent the “original-only” access control 
when engaging in noninfringing uses. 
92  T Brewster Kahle, May 14, 2003, p. 152. 

[PAGE 54]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 54 
In addition, it must be acknowledged that in enacting the DMCA, Congress specifically 
amended section 108 (c) to provide for the digital reproduction of works for certain preservation and 
use purposes. As the Senate Judiciary Committee’s report on the DMCA states: 
The amendment to subsection (c) also broadens its coverage to allow
the updating of obsolete formats. It permits the making of such copies
or phonorecords of a work “if the existing format in which the work is
stored has become obsolete.” This provision is intended to permit
libraries and archives to ensure that copies of works in their
collections continue to be accessible and useful to their patrons. In
order to ensure that the provision does not inadvertently result in the
suppression of ongoing commercial offerings of works in still-usable
formats, the amendment explicitly provides that, for purposes of this
subsection, a format will be considered obsolete only if the machine or
device necessary to render perceptible a work stored in that format is
no longer manufactured or reasonably available in a commercial
marketplace. Under this language, if the needed machine or device can
only be purchased in second-hand stores, it should not be considered
“reasonably available.”93 
This statement in the legislative history supports the view that Congress’ amendment was intended 
to allow digital reproduction of works in obsolete formats. 
Although §108(c) could reasonably suffice to qualify the preservation of obsolete formats of 
works as a noninfringing use, the Internet Archive seeks a broader exemption that would extend to 
formats that are not yet obsolete.  For that reason, it is necessary to examine the other bases relied on 
by Internet Archive in support of its contention that such archival activity is noninfringing: sections 
107 and 117(a)(2). 
The Register does not recommend broadening the exemption based on fair use, which is 
codified in §107. In determining whether libraries and archives may circumvent access controls for 
the purpose of systematic preservation of digital works, the Register believes that reliance on §107 is 
inappropriate. While it is true that some preservation activity beyond the scope of §108 may well 
93 S. Rep. No. 105-190 at 62. (1998). See also House Manager’s Report at 48. 

[PAGE 55]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 55 
constitute a fair use, it is improper in this context to generalize about the parameters of §107.  Fair 
use involves a case-by-case analysis94 that requires the application of the four mandatory factors to 
the particular facts of each particular use.95 Since disparate works may be involved in the 
preservation activity and the effect on the potential market for the work may vary, sweeping 
generalizations are unfounded. Also, the fact that Congress specifically addressed the making of 
preservation copies by libraries and archives when it amended §108 – a section that contains express 
limitations on the exemption that were an important ingredient in the balance achieved, e.g., digital 
reproductions may not be made available beyond the premises of the library or archives, and, as 
noted above, an unused replacement at a fair price must be unavailable – necessitates caution before 
resorting to §107 for broader uses.96 This is particularly true in light of the fact that Congress enacted 
the amendment to §108 as part of the DMCA, the same legislation that enacted §1201. Unless 
particular facts about the use of particular works are presented to reveal that the §108(c) exemption 
is insufficient, and unless these particular facts could be analyzed under §107 to establish a 
likelihood that fair use is applicable, it would be improper in this rulemaking to go beyond the 
express congressional parameters contained in the DMCA amendments to §108. 
The Register reaches a similar conclusion with respect to §117(a)(2).  The limitation on the 
exclusive rights of copyright owners contained in §117(a)(2) is limited to “computer programs.” The 
term “computer programs” is defined in the Copyright Act as “a set of statements or instructions to 
94  H.R. Rep. No. 94-1476, at 66 (1976); Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 
U.S. 569, 577 (1994); Nimmer on Copyright §13.05[A][4]. 
95  H.R. Rep. No. 94-1476, at 65 (1976) (“each case raising the question must be 
decided on its own facts”). 
96  In explaining why the proposed exemption would not harm the interests of copyright 
owners the Internet Archive itself pointed out that “We're regulated just like everybody else 
within the sort of 108 work. [Sic.]We are a library. So the use is protected.”  T Brewster 
Kahle, May 14, 2003, p. 91. 

[PAGE 56]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 56 
be used directly or indirectly in a computer in order to bring about a certain result.”97 Section 
117(a)(2) permits the owner of a copy of a computer program to make or to authorize the making of 
another copy or adaptation of that computer program when “such copy or adaptation is for archival 
purposes only and all archival copies are destroyed in the event that continued possession of the 
computer program should cease to be rightful.” 
While a superficial reading of §117(a)(2) might lead to the conclusion that activities such as 
those of the Internet Archive fall within its scope, case law construing §117(a)(2) requires caution in 
applying the exemption, and the leading treatises confirm that the construction of this exemption 
may be narrow.  The Internet Archive states that “[s]ection 117(a)(2) allows software owners to 
make reproductions for archival use” and asserts that it is engaging in archival use; therefore, its 
activity is covered by this exemption.  But the bulk of the authority construing §117(a)(2) suggests 
that the actual scope of that exemption does not extend to the systematic migration to modern 
storage systems98 of a wide variety of works by, in the Internet Archive’s own words, a nonprofit 
library that provides free access to an enormous and wide-ranging collection of web pages, movies, 
books, sound recordings and software in order to provide an historical record to future generations.99 
As one appellate court recently stated, “ Under the Copyright Act, the phrase ‘copy for archival 
purposes’ has established meaning with reference to computer programs: to make a backup copy to 
guard against the risk of damage to or destruction of the original caused by mechanical or electrical 
failure. See 17 U.S.C. § 117(a)(2).”100  The major treatises are in accord.  “Courts have generally 
construed this exemption narrowly and in light of the concern that occasioned its 
97 17 U.S.C. § 101. 
98  C25, p. 2. 
99  C25, p. 1. 
100 Operating System Support, Inc. v. Wang Laboratories, Inc., 52 Fed.Appx. 160, 169, 
2002 WL 1791101 (3rd Cir. 2002).  

[PAGE 57]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 57 
adoption--specifically, ‘to guard against destruction or damage by mechanical or electrical 
failure.’”101 “It has been held that this archival copy privilege may be invoked only where the copy 
purchased by the ‘owner’ may be destroyed or damaged by ‘mechanical or electrical failure.’”102 
It is far from clear that the purpose of the archival activity by Internet Archive and by other 
libraries and archives is to guard against destruction or damage by mechanical or electrical failure. 
Rather, the primary purpose of the Internet Archive’s activity appears to be, in the words of its 
[director], that “formats become obsolete and the platforms change.”103  At least in part, Internet 
Archive wishes to create archival copies of computer programs due to the “rapid obsolescence of 
digital formats.”104 Thus, to the extent that case law and treatises suggest that archiving of computer 
programs for other purposes is not permitted under §117, it is questionable whether that section 
applies to such archival activity. To be sure, the Internet Archive also states that it wishes to migrate 
digital works to its modern storage system because they are on media that are “degrading,” and that 
this “must be done before the formats or media become obsolete or damaged.”105  Thus, it appears 
that the Internet Archive’s systematic reproductions have a dual purpose: to ensure that the works 
are accessible on modern equipment and to ensure that intact reproductions of the work will be 
available in the event that the original copy is damaged. 
101 II P. Goldstein, Copyright §5.2.1.4 (2003). 
102 2 M. & D. Nimmer, Nimmer on Copyright §8.08[C] (2003).  See also Micro-Sparc, 
Inc. v. Amtype Corp., 592 F. Supp. 33 (D. Mass. 1984) ; Atari, Inc. v. JS&A Group, Inc., 597 F. 
Supp. 5 (N.D. Ill. 1983); Vault Corp. v. Quaid Software Ltd., 655 F. Supp. 750, 759 (E.D. La. 
1987), aff'd, 847 F.2d 255 (5th Cir. 1988).  But see Vault Corp. v. Quaid Software Ltd., 847 F.2d 
255, 267 (5th Cir. 1988) (“Congress imposed no restriction upon the purpose or reason of the 
owner in making the archival copy; only the use made of that copy is restricted”). 
103  T Brewster Kahle, May 14, 2003, p. 86. 
104  PHR Brewster Kahle, The Internet Archives, p. 2.  
105  C 25, p. 2. 

[PAGE 58]
 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 58 
Ultimately, however, the Internet Archive’s purpose is not to make a backup copy; rather, it 
is to make a “use” copy.  The copies that are migrated to the Internet Archive’s modern storage 
system are, in fact, the copies that will be used – and not only by the Internet Archive, but also by 
members of the general public.  “The Internet Archive and all of its collections are open to the 
public either directly or through a straightforward registration process.”106  “The Archive now 
provides free access to an enormous and wide-ranging collection of web pages, movies, books, 
sound recordings and software.”107  Thus, the activity which is the basis for the Internet Archive’s 
requested exemption is not simply archival activity.  See Allen-Myland, Inc. v. International 
Business Machs. Corp., 746 F. Supp. 520, 537 & fn. 19 (E.D. Pa. 1990) (§117(a)(2) “protects solely 
those copies used "for archival purposes only", and not copies made for use).  As the statute states, 
the exemption applies to copies made “for archival purposes only.” 108 
Because it seems unlikely at best that the activities asserted by the Internet Archive as a 
justification for exempting a class of works fall within the scope of §117(a)(2), the Register cannot 
conclude that that provision would justify exempting a class of works broader than that which is 
justified based on an application of §108(c). Moreover, the fact that the activity for which an 
exemption is sought fits far more comfortably within the scope of §108 than that of §117 persuades 
that Register that reliance on §117 to exempt a potentially broader class than could be supported 
under §108 would be unjustified. The fact that §117 was not created to enable libraries and 
archives to perform their important public functions – that is the purpose of §108 – leads to the 
106  C 25, p. 7. 
107  Id., p. 1. See also Internet Archives post-hearing response, p. 2 (“Like a paper 
library the Archive also provides free access to researchers, historians, scholars and the 
general public”). 
108  The restriction to “archival purposes only” also suggests that when, as discussed 
above, the reproductions are made only in part to guard against mechanical or electrical 
failure, the reproduction is not within the scope of the exemption. 

[PAGE 59]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 59 
conclusion that any exemption designed to address the concerns raised by the Internet Archive 
should be limited to the congressionally-chosen parameters of section 108, especially when 
Congress redefined those parameters as part of the DMCA. 
A review of the mandatory statutory factors of  § 1201(a)(1)(C) to assess the proper balance 
based on the record confirms the Register’s judgment that an exemption should be granted for 
computer programs and video games distributed in formats that have become obsolete and which 
require the original media or hardware as a condition of access. 
The availability for use of copyrighted works. 
Works in the proposed class of literary and audiovisual works are, broadly speaking, 
available for use in a number of unprotected formats.  This is not true, however, with respect to 
certain kinds of works, i.e., many works produced solely in digital formats, such as computer 
programs and video games, for which there is obviously no alternative analog substitute.  Many such 
works are accompanied by access controls, and the proponents of an exemption have demonstrated 
that many computer programs and video games have been protected by “original-only” access 
controls. Such controls do, in theory, limit the availability for use of such works, but the only 
circumstances under which the proponents have shown that use has actually been restricted relate to 
preservation activity (discussed below) where the access controls require the use of physical or 
software formats that are not available to the user.  The constraints on availability for use that are 
created by such access controls militate in favor of an exemption. 
An evaluation of the availability for use of copyrighted works must also consider whether, in 
the context of the particular class of works in question, access control measures are increasing or 

[PAGE 60]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 60 
restricting the availability of works to the public in general.109 Because many providers of software 
and video games have elected to use “original-only” access controls to ensure that unauthorized 
copies of their works may not be disseminated and displace the market for legitimate copies, care 
must be taken, in fashioning any exemption, to limit the scope of the exemption so that it does not 
serve as a disincentive to continue to make such works available.  Restricting the exemption to 
software and videogames that are (1) protected by such access controls and (2) in obsolete formats, 
serves this end while permitting noninfringing uses in the cases where users have no other (or, at 
best, very limited) options if they wish to gain access to the works.  The restriction to obsolete 
formats also helps ensure that use of the exemption will likely be made only or at least largely by 
some libraries and archives, since consumers are less likely than libraries and archives to have an 
interest in using and copying out-of-date software and video games. 
The availability for use of works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational purposes. 
When the focus is shifted from availability for general use to availability for nonprofit 
archival, preservation, and educational purposes, the core concerns of the proponents of this 
exemption are apparent.  “Original-only” access controls necessarily affect preservation activities. 
Works that are “born digital,” such as computer programs and video games, can best be preserved in 
digital formats, and as hardware and software formats fall out of use, preservation can best be 
accomplished by migrating the works to modern storage media and in formats that modern devices 
can access. Even for works that exist in both analog and digital formats, the archivist has a 
legitimate interest in preserving all editions, including the electronic editions, for posterity.  The 
archivist confronted with access controls that prevent preservation of digital works must either 
circumvent those access controls or refrain from making a usable copy of the digital work.  The 
latter option obviously does not serve the interests that the second statutory factor is intended to 
advance. 
109  See 65 FR at 64564. 

[PAGE 61]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 61 
The interest in making works available for preservation purposes is highest when the work 
can no longer be accessed in its original digital format.  For works that can still be accessed in that 
format (such as new versions of software distributed on CD-ROMS with original-only access 
controls that require that the original CD-ROM be in the computer’s CD-ROM drive), the interest in 
preservation is not so great, or at least not so urgent.  Moreover, as noted above, the provision of the 
copyright law specifically intended to address the needs of nonprofit libraries and archives, §108, 
limits its permission to make digital copies of published works to situations where the existing 
format in which the work is stored has become obsolete (or to replacement of copies or 
phonorecords that are damaged, deteriorating, lost or stolen), and imposes the additional prerequisite 
that an unused replacement cannot be obtained at a fair price. 
In principle, these considerations apply to a wide variety of works, but proponents of an 
exemption have provided sufficient facts to justify only the narrower class recommended herein. 
Moreover, to the extent that this factor warrants exempting all works (or all works in digital formats) 
from the prohibition of §1201(a)(1) in order to enable preservation activities, it actually would 
warrant rejection of the exemption since the purpose of this rulemaking is to determine whether 
there are “particular class[es] of works” which should be exempted – not whether particular uses 
should be exempted.  Paradoxically, the failure of the proponents of this exemption to justify the 
need to circumvent access controls for all the types of works they proposed to be exempted may 
have salvaged what otherwise would have been an overly broad proposal that failed to identify the 
“particular class of works” that the statute requires. 
The impact that the prohibition on the circumvention of technological measures applied to
copyrighted works has on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research. 
If works are not preserved, but are instead lost from the cultural history of our society, there 
will be an adverse effect on all of the uses on which this factor focuses: criticism, comment, news 

[PAGE 62]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 62 
reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research. However, it is equally important to consider that 
preservation activity such as the work of the Internet Archive is not the sole means of enabling these 
fundamental uses. As long as access to works is currently possible, their use for criticism, comment, 
news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research will generally be available. Access to a work may 
be available in alternative, unprotective formats, or the protected version may be readily available 
for these uses. Criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research on computer 
programs and video games are not hindered with respect to much of the class consisting of computer 
programs and video games. The primary problem arises with obsolete formats that are not available 
on the market. In such a case, libraries and archives may be the only resort for access to these 
historical works. Therefore, it appears that criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, 
scholarship, or research are likely to be adversely affected only with respect to the subset of 
computer programs and video games that are obsolete. 
The effect of circumvention of technological measures on the market for or value of copyrighted
works. 
Circumvention of all literary or audiovisual works or even of all computer programs and 
video games could cause significant harm without some limiting principle. Of course, 
§1201(a)(1)(D) has the effect of limiting the scope of any exemption to noninfringing uses, yet the 
evidence of likely adverse effects in the record before the Register suggests that a more carefully 
tailored class would more appropriately remedy the adverse effects on established noninfringing 
uses while also minimizing the potential adverse effects on the market for or value of these works. 
Such a decision to tailor the class carefully is supported by clear evidence in the marketplace that 
computer programs and video games are a significant part of the works distributed unlawfully over 
the Internet and through the reproduction and distribution of unauthorized copies. Sensitivity to such 
widespread illegal trafficking is obviously critical to this rulemaking process, since these concerns 
formed the impetus for providing copyright owners with the protections afforded by the DMCA. 

[PAGE 63]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 63 
Such other factors as the Librarian considers appropriate. 
The Register recognizes that many of the important concerns that libraries and archivists 
have about the preservation of our digital heritage may not be satisfied by the scope of this class. 
The exemption for this tailored class is intended to prevent the loss of digital works that have been 
distributed in formats that have become obsolete, but not to permit preemptive archival activity to 
preserve works before they become obsolete. While this may be important to libraries and archivists 
in a digital age, particularly as works are increasingly “born digital,” the resolution of that issue is 
beyond the scope of this rulemaking. Since preemptive archival activity is not currently exempted 
under §108, it is not categorically a noninfringing use. To the extent that such activity might qualify 
as a noninfringing use under some other exemption, such as fair use, it could apply to all categories 
of works and presumably would be engaged in on an ongoing basis. In essence, the problem 
confronting archival activity in the digital age is a “use-based” concern that is more appropriate for 
congressional consideration and properly crafted legislative amendment than it is for this 
rulemaking. Since certain forms of protection technology such as “original-only” measures are 
inconsistent with reproduction of works for purposes of preservation because they prevent use of 
reproductions, there is a tension created by the DMCA that is likely to grow and that should be 
considered by Congress in a comprehensive fashion.  Although the remedy is beyond the scope of 
this rulemaking since it is a problem that relates to all digital works and is a problem that is not 
resolved by three-year exemptions, the potential adverse consequences raise serious concerns.  As 
works are increasingly created and distributed exclusively in digital formats, the likelihood that 
rapid technological change will render the formats of today obsolete tomorrow is a problem that is 
likely to increase. At present, the Register has received evidence of a problem that may well increase 
in the future. In the absence of congressional action, the problems could well exceed the scope of 
this rulemaking and create a tension between evidence of harm to noninfringing uses and the 
insufficient authority to remedy the problem found.  At present, and due to the limitations of the 
§1201 rulemaking process, the Register finds that the problem established in the record can best be 
addressed in this rulemaking by exempting the recommended class. 

[PAGE 64]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003	 Page 64 
4.	 Literary works distributed in ebook format when all existing ebook
editions of the work (including digital text editions made available by
authorized entities) contain access controls that prevent the enabling of
the ebook's read-aloud function and that prevent the enabling of screen
readers to render the text into a “specialized format." For purposes of
this exemption, “specialized format,” “digital text” and “authorized
entities” shall have the same meaning as in 17 U.S.C. §121. 
Electronic books (“ebooks”) are books that are distributed electronically over the Internet 
and downloaded by users to their personal computers or other electronic reading devices. The 
public’s reception of ebooks has been tentative, and currently a small percentage of all works 
published are distributed in ebook formats, e.g., Microsoft Reader, Adobe Reader or Palm Reader. 
Although this is still a nascent market, ebooks offer tremendous new opportunities for the blind and 
the visually impaired. When a book is in electronic format, it has the potential to offer accessibility 
to the blind and the visually impaired that is otherwise not available from a print version  First, 
ebooks may allow the user to activate a “read-aloud” function offered by certain ebook readers, e.g., 
the Adobe Reader (renamed in the current version 6.0, but formerly known as the Adobe Ebook 
Reader) and the Microsoft Reader (currently available in version 2.0). Both of these ebook readers 
contain read-aloud functionality that can render110 the written text of the book into audible, synthetic 
speech. Ebooks may also permit accessibility to the work by means of screen reader software (e.g., 
JAWS by Freedom Scientific), a separate program for the blind and visually impaired that interacts 
with an ebook reader and that is capable of converting the text into either synthesized speech or 
braille. In addition to the audible and tactile rendering of text works, screen readers also allow the 
text and layout of a text screen to be conveyed spatially so that a blind or visually impaired user can 
perceive the organization of a page on the screen or even the organization of a work as a whole. 
110  In this context, and throughout this memorandum, “render” means the process by 
which the digital representation of sounds and/or images is converted back into those sounds 
and/or images. See DMCA Section 104 Report 108 fn.330 (2001). 

[PAGE 65]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 65 
This read-aloud functionality of the ebook reader and the text-to-speech (TTS) or text-tobraille (TTB) functions of the screen reader software create tremendous potential for accessibility to 
works that might otherwise be unavailable to the blind and visually impaired. But these forms of 
accessibility to ebooks by the blind and visually impaired are not available for all ebooks. The readaloud function of the ebook reader may be disabled by the copyright owner of the work and the 
ebook may be set to technologically prevent access to the work by means of screen reader software. 
Disabling these accessibility features may be accomplished in different ways, but it appears that 
generally, these uses are restricted by digital rights management tools. Digital rights management 
(DRM) may be employed in various ebook formats to set permissions or restrictions on uses of the 
work by the user. Typically, these DRM permissions are “wrapped” or bound to the copies of the 
work by means of an access control. For instance, after creating a document, the creator may decide 
to make it publicly accessible through the Adobe Reader software that is widely used on the Internet. 
The creator can convert the document into the Adobe Portable Document Format (PDF) with the 
Adobe Acrobat program and may also use that program to restrict or permit particular uses that will 
be available to users of copies of the work that are distributed. After these permissions or restrictions 
are set, the creator or other copyright owner, or his or her agent, may bind these security settings to 
the file by means of a password or some other technological measure that protects access, thereby 
wrapping the usage rights within the overall access control. In order to alter the usage settings of the 
document, a user would have to circumvent the access control. 
The information submitted has shown that a substantial number of ebooks have been 
distributed to the public with the read-aloud function and the screen reader accessibility function 
disabled. Since it is claimed that ebooks may be the only existing format of a book that is potentially 
accessible to the blind and visually impaired, commenters have proposed an exemption for literary 
works, including ebooks, which are protected by technological measures that block or inhibit 

[PAGE 66]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 66 
perception via a “screen reader” or similar text-to-speech or text-to-braille device utilized by a 
person who is blind or visually impaired.111
 The primary proponent of this exemption was the American Foundation for the Blind 
(AFB).112  Other commenters113 have supported this exemption and have noted that fewer than ten 
percent of published books are ever provided to the blind and visually impaired in accessible 
formats.114 The disabling of the “read-aloud” function on ebooks or the disabling of accessibility to 
screen reader software that provides accessibility to the blind and visually impaired is alleged to 
prevent these users from engaging in particular noninfringing uses such as private performance. 
Even more significant, the disabling of these functions is alleged to prevent access to these works by 
blind and visually impaired users altogether. 
In her analysis of this proposal, the Register concludes that technological measures that 
control access to copyrighted works have a role in the disabling of the read-aloud function and of 
screen reader accessibility. She then determines that the uses that the proponents seek to enable are 
noninfringing uses. The Register then proposes a particular class of works that should be exempted 
from the prohibition on circumvention in order to enable the noninfringing uses, and determines that 
an exemption for that particular class of works is warranted based on a review of the factors set forth 
in §1201(a)(1)(C). 
111 This formulation of the proposal is a close restatement of  the class proposed by the 
Library Associations in Comment 33, which more precisely states a class related to the 
evidence of adverse effects on noninfringing uses demonstrated by the American Foundation 
for the Blind. 
112 C26 
113 C9, C13 and C33. 
114 C33 at 7. 

[PAGE 67]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 67 
As a preliminary matter, however, it is necessary to address an issue raised by opponents of 
the proposed exemption: whether the issue presented by the proponents of an exemption is one of 
access or of accessibility. As the Association of American Publishers (AAP) put it, “‘access’ ... 
refers only to a person’s ability to obtain a sufficient level of contact with or proximity to a copy of 
copyrighted work for that person to be able to make some ‘use’ of it,” while “‘accessibility’ ... 
describes both a specific need and goal of persons with disabilities to overcome those disabilities in 
order to make the same or comparable use of something as could a person without those 
disabilities.”115  Moreover, to the extent that “accessibility” is an issue, AAP argued that the 
enactment of the “Chafee Amendment” in 1997, adding §121 to the Copyright Act, was Congress’s 
specific response to concerns about accessibility for the blind and visually impaired.  Therefore, it 
would be inappropriate for the Librarian to use this rulemaking as a means to address such 
“accessibility” concerns, especially if to do so would go beyond the solutions offered by Congress 
when it enacted §121.116 
Section 121 provides that it is not an infringement of copyright for an authorized entity to 
reproduce or distribute copies or phonorecords of published nondramatic literary works in 
specialized formats exclusively for use by blind or other persons with disabilities.  “Authorized 
entities” are nonprofit organizations and governmental agencies with a primary mission to provide 
specialized services relating to training, education, or adaptive reading or information access needs 
of blind or other persons with disabilities.  “Specialized formats” means “braille, audio, or digital 
text which is exclusively for use by blind or other persons with disabilities.”117 
115  R 25, p. 13. See also T Allan Adler, May 1, 2003, p. 22 (“the access issue that is 
dealt with in Section 1201 is not the same as the accessibility issue that is dealt with under the 
Chafee Amendment”). 
116 R25, pp. 13-15. 
117  17 U.S.C. §121(c). 

[PAGE 68]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 68 
While the Register understands the distinction made by AAP between “access” and 
“accessibility,” that distinction has little impact on the Register’s recommendation.  In determining 
whether to exempt a particular class of works in this rulemaking, the Register is not required to 
ascertain whether users of that particular class of works are able to gain access to those works. 
Rather, the question is whether the prohibition on circumvention has had a substantial adverse effect 
on users’ ability to make noninfringing uses of the works.  “Access” may be relevant when the 
noninfringing use consists of gaining access, but other noninfringing uses are also relevant to the 
inquiry. The real relevance of “access” is based on the requirement that the prohibition against 
circumventing technological measures that control access to copyrighted works be adversely 
affecting the ability of users to make those noninfringing uses.  The threshold issue in evaluating 
that requirement is whether there are any access controls.  If there are, and if the inability to 
circumvent them without running afoul of §1201(a)(1) is preventing noninfringing uses, then it is 
appropriate to determine whether, considering the factors set forth in §1201(a)(1)(C), the affected 
class of works should be exempted.  In making that analysis, the existence and effect of §121 are 
certainly relevant, but the fact that §121 exists does not disqualify blind and visually impaired 
persons from seeking an appropriate exemption in this rulemaking, even if that exemption permits 
acts not expressly included within the scope of §121. 
Thus, the alleged distinction between “access” and “accessibility” is a red herring. To say 
that a blind person technically has “access” to a work that he cannot perceive does not assist in 
resolving whether to recommend an exemption.  Moreover, to return to AAP’s definition of “access” 
– “ a person’s ability to obtain a sufficient level of contact with or proximity to a copy of 
copyrighted work for that person to be able to make some ‘use’ of it” – it is far from apparent that a 
blind person does have “access” to an work in an ebook format that can be perceived only by 
viewing it on the ebook’s screen. Nor does the blind person necessarily have access to the book just 
because it may be available in traditional print formats.  The potential availability of mechanisms to 

[PAGE 69]
 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 69 
make works “accessible” under §121 hardly ensures that any particular work will in fact be made 
available in a way that is usable for the blind and visually impaired. 
As noted above, a threshold issue in considering the proposed exemption is whether the 
works in question are protected by access controls. The record in this rulemaking proceeding is less 
clear than desirable on that point. However, there appears to be consensus among the relevant 
participants in the rulemaking that access controls are involved.118  The specific technology that 
enables and disables the read-aloud function or the accessibility to screen reader software does not 
appear to be, in itself, an access control measure.  Rather, it appears to be a measure that controls 
particular uses of the work. However it also appears that an access control measure serves to protect 
the integrity of the use control measures, e.g., a password that protects the security features of the 
file. The publisher of an ebook would decide whether to enable the “read-aloud” function and 
screen reader accessibility – perhaps by checking a box on a password-controlled menu controlling 
the document’s security settings.119  As a representative of a major publisher stated, “If you look at 
the Acrobat approach, you set the permissions in advance and one of the permissions is text-to-
118    The representatives of AFB and of McGraw-Hill, a leading publisher, expressly 
stated that the inability to convert text to speech is because of a technological measure that 
controls access. T Paul Schroeder, May 1, 2003, p. 49; T Robert Bolick, May 1, 2003, p. 51. 
The other witnesses at the hearing on this issue appear to have implicitly agreed.  See the 
Transcript of the May 1, 2003 hearing, at 51 et seq. [Question: “Everyone agrees that what 
we're talking about here, the circumstances when you're not able to use that screen reader to 
convert text to speech, for example, the reason you can't do it is because in fact there is a 
technological measure that is controlling access. Is that the problem? Because if it isn't, of 
course, there's no reason to talking to it. I just want to make sure it's understood.”  Mr. 
Schroeder and Mr. Bolick responded in the affirmative; none of the remaining witnesses 
expressed any disagreement.] In addition, the AAP representative stated that the proposed 
exemption “would allow for the ability to circumvent specific access controls that are used in 
the context of e-book simply because those access controls do not enable the use of text-tospeech software.” T Allan Adler, May 1, 2003, p. 47. 
119  See Adobe Acrobat 6.0 Professional Help, pp. 390-01 (“Adding passwords and 
setting security options” and “Security options”). 

[PAGE 70]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 70 
speech. Then the encryption of DRM is applied and wraps the package.”120 To enable the read-aloud 
function or the accessibility to screen reader software, a user would have to circumvent the access 
control that protects these functions. The prohibition on circumvention, therefore, may under certain 
circumstances prohibit activation of these DRM functions (screen reader accessibility and the readaloud function) of the ebook. 
Having concluded that the prohibition is preventing the desired uses by persons with 
disabilities, the Register must consider whether the desired uses are noninfringing.  When a blind 
person activates the “read-aloud” function on an ebook, or uses a screen reader to “read” the text to 
himself or herself, such a use typically will be a noninfringing use. A private performance of a work 
for which one has obtained lawful access will always be noninfringing, since the exclusive rights of 
the copyright owner do not extend to private performances.  See 17 U.S.C. §106(4). Use of a screen 
reader to convert the text of a lawfully obtained ebook into braille may pose a more complicated 
question, since it implicates the copyright owner’s exclusive right of reproduction.  Because an 
individual user of screen reader software is not an “authorized entity,” § 121 does not apply to this 
conduct. Nevertheless, if such an intermediate reproduction is for the purpose of the private 
rendering of an lawful copy of the work into a “specialized format” in order to permit a blind person 
to perceive the work, purely for personal use, and does not include any distribution of the work that 
could harm the potential market for the work, such conduct clearly would be within the spirit of 
§121 and most likely would, in such circumstances, appear to constitute a fair use of the work. The 
Register believes that the intended uses of the work by the blind and visually impaired are 
noninfringing uses. 
Opponents of the exemption argued that the §121 was the congressional expression of the 
scope of limitations on copyright owner’s exclusive rights in relation to noninfringing uses by the 
120  T Robert Bolick, May 1, 2003, p. 50. 

[PAGE 71]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 71 
blind and visually impaired. While it is true that Congress enacted §121 to enable certain nonprofit 
organizations and government agencies to make copies of nondramatic literary works in specialized 
formats and distribute them to the blind and disabled, there is no indication that Congress intended 
to strip an individual who is blind or visually impaired of traditional defenses, such as fair use, when 
that individual takes actions to make such a work perceptible to himself for his own personal use.121 
The Register considers it highly unlikely that a publisher would even consider accusing such a 
person of copyright infringement, and even more unlikely that a court would find such conduct to be 
infringing. 
It is also significant to note that the purpose of § 121 to exempt certain conduct for making 
otherwise inaccessible versions of published copyrighted works accessible. The question before the 
Register in relation to ebooks is entirely different. The digital format of books needs no adaptation in 
order to be accessible to the blind and visually impaired.  Unlike the works addressed in §121, the 
digital text format of ebooks enhances accessibility, with built-in features that benefit the blind and 
visually impaired,  unless the technology that enables such accessibility has been disabled. There is 
no reason to believe that in enacting §121, Congress foresaw that publishers or authors would act 
affirmatively to prevent accessibility from an otherwise accessible format, and no reason to believe 
that Congress intended to give its blessing to such conduct. This is not to say that there are not 
legitimate reasons for disabling accessibility, e.g., concern that such accessibility will allow 
circumvention by other devices or the desire to prevent an ebook from competing with an audio 
version of the same work, but such concerns do not eliminate the legitimate nature of the intended 
use by the blind and visually impaired. Similarly, §121 cannot be read as a statement that Congress 
did not intend accessibility for the blind and visually impaired to extend to ebooks. Section 121 
121  Indeed, there is no indication that in enacting §121, Congress was even considering 
works already in digital formats, such as ebooks, which perhaps for the first time offer an 
individual blind person the possibility of “self-help” in making a copy of a literary work 
perceptible. 

[PAGE 72]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 72 
addresses accessibility for works that were published but not accessible due to the nature of the 
format in which they were published. The proposed exemption to the prohibition addresses 
published works in formats for which there is no inherent obstacle to accessibility except for the 
choice to deploy a technological restriction on accessibility.  Section 121 therefore offers little 
guidance for the present analysis. 
The proponents of an exemption have, therefore, made the case that the prohibition on 
circumvention is adversely affecting noninfringing uses.  But is there a particular class of works with 
respect to which noninfringing uses have been adversely affected?  AFB requests that the class of 
works be designated as “literary.” Such a class clearly is overbroad. The joint comments of the 
library associations proposes a more narrowly tailored class: “Literary works, including eBooks, 
which are protected by technological measures that fail to permit access, via a “screen reader” or 
similar text-to-speech or text-to-braille device, by an otherwise authorized person with a visual or 
print disability.” 
The Register finds that the class proposed by the library associations is closer to the mark. 
Unlike the class proposed by the AFB, which consists of an entire section 102 category of works, the 
library associations’ proposed class commences with a section 102 category but, drawing on the 
guidance offered in the previous rulemaking, 65 FR at 64561, narrows it by reference to attributes of 
the technological measures that control access to the works. 
The Register recommends exempting a class of works that takes the library associations’ 
proposal as its starting point, but with some additional refinements.  First, the Register cannot 
recommend a class of “literary works, including ebooks” (emphasis added), since that class of works 
includes literary works other than ebooks. A class of works must be determined based on a factual 
showing of substantial adverse effects on noninfringing uses, and the only facts submitted by 

[PAGE 73]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 73 
proponents of an exemption related to ebooks.122  Accordingly, the class should be defined initially 
as consisting of “Literary works distributed in ebook format.”  But a class of “literary works 
distributed in ebook format,” without further refinement, would be too broad.  It would include 
ebooks which are accessible to screen readers or which have the “read-aloud” feature enabled. There 
is no reason to permit circumvention of access controls on such ebooks, because the noninfringing 
use is already permitted.  Moreover, although a class of works cannot be defined by reference to 
particular uses or users,123 the class should be defined in a manner that is calculated to benefit the 
types of users and uses for which a showing of harm has been made, and that is calculated not to 
benefit other uses for which no showing has been made.  Because the case has not been made for a 
cognizable adverse effect outside the context of use by the blind and visually impaired, it is 
appropriate to further tailor the class to that particular harm. The optimal designation appears to be 
“literary works distributed in ebook format when all existing ebook editions of the work (including 
digital text124  editions made available by authorized entities125) contain access controls that prevent 
122  See, e.g., C 26 , pp. 3-6, PHR Janina Sajka, AFB, pp. 1-2. 
123  For this reason, the library associations’ proposal to further define the class of 
works by reference to “an otherwise authorized person with a visual or print disability” cannot 
be accepted. As AAP pointed out, “the intended use or users of the work” is “an unacceptable 
measure for an exempt ‘class.’” R26, p. 15. To acknowledge that, however, is not to say that 
in determining how to define a “particular class of works,” the noninfringing uses that are 
adversely affected by the prohibition on circumvention may not be taken into account.  Indeed, 
to the extent that the statutory scheme permits, the Register attempts to define an exempted 
class of works in a way that will not overbroadly include works for which there has been no 
showing that the prohibition is hindering noninfringing uses. 
124 “Digital text” is the specialized format referred to in §121(c)(3): “digital text which 
is exclusively for use by blind or other persons with disabilities.” 
125  “Authorized entities,” defined in §121(c)(1), are nonprofit organizations and 
governmental agencies with a primary mission to provide specialized services relating to 
training, education, or adaptive reading or information access needs of blind or other persons 
with disabilities. 

[PAGE 74]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 74 
the enabling of the read-aloud function and the enabling of screen readers to render the text into a 
specialized format.”126 
Such an exemption is closely tailored to the noninfringing uses which have been prevented 
by the pertinent access controls. For example, the only ebooks whose access controls could be 
circumvented are those that prevent both use of the read-aloud function and accessibility to screen 
reader software. If an ebook enables either of these features, the Register believes that it would 
represent meaningful accessibility for the blind and visually impaired. It is conceivable that 
copyright owners might have legitimate reasons for disabling one of these features, and while there 
may well be legitimate reasons for disabling both, the Register believes that the evidence of  harm 
outweighs any justification for disabling both of these features that has been put forward in the 
record in this rulemaking. 
Another important component of the exemption is that it would not apply to a work if, at the 
time of circumvention, an ebook version is on the market for which either the read-aloud function or 
screen readers are enabled. Should publishers make accessible formats of a particular work 
available by enabling either of these functions, the exemption would no longer be applicable to that 
particular work. Additionally, if the ebook or an accessible “digital text” is available through an 
“authorized entity” under §121, such as Bookshare.org,127 the exemption to the prohibition will not 
apply. 
126 “Specialized format” is defined in§121(c)(3): “braille, audio, or digital text which is 
exclusively for use by blind or other persons with disabilities.” 
127 Bookshare.org is an arm of a California not-for-profit organization known as the 
Benetech Group that allows persons and organizations qualified under the provisions of 17 
U.S.C § 121 to download digital text and contribute scanned versions of books and certain 
printed material to the program. Those digital versions are made available to blind and disabled 
persons. As of March 2003, Bookshare.org was reported to have over 11,000 titles available 
on its service. See http://www.bookshare.org/web/PressReleaseC.html. 

[PAGE 75]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 75 
Formulating the exempted class as recommended would also ensure that it addresses harm 
that is not limited to isolated occurrences or mere inconveniences. The evidence suggests that the 
problem of accessibility is an adverse effect that would likely affect the vast majority of blind and 
visually impaired persons. Also, under the recommended formulation of the class, circumvention is 
not a matter of convenience or simply a question of the preferred means of accessibility. Although, 
as opponents of the exemption have pointed out, organizations like Bookshare.org exist to facilitate 
the conversion of books into digitized text for accessibility to the blind and visually impaired, the 
exemption specifically addresses whether such digital text versions of a work currently exist for use. 
If an accessible ebook edition of a work is available in the marketplace or a digital text is available 
through a §121 authorized entity, then the exemption does not apply.  As the exempted class is 
framed, affected users are likely to consider circumvention only as a last resort and only where the 
work is unavailable for the intended noninfringing use. The exemption also serves to encourage 
publishers to make accessible versions available: when such a version is available, the publisher 
need not worry that users may lawfully circumvent access controls applied to the work.  Thus, the 
recommended exemption gives the publisher ultimate control over whether any user can ever take 
advantage of the exemption with respect to that publisher’s work. 
The evidence in the rulemaking suggests that a significant number of ebook titles are not 
accessible to the blind and visually impaired. Although follow-up questions were asked of the 
witnesses testifying both in support of and in opposition to the proposed exemption for more precise 
data, the record on the precise number of works that prevent accessibility, such as the read-aloud 
function, is far from clear. Neither proponents or opponents of the exemption provided the Register 
with definitive details on the number of works or the particular works that prevented accessibility.128 
128 AFB’s post-hearing response offers some statistics from www.ebooks.com indicating 
that the percentage of ebook titles with the read-aloud function enabled was 62% of the titles in 
Adobe “Ebook” format, 28% of the titles in Microsoft Reader format and 0% of the titles in 
Mobipocket and Palm format. PHR Janina Sajka, AFB, p. 2. The reason for the last statistic 

[PAGE 76]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 76 
Despite the difficulty in establishing the exact scope of the problem, the evidence that has been 
submitted by both proponents and opponents of the exemption establishes that a significant number 
of ebook titles are currently offered to the public for which accessibility to the blind and visually 
impaired has been disabled.129 The compelling nature of the noninfringing use that such users seek – 
the ability to perceive the works – as well as the established scope of the problem weigh in favor of 
an exemption. 
In considering whether an exemption is necessary, the availability of alternative formats 
must also be addressed. There was no evidence introduced that titles available in ebook format are 
not also available in traditional book form as well. In addition, some titles available in ebook form 
that have the accessibility features disabled also exist in audio book format, although the record is 
vague on the extent to which this is true. It is necessary to consider whether the availability of these 
alternative formats eliminates the need for an exemption. Although the traditional book format is 
“available” in the marketplace, books in that format nevertheless are not necessaraily available for 
use by the blind and visually impaired. In order for a hard copy of a book to be accessible, it must be 
converted into some other form that is perceptible to the blind and visually impaired.  While §121 
allows authorized entities to undertake such a process, there is no question that this process has not 
kept pace with the publication of works in general and there is no evidence that such authorized 
entities have provided accessible formats of all of the works that are published in ebook format. 
would seem to be that the devices on which these formats are most often used often do not 
contain audio output. The post-hearing response refers to ebooks.com as an “Australian on line 
bookseller,” but the company’s contact information on its website also lists a U.S. corporate 
address and the website appears to have separate sections serving different regions, including 
the United States, so it is not entirely clear to what extent these percentages relate to U.S. 
editions of ebooks. In any event, it is probably reasonable to assume that statistics for the 
United States are similar to or the same as those for Australia. 
129  AFB post-hearing response at p. 2 (ebook.com statistics); AAP post-hearing 
response at 2 (one publisher whose default setting for Adobe Reader is “read-aloud off” has 
1650 titles available). 

[PAGE 77]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 77 
Bookshare.org, an entity that expressly operates under the auspices of § 121,130 uses 
volunteers who scan books into digital formats and makes those digital texts available to qualified 
members, who must be blind or disabled.  It has been argued by opponents of the exemption that 
entities such as Bookshare.org can make text versions of all books accessible to the blind and 
visually impaired since anyone can scan a book and submit it to Bookshare.org.  However, the fact 
that any book might conceivably be made available does not mean that all books are or will be made 
available through such organizations. Resources are limited, and, as noted above, as of March 2003, 
Bookshare.org was reported to have over 12,000 titles available on its service – a fraction even of 
the number of ebook titles (not to mention all book titles) in circulation.  In contrast, 280,590 ebook 
titles are reportedly on sale.131  The Register’s recommended exemption addresses whether the work 
is currently available in a format accessible to the blind and visually impaired.  To the extent that the 
digital text, with the read-aloud function or screen readers enabled, is available in the commercial or 
noncommercial marketplace, the Register agrees that the exemption is not appropriate. To the extent 
that it is not available, but when ebooks without those functions enabled are available, the blind and 
disabled should be permitted to circumvent the access controls that prevent them from making the 
texts perceptible to them.  Since a significant percentage of the ebooks on the market deny access to 
the blind and visually impaired by deactivating the read-aloud function and accessibility through 
screen readers, access to this significant segment of the population is, for practical purposes, 
unavailable for a large number of works. 
Audio books or books-on-tape are another form of books on the market that are accessible to 
the blind and visually impaired. Despite questions by the Copyright Office that attempted to clarify 
the extent to which commercially distributed audio books are available for the same titles in ebook 
130 http://www.bookshare.org/web/Legalities.html. 
131  “OeBF Releases eBook Sales Statistics,” EContent, Sept. 19, 2003 
[http://www.econtentmag.com/Articles/ArticleReader.aspx?ArticleID=5495 ]. 

[PAGE 78]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 78 
format that deny accessibility to the blind and visually impaired, the record remains unclear.132 
Nevertheless, there is sufficient information to conclude that the availability of audio book formats 
does not resolve the problem. For instance, AAP’s post-hearing response stated that one of its 
publisher members who generally disables the read-aloud function on ebooks publishes “roughly 
one-half” of its ebook titles in audio book format as well.133 Therefore, there are some significant 
number of “inaccessible” ebooks on the market for which there is no audio book substitute. 
In addition, AFB noted in its post-hearing response to the same question that while these 
audio books are useful for certain types of works, e.g., best sellers and novels, they are not available 
or useful for many other types of books. For instance, textbooks, scientific books or reference books 
are generally used in a manner that requires the content to be accessed at specific places within the 
work, and these works are not generally read from beginning to end.134 
It also may be legitimately assumed that to the extent that an audio book version of a work 
exists, it is unlikely that a user will opt for the synthesized speech of the read-aloud feature that is 
available in an ebook reader or a screen reader unless there is a purpose of the use that is not 
compatible with an audio book. While opponents have stated that the read-aloud feature is 
sometimes deactivated in order to avoid competition for the same title that is marketed in an audio 
book format, it appears very unlikely that the former is a marketplace substitute for the latter.135 In 
132 AAP’s post-hearing response stated that it could not obtain specific statistics on the 
number of ebooks that have the read-aloud function deactivated, and therefore was unable to 
determine how many of these unquantifiable titles were also available in audio book format. 
PHR Allan Adler, AAP, p. 1-3. 
133 Id at 2. 
134  PHR Janina Sajka, AFB, p. 1. 
135  See T Jonathan Band, May 1, 2003, p. 13 (“Screen readers do not compete with 
books on tape because of the synthetic quality of the sound”). 

[PAGE 79]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 79 
any case, the issue is not determinative since there is evidence that a substantial number of ebooks 
that disable accessibility functions are not available in audio book format. 
Before turning to the consideration of the statutory factors, one marketplace development 
that was raised late in the rulemaking warrants some additional discussion. AFB’s post-hearing 
response added some important, albeit cryptic, information. This response noted that the new version 
of the Adobe Reader 6.0 “incorporates access and read-aloud functionality” and that “[o]ur issues 
with the Adobe Ebook Reader itself appear to have been substantially resolved with this new 
release.”136 
This appeared to be a significant marketplace development, but the extent to which it had 
resolved the root of the problem was unknown. Does this mean that Adobe Reader 6.0 necessarily 
provides access? Can read-aloud functionality or accessibility to screen readers still be disabled? 
Were the responses in the AAP post-hearing response on default settings related to Abobe Reader 
6.0 or some earlier version? What is the significance in the context of the overall ebook market? 
Rather than move forward with incomplete information, the answers were sought in the 
Adobe Acrobat 6.0 software itself, which packages the work and allows digital rights management 
preferences to be chosen. A review of this software revealed that the default setting for documents 
saved in this format is that accessibility is enabled, thereby allowing both read-aloud functionality 
and accessibility by screen reader software. These defaults can be disabled, however, such that both 
accessibility options will be disabled. It therefore appears that although the default setting is 
favorable to accessibility and would make it unlikely that a publisher would inadvertently disable 
the read-aloud and screen reader functions, the fact remains that accessibility can still be denied if a 
136 PHR Janina Sajka, AFB, p. 1. 

[PAGE 80]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 80 
publisher chooses to disable those functions. Thus, AFB’s statement that its “issues with the Adobe 
Ebook Reader itself appear to have been substantially resolved” (emphasis added) cannot be read as 
admitting that its “issues” with ebooks in general have been resolved.  In addition, there was no 
evidence that any changes had occurred in other ebook reader formats that would warrant an 
assumption that the market has abruptly changed course. Therefore, the Register does not find that 
the problems raised have been resolved by the market. The evidence weighs in favor of an 
exemption during the next three-year period, and a review of the statutory factors applied to the class 
of works recommended supports this view. 
Under the first factor –  the availability for use – the record is clear that a significant number 
of ebook titles are distributed only in formats that are not perceptible to the blind and visually 
impaired.137 Not only does the evidence introduced by proponents support this conclusion, but the 
statements by the opponents of an exemption corroborate this fact.138 These ebook versions of this 
work are therefore unavailable for use by the blind and visually impaired. Although other formats of 
these works are “available” in the marketplace, they are nevertheless unavailable for use to the blind 
and visually impaired. The existence of a statutory exemption that allows works to be converted into 
accessible formats is relevant to this inquiry, but it is not determinative. This factor addresses the 
current availability for use rather than the potential availability for use. At present, this potential is 
137  AAP points out that it has taken many steps that have assisted in making literary 
works more available to the blind and visually impaired.  R26, at 12-13. The Register 
recognizes those efforts and commends AAP for its continuing activity in this area.  However, 
the fact remains that for the blind and visually impaired, a substantial proportion of literary 
works remain, as a practical matter, unavailable. 
138 Based on AAP’s own submissions, it is clear that a substantial number of ebooks are 
not “accessible” to the blind. AAP reports, for example, that “One such publisher, which 
indicated that its own default setting for Adobe Reader at this time is ‘read-aloud off,’ stated 
that it currently has about 1650 ebook titles available and that about 25% of those titles are also 
available for purchase as an audiobook.” AAP post-hearing response, at 2. Thus, there appear 
to be at least 1650 ebooks (from one publisher alone) that have “read-aloud off.” 

[PAGE 81]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 81 
all that §121 provides. The analysis must, however, consider the extent to which particular works are 
currently available in other accessible formats. To that end, the class has been tailored to encompass 
only the works that are unavailable in any ebook or digital text format that would allow accessibility 
to the blind and visually impaired. 
The second factor looks more particularly to the availability for use of works for nonprofit 
archival, preservation, and educational purposes. The two considerations dealing with archival or 
preservation purposes have not been specifically addressed at all in this rulemaking. Although the 
availability for educational purposes has not been expansively addressed in the record, it may be 
noted that the Library Associations’ comments and testimony have cited concerns for accessibility to 
required readings by blind and visually impaired students.139 Without a clearer record on the nature 
of this problem, this factor is of limited value. 
The third factor requires consideration of the impact that the prohibition on circumvention of 
technological protection measures applied to copyrighted works has on criticism, comment, news 
reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research. While there is little specific evidence of an adverse 
effect on these uses, it is apparent that to the extent that ebooks exist in the market but are not 
accessible to the blind and visually impaired and cannot be made accessible to them as a result of the 
prohibition, the prohibition will have an adverse impact on all of these uses by the blind and visually 
impaired. The record indicates that some significant number of works that exist in ebook format are 
not currently available in accessible formats. Therefore, but for the prohibition, these works might 
be available for such uses. 
139  C33, p. 11. 

[PAGE 82]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003	 Page 82 
The fourth factor analyzes the effect of circumvention of technological measures on the 
market for or value of copyrighted works. While a broad exemption on ebooks generally could 
create significant harm to this emerging market by facilitating Napster-like distribution of ebooks 
over the Internet, a refinement of the class will serve to minimize or even eliminate likely adverse 
effects. As discussed above, by limiting the class to “literary works distributed in ebook format 
when all existing ebook editions of the work (including “digital text” editions made available by 
authorized entities) contain access controls that prevent the enabling of the read-aloud function and 
the enabling of screen readers to render the text into a ‘specialized format,’” the exemption gives 
publishers control over whether users will be able lawfully to circumvent access controls on ebooks. 
Publishers, while opposing an exemption, have made no concrete showing that such an exemption 
would deter them from distributing literary works in ebook form, and it is difficult to imagine that 
the recommended exemption would provoke such a reaction. To the extent that the exemption may 
be used, its scope is restricted to a manner which minimizes the potential for unintended 
consequences. 
B.	 Other Exemptions Considered, But Not Recommended 
A number of other proposed exemptions were considered, but for the reasons set forth below, 
the Register does not recommend that any of them be adopted.  In most cases, proponents failed to 
propose a true “particular class of copyrighted works” and failed to demonstrate that users of such 
works have been or will be adversely affected in their ability to make noninfringing uses of those 
works. 
1.	 Proposed class: All works should be exempt for noninfringing uses, e.g., fair use and 
private uses, and other use-based proposals140. 
140  C7, C8, C43, and C44. 

[PAGE 83]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 83 
Many commenters proposed classes of works that were defined primarily or solely by 
reference to the uses that are made of the works.  As noted above and in the 2000 rulemaking, the 
Register cannot read §1201 as permitting the exemption of a class of works that is based on 
attributes of the users of those works or uses made of those works.  Rather, a class must be defined 
initially by reference to common attributes relating to the works themselves. 
A number of comments declined to specify a “class of works” and instead designated the 
class to be exempted as “all works.” Some of these comments cited facts which offered anecdotal 
support for a much narrower class, but did not factually buttress the claim to show the rationale for 
such a broad classification, except to the extent that the comments were critical of the DMCA 
generally. Such comments were considered by the Office as support for a narrower class to the 
extent that they cited any particular evidence of present or likely harm. 
In the last rulemaking, after an extensive review of the statutory language and the legislative 
history, the Register reached the conclusion that the term “class of works,” as applied to this 
rulemaking process in section 1201, refers to some subset of the section 102 categories of works. 
The section 102 categories are a “starting point” for any determination of what a particular class of 
works might be.141 Determining the precise contour of the scope of a “particular class,” so that it is 
neither too broad or too narrow, is one of the principal functions of the rulemaking process. The 
factual record established in the rulemaking process creates the means for appropriately tailoring the 
scope of the class. It is therefore incumbent upon commenters to create a factual record to support a 
141 65 FR at 64560. 

[PAGE 84]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003	 Page 84 
proposed exemption. The factual evidence of present or likely adverse effects on noninfringing uses 
will generally dictate the scope of the exemption. On the other hand, the lack of an evidentiary 
foundation will undermine the legitimacy of any proposal for an exemption in this process.  
Because the proponents of an exemption for “all works” have utterly failed to propose “a 
particular class of copyrighted works,” but have simply asked, in effect, for a blanket exemption for 
all works – in effect, an administrative abrogation of §1201(a)(1) – these proposals must be rejected. 
2.	 Proposed classes: Several, including “Per se Educational Fair Use Works” and “Fair Use 
Works.”142 
Another group of proposals defined the class of works primarily by reference to the type of 
use of works or the nature of the users, e.g., fair use works. A “use-based” or “user-based” 
classification was rejected by the Register in the last rulemaking, because the statutory language and 
the legislative history did not provide support for classification on this basis.143 Defining a class in 
such a manner would make it applicable to all works and would not provide any distinctions 
between varying types of works or the measures protecting them. If an exemption encompassing all 
works is to be granted, it is more appropriately a matter for Congressional action. This “use-based” 
or “user-based” classification is inconsistent with the narrowly tailored authority provided to the 
Librarian of Congress to exempt particular classes of adversely affected works in this rulemaking 
process. Had Congress wished to exempt all circumvention when it is for the purpose of 
142 C28, C30(7), C37(2), and C43. 
143  65 FR at 64560. 

[PAGE 85]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 85 
“noninfringing use,” or “fair use,” it could easily have done so. Giving the Librarian authority to 
exempt “a particular class of copyrighted works” is not designed to accomplish that end, or even to 
accommodate such an end. 
The statutory exemptions in section 1201 contain carefully crafted, use-based and user-based 
exemptions. Importantly, Congress considered and declined to enact certain use-based exemptions 
virtually identical to some of the proposals raised in this rulemaking. The statutory text and the 
legislative history provide no evidence that Congress intended this rulemaking to second-guess 
congressional determinations. Rather, Congress created this rulemaking as a “fail-safe” mechanism 
to focus on evidence of adverse effects in particular sub-categories of works that could be 
ameliorated by appropriately crafted, short-term exemptions.144 By their nature, use-based 
exemptions are not limited in time and would require recurring remedial treatment – a scenario at 
odds with the three-year term of exemptions in this rulemaking. It is also of note that several bills 
currently before Congress incorporate use-based revisions of section 1201. If Congress finds that an 
expansion to the existing statutory exemptions is warranted, it will accomplish that through 
legislation. 
Some commenters have packaged their proposed use-based exemptions by referring to 
certain types of works in an attempt to transform an essentially use-based exemption into a class of 
works more consistent with the requirements identified in the last rulemaking proceeding. For 
example, the comment on behalf of Association of American Universities (“AAU”)and other 
144  Commerce Comm. Report at 36. 

[PAGE 86]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003	 Page 86 
educational organizations (C28), while critical of the Register’s determination that a “class of 
works” must, as a starting point, be based on attributes of the works themselves, simply lists several 
subcategories (e.g., scientific and social science databases, textbooks, law reports, and educational 
audiovisual works) of virtually every section 102 category of works (“the following subcategories of 
literary works, musical works, pictorial, graphic, and sculptural works, audiovisual works, and sound 
recordings”). These types of works are proposed as a class of “Per se Educational Fair Use 
Works.”145 One of the fatal flaws in this designation becomes obvious when the types of works listed 
are matched with this broad use-based proposal. While there might be certain instances in which the 
unauthorized reproduction or adaptation of a textbook in an educational setting could be a fair use, 
such a determination would be unusual since the primary market for textbooks consists of students 
and teachers. The comment assumes that, but fails to show why, the unauthorized use of these types 
of works will be “per se” fair use. Indeed, the comment sets forth no facts regarding the proposed 
class of works, the technological measures that are applied to them, or the ways in which the use of 
those technological measures has adversely affected users of those works or is likely to adversely 
affect those users. The complete absence of any factual showing precludes serious consideration of 
this proposal. The same analysis applies to each of the “classes” proposed by AAU. 
3.	 Proposed classes: (1) Musical recordings and audiovisual works protected by access 
control mechanisms whose circumvention is reasonably necessary to carry out a legitimate 
research project where the granted exemption applies only to acts of circumvention whose 
primary purpose is to further a legitimate research project.146 
145  A similar class was proposed and rejected in 2000.  See 65 FR at 64571-72. 
146 C27; R23, pp. 46-47; R28, p. 4. 

[PAGE 87]
 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 87 
(2) Musical recordings and audiovisual works protected by access control mechanisms 
whose circumvention is reasonably necessary to carry out a legitimate research project.147 
We discuss these two related classes together.  Both were proposed by Professor Edward 
Felten, who proposed the second class as an alternative to the first, in the event that “Class 1 does 
not constitute a valid ‘class of works’ as defined in the Notice of Inquiry.” Professor Felten also 
observed that although he believes his second proposed class “likely is a viable ‘class of works,’ ... I 
recognize that the Librarian may find otherwise.”  This observation was perspicacious. 
Each of Professor Felten’s two proposed classes consist of broad categories of works named 
in section 102 of the Copyright Act, subject to a condition relating to the intended use by the person 
circumventing the access control.  While it is appropriate in determining a “class of works” to begin 
with the categories of works set forth in section 102, it is unlikely that a class of works could consist 
of an entire section 102 category, not to mention large portions of three categories.  Here, each of the 
two proposed classes consists of “musical recordings and audiovisual works,” apparently occupying 
virtually the entire field of works in the category of audiovisual works (§102(6)) and a substantial 
part of the categories of sound recordings (§102(7)) and musical works (§102(2)).148  Thus, unless 
147  Id. 
148  Musical works are necessarily included because all musical recordings will be 
recordings of musical works. 
In fact, it is difficult to understand in principle why Professor Felten has chosen to limit 
his proposed class to these three section 102 categories of works.  Because his concern is with 
the ability to engage in legitimate research on technological measures that control access to 
copyrighted works, his proposed exemption logically should include all section 102 categories 
of works, subject to the further use-based conditions set forth in his descriptions of the 
proposed class. 

[PAGE 88]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 88 
the remainder of the defining characteristics of the proposed classes of works reduces the scope of 
the classes to that which is required to comprise a “particular class of works,” Professor Felten’s 
proposal must be rejected at the outset.  Professor Felten does attempt to further delimit each class, 
but in each case, the proposed class is further narrowed only by reference to the necessary or 
intended use by persons wishing to circumvent the access controls.  In one case, the intended use is 
to “carry out a legitimate research project,” and the exemption would be available only when the 
person engaging in circumvention did so primarily in order to carry out such a legitimate research 
project. Professor Felten appears to recognize that the Librarian may not have the power to restrict 
the benefit of an exemption only to persons engaging in certain kinds of activity – and he is correct 
in recognizing that problem.  As a result, his alternative proposal removes the condition that the 
exemption is available only to persons engaging in circumvention primarily in order to carry out a 
legitimate research project, but retains the restriction that the musical recordings and audiovisual 
works in the class must be protected by access controls whose circumvention is reasonably 
necessary in order to carry out a legitimate research project.  The difference between the two 
proposals appears to be that the second applies an objective standard to determine whether intended 
uses (legitimate research) are likely to be necessary, while the first adds a subjective standard 
requiring that anybody taking advantage of the exemption actually have such a purpose. 
Because each of these proposed classes is defined largely in terms of the purpose of the 
circumvention, they cannot be considered.  They are simply variants of the type of use-based class 
that is beyond the scope of this proceeding. The purpose or necessity of carrying out a legitimate 
research project is not an attribute of the works themselves.  Nor, contrary to Professor Felten’s 
assertion, is it even an attribute of the access controls. Presumably, every technological measure that 

[PAGE 89]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 89 
controls access to copyrighted works is a legitimate subject of research, and presumably 
circumvention of the access control measure would be a reasonably necessary part of such research. 
For purposes of analysis, the Register can accept Professor Felten’s assertion that legitimate 
research such as his own research on the Secure Digital Music Initiative (SDMI) involves 
noninfringing uses of copyrighted works. The Register also acknowledges Professor Felten’s belief 
that “research on access control technologies provides many benefits to the public and to copyright 
holders” and his belief that the existing statutory exemptions in §1201 are insufficient to permit 
researchers such as Professor Felten to engage in their research.149 The problem is that this 
rulemaking is not intended to be a vehicle for creation of new exemptions (or expansion of existing 
exemptions) for particular uses, no matter how beneficial they might be. 
4. Proposed class: Any work to which the user had lawful initial access (and variations) 
Some comments repeated or modified the class proposed three years ago by the Digital 
Future Coalition.150 Although the Register fully explained why this proposed exemption does not 
constitute an appropriate class within the context of this rulemaking three years ago,151 commenters 
sought to re-assert this proposal without providing any factual support whatsoever.  Even assuming 
that the proponents have crafted a proper “class” for purposes of this rulemaking,  it is impossible to 
assess such a proposal without evidence of any harm (or even any attempt to produce evidence of 
149  Professor Felten did not even address §1201(j), which covers security testing. 
150 C28(5), C30(7) 
15165 FR at 64572 - 64573 (October 27, 2000). 

[PAGE 90]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 90 
insubstantial harm or harm that rises beyond mere speculation and conjecture). Moreover, it appears 
(from the absence even of any assertions to the contrary) that the speculative fear of harm that was 
the impetus for this proposal three years ago has, in the ensuing period, failed to materialize in the 
marketplace. Had the fears been justified, it is quite evident that such examples would have been 
brought to the Copyright Office’s attention in this second rulemaking. 
While the Register’s “assessment of adverse impacts on particular categories of works is to 
be determined de novo,”152 that does not mean that decisions as to legal interpretation made in the 
previous rulemaking are to be ignored.  The requirement of a de novo determination means that the 
Register’s evaluation of the facts relating to adverse impacts on particular categories of works must 
be based on facts presented to the Register in the current rulemaking proceeding, regardless of what 
facts might have been presented to and found by the Register in previous proceedings.  But the 
decisions made in the previous rulemaking on such fundamental matters as the requirement of (and 
definition of) a “particular class of works” and the burden of proof that proponents of exemptions 
must bear are precedential decisions, and they continue to guide the Register in her analysis of 
proposed class and ought to guide participants in the rulemaking process. That is not to say that the 
Register will not reconsider such previous intepretations of law in the face of a persuasive legal 
argument, but no such arguments have been presented to the Register in this proceeding. 
The proponents of this exemption appear to have overlooked the fact that an assertion that 
noninfringing uses have been or will be adversely affected by the prohibition is only the starting 
152  Commerce Comm. Report at 37. 

[PAGE 91]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 91 
point for the relevant analysis. Identifying what specific noninfringing uses are prevented in relation 
to which specific class of works is necessary in order to determine either the appropriate scope of the 
class or whether such use could have been accomplished without the necessity of circumvention. 
Similarly, the identification of the particular technological measure to which the prohibition applies 
is necessary to examine whether the use was in fact prevented by the technological measure 
protecting access or whether such use was prevented by something unrelated to the prohibition, e.g., 
a measure protecting use or a contractual agreement. Proponents of this exemption also overlooked 
other required considerations, such as the nature or scope of the adverse effect or the effect of an 
exemption on the market for such works. 
Although one derivation of the proposed exemption argues for an exemption only “during the 
period of lawful access,”153 others are not so limited.154  These expansive derivations would preclude 
copyright owners from pursuing “use-facilitating” distribution models that would replicate shortterm loan or rental of works at a less expensive price than outright sale of the entire work.  As the 
House Manager’s Report stated, “[i]n assessing the impact of the implementation of technological 
measures, and of the law against their circumvention, the rulemaking proceedings should consider 
the positive as well as the adverse effects of these technologies on the availability of copyrighted 
materials. . . . These technological measures may make more works more widely available, and the 
process of obtaining permission easier.”  The Report noted that, for example, “[t]echnological 
measures are also essential to a distribution strategy that allows a consumer to purchase a copy of a 
153 C28(5)(i) 
154 C30(7) 

[PAGE 92]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 92 
single article from an electronic database, rather than having to pay more for a subscription to a 
journal containing many articles the consumer does not want.”155 
Not only would the proposed exemption invariably limit the alternatives available to users 
and consumers of copyrighted works, but it would also  most likely increase the prices. No longer 
could a copyright owner allow time-limited or scope-limited access to works at a portion of the sale 
price. All loans, rentals, or conditional access would be required to be priced the same as the full 
sale price of the work, since users would be free to circumvent the access controls that enforced the 
limitations as to time or scope. 
In the final analysis, however, the requested exemption must be denied because proponents 
of this exemption have failed to identify a “particular class of works,”156 have failed to specify 
155  House Manager’s Report at 6-7. 
156  As the Register concluded in the previous rulemaking with respect to the same 
proposed class, in an analysis equally applicable to the current proposal: 
“First, none of the proposals adequately define a `class' of the 
type this rulemaking allows the Librarian to exempt. As discussed 
above in Section III.A.3, ‘a particular class of work’ must be 
determined primarily by reference to qualities of the work itself. 
It cannot be defined by reference to the class of users or uses of 
the work, as these proposals suggest. Second, although the 
commenters have persuasively articulated their fears about how 
these business models will develop and affect their ability to 
engage in noninfringing uses, they have not made the case that 
these fears are now being realized, or that they are likely be 
realized in the next three years.” 
65 FR at 64573. 

[PAGE 93]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003	 Page 93 
particular access controls that have caused adverse effects on noninfringing uses, and have failed to 
describe what noninfringing uses have been adversely affected.  This rulemaking proceeding is not a 
forum for arguments of pure policy.  Any exemption must be based on a factual showing by its 
proponents. Proponents of this “class” did not even make the attempt. 
5.	 Proposed class: Copies of audiovisual works, including motion pictures, and phonorecords 
of musical sound recordings that have been previously licensed for reproduction but can 
no longer be reproduced for private performance after the lawful conditions for prior 
reproduction have been met. 
In contrast to most of the proponents of an exemption for “any work to which the user had 
lawful initial access” and its variations, one proponent did provide some specificity, and at least 
arguably formulated a “particular class of works.”  The class, identified above, was proposed by a 
commenter seeking an exemption to permit persons who have obtained digital copies of motion 
pictures or sound recordings, under agreements that limit the circumstances (typically, a time 
limitation) under which they may view or hear them, to circumvent access controls that enforce 
those agreements.157 
The examples cited by the commenter relate primarily to online services that deliver music or 
movies to subscribers under an agreement that permits the subscriber to obtain access to the work 
only so long as the subscriber continues to subscribe to the service.158  The commenter also refers to 
an announced new product that would permit time-limited access to motion pictures on DVDs by 
157  C30(1). 
158  See C30, pp. 3-4 (citing pressplay, Musicnet, and Movielink). 

[PAGE 94]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 94 
treating the DVD with a “Reading Inhibit Agent” that is activated when the DVD is first removed 
from its package and that causes the DVD to be unplayable after a certain period of time.159 
The proponent of this exemption states the question as follows: “The fundamental question 
here is whether the Copyright Act gives copyright holders the right to destroy or render unusable 
lawfully made copies or phonorecords belonging to others. The answer, clearly, is ‘no’.”160 The 
commenter seeks to exempt such works from the prohibition on circumvention so that users of such 
works would be able to continue to play them even when the agreed-on conditions for their use no 
longer apply. 
In reality, this proposal appears to be a variation on the proposed class of “any work to which 
the user had lawful initial access,” reworked in an attempt to comply with the requirements for 
stating a “particular class” and supported by some examples of actual instances where technological 
measures have cut off access to works for which access was initially granted. 
The Register is skeptical whether the commenter has in fact stated a “particular class of 
copyrighted works.” In an effort to meet the requirements of a “particular class,” he has limited the 
proposed class to audiovisual works and sound recordings, two section 102 categories of works, that 
have access controls that are activated under certain circumstances.  However, the fact that the class 
159  Id., p. 4. 
160  C 30(1), p. 4. 

[PAGE 95]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 95 
appears in reality to be defined by the use that (1) is intended by the user and (2) activates the access 
control, is troublesome and raises the question whether this is, in reality, a use-based exemption. 
Moreover, although the proponent has chosen to limit the proposed class to a subset of two section 
102 categories, the situation that his proposal addresses is one that in principle can occur, and most 
likely in reality does occur, with respect to most or all categories of works.  Just as the proposal to 
exempt “any work to which the user had lawful initial access” failed to state a “particular class,” in 
substance if not in form this reformulation may suffer from the same shortcomings. 
Because there are other grounds to reject this class, the Register declines to determine 
whether a “particular class” has in fact been proposed in this case. 
The proponent asserts that an exemption for this class is necessary in order to permit the 
noninfringing use of private performance.  It is, of course, true that a private performance is, in 
general, noninfringing. What the proponent appears to ignore is that it appears that in the cases 
which the proponent has raised, the performance probably would be unlawful, since it appears that 
in each case the user would be performing the work in violation of a term of the agreement he 
entered into in order to gain access to the work in the first place. Although the version of §1201 
approved by the House Commerce Committee would have permitted an exemption from the 
prohibition on circumvention only in order to permit “lawful uses”161 – and therefore probably would 
have required rejection of this proposed exemption because it seeks to enable unlawful, albeit 
161  Commerce Committee Report at 3. 

[PAGE 96]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 96 
noninfringing, uses – §1201 as enacted requires that the inquiry focus on “noninfringing uses.” 
Therefore, it appears that the proposal has passed this threshold. 
The Register reaches a different conclusion, however, with respect to the substantiality of the 
adverse effect on noninfringing uses. The Register cannot place a high value – or, indeed, any value 
at all – on the desire of someone to get more than he bargained for.  A consumer who enters into an 
agreement to pay a particular sum for the right to listen to or view a copyrighted work for a limited 
period of time can have no reasonable expectation of continued access once that time has expired. 
Just as a person who rents a video has no right to continue possession and use of that video once the 
rental period has expired, a person who knowingly purchases a DVD that is designed – and priced – 
to last for only a few days (perhaps as long as the typical video rental) cannot complain when the 
DVD is no longer viewable after that time has expired.  A person who subscribes to an internet 
music service and agrees that he will have access to the digital phonorecords he receives only as 
long as his subscription is current has no right to complain if he no longer has access once the 
subscription expires. 
The calculus might be different if there were evidence that we are living in a “pay-per-use” 
world. But the record in this proceeding does not offer any indication that we are approaching such 
a world.162 To the contrary, the works that are the subject of this proposed exemption – motion 
162  In this respect, the situation does not seem to have changed significantly since the 
last rulemaking, where the Register observed that “The record in this proceeding does not 
reveal that ‘pay-per-use’ business models have, thus far, created the adverse impacts on the 
ability of users to make noninfringing uses of copyrighted works that would justify any 
exemptions from the prohibition on circumvention. If such adverse impacts occur in the future, 

[PAGE 97]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 97 
pictures and sound recordings – are widely available for purchase in formats (CDs, DVDs, 
videocassettes and, recently, downloads of phonorecords) that have no time restrictions on use. 
In fact, as noted in the immediately preceding section, the types of services that are the 
targets of this proposed exemption are exactly the type of “use-facilitating” services that the DMCA 
was enacted, in part, to encourage. As the legislative history relates,
 “an access control technology under section 1201(a) would not 
necessarily prevent access to a work altogether, but could be designed 
to allow access during a limited time period, such as during a period of 
library borrowing. Technological measures are also essential to a 
distribution strategy that allows a consumer to purchase a copy of a 
single article from an electronic database, rather than having to pay 
more for a subscription to a journal containing many articles the 
consumer does not want.”163 
The Register cannot see how users of copyrighted works could be adversely affected by the 
offering of differentiated services. On-line service offerings do not place users in a “take-it-orleave-it” negotiating position, but add to the users’ options in ways that were not available at the 
time the DMCA was enacted. 
The Register’s recommendation is consistent with, and based on, the factors in 
§1201(a)(1)(C). First, with respect to the exemption’s impact on availability for use, motion 
pictures and sound recordings are widely available in a variety of formats.  It is likely that the 
they can be addressed in a future rulemaking proceeding.”  65 FR at 64564. 
163  House Manager’s Report, at 7. 

[PAGE 98]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 98 
proposed exemption would actually decrease the variety of means in which these works are made 
available. Copyright owners would hesitate to continue offering such works for transmission on the 
Internet if they could not be assured that they could rely on the technological measures used to 
protect various business models.  No impact on nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational 
uses or criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research has been alleged.  The 
proposed exemption probably would have an adverse effect on the market for or value of 
copyrighted works, for the reasons outlined above. It could easily eliminate the market for 
conditional downloads and thus would negatively affect the variety of options in the market for 
copyrighted works. 
6. Proposed class: “Thin copyright” works 
As in the previous rulemaking, the AAU proposed an exemption of a class of works 
consisting of “thin copyright works.”164 This proposal suffers from the same flaws as the proposals 
to exempt classes such as “fair use works.”  Although it was stated that these “thin copyright” works 
contain “limited copyrighted subject material,” there was no showing of any present or likely harm 
to users wishing to engage in noninfringing uses. While the “class” of works was narrowed, in one 
derivation, to certain types of works “most often” used in the educational environment, there was no 
showing that any such works were unavailable in an alternative, unprotected format. In fact, it seems 
likely that many of these works are currently available in unprotected formats, e.g., encyclopedias, 
dictionaries and newspapers. Without any allegation of an adverse effect during the relevant threeyear period, any specific allegation of any particular technological measure protecting access to 
164 C28(3) &(4). 

[PAGE 99]
 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003	 Page 99 
works, or any discussion of the unavailability of the material cited in unprotected formats, there is 
little basis for consideration of this proposal by the Register. Circumstantially, it is informative to 
note that no evidence was presented that the fears anticipated during the previous three-year period 
have materialized. 
7.	 Proposed class: Public domain works or works distributed without restriction. 
This formulation of the proposed class takes into consideration several comments which 
made essentially the same proposal, seeking an exemption for works that are either public domain, 
open source or “open access,” but to which access controls are applied.165  Aside from the proposal 
relating to public domain material on DVDs (discussed below), there was a paucity of information 
related to other public domain works.  The commenters addressing open source and open access 
works provided absolutely no information in support of their requests. Of the few commenters 
addressing public domain works, only one cited even a few ebooks, e.g., Robert Lewis Stevenson’s 
Treasure Island and collected poems of Keats and Whitman, that contained some use restrictions.166 
What the comments relating to public domain works appear to have overlooked is that if a 
work that is entirely in the public domain is protected by an access control measure, the prohibition 
on circumvention will not be applicable. Section 1201 only applies to “a work protected under this 
title" [title 17]. A wholly public domain work is, therefore, no longer protected under title 17 and 
any protection measures on such a work do not implicate section 1201(a)(1). While a wholly public 
165  C2, C3, C14(1), C22, and C35(4). 
166C14(1). 

[PAGE 100]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 100 
domain work is not protected by copyright and also, therefore, is not protected by section 1201, 
there is nothing that precludes one from placing a technological access or use control on a public 
domain work. When a work enters the public domain, there is no affirmative obligation for an 
author, publisher or distributor to offer free access to that public domain work. The author, publisher 
or distributor is simply precluded from claiming copyright on a public domain work and is precluded 
from using section 1201(a)(1) from prevent circumvention of technological protection measures 
placed on a public domain work. If the works at issue are, as the commenter states, public domain 
works without any new original authorship, then neither section 106 nor section 1201 apply and no 
exemption is necessary. 
Moreover, there is considerable doubt whether the Librarian has the power to grant an 
exemption the sole purpose of which is to enable “noninfringing” uses of public domain works.167 
The purpose of this rulemaking is to determine whether the prohibition on circumvention has 
adversely affected users “in their ability to make noninfringing uses under this title of a particular 
class of copyrighted works.” (Emphasis added.)  Because public domain works are not copyrighted 
works, it does not appear that adverse effects on users’ abilities to use public domain works can be 
considered. 
Even if such adverse effects could be considered, however, proponents of an exemption have 
not made their case.  It is, of course, possible that a public domain work may exist side-by-side with 
copyrighted material, e.g., on a CD-ROM, and that access controls may be applied to all the content 
167  Of course, since a public domain work cannot be infringed, all uses of such works 
will be noninfringing. 

[PAGE 101]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 101 
on the medium.  But outside of the context of motion pictures on DVDs, (discussed below), the 
proponents of a “public domain” exemption did not address that scenario, and if an exemption had 
been sought for that scenario, further information would be required.  For example,  is an access 
control preventing these uses?  Are the public domain works in question available  in other nonprotected formats?  Even assuming that the cases cited in support of a “public domain” exemption 
were to establish that the cited works were bundled with copyrighted works and protected by access 
controls, the works of Stevenson, Whitman and Keats are all currently available in alternative nonprotected formats. As long as this is the case, noninfringing uses appear to be unaffected by the 
prohibition on circumvention. Although the “digital” version of a work may prevent certain 
noninfringing uses of that particular copy, that fact alone does not justify an exemption if other 
versions are unrestricted. Unless one can show that a particular noninfringing use can only be 
accomplished by using the digital version, the existence of a public domain or other work in 
alternative, unprotected formats provides a safety valve for noninfringing uses.  Users should 
recognize that works in digital formats may be protected by the copyright owner differently than 
hard copy or analog versions of the same works and should consider this in making their purchasing 
decisions. 
In the DVD context, proponent Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) provided a series of 
lists of audiovisual works that EFF contended are in the public domain, some of which EFF alleged 
are distributed bundled with copyrighted material.168  However, opponents of the proposed exception 
indicated that many if not all the works named by the proponent are available in unencrypted (VHS) 
168  C35(4), TGwen Hinze, May 15, 2003, p. 155-56, PHR Gwen Hinze, EFF. 

[PAGE 102]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003	 Page 102 
format, are not bundled with copyrighted material, are themselves still subject to copyright 
protection, or are not encrypted by the Content Scrambling System (“CSS”) or otherwise subject to 
an access control.169 
Thus, in the final analysis, as with the other categories of works, proponents have provided 
virtually no examples of public domain audiovisual works that are protected by access controls and 
not otherwise available. There is insufficient evidence to demonstrate that any problem exists and at 
most, to the extent that any problem might exist, the record leads to the conclusion that it is not more 
than de minimis. 
8.	 Proposed class: Musical works, sound recordings, and audiovisual works embodied in 
media that are or may become inaccessible by possessors of lawfully-made copies due to 
malfunction, damage, or obsoleteness. 
Most of the commenters proposing this class or some variant of it concentrated their factual 
discussion on musical works and/or sound recordings.170   However, two commenters171 specifically 
addressed backup copies of audiovisual works on DVDs subject to access controls. 
With respect to musical works and sound recordings, the comments indicate that the 
proponents of the exception want to be able to transfer sound recordings and musical works from 
169  R23, T Steven Metalitz, May 15, 2003, p. 187; PHR Steve Metalitz, Joint Reply 
Commenters. 
170  C4, C6, C39(1), C48, and C49. 
171  C47 and R21. 

[PAGE 103]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 103 
one medium to another. Some commenters also believe that they should be able to convert these 
works to new or different formats or to back up the works for archival purposes, e.g., to “refresh” the 
media from time to time to ensure that the works are available both for their use and for future 
generations.172 
However, these proponents have not clearly stated or demonstrated that access controls are 
preventing these activities. Compact discs rarely if ever are protected by access controls.173 
Concerns about the practical difficulties or the copyright implications of copying works in order to 
achieve interoperability with new devices are not within the scope of this rulemaking unless there is 
a technological measure protecting access to the work. Because many commenters failed to identify 
any particular work protected by an access control, it is impossible to determine how the alleged 
problem fits into this rulemaking. 
The case made for audiovisual works on DVDs is entirely different.  The Content Scrambling 
System, commonly known as CSS, has been identified as the particular access control protected by 
the prohibition against circumvention.  This encryption renders DVDs unplayable in a device 
without corresponding decryption technology.174 
172  See C4, C6, C48, and C49. 
173  See the discussion below of rejected class no. 18 (“Published sound recordings of 
musical works on compact discs that use technological measures that prevent access on certain 
playback devices”). 
174  In Universal City Studios v. Corley, 273 F.3d 429 (2d. Cir. 2001), the United 
States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit described CSS as follows: 
“The movie studios were reluctant to release movies in digital 

[PAGE 104]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 104 
form until they were confident they had in place adequate 
safeguards against piracy of their copyrighted movies. The 
studios took several steps to minimize the piracy threat. First, 
they settled on the DVD as the standard digital medium for home 
distribution of movies. The studios then sought an encryption 
scheme to protect movies on DVDs. They enlisted the help of 
members of the consumer electronics and computer industries, 
who in mid-1996 developed the Content Scramble System 
(‘CSS’). CSS is an encryption scheme that employs an algorithm 
configured by a set of ‘keys’ to encrypt a DVD's contents. The 
algorithm is a type of mathematical formula for transforming the 
contents of the movie file into gibberish; the ‘keys’ are in 
actuality strings of 0's and 1's that serve as values for the 
mathematical formula. Decryption in the case of CSS requires a 
set of ‘player keys’ contained in compliant DVD players, as well 
as an understanding of the CSS encryption algorithm. Without the 
player keys and the algorithm, a DVD player cannot access the 
contents of a DVD. With the player keys and the algorithm, a 
DVD player can display the movie on a television or a computer 
screen, but does not give a viewer the ability to use the copy 
function of the computer to copy the movie or to manipulate the 
digital content of the DVD. 
“The studios developed a licensing scheme for distributing the 
technology to manufacturers of DVD players. Player keys and 
other information necessary to the CSS scheme were given to 
manufacturers of DVD players for an administrative fee. In 
exchange for the licenses, manufacturers were obliged to keep the 
player keys confidential. Manufacturers were also required in the 
licensing agreement to prevent the transmission of ‘CSS data’ (a 
term undefined in the licensing agreement) from a DVD drive to 
any ‘internal recording device,’ including, presumably, a 
computer hard drive. 
“With encryption technology and licensing agreements in hand, 
the studios began releasing movies on DVDs in 1997, and DVDs 
quickly gained in popularity, becoming a significant source of 
studio revenue. [Footnote: By the end of 1997, most if not all 
DVDs that were released were encrypted with CSS.  Moreover, 
DVD players were projected to be in ten percent of United States 
homes by the end of 2000. In fact, as of 2000, about thirty-five 
percent of one studio's worldwide revenue from movie distribution 
was attributable to DVD sales and rentals.] In 1998, the studios 

[PAGE 105]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 105 
The proponents of this exemption desire to make backup copies of their DVDs for a variety 
of purposes: they claim that DVDs are inherently fragile and subject to damage; they are concerned 
about loss or theft of the original during travel; they wish to duplicate collections to avoid the 
burdens and risks of transporting DVDs; they assert that some titles are out of print and cannot be 
replaced in case of damage; and they claim that the duration of a DVD’s lifespan is limited.175 
Since there is no question that many DVDs are currently distributed with CSS as a 
technological measure protecting access to the works contained on the medium and because the 
comments and testimony have established that a significant number of users say they have been 
experiencing problems with DVDs, the inquiry must examine the nature of these problems to 
determine whether the prohibition is adversely affecting noninfringing uses. The common 
denominator in all of the comments endorsing an exemption for DVDs appears to be the need to 
make backups of the original copy due to the alleged fragility of the medium. The question therefore 
becomes whether making a backup copy of a DVD is a noninfringing use. 
secured added protection against DVD piracy when Congress 
passed the DMCA, which prohibits the development or use of 
technology designed to circumvent a technological protection 
measure, such as CSS. The pertinent provisions of the DMCA 
are examined in greater detail below.” 
273 F.3d at 436-37. 
175  See R21 and T Robert Moore, May 2, 2003, p. 18 et seq. 

[PAGE 106]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 106 
The creation of a backup copy of a work implicates the reproduction right. While the 
Copyright Act contains an exception for the making of backup copies of computer programs in 
§117, it contains no comparable exemption for motion pictures and other audiovisual works. In 
addition, the Register is aware of only one court decision that has held that reproducing a 
copyrighted motion picture is a fair use:  where an over-the-air broadcast was taped for purposes of 
time-shifting the user’s viewing of the work.176  In the time-shifting case, the Court explicitly did not 
address the issue of librarying such a work, and this rulemaking is not the forum in which to break 
new ground on the scope of fair use. The proponents of an exemption bear the burden of proving that 
their intended use is a noninfringing one. No proponent has offered a fair use analysis or supporting 
authority which would allow the Register to consider such a basis for the exemption, and the 
Register is skeptical of the merits of such an argument. 
DVDs, of course, are not indestructible. Neither were traditional phonograph records; nor 
are CDs, videotapes, paperback books, or any other medium in which copyrighted works may be 
distributed. The Register is not persuaded that proponents of this exemption have shown that DVDs 
are so susceptible to damage and deterioration that a convincing case could be made that the practice 
of making preventive backup copies of audiovisual works on DVDs should be noninfringing. 
The proposed exemption is not simply to permit remedial measures for disks which become 
damaged, but rather to allow reproduction of the works as a precautionary measure. While an 
analogy might be made to the basis for the backup exemption for computer programs that was 
176  Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City Studios, Inc., 464 U.S. 417 (1984). 

[PAGE 107]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 107 
enacted in the days of corruptible floppy diskettes, there are important differences. Congress 
carefully addressed the §117 exemption for backups of computer programs with restrictive 
conditions. One day Congress may choose to consider a carefully tailored exception for backing up 
motion pictures if it is persuaded that one is necessary, but the Register sees no authority under 
current law that would justify an exemption to enable the making of backup copies of motion 
pictures on DVDs. Given the tremendous commercial appeal of the DVD format at a time when 
alternative analog formats still exist, it seems unlikely that now is the time. And while it may well be 
true that analog formats are headed for ultimate extinction, the market is already beginning to see 
evidence of alternative forms of digital delivery over the Internet. The decision to purchase a DVD 
format entails advantages and, perhaps, disadvantages for some. The purchase of a work in that 
particular format is not, at present, a necessity and DVDs are unlikely to become the only format in 
which motion pictures may be purchased. The record in this rulemaking does not establish that the 
potential for possible future harm to individual disks outweighs the potential harm to the market for 
or value of these works that would result if an exemption were granted. The unauthorized 
reproduction of DVDs is already a critical problem facing the motion picture industry. Creating an 
exemption to satisfy the concern that a DVD may become damaged would sanction widespread 
circumvention to facilitate reproduction for works that are currently functioning properly. As 
presented in this rulemaking, the exemption would be based on speculation of future failure. Even 
though certain copies of DVDs may be damaged, given the ready availability of replacements in the 
market at reasonable costs, on balance, an exemption is not warranted on the current record. 

[PAGE 108]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 108 
The opponents have provided strong evidence of the increasing popularity of the DVD 
format.177  The Register finds it difficult to imagine that a format that is fundamentally flawed would 
become so popular.  Similarly, it is difficult to imagine how a business model of renting DVDs, 
which also appears to be thriving, could be viable if the medium were so fragile.  Further, it is 
significant that the scope of the problem the proponents describe is limited to movies on DVDs and 
does not address other types of works which commonly employ DVDs, such as video games.  All 
these facts lead to the conclusion that, on the current record, DVDs are not unusually subject to 
damage in the ordinary course of their use. To the extent that some commenters found it more 
convenient to travel with backups or keep backups of their works in multiple locations, e.g., vacation 
homes or cars, the prevention of such uses appears to represent an inconvenience rather than an 
adverse effect on noninfringing uses. Indeed, the Register is aware of no authority that such uses are 
noninfringing. To endorse such uses as noninfringing would be tantamount to sanctioning 
reproductions of all works in every physical location where a user would like to use the work, e.g., 
the purchase of one book would entitle the user to reproduce copies for multiple locations. Except 
where a case-by-case analysis reveals such reproduction to be noninfringing under §107 or some 
other specific exemption, such reproductions of convenience are infringing under the Copyright Act. 
Neither the fear of malfunction or damage nor the conveniences enabled by backups satisfy the 
requirement that the intended use be a noninfringing one. 
177  See, T Shira Perlmutter, May 2, 2003, p. 52; T Dean Marks, May 15, 2003, p. 42. 

[PAGE 109]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003	 Page 109 
9.	 Proposed class: Audiovisual works released on DVD that contain access control measures 
that interfere with the ability to defeat technology that prevents users from skipping 
promotional materials. 
This class as put forth by its proponent would encompass all access controls that interfere 
with private performance, including the ability to skip promotional material,178 but the substance of 
the comment addresses only unskippable promotional materials.  As the proponent succinctly states 
the problem, “Movie studios are able to make certain DVD content ‘unskippable’ during playback. 
Some studios have abused this feature by preventing the skipping of advertising shown prior to the 
start of the feature presentation.”179 
Since no one asserts that the technology which deactivates the fast-forward function of DVD 
players (UOP – or user operation – blocking) is an access control (and, therefore, the §1201(a)(1) 
prohibition would not extend to circumvention of the UOP blocking feature) – the only measure 
which might implicate the prohibition is CSS.  Therefore, the central question is: must CSS be 
circumvented in order to disable the UOP blocking on a DVD or on the player? 
Although the disabling of the fast forward function is clearly upsetting to some consumers, it 
is not, on its own, an access control within the meaning of subsection 1201(a).  The users gain 
access to the work without the application of any information,  process, or treatment– they simply 
178  C35(3). 
179  C35, p. 25. 

[PAGE 110]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 110 
have to wait for the promotional material to run its course.180  However, the proponents argue that 
defeating the UOP block cannot be accomplished without the prerequisite step of circumventing 
CSS. Thus, they would require an exception to circumvent CSS in order to reactivate the fast 
forwarding function of their DVD players.
 Of course, if the UOP block can be defeated without circumventing CSS, no exemption is 
needed as the UOP block is not an access control protected by §1201(a)(1). On the record 
established, the Register must conclude that it is not necessary to circumvent CSS in order to disable 
or bypass the technology that prevents fast forwarding through the promotional material on DVDs. 
No one has proved that circumvention is necessary and from the evidence in the record it appears 
that it is technologically possible to re-enable the fast forwarding functions of a player without 
circumventing CSS.181 
180  Section 1201(a)(3)(B) provides: “a technological measure ‘effectively controls 
access to a work’ if the measure, in the ordinary course of its operation, requires the 
application of information, or a process or a treatment, with the authority of the copyright 
owner, to gain access to the work.” 
181  One commenter asserts that “for all practical purposes” one must circumvent the 
CSS, but also admits that the controls on the player may be bypassed without circumventing 
CSS (PHR Robert Moore, 321 Studios). Two other witnesses assert that CSS need not be 
circumvented (PHR Bruce Turnbull, DVD CCA; PHR Dean Marks, AOL Time Warner), and 
the chief proponent of the exception admits uncertainty on this point (PHR Gwen Hinze, EFF). 

[PAGE 111]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 111 
In response to a post-hearing question on this issue,182 there was generally unanimity that the 
fast-forwarding function can be disabled without circumventing CSS. AOL Time Warner’s response 
stated that while AOL Time Warner’s works do not limit fast forwarding, it is their understanding 
that this functionality can be restored without circumventing CSS.183 The DVD Copy Control 
Association’s (DVD CCA) reply to a related question184 stated that the CSS license has no 
requirement that relates to this particular function and that it is the understanding of the DVD CCA 
that “there would be no effect on the CSS-related performance of a DVD playback system or DVD 
disc due to modification of a playback system to ignore the UOP blocking commands.”185 The Joint 
Reply Commenters’ answer to the latter question was similar,186 stating that, to the best of the 
commenters’ knowledge, it was technologically possible to modify a licensed DVD player to ignore 
the UOP functions. The reply added that because the navigational functions of a DVD are not 
encrypted and are unrelated to the CSS license, they are not aware of any way in which such 
enabling of the UOP functionality would impact the performance of a CSS-encrypted DVD other 
182 “Can the disabling of the fast-forward function or the UOP blocking commands of a 
DVD be reversed or altered, thus reactivating the fast-forward function, without decrypting 
CSS?” 
183 PHR Dean Marks, AOL Time Warner, p. 2. 
184 “Is it technologically possible for a person to modify a licensed DVD player to ignore 
the UOP blocking commands in order to reactivate the fast-forward function of a lawful copy of 
a DVD? If so, would the performance of a CSS-encrypted motion picture on that lawful DVD be 
affected or prevented by such a modification? Does such a modification of the player affect the 
legal status of the performance of the motion picture on the DVD, either under section 106 or 
section 1201(a)(1)? Please explain fully.” 
185 PHR Bruce Turnbull, DVD CCA, p. 5.
186PHR of the Joint Reply Commenters at 5-6.


[PAGE 112]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 112 
than enabling these navigational tools. The Joint Reply Commenters also stated that in their view, 
such a modification would have no effect on the legal status of the performance of a motion picture 
on a DVD under either § 1201(a)(1) or under § 106.187 The post-hearing response from the 
Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) stated that even if the UOP function were not encrypted, it 
would not be possible to alter these functions on the DVD since such discs are distributed as “read 
only.” Yet, EFF stated that it is possible to modify a DVD player to ignore the fast-forwarding 
restriction without violating § 1201(a)(1) as long as this restriction was not encrypted within CSS. 
Since it has been unrebutted in the record that UOP blocking is not encrypted within CSS and that 
enabling navigational functionality in a player does not violate the prohibition on circumvention, it 
appears that the intended use can be accomplished without circumvention of CSS. 
321 Studios’ post hearing response provides additional, albeit qualified, support for the 
conclusion that it is technologically possible to enable the fast-forwarding capability by modifying a 
DVD player.188 While 321 Studios corroborated EFF’s statement that the DVD disc itself cannot be 
modified (without the additional act of reproducing the disc and deleting the UOP directive on the 
copy – a function performed by software marketed by 321 Studios), 321 Studios agreed that it is 
theoretically possible to modify a DVD player to ignore the UOP blocking. 321 Studios added, 
however, that this is not practical for users since “such a modification would require a substantial 
reverse engineering effort.”189 
187 Id.
188 PHR Robert Moore, 321 Studios, p. 5-6.
189 Id. It is worth noting that 321 Studios has an interest in asserting that users have to
copy the DVD itself, and circumvent CSS in doing so, rather than modify their players, 

[PAGE 113]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 113 
While the record in this rulemaking is not as clear as the Register would like it to be, the 
Register concludes that technological modification of a DVD player to ignore or bypass navigational 
blocks such as fast forwarding can be accomplished without circumventing CSS. Since this 
noninfringing use can be accommodated without an exemption and is therefore not adversely 
affected by the prohibition, the Register finds that an exemption is unwarranted. 
Even if it were not possible to disable the UOP block without also circumventing CSS, an 
exemption for this particular use would not be warranted. Even though a quantitatively substantial 
number of commenters (over 20 percent of those submitting comments) expressed annoyance with 
being prevented from fast forwarding through advertising material, it did not amount to a 
qualitatively significant adverse effect. At most, being forced to play (not necessarily watch) the 
promotional material constituted no more than a mere inconvenience for users in possession of such 
works.190 While such fast forwarding could be reasonably assumed to be a noninfringing use, simply 
showing that any noninfringing use is adversely affected is not determinative. At a minimum, the 
adverse effect on the noninfringing use must be more than de minimis and more than a mere 
inconvenience. 
because the software marketed by 321 Studios (potentially in violation of §§1201(a)(2) or 
1201(b)), or both) facilitates the former act. 
190 It is also relevant to note that there was no evidence produced what percentage of 
DVDs contain this UOP blocking function, but proponents certainly failed to indicate that the 
practice is widespread or even common. At least one studio asserted that it has never used this 
function on any release. The scope of the use of this function by other studios is unclear, but to 
the extent that consumers dislike this feature, the market is likely to affect its continued 
implementation. 

[PAGE 114]
 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 114 
Although the Register understands the proponents’ objections to DVDs which have the fast 
forward feature disabled, she will not recommend an exemption based on a showing of de minimis 
inconvenience. This decision is reinforced by an application of the four §1201(a)(1)(C) factors. 
Because the only access control alleged to be involved is CSS, granting an exemption presumably 
would permit circumvention of CSS.191  The Register has rejected exemptions that would permit 
circumvention of CSS in the past192 and, elsewhere in this recommendation, she continues to reject 
such exemptions.  Granting an exemption in this context would not in any way increase the 
availability of copyrighted works. The Register can discern no impact on nonprofit archival, 
preservation, and educational uses or on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, 
or research. And motion picture studios were willing to distribute copies of motion pictures in the 
DVD format in part because of the protection offered by CSS.193  Permitting circumvention of CSS 
could, therefore, have a negative impact on the market for or value of motion pictures on DVDs, 
since motion picture studios might have a reduced incentive to utilize that format. 
In sum, the adverse effects on the noninfringing use must be balanced with the effect of 
circumvention on the market for or value of the copyrighted works. Where the harm is a mere 
inconvenience experienced with an unknown – but apparently small – quantity of available DVD 
titles and an exemption might entail allowing circumvention of the access control contained on a 
191  This, of course, is not necessarily the case, since it has not been established that it is 
necessary to circumvent CSS to disable UOP blocking.  But for purposes of the following 
analysis, the Register assumes that is the case. 
192  65 FR at 64567-70. 
193  R23, pp. 7, 22, 36. 

[PAGE 115]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 115 
majority of DVDs, the balance weighs against an exemption. The benefit to users is the avoidance of 
a mere inconvenience.  The harm, on the other hand, would be to threaten the security of the DVD 
format.  This would seem to be an instance far better suited to a marketplace solution than an 
exception to broad statutory protection. Finally, as noted above, it appears likely, although not 
certain, that it is not necessary to violate the prohibition against circumvention in order to disable 
UOP blocking. For these reasons, the Register does not recommend an exemption. 
10. Proposed class: Ancillary audiovisual works distributed on DVDs encrypted by CSS. 
This is a slight rewording of an exception proposed and advanced primarily by one 
commenter,194 although at least one other commenter proposed a somewhat similar class.195 
As discussed above, CSS is an access control as that term is defined in subsection 1201(a). 
In addition to the evidence presented, it is virtually uncontested that there are ancillary works on 
DVDs that are not available in another, unprotected format.196  As the Register explained in the 
previous rulemaking, such ancillary material includes “matter that is available along with the motion 
picture in DVD format but not available in videotape format, such as 
outtakes, interviews with actors and directors, additional language features, etc.”197 
194  C21. 
195  C5. 
196  C21 and R23. 
197  65 FR at 64568 n.13. 

[PAGE 116]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 116 
The proponent of an “ancillary works” exemption asserts that the use of CSS on DVDs 
reduces the availability of ancillary audiovisual works for nonprofit archival, preservation and 
educational purposes, but offers no facts to support the assertion.  His primary point, however, is that 
CSS prevents “quotation, for purposes of commentary and criticism, of ancillary audiovisual 
works.”198  “Quotation” in this context means reproduction of portions of the ancillary audiovisual 
material, in particular by reviewers who post their reviews of motion pictures and ancillary materials 
on websites.199 
There is little doubt that the desired use for comment and criticism by weblog critics can be 
within the fair use exception.200  It is conceded by the key proponent of this exception that users, 
nonetheless, have the ability to make copies of these works by circumventing the Macrovision copy 
control protection to record the analog output of DVD players.201  The record also indicates that 
analog copies can be made by using digital camcorders to record the rendering of these works on an 
ordinary television screen.202  Because users already have access to an analog copy of the work, they 
have the ability to engage in the desired activity. Nonetheless, the proponents of this exception seek 
the ability to circumvent CSS so as to be able to use direct digital-to-digital copies of the work for 
198  C21, p. 9. 
199  See C21, p. 14. 
200  Of course, the specifics of each case, such as the length of the portion of the work 
that is copied and the need to copy that amount in relation to the purpose, can alter the 
outcome of the fair use analysis. 
201  C21. 
202  T Fritz Attaway, May 2, 2003, p. 69 et seq. 

[PAGE 117]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 117 
their comment and criticism.  They assert that the improved quality of the picture and sound is 
constitutionally mandated and is particularly desirable for connoisseurs of motion pictures.203 
Existing case law is clear that there is “no authority for the proposition that fair use, as 
protected by the Copyright Act, much less the Constitution, guarantees copying by the optimum 
method or in the identical format of the original.”204  That is not to say that the proposed use is 
necessarily infringing. Indeed, the use of direct digital-to-digital copies described in these 
comments may well constitute fair use. 
In the three years since the last rulemaking, the availability of DVDs and their ancillary 
audiovisual works has increased dramatically.205  Many factors are likely to have combined to 
generate that trend. There is little doubt that the prohibition on circumvention has contributed to 
rightholders’ confidence in the security of the DVD format and that such confidence has been a 
factor in the increased availability of works in that format.  Fears of piracy of works in digital format 
are not hypothetical – the scope of that problem is the subject of extensive public discussion and is 
frequently reported in major media. 
The balance of interests pits the incremental benefit of improved sound and picture quality of 
ancillary material for purposes of comment and criticism against the risks of increased unauthorized 
203  T Ernest Miller, May 15, 2003, p. 170, 201 et seq. 
204  Universal City Studios v. Corley, 273 F.3d 429, 458 (2d. Cir. 2001) (“Corley”). 
205  R23. 

[PAGE 118]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 118 
reproduction and distribution of all of the material on DVDs. In addition, there was little specific 
evidence of why this material was required to be reproduced in enhanced digital format in order to 
comment or criticize. Without such a showing of verifiable need for this format and the specific 
types of works for which such comment or criticism is needed, the commenters present a balance of 
interests with little substance. As the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit has 
concluded, “Fair use has never been held to be a guarantee of access to copyrighted material in order 
to copy it by the fair user's preferred technique or in the format of the original.”206  Fair use allows 
reproduction of an amount, both quantitatively and qualitatively, necessary to achieve the purpose of 
the use. While it is true that CSS prevents digital reproduction through a digital output and therefore 
may prevent some fair uses, without specific information about why this digital content is necessary 
for the purpose, without information about what type of audiovisual or ancillary work is needed for 
this purpose, and without specific information about the purpose and character of the use, it is 
impossible to assess the merits of the proposal. Even with that information, the harm to the potential 
market for or value of these works would have to be considered. Given the risks of unauthorized 
reproduction and distribution over the Internet, it is obvious that a compelling case would have to be 
made in order to outweigh the potential adverse effects. 
A review of the factors set forth in §1201(a)(1)(C) confirms that the case has not been made 
for an exemption.  While it appears to be true that many of the ancillary works in question are 
available only in the DVD format, they likely would not exist at all but for that format, due both to 
206  Corley, 273 F.3d at 459. 

[PAGE 119]
 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 119 
its greater storage capacity over VHS tapes and the greater security it offers. As the Register noted 
in the previous rulemaking: 
[T]his ancillary material traditionally has not been available in copies 
for distribution to the general public, and it appears that it is only with 
the advent of the DVD format that motion picture producers have been 
willing or able to include such material along with copies of the 
motion pictures themselves. Because of this and because motion 
picture producers are generally unwilling to release their works in 
DVD format unless they are protected by access control measures, it 
cannot be said that enforcing section 1201(a)(1) would, in the words of 
the Commerce Committee, result “in less access, rather than more, to 
copyrighted materials that are important to education, scholarship, and 
other socially vital endeavors.” See Commerce Comm. Report, at 35. 
Thus, it appears that the availability of access control measures has 
resulted in greater availability of these materials.207 
As noted, apart from a bald assertion of harm, no case has been made that the availability for 
use of ancillary works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational purposes has been 
adversely affected. While the proponents have demonstrated inconvenience with respect to some 
uses involving criticism and comment, the Register’s analysis has shown that acceptable alternatives 
exist to permit “quotation” by those who wish to review such material.  Finally, permitting 
circumvention of CSS in order to enable digital “quotation” would be likely to 
have an adverse effect on the availability of such works on DVDs to the public. As noted above, the 
motion picture industry’s willingness to make audiovisual works available in digital form on DVDs 
is based in part on the confidence it has that CSS will protect it against massive infringement. 
Encouraging circumvention of CSS even for laudable goals threatens to undermine that confidence. 
207  65 FR at 64568 fn. 13. 

[PAGE 120]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003	 Page 120 
Given the vague benefit and the much clearer large potential harm, the Register believes that 
the equities weigh against the proposed exemption. 
11.	 Proposed class: Audiovisual works stored on DVDs that are not available in Region 1 
DVD format and access to which is prevented by technological measures. 
An exemption for this class of works was proposed by several commenters,208 although this 
particular formulation, which articulated the issue presented by the comments collectively, was 
proposed by a single commenter.209  Additionally, there were over one hundred reply comments 
received in this rulemaking in support of the proposed exception.210 
Implicit in the proposed class is either the assumption that region coding is an access control 
or the assumption that it is necessary to circumvent an access control (CSS) in order to disable the 
region coding. Since the Register previously concluded that region coding is an access control,211 
and since motion picture studios who use region coding and oppose the exemption appear to agree 
that it is an access control212 – there is no reason to consider whether access to the region coding 
function itself is blocked by CSS. 
208  See C15(1), C17, C35(2), and C36. 
209  See C35(2). 
210  See C83-203. 
211  65 FR at 64569. 
212  See R23, pp. 25-27, R19, p.10. 

[PAGE 121]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 121 
There are two components to the region coding system – the region code flag on a DVD and 
the region code check conducted by a licensed DVD player. The region code check performed by a 
licensed player is designed to prevent the player from rendering the content of a DVD unless the 
correct region code flag is found on that DVD. In the ordinary course of its operation, the process of 
applying the flag to the region code check results in access being granted where the region of the 
disc matches the region of the player.213 
It is uncontested that merely watching a lawfully obtained copy of a non-region 1 DVD is a 
noninfringing use.214  So, the next step in the analysis is to consider whether the proponents have 
demonstrated that the prohibition is adversely affecting this noninfringing use. 
213  The comments contain reference to a new type of region coding, namely enhanced 
region coding. The evidence is that to the limited extent this technology is used to protect 
DVDs, it is only used on region 1 DVDs, which U.S. viewers need not circumvent to have 
access to the work, as licensed players sold in the U.S. are set to region 1.  Therefore, it does 
not appear to be relevant to this rulemaking, which is concerned only with impacts in the 
United States. Moreover, the purpose of enhanced region coding is to prevent the playback of 
single region coded DVDs on multi-region players. Persons with multi-region players are able 
to watch non-region 1 DVDs, but multi-region players appear to violate the prohibition on 
circumvention. They are, however, widely available in the online marketplace, and there is no 
indication that copyright owners or others have made any efforts to stop their distribution or 
use. Persons who use multi-region players to watch non-region 1 DVDs probably would be 
circumventing a technological protection measure that prevents access. When enhanced region 
coding is employed, a person with a multi-region player would not be able to view region 1 
DVDs. 
214  See PHR Steve Metalitz, Joint Reply Commenters., Aug. 5, 2003; PHR Bruce 
Turnbull, DVD CCA. Those comments note that a public performance of the work could be 
infringing. This is not the type of activity in which the proponents have asserted an adverse 
effect. Accordingly, the analysis of this proposed exception is based upon a model of private 
viewing. 

[PAGE 122]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 122 
In the course of this rulemaking, the Office received more comments on this proposed 
exception than any other. As already noted, over one hundred of those comments were in support of 
the proposed exception. The overwhelming majority of those comments were from individuals who 
had acquired DVDs from a region outside the U.S. and then encountered difficulty in playing those 
DVDs on devices purchased in the U.S. 
In the previous rulemaking, the Register determined that region coding did not adversely 
affect noninfringing uses because of the options available to those who wish to play foreign content, 
such as VHS versions of the works, non-region 1 DVD players, and the ability to reset the region 
code setting of DVD-ROM drives in computers.215  If VHS substitutes are still available today, it is 
reasonable to presume that they will be substantially less so in the next three years.216  However, 
while the option of analog alternatives may diminish, there continue to be options available to 
consumers who wish to view non-region 1 DVDs. A user may still obtain DVD players for other 
regions from which the user wishes to watch DVDs.217  A more practical approach is the ready 
availability of DVD-ROM drives for computers218 which can be switched from one region to another 
215  65 FR at 64569. 
216  See, T Shira Perlmutter, May 2, 2003, p. 72; T Dean Marks, May 15, 2003, p. 72-
73; T Steven Metalitz, May 15, 2003, p. 71-72. 
217  PHR Steve Metalitz, Joint Reply Commenters, August 5, 2003. 
218While it is likely that not every person who wishes to view non-region 1 DVDs has a 
computer, there has been no showing to what extent the likely limited number of foreign DVD 
connoisseurs own only stand-alone DVD players. All of the commenters and reply commenters 
in this rulemaking commented via computer and therefore it can be assumed that their concerns 
could be addressed with a computer hardware solution. 

[PAGE 123]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 123 
for a limited number of times.219  The record indicates that those DVD drives are available for as 
little as $19.95.220  Those users who prefer to view DVD content on their television screens rather 
than their computer monitor may connect their computers or laptops to most recently manufactured 
television sets via S-Video, Composite Video or standard RCA jacks. These options allow the 
content of non-region 1 discs to be accessed and render allegations of adverse effects mere 
inconveniences. Therefore, it is not true that the prohibition against circumvention of region coding 
prevents access to any motion picture on DVDs from any region. 
While the prohibition may prevent a potentially more convenient means of accessing nonregion 1 encoded DVDs,221 it is uncontested that non-region 1 DVDs may be accessed by other 
available means. As long as such relatively inexpensive options remain available to those users who 
seek to view foreign DVDs, it does not appear that an exemption is necessary to preserve this 
noninfringing use. 
An analysis of the §1201(a)(1)(C) factors might well militate in favor of an exemption if one 
who wanted to view a non-region 1 DVD had no choice other than to circumvent the region coding. 
219  Indeed, this ability provides more to users than was stated in the previous 
rulemaking. Not only can the drive be set to different regions five times, but we now 
understand that the drive can be reset so that the user may switch regions up to a total of 
twenty-five times with the assistance of an authorized dealer or service representative.  See T 
Dean Marks, May 15, 2003, p. 288. 
220 T Bruce Turnbull, May 2, 2003, p. 48. 
221How convenient that means would be, however, is questionable, since it may not be 
likely that most users would be able to circumvent the region coding except with a multi-region 
player. 

[PAGE 124]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003	 Page 124 
However, in light of the fact that there are a number of ways to view non-region 1 DVDs in the 
United States, there is no reason to grant an exemption in this case. 
12.	 Proposed class: Video games stored on DVDs that are not available in Region 1 DVD 
format and access to which is prevented by technological measures. 
Although numerous comments addressed region coding with regard to movies, only one 
discussed region coding with regard to video games.222  The formulation above of the proposed class 
is a more accurate representation of the concerns expressed by that commenter than is the text of the 
class he proposed. 
In the previous rulemaking, the Register noted that there was not enough evidence to support 
an exemption.  Thus, the proponents were on notice that they needed to supply more and better 
evidence in order to sustain the proposed exception. Such evidence has not been produced in this 
rulemaking.223  As a result of the paucity of evidence in the record before us, there is less 
information on this issue than there was three years ago. Thus, as in the previous rulemaking, there 
is inadequate evidence to support an exemption. 
222  C15(2). 
223  The record contains a reference to the removal of something called “story mode” 
from the U.S. release of one game and an assertion that another game will never be released in 
the U.S. 

[PAGE 125]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 125 
13. Proposed class: Audiovisual works embodied in DVDs encrypted by CSS. 
The comments in support of this exception sought to engage in a variety of sometimes 
unspecified claimed fair uses with respect to audiovisual works on DVDs that do not necessarily 
appear to fall within the scope of the proposed exemptions discussed above.224  The above 
formulation of the proposed class represents a combination of individual proposals and encompasses 
all of them. 
While it has already been reaffirmed that CSS is an access control as that term is defined in 
subsection 1201(a), the proponents failed to provide evidence of actual or likely harm. Unless a 
proponent can show that the particular use to be made of an audiovisual work required use of the 
DVD version of that work and that the prohibition on circumvention prevents that use, an exemption 
is unsustainable. While some commenters mentioned uses that may theoretically qualify as a fair 
use, specific facts were not provided and it was not shown that this work was unavailable in an 
unprotected format. Moreover, these comments tended to be vague and brief in their discussions of 
the facts.
 The one comment that appears to have provided an actual example failed to indicate any 
specifics and was even unclear as to whether the commenter was speaking from personal experience 
or merely theoretically.225 
224  See C1, C10, and C11(2). 
225  C1. 

[PAGE 126]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003	 Page 126 
Given the insufficient evidence of what use of the DVD was required by the commenter and 
whether alternative sources for the material existed, these proposed exceptions cannot be sustained. 
14.	 Proposed class: Software designed for use on dedicated video game players. 
This proponent of this exception provided almost no evidence in support of his proposal.226 
The Register does not understand the specifics of the complaint or the nature of the desired use.  To 
the extent that this proposal addresses region coding for video games, it is addressed in our 
discussion of region coding. To the extent it attempts to raise further issues, the proponent has failed 
to identify a technological measure that controls access to copyrighted works227 and failed 
sufficiently to identify what noninfringing activity is adversely affected.228 
15.	 Proposed class: Literary works (including ebooks), sound recordings, and audiovisual 
works protected by access controls that prevent post-sale uses of works; “tethered” works. 
Some commenters proposed an exemption for a class of literary works or ebooks stating that 
the technological measures used in connection with ebooks tether the works to particular devices and 
also that they prevent a number of noninfringing uses, including fair use, private performances, and 
226  C15(2). The comment admits that “This class of works was hard to define.”  Id., 
p. 5. 
227  The comment states that “A video game will not play in the machine unless certain 
information on the disk, possibly including an encryption checksum, is correct.” Id. (Emphasis 
added). 
228  Apart from foreign region-coded video games, the comment simply refers to 
“playing unauthorized software (such as Xbox Linux),” and provides no facts that would 
provide the Register with a basis for evaluating the claim of noninfringing use or of adverse 
effects on such use. See id. at 6. 

[PAGE 127]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 127 
lending or redistribution traditionally falling within the scope of the first sale doctrine.229 This same 
argument was applied to other categories of works, such as sound recordings and audiovisual 
works.230 
Similarly, these same categories or subsets of works were proposed for exemption in a 
different formulation of the class, namely literary works, sound recordings and audiovisual works 
restricted by access controls that limit access to and post-sale uses of the work.231 On closer 
examination, it appears that the two arguments are different ways of stating the same problem. 
Tethering means limiting access to certain hardware or software. The purpose of limiting access to 
particular devices or hardware is to enable varying degrees of control over certain uses. Since there 
are other ways of limiting post-sale uses, tethering appears to be a subset of the broader formulation 
of access controls that limit lawful access and post-sale uses of the work. It is therefore useful to 
analyze these proposals together. 
Ebooks 
Tethering of ebooks is a means of establishing a secure platform on which digital works will 
be accessed by the user. By placing an ebook in a particular format for access only on a particular 
229 See, e.g., C11(3), C13, C14(1), and C20(1)&(4). 
230 See e.g., C20(2) and (3). 
231 C20(4), (5), and (6). These proposals by IP Justice added the further qualification to 
the class: “where circumvention of the technology allows the lawful possessor to use the work 
in a non-infringing way.” Id. Since an exemption can only apply to noninfringing uses by 
users, this qualification appears to be superfluous. 

[PAGE 128]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 128 
reader, the copyright owner has some assurance that this digital version of the work will obtain a 
predictable degree of protection. Using a closed or restricted system – one that will allow access 
only on a particular device or software platform – reduces the opportunities for redistribution of 
digital works on open systems, such as the Internet. In part, this is achieved by allowing access only 
on platforms that provide the copyright owner with some control over authorized uses. In such a 
closed or restricted system, access is therefore authorized only on software or hardware that may 
limit the scope of permissible  uses. Since limiting access to particular hardware or software may 
have an effect on noninfringing uses, this situation may be one that requires review in this 
rulemaking proceeding. 
Tethering is not the only way to limit the uses of a work. Works may be distributed with selfcontained limitations on uses. For instance, works may be distributed with copy protection measures 
that are wrapped with an access control in such a manner that in order to circumvent the copy 
protection, a user must first circumvent an access control to get to the measures controlling use. 
Digital rights management permissions are often wrapped by some form of access control, e.g., 
passwords or encryption. In order to alter the settings on the restrictions on use, it would be 
necessary to circumvent the access control that protects these DRM settings. 
Commenters have referred to this as “dual purpose technology.”232 In the last rulemaking, the 
issue was referred to as “merged” access and use controls. The Register had expressed a desire for 
further clarification from Congress on this issue, since in a broad sense, protecting uses of a work by 
232 See, e.g. C20, p. 6. 

[PAGE 129]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 129 
an access control measure blurs the disparate treatment Congress afforded each of these types of 
technology, i.e., providing a prohibition on circumvention to one but not the other. Despite the fact 
that Congress has not provided additional guidance in this matter, particular instances of the 
prohibition’s adverse effect on noninfringing uses of “particular classes of works” may be addressed 
in this proceeding. The rulemaking is only authorized to recommend particular classes of works for 
exemption and thus cannot address the issue of tethering or dual purpose technology generally, but 
only the impact of the prohibition on particular classes of copyrighted works. 
Ebooks were one of the examples provided as evidence that works that are tethered or that 
limit post-sale uses of the work have been or are likely to be adversely affected by the prohibition on 
circumvention. It is necessary to examine whether the prohibition is adversely affecting 
noninfringing uses of the copyrighted works that are distributed in ebook format. It is important to 
note, however, that the inquiry is not limited to whether the prohibition is adversely affecting 
noninfringing uses of the ebook format, but rather whether the prohibition is adversely affecting 
noninfringing uses of these copyrighted “works” in any format available in the marketplace. 
In many cases, ebooks are available for purchase in alternative digital formats. The consumer 
often has choices between various ebook formats as well as between ebook formats and alternative 
formats for books, e.g., hard copies or audio versions. Some commenters, however, appear to believe 
that this is not enough.233 These commenters believe that users should be able to “space-shift” any 
work they purchase in order to access this work on any device of their choosing. Although, as a 
233  C13 and C20(1). 

[PAGE 130]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 130 
practical matter, this option has historically been unavailable for most types of works, the 
distribution of works in digital file formats now creates the potential for such space-shifting. Yet no 
court has held that “space-shifting” is a fair use,234 and the Register is skeptical of arguments that it 
is. Certainly, where the online distribution of works is a potential concern, space-shifting will be 
incompatible with fair use.235 The potential for widespread online distribution of digital works was 
precisely the type of concern that led to the enactment of §1201. Denying copyright owners the 
ability to limit the device on which a particular digital work will be rendered would necessarily 
foreclose the most useful protections afforded by the DMCA. The purpose of tethering is to limit 
subsequent redistribution. While this may limit a user’s options, as long as alternative formats of the 
work are available for noninfringing uses, such user limitations would appear to represent only an 
inconvenience – an inconvenience that is the result of a choice made by the consumer to purchase 
that particular electronic version because of its other conveniences. If the user purchased this format, 
it may be assumed that some benefit drove the purchase despite any possible inconveniences. In 
essence, the commenters seek to have their cake and eat it too – they want copyright owners to 
provide works in digital formats, but do not want to live with the reasonable measures copyright 
owners feel they must take to guard against the risks that this digital distribution entails. Stating that 
copyright law “has never been construed to allow authors to prevent a reader’s freedom to read a 
lawfully purchased literary work where and how they choose”236 overstates the case; the prohibition 
234 Recording Industry Association of America. v. Diamond Multimedia Sys. Inc., 180 
F.3d 1072, 1079 (9th Cir. 1999), cited in C20, did not hold that “space-shifting” is fair use.  It 
did state, in dicta, the view that “space-shifting” of digital and analog musical recordings is 
noncommercial personal use consistent with the Audio Home Recording Act. 
235 See, e.g., A & M Records, Inc. v. Napster, Inc., 239 F.3d 1004, 1019 (9th Cir. 
2001). 
236 C20(1), p. 2. 

[PAGE 131]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 131 
on circumvention does not prevent this choice. Users may still choose the paperback version of a 
book to read anywhere they would like.237 What the prohibition does accomplish is to encourage 
copyright owners to provide works in new use-facilitating business models that provide users with 
new choices and different options that were previously unavailable. 
Commenters also discussed the problems associated with tethered ebooks when users try to 
upgrade their computers or reading devices.238 One commenter states that although the Microsoft 
Reader allows up to 8 machines to access a book, other readers, e.g., Gemstar and Adobe, limit each 
book to one machine. While upgrading computers, handheld devices or other dedicated portable 
reading devices is a legitimate noninfringing use, the fact that there are variations in the market 
provides some insight. If one format allows more choices and if consumers find those choices 
valuable, it is likely that more consumers will opt for the device with the more liberal DRM policies. 
The market will therefore have an important role in resolving this issue as long as choices are 
available. In addition, when unprotected choices are also available, as is the case with books, the 
user as a consumer will not only have choices, but in the purchasing decisions made, will have 
substantial leverage over the commercial success or failure of particular protection systems. 
The case for other noninfringing and post-sale uses of ebooks contains similar flaws. Unlike 
the situation where ebooks are sought to be used by the blind and visually impaired, these 
commenters have not presented any evidence why alternative formats such as hard copies and audio 
237  The user may also read an ebook wherever he likes if it has been downloaded to a 
portable device. 
238 C13, p. 1. 

[PAGE 132]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 132 
books are unable to fulfill such noninfringing uses. Moreover, these commenters have failed to 
identify specific noninfringing uses of specific works that the prohibition on circumvention has 
adversely affected. Merely showing that ebook formats restrict certain uses is a starting point for the 
inquiry, but alone does not provide sufficient factual information necessary to analyze and balance 
the factors. For example, stating that certain ebook formats prevent uses such as printing, read-aloud, 
or “space-shifting,” without explaining whether other formats of a particular work are available for 
such uses, makes it impossible to fully assess the proposal. Without an identification of which 
particular works were necessary for which particular  uses, the manner in which the prohibition 
prevented uses, and why such uses were unavailable from alternative formats, the factual basis for an 
exemption is uncertain. There is clearly no affirmative obligation for copyright owners to make all 
uses available in all formats in which a work is distributed. The question is whether noninfringing 
uses of particular classes of works are being adversely affected and whether, on balance, an 
exemption is warranted based on the evidence provided. 
For users who are not blind or visually impaired, it is not clear how an access control on an 
ebook is adversely affecting noninfringing uses of the works themselves. Since books are available 
in many alternative formats, some of which are completely devoid of any technological protection, it 
would appear that traditional noninfringing uses are unaffected in some of these formats. When 
purchasing an ebook, often the user has multiple choices of formats, e.g., Adobe Reader, Microsoft 
Reader, Palm Reader, etc.. The user also has the choice of whether to purchase an ebook or an 
alternative format of the work, e.g.,  hardcover, paperback, or audio book. Should the user choose to 
purchase an ebook, he or she may choose the appropriate format for the ebook reader software that 
he or she possesses. While the digital rights management in the ebook format may limit what one 

[PAGE 133]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 133 
can do with the ebook, and even though these use permissions are “wrapped” within an access 
control, virtually all works currently available in ebook format are also available in unprotected 
formats as well, e.g., books and audio tapes. There was no evidence introduced in this rulemaking 
regarding particular works solely available in protected ebook formats. 
Ebooks, like many other digital works, offer certain advantages to the user, e.g., the ability to 
fit a library of books into a pocket or to search the text. By placing the work in digital format, 
however, the author and publisher face added risks. If an ebook is redistributed widely over the 
Internet, the market for that work could diminish substantially. It is not surprising, therefore, that 
along with the benefits of ebooks, there are also some limitations imposed to protect the copyright 
owner who chooses to distribute a digital version. In the case of hard copy books, the practical 
limitations on copying and redistribution (e.g., imperfect copies, time consuming to make copies, or 
the availability of relatively inexpensive new copies) limited the potential harm to the copyright 
owner. In the case of ebooks, the practical limitations on copying are eliminated. It becomes a 
simple matter to redistribute the entire works in perfect copies around the world. 
Given the potential for harm to the market for or value of a work if it should be re-distributed 
over the Internet or placed on a peer-to-peer file sharing service, an exemption for a class of works 
cannot be taken lightly since the result may be that the incentive to distribute the work in digital 
formats  may be diminished. Whatever adverse effects the prohibition in §1201 might have on users 
of the proposed class of works – and in this case, no concrete adverse effects have been shown – 
users of the proposed class of works would be adversely affected to a much greater degree if 

[PAGE 134]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 134 
publishers choose not to publish works in that class. As long as alternative versions are available that 
allow these noninfringing uses, consumers have a choice between accepting  the benefits as well as 
the restrictions of the digital versions and electing to obtain the analog or hard copy version without 
such restrictions. Due to the lack of specificity regarding the particular works alleged to be adversely 
affected by the prohibition and the failure to show that such works are unavailable in alternative 
formats for noninfringing uses, there is no basis on which to recommend an exemption. 
The most frequently discussed adverse effect among commenters is the disabling of the “read 
aloud” function. Some commenters appear to believe that this restriction means that the author is 
trying to prevent the purchaser of the ebook from reading it aloud and therefore restrict private 
performances.239 Despite this confusion, it is apparent that the user’s ability to read the text aloud is 
not technologically prohibited – it is difficult to imagine how that might be accomplished –  but 
rather it simply means that the “read aloud” function on the operating system or the particular ebook 
reader – a synthesized voice rendering of the text – has been disabled by the digital rights 
management either selected by the author or publisher, or left at its default setting.240 While it is true 
that a private performance is a noninfringing use, unless a person is blind or visually impaired, the 
person in possession of the ebook may read it aloud to himself or herself in precisely the same 
manner that this could be accomplished with a hard copy of the book. If a person wishes to hear a 
239 See, e.g., C14, p. 2, C30, p. 20. 
240 The default setting for the read aloud function varies with particular ebook reader 
programs and with different versions of the same program. For example, the default setting in 
some versions of Adobe Acrobat  was that the read aloud was disabled, whereas with Adobe 
Reader 6.0, the default setting is enabled. 

[PAGE 135]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 135 
book, an audio version of the book may well be available. The fact that every noninfringing use is 
not available in every format is not, in and of itself, a basis for an exemption. 
Similarly, the “lending” feature may be turned off on some ebooks, limiting the program’s 
permission to redistribute a work electronically to another. Yet for these uses to be adversely 
affected, a proponent must show not only that the intended use is noninfringing, e.g., permitted by 
the first sale doctrine,241 but must also show that this intended use was unavailable by other means. 
As long as hard copies are still available at the bookstore or library, transfer of a copy by transfer by 
sale, rental, lease or lending may still be accomplished.242 It is only when the ebook is unavailable in 
other formats or when the intended use requires the ebook version that the prohibition’s effect on use 
could conceivably rise to a level of significant concern. In addition to the wide availability in 
alternative formats, the proponents offered no evidence that a particular noninfringing use required 
the ebook version of the work in order to accomplish such a noninfringing use, nor was there any 
evidence that the prohibition on circumvention was adversely affecting use for archival, 
preservation, or education, purposes or for purposes of criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, 
scholarship or research.243 
241  The applicability of the first sale doctrine is questionable where the possessor of a 
digital copy attempts to transfer the copy by electronic transmission.  See DMCA Section 104 
Report 78-80 (2001). 
242  An ebook stored in an electronic device may also be transferred as part of a transfer 
of the device itself. 
243  Cf. section III.A.4. supra, discussing the class of ebooks proposed by advocates for 
the blind and visually handicapped, who did make such a showing. 

[PAGE 136]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 136 
Another problem cited was the inability to print a page or parts of a work. While the 
reproduction of a page or portion of a book may well be a noninfringing use in appropriate 
circumstances, the fact that this is unavailable in some ebooks does not adversely affect 
noninfringing uses of the works in general.244 One may still quote from the ebook or re-type portions 
of the text. The fact that an ebook may prevent portions to be directly printed or may limit the 
amount that can be printed does not equate with an adverse effect on noninfringing uses. It does 
limit what a user can do with the ebook technology, but it does not prevent or limit the availability of 
noninfringing uses of the “work.” A user may still quote the work. In fact, a user may still re-type 
the entire work if such a reproduction is believed to be a fair use. Fair use does not, however, require 
a copyright owner to provide the most efficient means of engaging in a noninfringing use. Certainly, 
a user may even use technology, e.g., a photocopier, to reproduce a portion of the hard copy version 
of the work. Evidence has not been presented to show that these noninfringing uses of a particular 
class of works have been or are likely to be adversely affected by the prohibition. 
Finally, although the class recommended for exemption, “ebooks,” is a subset of literary 
works, the true focus of the exemption is the use rather than the “class of works.” The harm alleged 
is applicable to all types of works rather than a particular class. While the purpose of this rulemaking 
is to review the prohibition’s effect on noninfringing uses, it must do so with more specificity than 
the commenters have provided. Merely reciting the exemptions in title 17 without discussing 
specific facts is unproductive. The Librarian does not have authority to create general use-based 
exemptions for even subsets of works. The Librarian must exempt classes of works and without 
244  Compare the ebook to a traditional book. One cannot “print” a page of that book, 
either. 

[PAGE 137]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 137 
information about specific factual situations in which persons have been or are likely to be adversely 
affected in their ability to use works in the proposed class, it is impossible to tailor a class to address 
the harm. To the extent that a commenter succeeds in proving that all works are adversely affected 
by the prohibition, he or she may have proved too much – and be beyond the scope of this 
rulemaking which is limited to recommending designations of particular classes of works. 
For all of these reasons, the Register declines to recommend these proposed exemptions 
relating to literary works. 
Sound Recordings and Audiovisual Works 
The arguments on tethering of sound recordings of musical works and on the tethering of 
motion pictures to particular devices or software platforms are very similar to those relating to 
ebooks. As with the space-shifting of ebooks, commenters seek to “platform-shift” their sound 
recordings or motion pictures. Some four commenters seek broad use for works in digital form, and 
perceive no problem with granting such use in all digital forms.245 Others specifically would exempt 
access-restricted compact discs.246  All proponents criticize the inability of consumers freely to 
choose playback devices and online media players. 
Some proponents of this class seek to be able to perform musical sound recordings and 
motion pictures generally, online and otherwise, on any platform and through any playback 
245 See, e.g., C8, C20(2)and (3), C30(2) and (3), C34, and C38(1) and (2). 
246 See, e.g., C11. 

[PAGE 138]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 138 
device.247 Some complain that customers of music and motion picture services are unable to use any 
media player to playback the works distributed online, but instead must use proprietary players, e.g., 
RealOne Player for MusicNet and Windows Media Player for Pressplay, through which the 
copyright owner offers online services that require the installation or use of a specific player, 
denying the user the choice of alternative players.248 Essentially, the argument is that whenever a 
digital work is purchased, a user should be able to move and access that copy of the work to any 
device or software platform of the user’s choosing. It is the same argument that was made for ebooks 
and the commenters rely on the same legal support to establish the noninfringing status of this spaceshifting.249 
Just as the arguments are the same, the reasons against recommending an exemption are 
largely the same. First, the opponents have not really identified an adversely affected class of works, 
but rather have identified a problem affecting noninfringing uses generally that is applicable to most 
categories of works. As discussed above, tethering and DRM policies serve a legitimate purpose for 
limiting access to certain devices in order to protect the copyright owners from digital redistribution 
of works. Tethering works to particular platforms such as RealOne Player or Windows Media Player 
provides copyright owners with some assurance that these works will not be easily placed on peerto-peer networks. The fact that copyright owners are able to tether works to particular platforms is 
likely to encourage some copyright owners to make their works available in digital format. In the 
247 See, e.g., C8, C20, and C38.
248 C30(2)and (3).
249 RIAA v. Diamond Multimedia Systems, Inc., 180 F.3d 1072 (9th Cir. 1999) and
Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City Studios, Inc., 464 U.S. 417 (1984). 

[PAGE 139]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 139 
case of sound recordings of musical works, this encouragement serves the public by increasing the 
availability of legitimate online music services. 
Second, proponents have not established that space-shifting or platform-shifting is a 
noninfringing use. The cases cited do not support the claim and are quite reasonably read as being 
limited to the particular facts involved. Recording freely available, over-the-air broadcasts for 
purposes of time-shifting viewing (but not librarying) as a fair use in a pre-Internet age does not lead 
to the conclusion that all “shifting” is noninfringing, particularly considering that these works may 
just as easily be shifted to a peer-to-peer network. The Diamond case, cited as support for spaceshifting as a noninfringing use, referred to shifting as being consistent with the spirit of the Audio 
Home Recording Act (AHRA). The AHRA specifically does not apply to computer hard drives at 
issue in platform shifting.  Nor does it apply to audiovisual works. As has been noted before, there is 
no unqualified right to perform a copyrighted work on any device or platform. Without a clear legal 
argument addressing why such  consumer preferences are noninfringing uses, the proposals fail to 
provide an essential ingredient in the analysis for an exemption. 
Third, although it is very likely true that access controls are used on many of the services or 
formats presented and that these access controls limit the uses that can be made of a work, e.g., 
reproduction and distribution, the proponents have not identified any particular “works” for which 
other formats are unavailable for accomplishing proven noninfringing uses. In addition, as indicated 
with ebooks, consumers have choices of which formats to select or whether their intended use is best 
served by a digital online version or by another available version of the work. While it appears that 

[PAGE 140]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 140 
some believe the choices are contracting, it is more likely that providing a measure of security for 
copyright owners will increase the availability of use-facilitating options. For example, while the 
growth of legitimate online music services was slow (particularly when unfairly contrasted with the 
illegitimate services), the pace of alternative services is growing much more rapidly and the options 
available from these services is beginning to show signs of greater variety, e.g., Listen.com’s 
Rhapsody service or Apple’s iTunes services (which was recently opened to Microsoft Windows 
users). Given these expanding options in the online environment as well as the continued availability 
in existing formats, the claim that the prohibition is adversely affecting noninfringing uses appears 
wanting. Simply stating that all versions of a work are not available for all desired uses is an 
inadequate basis for an exemption. A proponent must show that the prohibition is adversely 
affecting noninfringing uses of the work and must consider the various formats of that work that are 
available for the desired noninfringing use. A consumer choice to purchase a more restrictive digital 
format is still a choice as long as alternative outlets for noninfringing uses of the “class of works” 
are available. At present, it appears that the prohibition is increasing users’ choices rather than 
diminishing them. 
The same is true of audiovisual works. One commenter claims that Movielink and 
SightSound.com tether lawfully made reproductions to the hardware upon which they are first 
accessed.250 Despite these charges, user options for the availability of motion pictures in new formats 
250  C30, p. 14. Only one specific title of a work was given as an example of motion 
picture tethering, SightSound’s “Dead On Arrival.”  The Joint Reply Commenters report that 
no film with that title was available on Sightsound, but that a film entitled “D.O.A.,” 
copyrighted in 1950, starring Edmond O’Brien was available on Sightsound and that it is also 
available in DVD and VHS formats on Amazon.com. R23, n. 44.  

[PAGE 141]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 141 
is increasingly growing and is rapidly outpacing the formats that are diminishing, e.g. VHS. Online 
availability of motion pictures is in its infancy, yet pay-per-view, on demand, and premium channel 
options are steadily growing. At the same time theatrical release, videotape release and the 
massively successful DVD format continue to be available for these works. Although it is possible 
that a time may come when digital formats are the only source available, it would be speculative at 
this time of expanding options to assume that the ability to make noninfringing uses will decrease. 
Nevertheless, if specific facts reveal that to be the case, this rulemaking serves as a check on the 
developing market. At present, however, the proponents have not provided evidence that 
noninfringing uses from available sources of these classes of works are being adversely affected by 
the prohibition. 
For all of these classes, the evidence has shown that the availability for use has been 
restricted in certain digital “formats,” but the overall availability for use of these classes of “works” 
has not been adversely affected. There has been no evidence that these works are unavailable for 
nonprofit archival, preservation or educational uses. Similarly, the impact on criticism, comment, 
news reporting, teaching, scholarship and research appears to be enhanced by the increasing number 
of formats available to satisfy choices for use. The effect of circumvention of the protection 
measures employed on these works would be likely to decrease the digital offerings for these classes 
of works, reduce the options for users, and decrease the value of these works for copyright owners. 
Therefore, the factors weigh heavily against an exemption. 

[PAGE 142]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003	 Page 142 
16.	 Proposed class: Audiovisual works, including motion pictures, the DVD copies of which 
are tethered to operating systems that prevent rendering on alternative operating systems 
A number of commenters251 sought exemption of a class of works consisting of motion 
pictures on DVDs tethered to particular operating systems, e.g., the Windows or Macintosh 
environment, that prevent rendering of the motion pictures on alternative systems, such as Linux. 
The general argument of the proponents of an exemption is that DVDs with CSS, 
increasingly the principal physical media on which feature films are currently released for sale or 
rental in the United States following theatrical exhibition, are tethered by CSS to particular machines 
or, in the case of computers, to particular operating systems, making it impossible, as a  practical 
matter, for users to play DVDs on Linux operating systems.252  At least four commenters and one 
witness sought a general exemption to view DVDs on the Linux operating system.  One Linux 
proponent sought to view DVDs using that system, without further specification.253 One commenter 
noted that “The main CSS-related reason why in ‘practice’ Linux players can’t be licensed is that 
though technically, Linux DVD players are allowed, they are only allowed in a way incompatible 
with how Linux is used in reality.”254 
251  C15(1), C20, C37(1). See also T Phil Gengler, May 2, 2003.  One commenter 
(C8) sought to copy DVDs to VHS to view in his car. This is addressed in the discussion of 
rejected class no. 8 above. 
252  As an example, one commenter listed the first 15 DVD titles released at a popular 
online site for sale in January 2003, and found that fewer than one-half of those titles were 
available in VHS. C15, at 3. 
253  C15. 
254  C15, p. 2. 

[PAGE 143]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 143 
The proponents have successfully identified a “particular class of works,” and they have also 
identified an access control that prevents them from doing what they wish to do.  Moreover, they 
wish to engage in private performances of the motion pictures on DVDs, a noninfringing use. 
The incompatibility of DVDs protected by CSS with Linux was one of the major issues 
addressed in the previous rulemaking.  On that occasion, an exemption was denied when the 
Register concluded that “The reasonable availability of alternate operating systems (dual bootable) 
or dedicated players for televisions suggests that the problem is one of preference and 
inconvenience.” She observed: 
“[T]here is no unqualified right to access works on any particular 
machine or device of the user's choosing. There are also commercially 
available options for owners of DVD ROM drives and legitimate DVD 
discs. Given the market alternatives, an exemption to benefit 
individuals who wish to play their DVDs on computers using the 
Linux operating system does not appear to be warranted.”255 
The same is true today; in fact, as DVDs occupied a more significant place in the market for 
sale and rental of motion pictures in the past three years, availability of devices (and at lower costs) 
to play DVDs has increased. 
In 2000, the Register also observed that “with the rapidly growing market of Linux users, it 
is commercially viable to create a player for this particular operating system,” and that “[t]here is 
evidence that Linux players are currently being developed (Sigma Designs and Intervideo) and 
should be available in the near future. It appears likely that the market place will soon resolve this 
255  65 FR at 64569. 

[PAGE 144]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 144 
particular concern.”256  That prediction may have been overly optimistic.  Sigma Designs is no 
longer producing the hardware that was in development three years ago.257 Intervideo’s software 
solution is on the market, but it is only sold to original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) such as 
computer manufacturers, and is not sold directly to consumers.258 The IBM Thinkpad T22 model for 
Linux also included DVD player software.259  The record thus indicates that persons who wish to 
view CSS-protected DVDs on their computers running the Linux operating system have few, and 
probably unsatisfactory, options. 
The fact remains, however, that the licensors of CSS are willing to license a Linux player. 
Licenses to incorporate the CSS system into players are apparently royalty free, but one commenter 
alleges that the license requires a prohibitively expensive annual administrative fee.260  However, the 
same commenter confirms a basic incompatibility between open source philosophy and the 
nondisclosure agreements required by DVD CCA as a condition of receiving a CSS license.261 
While the Register recognizes that one of the reasons Linux appeals to many of its users is the fact 
that it is open source software, DVD CCA cannot be held responsible for the hostility in the Linux 
256  65 FR at 64569. 
257  T Dean Marks, May 15, 2003, pp. 74. 
258  Id., p. 74-5. 
259  Id., p. 75. But see T Robin Gross, May 15, 2003, p. 377-78 (explaining her 
understanding that due to the threat of litigation, this model of Thinkpad was withdrawn from 
the market.) 
260  C15, p. 2. 
261  Id. (“Being legally licensed to make a player involves signing a non-disclosure 
agreement which is inherently incompatible with open source (since publishing source code 
amounts to disclosing all the specifications it uses)”). 

[PAGE 145]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 145 
community to nondisclosure agreements, nor should it be required to permit trade secrets about CSS 
to be made public simply because Linux licensees (or, for that matter, Linux’s GNU General Pubic 
License) prefer or require public disclosure. Without trade secret protection, CSS likely would be a 
very ineffective access control. See DVD Copy Control Ass'n, Inc. v. Bunner, 31 Cal.4th 864, 75 
P.3d 1, 4 Cal.Rptr.3d 69 (2003). 
While it is unfortunate that persons wishing to play CSS-protected DVDs on computers with 
the Linux operating system have few options, the fact remains that they have the same options that 
other consumers have.  The Register concludes, as she concluded three years ago, that the harm to 
such persons is de minimis, amounting to no more than a mere inconvenience.  When the factors set 
forth in §1201(a)(1)(C) are taken into account, the balance falls fairly decisively against an 
exemption. 
Considering the availability of copyrighted motion pictures as a general proposition, the 
Register recognizes that they have only limited availability for use on Linux-based computers. 
However, as a general proposition the DVD medium has increased the availability of motion 
pictures for sale and rental by the general public, and as noted above, the motion picture studios’ 
willingness to distribute their works in this medium is due in part to the faith they have in the 
protection offered by CSS. Permitting circumvention to enable playability in Linux-based players 
would undermine that faith and put strains on the motion picture studios’ commitment to this 
popular form of distribution. Moreover, all motion pictures on CSS-protected DVDs remain 

[PAGE 146]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003	 Page 146 
available even to Linux users. The Linux users simply must use the consumer electronic devices 
used by most consumers to view those DVDs.  That does not seem to be a substantial burden. 
No serious argument has been offered that the inability to play CSS-protected DVDs on 
Linux-based computers has had or will have a negative impact on the availability for use of works 
for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational purposes or on criticism, comment, news 
reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research. 
Finally, when examining the effect of circumvention of technological measures on the 
market for or value of copyrighted works, as stated above, the value of copyrighted works could 
likely be negatively affected by any exemption permitting circumvention of CSS.  The major 
countervailing interest expressed by opponents of the exception is the increased threat of piracy. 
Given that the proposed use is on a computer, which is easily capable of ripping and distributing 
copies over the Internet, those concerns are reasonable. The balancing of the incremental benefit of 
allowing circumvention for the purposes of watching a movie on a Linux-based computer is 
outweighed by the threat of increased piracy that underlies Congress’ motivation for enacting §1201. 
Therefore, the statutory factors in §1201(a)(1)(C) disfavor granting an exemption. 
17.	 Proposed class: Sound recordings, audiovisual works and literary works (including 
computer programs) protected by access control mechanisms that require assent to EndUser License Agreements as a condition of gaining access. 
One commenter proposed an exemption for the class of sound recordings, audiovisual works 
and literary works (including computer programs) protected by access control mechanisms 

[PAGE 147]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 147 
employed by or at the request of the copyright holder which require, as a condition of gaining 
access, that the prospective user agree to contractual terms which restrict or limit any of the 
limitations on the exclusive rights of the copyright holder.262 Factual examples provided in support 
of this class include licenses for the making of a musical work into a sound recording, the purchase 
of copies of sound recordings for a limited period of time, and “end-user licensing agreements” 
(EULAs) for medical information on a website and for a EULA required by an ebook. 
At the outset, it must be noted that the evidentiary support for the scope of this class is 
meager.  There is slight evidence provided for support of an exemption for audiovisual works.  For 
sound recordings, the evidence appears to be limited to one particular service that was distributed in 
1999 by a service that has since become defunct – a problem seemingly remedied by the market – 
and a CD-ROM sound recording/multimedia product and service for computers running on 
Windows 3.1 and Windows 95.  Both appear to be early experiments into the digital market and 
have little relevance during the current three-year period. 
In addition, a proposal for the broad class of all literary works is without factual support. The 
comment expressly states that the example cited for the exemption based on ebooks is  “not so 
troublesome,” since the work was restricted by someone other than the copyright owner and because 
the work was readily available in an unrestricted medium.263 Although the commenter states that 
ebooks are protected by EULAs, the citation of the hyperlink in support of this claim appears to 
262 C30(4) 
263 C30, p. 20. 

[PAGE 148]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 148 
reveal a misunderstanding of the nature of DRM “permissions” and their differences from EULAs.264 
After reviewing the evidentiary foundation for this proposal, it is apparent that the scope of 
the perceived problem may be much narrower than the scope of the proposed class. The sole relevant 
evidence provided appears to be related to information on literary works: text material on a website 
and computer programs. In a broader context, however, this comment may be understood as a 
general attack on the use of clickwrap, clickthrough, or shrinkwrap licensing on mass market 
products and services. 
In the case of the cited website requiring agreement to a EULA as a condition precedent to 
permitting access to certain information, the website purports to be a derivative work of the author’s 
book.265 That book is available for purchase from the author’s site, presumably without a EULA, and 
264 A few commenters appeared to be confused about the “read aloud” feature on 
ebooks. While the description of an ebook’s features may state “Off – Reading aloud is not 
available for this book” or “Off – Lending options are not available for this book,” these are 
not contractual conditions that preclude an individual from reading the book aloud or loaning a 
person one’s ebook reader. See, e.g., C14, p. 2. Rather, these descriptions are statements 
about the technological functions that are permitted within the ebook reader. The statement: 
“this book cannot be read aloud” does not mean that private performances are prohibited, but 
rather it indicates that, for example, the Adobe Reader will not render that ebook in audible 
form. As indicated elsewhere, it is difficult to imagine technology that could force a user to be 
silent. It is similarly difficult to imagine a contractual term that would forbid a user to read a 
book to his or her family. 
265  See http://www.backache.md/eula.htm (accessed December 16, 2002), and W.T. 
O'Connor, Jr., Making Your Back Better With the O’Conner Technique™: How to Become Your 
Own Chiropractor, as described at C30, p. 20. 

[PAGE 149]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 149 
is also available through other sites. It would appear that any restrictive contractual verbiage could 
be avoided by a consumer’s choice of an alternative format. 
Even if this were the only format in which the information could be found, the question 
arises as to whether such contractual limitations are causally related to the prohibition on 
circumvention or are separate legal considerations. It appears that in a case such as this, the 
prohibition on circumvention is not enforcing the contractual terms of the EULA. Section 1201(a)(1) 
prohibits circumvention of a technological measure that controls access, but does not refer to 
contractual conditions imposed on access. A user’s agreement to additional terms as a condition to 
receiving access is a separate issue, and violations of such terms are not prohibited by §1201(a)(1), 
but rather would be actionable as a breach of contract or in a traditional copyright infringement suit. 
To the extent that the commenter is arguing that such terms are so restrictive as to be unenforceable, 
these terms would have no effect whatsoever if that were adjudged to be the case. Yet even if they 
were enforceable, one who agreed to the terms and then received access would not be in violation of 
§1201(a)(1) if he breached the terms of the contract. The only way that §1201(a)(1) would be 
implicated would be if one attempted to avoid agreement to the terms by hacking through a measure 
protecting access. Clickwrap technology, which requires the application of information to gain 
access to a work, may arguably qualify as a technological measure that “effectively controls access 
to a work,” yet the terms included in that technological protection measure are not themselves 
enforceable under §1201(a)(1). Once the conditions for access imposed by the technological 
measure have been satisfied, further conditions of use are the domain of applicable contract law or 
the rights and limitations of the Copyright Act. Similarly, once the conditions for access imposed by 
the technological measure controlling access to the work have been satisfied, another technological 

[PAGE 150]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003	 Page 150 
measure preventing noninfringing uses would not be within the scope of the §1201(a)(1) prohibition, 
which addresses only measures that control access. 
The primary concern of the commenter appears to be contractual over-reaching.  While 
technological measures may prevent access unless a user signals assent to the terms of a contract, the 
prohibition on circumvention does not enforce the terms of a contract. Also, while the prohibition 
may prevent a user from circumventing a clickthrough license to obtain access, a user who agrees to 
contractual terms can gain access. It is true that if §1201(a)(1) did not exist, one might be able 
lawfully avoid a technological licensing agreement gateway, thereby attaining access without assent 
to disfavored terms. Yet if these terms are, as the commenter suggests, “beyond the limits imposed 
by Congress” or are a “misuse” of copyright, such preemption or misuse determinations can still be 
made in a court without regard to the §1201(a)(1) prohibition if one accepts and then subsequently 
breaches the terms. These determinations of preemption and misuse are, without question, beyond 
the scope of this rulemaking and are matters currently being addressed in the courts.266 This 
rulemaking is not the proper forum for adjudicating the legitimacy of such contractual terms. 
18.	 Proposed class: Published sound recordings of musical works on compact discs that use 
technological measures that prevent access on certain playback devices 
The Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) proposed a class of “Sound recordings released on 
compact disc (“CDs”) that are protected by technological protection measures that malfunction so as 
266 See e.g., Bowers v. Baystate Technologies, Inc., 320 F.3d 1317 (Fed. Cir. 2003) 
cert.denied, 123 S. Ct. 2588 (2003). 

[PAGE 151]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 151 
to prevent access on certain playback devices.”267  EFF appears to have identified a “particular class 
of works” – a subset of the §102 category of sound recordings (and implicitly and necessarily 
including the musical compositions that are performed in those sound recordings), further limited by 
reference to media on which they are fixed and the technological measures applied to them. 
EFF summarized its case as follows: 
“Copy-protected” CDs are intended to prevent the unauthorized 
reproduction of sound recordings. Unfortunately, the technological 
protection measures involved can malfunction so as to make the copyprotected CDs unplayable in certain playback equipment. A consumer 
should be entitled to take steps to restore the playability of such a CD. 
To the extent this activity may constitute a violation of Section 
1201(a)(1), consumers should be exempted from liability.”268 
EFF describes a number of technologies that, although said to be copy controls, have 
prevented access to certain sound recordings when CDs with those controls have been placed in 
certain devices, particularly in personal computers. Controls that may prevent such playback are 
Macrovision’s Cactus Data Shield-200 (CDS) and CDS-300, among others, which are supposed to 
provide at least a “second session” alternative to Red Book standard recording for rendition on 
computers.  In many cases, the nature of the malfunction is unspecified.  The problem is that in these 
267  C35(1). C11 proposed a similar class. 
268  C35, p. 3. For a more detailed explanation of the problem as presented by EFF, 
see id., pp. 3-6. 

[PAGE 152]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 152 
cases, the copyright owner intended the consumer to be able to play the work, but the technology 
prevents the consumer from listening to a work which he or she has purchased or otherwise lawfully 
acquired a right to play. 
EFF argues that the technological measures used on copy-protected CDs do not effectively 
control access to a work and thus do not come within the provisions of §1201(a).269 EFF asserts that 
it does not appear that the sound recordings in question require “application of information or a 
process or treatment with the authority of the copyright owner,” one of the statutory aspects of an 
access control, because the content on copy-protected CDs is unencrypted and the players that do 
manage to access the content do not “apply” any special “information, process or treatment” to the 
disc in the course of their operation. EFF further notes that, conversely, even though some modern 
CD drives are unable to access content, that failure to permit access does not arise from the failure to 
apply information, or a process or treatment. 
This proposal does not appear to describe a technological measure that “effectively controls 
access to a work” within the meaning of § 1201(a)(3)(B), when the technological measure 
malfunctions.  In these cases, the technological measure is not performing “in the ordinary course of 
its operation.” In addition, access to the work is not being controlled by a technological measure 
under the authority of the copyright owner. When failed playback is an unintended consequence, 
activities undertaken to restore playability do not fall within the purview of this statutory definition. 
269  C35, p. 6-7. 

[PAGE 153]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 153 
EFF acknowledged in its testimony that it wishes to dispel the uncertainty among consumers 
and other members of the public as to whether these controls fall within §1201(a)(1).  EFF further 
stated that if the Register could clarify that point, “the proposed exemption would not be 
required.”270   Opponents of the proposed exemption appear to agree that a malfunctioning copycontrol technology does not implicate access-control technology.271  The Register agrees that when 
copy controls also prevent access to a work not because they are intended to prevent access, but 
simply because they are malfunctioning or as an unintended consequence of the technology, they are 
not access controls. Thus, to the extent that EFF seeks an exemption covering malfunctioning copy 
controls, there is no need to consider that proposal. 
Unfortunately, the inquiry cannot end here, because it appears that in some cases, the 
technologies cited by EFF are intended to deny access to sound recordings under certain 
circumstances.  In particular, record companies have asserted that some of these technologies are in 
fact intended to serve as both access and copy controls.272  Specifically, RIAA identifies 
Macrovision CDS 200, Macrovision SafeAudio, and SunComm MediaCLoQ Ver. 1.0 as “effectively 
control[ling]access to a work” because these TPMs all are used under the authority of the copyright 
owner to control access on different platforms, and in each case, the TPMs require the application of 
a certain process or treatment to obtain access.”273  One of the technologies (Macrovision 
SafeAudio) makes the CD unplayable on a CD-ROM drive – i.e., the type of drive used in 
270  T Gwen Hinze, May 14, 2003, p. 185. 
271  R23, p. 16; PHR Steve Marks, RIAA, n.8. 
272   PHR Steve Metalitz, July 28, 2003; PHR Steve Marks, RIAA, July 28, 2003, p. 5. 
273  PHR Steve Marks, RIAA, July 28, 2003, p. 5. 

[PAGE 154]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 154 
computers, but permits the CD to be played on standard CD players.  The other technologies permit 
the CD to be played on a CD-ROM drive, but only in a “second session.” CDs with “second 
sessions” include two copies of each work. The first copy cannot be accessed from certain devices, 
such as computers.  The second copy (“second session”) can be accessed from those devices. The 
second session is also protected by technological measures that inhibit copying and file-sharing. 
The purpose of the second session is to permit playability on devices such as computers, but to 
hinder the ability of computer users to reproduce and disseminate the copies, e.g., in a peer-to-peer 
network.274 
Thus, it appears that in some cases, technological measure that control access to copyrighted 
works have been used on sound recordings distributed on compact discs.  While the class as 
originally formulated by EFF (expressly referring to technological measures that malfunction) is not 
an appropriate class for consideration (since everyone appears to agree that a technological measure 
that is designed to control copying and is not intended to control access, but which happens to 
restrict access due to malfunction, is not a technological measure that controls access), it is 
necessary to consider a modified formulation of that class: “Sound recordings on CDs that 
incorporate technological measures intended to prevent access on certain playback devices or 
control access on those devices.” 
EFF and the other proponents of the proposed exemption urge the Register to recommend an 
exemption to allow nonpublic performance of unplayable CDs that consumers have lawfully 
274  T Mark Belinsky, May 14, 2003, p. 255. 

[PAGE 155]
 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 155 
acquired. Clearly, a private performance is not an infringing use.  Playback on a modern CD device 
installed in personal computers or DVD players with CD drives also is a noninfringing use.  That is 
not to say that there is a right to perform a CD on any device, e.g., to play a CD in a toaster, but 
consumers understandably expect a CD to play on any CD player, including CD drives in computers. 
In sum, the proposed use is unquestionably noninfringing.
 By the same token, copyright owners are not legally required to continue marketing sound 
recordings on CDs, or to make all CDs they distribute compatible with all devices that have CD 
drives. Copyright owners may migrate their works to other devices and offer new formats, such as 
super audio or DVD drives, just as the physical medium has evolved from vinyl to cassette tapes 
and 8-track tapes in times past, and to CDs  and minidisks more recently.  
Of course, identifying a noninfringing use does not end the inquiry.  The next step is to 
determine whether the prohibition on circumventing access controls is having an adverse effect (or, 
in the next three years, is likely to have an adverse effect) on the ability to make noninfringing uses 
of the class of works. On the present record, the Register concludes that the requisite showing has 
not been made. 
Although a number of reply comments reported malfunctions of various CDs on various 
playback devices, including standard CD players, most of the reports did not explain the precise 
cause of the failure to playback. Some small percentage of compact discs, like any other product, 
can be expected to fail simply due to causes such as manufacturing defects or damage in transit to 

[PAGE 156]
 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 156 
the retailer or consumer.275 The Register concludes that these comments provide insufficient 
information to conclude that access controls have caused any appreciable number of users to be 
denied access to a sound recording. 
RIAA has provided information that establishes the minimal deployment of CDs protected 
by any technological measures in the United States to date, as well as the level of reported 
malfunctions.  The number of works protected by technological measures thus far appears to 
constitute a very small number of titles and CDs offered for sale in the United States. From a total of 
125,000 sound recordings titles RIAA identified that have been released on CDs for U.S. sale since 
calendar year 2001, only fifteen contained copy or access protection technology.  Further, only five 
of the fifteen copy-protected CDs that were released completely restricted access to a work for 
computer playback, without a nearly identical second session. Only four of those titles represented 
sales in excess of 50,000 copies, and in each case the technological measure included a second 
session.276 
Thus the total number of access-restricted CDs released in the United States is minuscule. 
While that number may increase in the next three years, it is not at all clear what the magnitude of 
that use will be or exactly what kind of technological measures will be applied.  As the record 
industry attempts to cope with massive infringement on peer-to-peer networks and elsewhere, a 
275   RIAA provided information showing that of the 37 CDs identified in reply 
comments complaining about playbility, only three had been commercially released in protected 
form in the United States. 
276  PHR Steve Marks, RIAA, July 28, 2003, p. 7-8, and Ex. A. 

[PAGE 157]
 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 157 
period of experimentation can be anticipated.  What we know about the present is that according to 
RIAA, the number of CDs commercially released in the United States by its members with 
technological access-control measures is five one hundredths of one percent (0.05%).  RIAA 
members represent 90% of the recording industry in the United States.277 
The Register concludes that the record does not support a conclusion that at present, access 
controls on CDs have had a substantial adverse effect on noninfringing uses of sound recordings on 
CDs. Only a handful of CDs released in the United States have had any access controls applied, and 
only small subset of that handful (those without a “second session” feature) have prevented users 
from listening to a sound recording on a particular device.  Even in the few cases where someone 
could not listen to a sound recording on a computer or some other device, the Register cannot find 
that this is more than a mere inconvenience.  Standard CD players are readily available and 
inexpensive, and there has been no assertion that access controls have prevented access to sound 
recordings using such conventional equipment. While the situation in the next three years is less 
clear, proponents of an exemption certainly have not demonstrated that it is more likely than not that 
access controls will have substantial adverse effects on user’s ability to listen to music. 
A review of the §1201(a)(1)(C) factors supports the Register’s decision not to recommend an 
exemption.  Sound recordings are widely available for use on devices intended to play music on 
CDs. There is no allegation that access controls have had an adverse impact on the availability for 
use of works in non-profit, archival or educational settings, or for criticism, comment, scholarship 
277  PHR Steve Marks, RIAA, July 28, 2003, RIAA, p. 7. 

[PAGE 158]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003	 Page 158 
and research. But an exemption from the prohibition on circumvention in cases where sound 
recordings on compact discs are protected in the ways discussed above would have great potential 
for massive negative effects on the market for copyrighted sound recordings.  The record industry 
has not massively deployed technological measures on CDs, but the use of technological measures is 
obviously a potentially important tool that record companies can use to combat widespread 
unauthorized infringement in the internet environment.  Granting an exemption to permit 
circumvention based on such a meager record at a time when the use of technological measures on 
CDs is unclear would likely have an adverse effect on the market for or value of sound recordings. 
Because the deployment of access-control devices on copy protected CDs has not been 
shown to have more than a de minimis effect on noninfringing users, and because threshold 
conditions for consideration of an exemption have not been met, the Register cannot recommend 
exempting sound recordings on CDs that incorporate technological measures that prevent access on 
certain playback devices or control access on those devices. 
19.	 Proposed class: Sound recordings on copy-protected Red Book Audio format compact 
discs 
This class was proposed by the Digital Media Association (DiMA), on behalf of transmitting 
organizations (including webcasters) operating under licenses (including statutory licenses) that 
permit them to transmit performances of sound recordings of musical works.  The purpose of the 
proposed exemption is to permit such licensees (hereinafter “webcasters”) to circumvent what they 

[PAGE 159]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 159 
claim are access controls that prevent them from making “ephemeral” copies of the sound recordings 
pursuant to the statutory license in §112(e).278 
DiMA and the other proponent of the proposed exemption, Full Audio (collectively, DiMA), 
have identified a particular product – multisession discs – as employing an access control.  A 
multisession disc provides access to a phonorecord in the Red Book standard279 when it is played on 
a standard CD player, but provides access only to a compressed “Yellow Book” standard version of 
the work280 when the disc is played on a computer.  Other access-control technologies—e.g., CDS -
100 and similar technologies281—prevent playback altogether when the disc is inserted in a 
computer’s CD drive.  DiMA’s proposal also extends to these technologies. Finally, although what 
DiMA has described appears to be a copy control technology, the recording industry asserts that 
these technologies may indeed control access, depending on the specific technology being used.  For 
instance, some technologies both control access to Red Book standard CDs and prevent them from 
being copied to computer hard drives.282 But, contrary to DiMA’s apprehension, it appears that, of 
278  C41. 
279  The “Red Book Audio” standard was developed by Sony and Philips Electronics.  It 
is a format that plays 44,100 samples per second in a range of 16 bits. 
280 Yellow Book standard defines the format of CD-ROMs.  It essentially adapts the 
Red Book Audio standard for playback on computers, processing both computer data and audio 
data, in sectors, with 2336 bytes of user data for audio playback. The opposition to copy 
protected CDs adapted for PC playback is that the sounds on the compressed data sessions 
offered are not of the highest, professional quality, not that there is any technical standard 
limitation on reproducing the same sounds. 
281See Macrovision FAQs, Appendix B, PHR Steve Marks, RIAA. 
282  T Seth Greenstein, April 11, 2003, p. 117, 142-43. With respect to copy protected 
CDs that prevent playback on computers altogether, see also PHR Steve Marks, RIAA, July 

[PAGE 160]
 
 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 160 
CDs distributed in the United States, the overwhelming majority is widely available in unprotected 
form.  See discussion supra.283 
One of the significant questions in considering this request is whether restricting computer 
uses of CDs to the compressed Yellow Book standard sound recordings made for computer-driven 
playback is a form of access control.  “A technological measure ‘effectively controls access to a 
work’ if the measure, in the ordinary course of its operation, requires the application of information, 
or a process or a treatment, with the authority of the copyright owner, to gain access to the work.”284 
Regarding multisession disks, if the first-session rendition of a track and the second-session 
rendition of the same track are considered separately, and a user is prevented from playing the first 
session on a computer by the CD’s technology, it could be considered an access control even if the 
second session is comparable.  Alternatively, it could be argued that access to the work was not 
denied, because it was available for play on both standard CD players and computer drives on either 
the first or the second session. In either case, access to the work is controlled, because information, a 
process or treatment with authority from the copyright owner is required to render the work.  For 
the vast majority of users,  the two sessions are nearly identical; thus access to the work is nearly 
universal. DiMA, however, contests the assertion that the two renditions are nearly identical, and 
for the minute number of specialists who can detect the difference in sound quality, that may be true. 
28, 2003, p. 6; PHR Steve Metalitz, Joint Reply Commenters, July 28, 2003, p. 1 (stating that 
no more than 43,500 CDs have been released that are intended to prevent playback on personal 
computers). 
283  See the discussion of rejected class no. 18, supra. 
284  17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(3)(B). 

[PAGE 161]
 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 161 
The Recording Industry Association of America (“RIAA”) opposes the requested exemption. 
With respect to copy-control technologies that block or direct access when the disc is used in a 
computer’s CD-ROM drive, RIAA asserts that, by using technologies like Macrovision’s CDS 200, 
Safe Audio or SunnComm’s Media CloQ, the copyright owner intends to control access on different 
platforms, and thus the technological protection measure “requires application of a certain process or 
treatment to obtain access.”  The CDS-100 system apparently restricts access on computers and no 
playback is possible on that platform.285 
Thus, it may be accepted that for the purpose of considering the need for an exemption, the 
technological measures discussed are access controls. 
We next consider whether DiMA has identified “a particular class of copyrighted works.” 
DiMA’s original formulation – “Copy-protected Red Book Audio format Compact Discs” – 
probably is not the most felicitous or accurate description of the exemption DiMA seeks.  A more 
accurate description might be: “Copy-protected Red Book Audio standard sound recordings that 
prevent the making of authorized or licensed ephemeral recordings that are necessary for exercising 
webcasting licenses pursuant to 17 U.S.C. § 112(e).” This class, which is defined initially by 
reference to a §102 category of works (sound recordings) is modified by reference to the 
technological measures applied to those works. This is an appropriate means of constructing a class, 
and the Register accepts it for purposes of evaluating DiMA’s proposal. 
285 See PHR Steve Marks, RIAA, July 28, 2003, Appendix B. 

[PAGE 162]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 162 
The next step in the analysis is to determine whether DiMA has shown that the access 
controls in question have prevented webcasters from engaging in noninfringing uses of sound 
recordings. 
DiMA proposed this class in order to obtain promptly the highest professional quality 
reproductions of sound recordings for its members’ webcasts.  These webcasts are authorized by a 
statutory a statutory license.286  As such, the exercise of these licenses constitutes a noninfringing use 
of the copyright works. Acting pursuant to their licenses, webcasters make copies of the recordings 
on computer servers, using economies of scale to expedite large-scale exercise of their §112(e) 
licenses to use ephemeral recordings.  DiMA and other proponents of this proposed class assert that 
the exemption is needed in order to circumvent copy-protected sound recordings, which they prefer 
to compressed formats.  For business reasons, they assert, such circumvention is needed in order to 
make the timely, cost-effective, and professional quality reproductions of sound recordings. 
RIAA observes that the legislative history of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act 
acknowledges the proponents’ concern. It points out the Conference Committee language that “if 
the use of copy protection technologies became widespread, a transmitting organization might be 
prevented from engaging in its traditional activities of assembling transmission programs and 
making ephemeral recordings permitted by section 112 . . . .”287  RIAA notes that this concern led 
Congress, with the approval of both broadcasters and the recording industry, to draft compromise 
286  See 17 U.S.C. §112(e) (citing §114(f)). 
287   PHR Steve Englund, RIAA, June 30, 2003, p. 2 (quoting H.R. Conf. Rep. 105-
796, at 78 (1998)). 

[PAGE 163]
 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 163 
language that exempts certain transmitting organizations in specified circumstances.  Id. It 
concludes that Congress has already provided for DiMA’s needs in §112(e)(8).288 
DiMA and other proponents nevertheless assert that this provision arguably contemplates 
that requests for circumvention must be made for each sound recording to be uploaded, and 
individual requests are not realistic for large-scale webcasting.  RIAA counters that §112(e)(8) was 
enacted at the same time as the anticircumvention provision.  Therefore, even if the provisions are 
not sufficient, Congress has already expressed its intent as to this proposed exemption, and, since the 
situation has not changed since enactment, the Copyright Office should exercise caution before 
creating a similar exemption under §1201(a)(1) for the upcoming three-year period.  Similarly, the 
Joint Reply Commenters also point out that, because §112 was intended to address all webcasters’ 
288  §112(e)(8) provides: 
“If a transmitting organization entitled to make a phonorecord 
under this subsection is prevented from making such phonorecord 
by reason of the application by the copyright owner of technical 
measures that prevent the reproduction of the sound recording, 
the copyright owner shall make available to the transmitting 
organization the necessary means for permitting the making of 
such phonorecord as permitted under this subsection, if it is 
technologically feasible and economically reasonable for the 
copyright owner to do so. If the copyright owner fails to do so in 
a timely manner in light of the transmitting organization's 
reasonable business requirements, the transmitting organization 
shall not be liable for a violation of section 1201(a)(1) of this title 
for engaging in such activities as are necessary to make such 
phonorecords as permitted under this subsection.” 

[PAGE 164]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 164 
needs with respect to anticircumvention, the Librarian should proceed with caution before 
effectively expanding the ephemeral provision in an exemption.289 
The Register concludes that because the §112(e) license gives webcasters the right to make 
ephemeral copies on their servers of sound recordings, the activities that are the focus of this 
requested exemption are noninfringing. However, to state that the activities are noninfringing does 
not answer the question whether the technological measures used on some CDs have caused or will 
cause substantial adverse effects on webcasters’ ability to make noninfringing uses of the identified 
class of works. 
The key question is whether the mechanism already prescribed by Congress in §112(e)(8) is 
sufficient to address webcasters’ needs. DiMA asserts that it is not. It states that it wants to avoid 
delays in obtaining the highest-quality sound recordings in various formats at a cost appropriate for 
its members’ businesses.  It thus seeks an administrative determination that bulk circumvention of 
the Red Book Audio standard is permissible, arguing that large webcasters cannot run a timely 
business without such an exemption.  Significantly, however, this problem has not actually been 
encountered. DiMA has not presented any evidence of an instance in which a webcaster has been 
unable to obtain the quality of recording it needs in a timely manner.  Full Audio testified about 
agreements with major and independent record companies, as well as agreements with the Harry Fox 
Agency for mechanical licenses, and about webcasters’ overall good relations with the music and 
289 R23, p. 53. 

[PAGE 165]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 165 
recording industries.290  Additionally, the record reflects that the witnesses representing webcasters 
had not encountered copy-protected CDs in any significant number.291  One DiMA witness 
acknowledged that “so far, at least for the webcasting community...we have not been prevented from 
getting access by the control measures that have currently been applied.”292 
Rather than citing actual problems, such as competitive disadvantage with respect to major 
labels or an independent labels’ inability to deliver, proponents cited their fears of various 
operational problems.293  The proponents did allege that copy-protected CDs are beginning to be 
used as promotional material and webcasters cannot use them.294  They also cited a few news articles 
and projections prepared by an analyst at J.P. Morgan that hundreds of millions of protected discs 
will be available elsewhere in the world, and that volume shipments were to ship commercially in 
the United States as early as May or June 2003. 295  Full Audio’s witness acknowledged, however, 
that the problem really has not yet developed.  “I know that perhaps could be characterized as 
speculation, but it does seem very inevitable, certainly within these three years, that we are going to 
be encountering this.”296  Moreover, as representatives of record companies pointed out, and as 
290  T Thomas Leavens, April 11, 2003, p. 125-6. 
291  T Seth Greenstein, April 11, 2003, p. 115,189-90; T Thomas Leavens, April 11, 
2003, p. 179-81. 
292  T Seth Greenstein, April 11, 2003, p.190. 
293  See, e.g., T Thomas Leavens, April 11, 2003, p. 131 et seq.; T Seth Greenstein, 
April 11, 2003, p. 171. 
294  Id., p. 152, 173. 
295  Id., p. 153. 
296  T Thomas Leavens, April 11, 2003, p. 180; see p. 178-79. 

[PAGE 166]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 166 
DiMA did not deny, there is no indication that webcasters have ever approached record companies 
to resolve any problems in gaining access to protected material.297 
In any event, §112(e)(8) clearly provides a mechanism that enables webcasters to circumvent 
technological measures under what appear to be the same circumstances that would operate in the 
case of the exemption sought in this rulemaking by DiMA.  The fact that the statutory provision 
enacted by Congress requires some additional procedural steps does not justify ignoring the fact that 
Congress has provided a specific remedy for the situation that has given rise to DiMA’s request for 
an exemption, especially when it does not appear that there have actually been any problems thus 
far. Having failed to demonstrate that the mechanism in §112(e)(8) has not accomplished the 
Congressional purpose, DiMA has not made the case for its proposed exemption. 
The Register concludes that the evidence falls far short of supporting a conclusion that the 
access controls at issue have a present adverse effect on noninfringing uses. The proponents’ 
evidence does not show more than de minimis present harm.  Nor have they, based on a small 
number of news articles and a single analyst’s projection, shown that future harm is more likely than 
not. They have not shown that record companies are unwilling to work out any anticipated 
problems. They have not provided sufficient evidence that they are now prevented from obtaining 
access to sound recordings to make ephemeral phonorecords for webcasting, or that it is likely that 
they will be denied access in the future. Mere apprehension that sound recordings will not be 
available to webcasters in the future is insufficient to prove the likelihood of a future adverse effect. 
297   R23, p. 53; T Steve Englund, RIAA, April 11, 2003,  p. 180; see T Seth 
Greenstein, April 11, 2003, p. 159-60. 

[PAGE 167]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 167 
They have not shown that the statutory exemption crafted specifically for their benefit does not serve 
its purpose. Without that showing of actual or likely harm, this exemption cannot be recommended. 
The factors set forth in §1201(a)(1)(C) do not militate in favor of an exemption.  Sound 
recordings are already widely available for use. Even if webcasters could not take advantage of the 
exemption in §112(e)(8), they would still have access to the “second session” Yellow Book 
recordings on the protected CDs, and DiMA has not made a convincing case that those compressed 
versions are too inferior to serve the webcasters’ purposes. The use of recordings for educational, 
nonprofit purposes is not relevant for this proposal, nor is the availability of the works for comment 
or criticism.  However, exempting this class of works could have a substantial negative effect on the 
market for, and the value of, copyrighted sound recordings in this format.  It cannot be denied that 
the recording industry is in a state of unprecedented crisis due to the widespread copyright 
infringement of sound recordings on the Internet.  If record companies choose to use reasonable 
access controls in an attempt to deter such massive infringement, an exemption permitting 
circumvention of those access controls could have a deleterious effect on an already disrupted 
market.  DiMA simply has not made a showing that it needs such an exemption.  A balancing of the 
interests of copyright owners and the pertinent users requires rejection of the proposed exemption. 
20. Proposed exemption: Broadcast news monitoring 
When the Copyright Office sought requests to testify at hearings in this rulemaking 
proceeding, a request was received from the International Association of Broadcast Monitors 
(“IABM”). Members of this association are in the business of monitoring and recording portions of 

[PAGE 168]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 168 
broadcast news and public affairs programming for clients that include businesses and government 
agencies. They then compile relevant segments of the programming for delivery to their clients. The 
IABM requested to testify in support of the following proposed exemptions: 
(1) Musical recordings and audiovisual works, protected by access control 
mechanisms whose circumvention is reasonably necessary to carry out a 
legitimate research project, where the granted exemption applies only to acts 
of circumvention whose primary purpose is to further a legitimate research 
project.298 
(2) Musical recordings and audiovisual works, protected by access control 
mechanisms whose circumvention is reasonably necessary to carry out a 
legitimate research project.299 
(3) Any lawfully acquired copy or phonorecord including a copyrighted work 
falling within any category in section 102 that, due to its nature and the users 
who typically use it, is likely to be lawfully used in particular environments 
under the fair use doctrine.300 
(4) All photographic, video, and audio digital content that is, or 
purports to be, record of fact (e.g. news footage).301 
Although IABM alleged that it wished to testify in support of these already-proposed 
exemptions, the arguments asserted by the IABM all related to the perceived adverse effects of a 
proposed broadcast flag regulation that is currently being reviewed by the Federal Communications 
Commission.302 Although the activities of the members of the IABM may fit within the general 
parameters of some or all of these proposed exemptions, the Register conducted one hearing session 
298  C27. 
299 C27. 
300  C27. 
301  C50. 
302 See 67 FR 53,903 (Aug. 20, 2002). 

[PAGE 169]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 169 
specifically on this issue, since this specific factual context was not raised in the written initial or 
reply comments.303 
Notwithstanding IABM’s statement that it intended to testify in support of the proposed 
exemptions noted above, at the hearing it did not actually address those proposals, except to the 
extent that what it sought relates to news footage and programming.304  Rather, it asked the Office 
“to exempt news and public affairs programming from the scope of the broadcast flag.”305 Such an 
exemption would be a “narrow, focused exemption specifically designed for the broadcast news 
monitoring industry. That exemption would allow us to bypass the broadcast flag for the very 
limited purpose of making news segments available to our customers.”306 
The Register cannot recommend such an exemption.  First of all, the Register cannot find 
that the “limited purpose” for which IABM seeks an exemption constitutes a noninfringing use.  The 
303 Other witnesses who testified on this issue included representatives of the Electronic 
Frontier Foundation, The Walt Disney Company/The ABC Television Network, and Allbritton 
Communications/National Association of Broadcasters.  The Copyright Office subsequently 
received a written submission on behalf of Cox Communications, Inc. after the hearings 
opposing IABM’s testimony, but since there was no established process to consider further 
comments, the Office did not consider this submission in rendering its recommendation to 
reject this proposed exemption. 
304  IABM did mention, in passing, that “We also support the exemptions proposed 
in comment numbers 27, 28 and 50 because they, too, would allow the public to bypass a 
technical measure for the purpose of using an audiovisual work for legitimate research and 
analysis.” T Todd Murphy, IABM, May 9, 2003, p. 160. But it did not elaborate on those 
proposed exemptions. 
305  T Pro Sherman, IABM, May 9, 2003, p. 159. 
306  Id., p. 160. 

[PAGE 170]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 170 
case law has, almost without exception, held that unauthorized broadcast news monitoring infringes 
the copyright owner’s copyrights in broadcasts news programs.307 
The evidence produced by IABM fails to support an exemption because it is entirely 
speculative. It further fails in that even if the speculative adverse effects were to become a reality, 
such adverse effects would only cause an inconvenience with respect to the intended use. Finally, it 
is also highly unlikely that the desired use for commercial purposes would constitute a noninfringing 
use absent authorization by the copyright owners. 
 IABM asserts that the institution of a broadcast flag regulation would prevent broadcast 
monitors from  redistributing news broadcasts digitally over the Internet, a means of distribution that 
would be much more convenient than other forms of distribution currently used. While this is 
possible, it is not necessarily “likely.” At present, there is no broadcast flag regime in place.308 
307 Pacific & Southern Co., Inc. v. Duncan,744 F.2d 1490, 1496-98 (11th Cir. 1984), cert. 
denied, 471 U.S. 1004 (1985); Los Angeles News Service v. Tullo, 973 F.2d 791, 796-99 (9th 
Cir. 1992); Georgia Television Co. v. TV News Clips of Atlanta, 19 U.S.P.Q.2D 1372,1991 
Copy. L. Rep. (CCH) ¶26,765, 18 Media L. Rep. 2349 (N.D. Ga. 1991); see Infinity Broadcast 
Corp. v. Kirkwood, 150 F.3d 104 (2d Cir. 1998)(retransmission of radio broadcasts over the 
telephone not fair use).
 As IABM observed, Cable News Network, Inc. v. Video Monitoring Services of 
America, 940 F.2d 1471 (11th Cir. 1991), vacated, 949 F.2d 378 (11th Cir. 1991), appeal 
dismissed en banc, 959 F.2d 188 (11th Cir. 1992), reversed an order granting a preliminary 
injunction against a broadcast monitor. However, that decision was made because the 
injunction granted relief that went beyond protecting CNN’s copyrighted material.  More 
important, as noted in the Tullo case, cited above, that CNN decision does not have binding 
precedential effect, having been vacated and dismissed on appeal en banc. 973 F.2d at 794. 
308  Recent news reports predict that the FCC will issue a regulation around the time 
that the Librarian announces the classes of works to be exempted in this rulemaking, see, e.g., 
“FCC Targets Copying of Digital TV,” Washington Post, Oct. 16, 2003, p. E1, but an 

[PAGE 171]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 171 
While the FCC may adopt a broadcast flag regulation, this is not known. Even if the FCC does adopt 
such a regulation, it is not known when the regulation will go into effect, what the regulation will 
cover, and how it will be implemented.  Had IABM been able to prove the likelihood that a 
broadcast flag regulation would be adopted, the likelihood that the regulation would be implemented 
within the relevant three-year period for this rulemaking, the likely nature of the compliance rules 
that will be mandated by the regulation, and the likely scope of any limitations that may be 
implemented in the regulation, there might have been some basis for consideration. The proponents, 
however, failed to offer any support beyond mere speculation. 
The proponents also failed to prove any adverse effects beyond mere inconvenience that 
would result from the possible FCC regulation.  There appears to be no dispute that analog 
broadcasting will continue for the next three years, and that any broadcast flag regulation that may 
be implemented would only affect digital broadcasts. Therefore, the activity currently conducted by 
broadcast monitors would not be significantly affected. By the proponents’ own testimony, the 
desired redistribution over the Internet – a use that most likely is not noninfringing – would only be 
for the purpose of satisfying “some of our customers[’] clamor for speed and convenience of digital 
delivery.”309  The fear that a possible regulation might inconvenience a user is a wholly insufficient 
basis for an exemption. Even if the proponents’ worst case scenario were to come to pass during the 
ensuing three-year period, not only would analog recording and distribution be unaffected by such a 
regulation, but such a broadcast flag regulation apparently would not even prevent “digital” 
reproductions on CD-ROMS, discs, or other tangible media from being distributed to IABM’s 
exemption cannot be based on news reports predicting action by another agency. 
309 T Pro Sherman, IABM, May 9, 2003, p. 157. 

[PAGE 172]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003	 Page 172 
clients.310 At worst, a regulation may only prevent, at some unknown time in the future, the 
redistribution of digital broadcast recording over the Internet. For all of these reasons, the proposal is 
rejected. 
21.	 Proposed exemption: Reverse engineering for interoperability and the Static Control 
proposals 
The Register granted a petition to submit a late comment from Static Control Components, 
Inc. (“Static Control”), which proposed three exemptions to the prohibition on circumvention. 
Sixty-five reply comments addressed the Static Control petition, and one session of the hearings was 
devoted to Static Control’s proposals. In specific, Static Control proposed: 
1. Computer programs embedded in computer printers and toner cartridges and that 
control the interoperation and functions of the printer and toner cartridge. 
2. Computer programs embedded in a machine or product and which cannot be 
copied during the ordinary operation or use of the machine or product. 
3. Computer programs embedded in a machine or product and that control the 
operation of a machine or product connected thereto, but that do not otherwise control 
the performance, display or reproduction of copyrighted works that have an 
independent economic significance. 
The origins of these proposals have their roots in a marketing strategy employed by Lexmark 
International, Inc. (Lexmark) associated with the introduction of two lines of laser printers, the 
T520/522 and the T620/622 (T-series). In addition to the sale of the T-series Lexmark printers, 
Lexmark tries to entice consumers to purchase its laser toner cartridges for use in the T-series 
printers. Lexmark offers a regular toner cartridge for sale that could be returned to any third-party 
310 T The Walt Disney Co. and The ABC Television Network, May 9, 2003, p. 176-77. 

[PAGE 173]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 173 
toner cartridge remanufacturer for replacement or refilling. After being refilled, these regular toner 
cartridges could then be used by consumers in the T-series printers, although allegedly with some of 
the enhanced features of the printer nonfunctional, e.g., the toner low meter functions only prior to 
being refilled.311 Lexmark also offers a “Prebate” toner cartridge for use with its T-series printers. 
These Prebate toner cartridges provide consumers with up to a $50.00 savings over the regular 
cartridges. In return for this price discount, the box on the Prebate toner cartridge contains a 
shrinkwrap agreement which obligates the consumer to use the Prebate cartridge only once and to 
return the cartridge only to Lexmark.312 Unwilling to rely solely on the terms of this shrinkwrap 
agreement, Lexmark also deployed a technological measure contained on a microchip in its Prebate 
and regular cartridges.313 In the regular cartridges, the technological measure does not prevent third 
parties from remanufacturing the cartridges, nor does it prevent users from using the remanufactured 
cartridge in the T-series printers. The technological measure in the Prebate toner cartridges, 
however, does prevent third-party remanufacturing and consumer use of remanufactured Prebate 
toner cartridges in the T-series printers. If consumers opt for the Prebate price discount, then not 
only are they contractually bound to return the cartridge to Lexmark rather than send it to a third-
311 T Seth Greenstein, Static Control, May 9, 2002, p.98. 
312 The shrinkwrap license agreement states: “RETURN EMPTY CARTRIDGE TO 
LEXMARK FOR REMANUFACTURING AND RECYCLING. Please read before opening. 
Opening this package or using the patented cartridge inside confirms your acceptance of the 
following license/agreement. This all-new cartridge is sold at a special price subject to a 
restriction that it may be used only once. Following this initial use, you agree to return the 
empty cartridge only to Lexmark for remanufacturing and recycling. If you don’t accept these 
terms, return the unopened package to your point of purchase. A regular price cartridge 
without these terms is available.” [emphasis added.] 
313 Lexmark International, Inc. v. Static Control Components, Inc., 253 F. Supp.2d 
943, 949 (E.D. Ky. 2003), appeal pending, No.03-5400 (6th Cir.). 

[PAGE 174]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 174 
party remanufacturer, but that contractual obligation is backed up by a technological measure that 
prevents the remanufacturing and refilling of the cartridge by third parties. 
In both the regular and Prebate toner cartridge’s microchip, there is a registered computer 
program called the Toner Loading Program (TLP). This program enables, inter alia, the T-series 
printers to approximate the amount of toner remaining in the toner cartridges. The T-series printers 
contain a registered computer program called the Printer Engine Program (PEP). While there are 
some differences in the Toner Loading Programs and the Printer Engine Programs  for the T520/522 
and the T620/622, for purposes of this analysis, the programs communicate in essentially the same 
manner.314 Both Toner Loading Programs and the Printer Engine Programs received copyright 
registrations, leading to a presumption that they are copyrightable works. Both Lexmark and Static 
Control agree that the Toner Loading Programs for the T520/522 and the T620/622 may be 
expressed in different ways – i.e., that different toner loading programs could be written that would 
communicate with the Printer Engine Program.315 
The Toner Loading Program on the regular and Prebate toner cartridge microchips engages 
in an authentication sequence, or “secret handshake,” with the Printer Engine Program on the 
Lexmark T-series printers. This authentication sequence runs each time a toner cartridge is inserted 
into a Lexmark T-series printer, each time the printer is turned on, or whenever the printer is opened 
314 Id. at 948-49. 
315 Id. at 950-51. 

[PAGE 175]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 175 
and closed.316 This authentication sequence must be successfully performed in order for the Toner 
Loading Program to exchange information with Printer Engine Program and to allow the printer to 
function. If, on the other hand, the authentication sequence does not successfully occur, the printer 
will not recognize the toner cartridge as authorized and access to the Printer Engine Program will be 
disabled.317 
In order to remanufacture cartridges that can interoperate with the Lexmark T-series printers, 
Static Control needs to understand how to gain access to the Printer Engine Program to enable it to 
operate. The authentication sequence (which may or may not include the “Checksum” operation)318 
protects access to the Printer Engine Program. If this sequence is not successful, the Printer Engine 
Program will neither accept information from the Toner Loading Program nor allow the Printer 
Engine Program to be used to operate the printer’s functions. Access to the Printer Engine Program 
is necessary for any use of the program. 
316 Id. at 952. 
317 Id. at 952-53. 
318 See id at 953-54. Although the district court found that the checksum operations 
(which involves the Printer Engine Program’s downloading of a copy of the Toner Loading 
Program from the toner cartridge’s microchip and comparing the number of bits to the 
expected number) was not a part of the authentication sequence or a secondary authentication 
sequence, from the information available in the record, the Register believes that this may well 
be a secondary access control. The checksum operation prevents access and use of the Printer 
Engine Program unless the correct value results from the process. It therefore appears, in the 
ordinary course of its operation, to require the application of information, or a process or a 
treatment, with the authority of the copyright owner, to gain access to the work. 
§1201(a)(3)(B). A determination on this point is not, however, essential to the Register’s 
analysis. 

[PAGE 176]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 176 
Many of the facts relating to the ongoing litigation between Lexmark and Static Control are 
still in dispute. One critical issue is whether Static Control reverse-engineered the communication 
between the Toner Loading Program and the Printer Engine Program in order to create an 
independent computer program or whether Static Control copied all or part of Lexmark’s Toner 
Loading Programs in order to achieve interoperability with the Printer Engine Programs. The district 
court found that Static Control’s SMARTEK microchip had “copied” Lexmark’s Toner Loading 
Programs “entirely” rather than reverse engineering it.319 As discussed below, while reverse 
engineering to identify and analyze the elements of a program necessary to achieve interoperability 
may be a noninfringing fair use, unnecessarily copying copyrightable elements to enable 
interoperability is infringing activity. Although the Register does not have sufficient factual 
information to make an independent determination on this issue, this determination is unnecessary to 
the decision of whether or not an exemption should be recommended. A review of  the record 
accumulated by the Office, including the court’s findings of fact at issue in the ongoing litigation 
between Static Control and Lexmark,320 yielded evidence sufficient to make a determination for 
purposes of this rulemaking. The Register’s conclusion is that Static Control’s purpose of achieving 
interoperability of remanufactured printer cartridges with Lexmark’s Prebate and non-Prebate 
Printers could have been lawfully achieved by taking advantage of the defense found in §1201(f), 
the reverse engineering exemption.  The Register takes no position on whether Static Control did, in 
fact, circumvent the “secret handshake” or the checksum operation in order to reverse engineer the 
319 Id. at 961. “In the instant case, it is clear that Static Control copied Lexmark’s 
Toner Loading Programs in their entirety.” Id. 
320 Lexmark International, Inc. v. Static Control Components, Inc., 2003 U.S. Dist. 
LEXIS 3734 (Civil Action No. 02-571-KSF), (E.D. Ky. 2003), appeal pending, No.03-5400 
(6th Cir.). 

[PAGE 177]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 177 
particular portion of Lexmark’s Printer Engine Program or its Toner Loading Program for the sole 
purpose of identifying and analyzing the elements necessary to achieve interoperability of an 
independently created computer program with the Lexmark Printer Engine Program. Nevertheless, 
there was agreement between the parties that it was technologically possible to reverse engineer in 
order to create an original interoperable toner loading program that did not infringe the copyright of 
Lexmark’s Toner Loading Program. The technological feasibility of creating such a noninfringing 
and interoperable program means that the congressional scheme could have been utilized. Whether 
or not this scheme was in fact utilized in this particular dispute is not an issue for the Register or the 
Librarian to resolve, but rather is an issue currently before the courts.321 The fact-finding tools 
available to the parties and the trier-of-fact through the adversarial litigation process in the federal 
courts, including the extensive discovery and evidentiary record available to the court, make the 
courts the appropriate forum for resolution of the specific factual dispute. The role of this 
rulemaking process is to determine whether noninfringing uses of particular classes of works are 
adversely affected by the prohibition on circumvention of technological measures that control access 
to works. In order to resolve Static Control’s request that the Librarian grant an exemption that 
would permit remanufacturers such as Static Control to circumvent access controls on computer 
printers and toner cartridges that control the interoperation and functions of the printer and toner 
cartridges, it is necessary for the Register to review and evaluate the facts to determine whether an 
adequate showing has been made in support of the proposed exemption. Given the technological 
ability to achieve interoperability through an existing statutory exemption, it appears that the 
congressional scheme sufficiently enables the noninfringing uses sought without requiring the 
assistance of an exemption in this rulemaking. 
321 Id. 

[PAGE 178]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 178 
Section 1201(f) is applicable to the goal of interoperability sought by Static Control.322 The 
statutory exemption in §1201(f) was intended “to avoid hindering competition and innovation in the 
computer and software industry.”323 Congress did not intend the DMCA to change the effect of preDMCA case law that allowed legitimate software developers to continue engaging in certain 
activities for the purpose of achieving interoperability between computer programs.324  Not only did 
Congress intend that “interoperability” include the exchange of information between computer 
programs; it also intended “for such programs mutually to use the information which has been 
exchanged.”325 Interoperability necessarily includes, therefore, concerns for functionality and use, 
and not only of individual use, but for enabling competitive choices in the marketplace. 
Section 1201(f) addresses these concerns in a series of progressive subsections. To show how 
§1201(f) relates to the facts of the Lexmark computer programs and Static Control’s intended use, it 
is necessary to examine the language of §1201(f). 
Under §1201(f)(1), Static Control is not subject to the §1201(a)(1)(A) prohibition if it has 
lawfully obtained the right to use a copy of a computer program326 and circumvents the technological 
322 The Register takes no position on whether the means of achieving this goal actually 
used by Static Control satisfied the requirement of §1201(f). 
323 House Manager’s Report at 14. 
324 Id. Such case law includes Sega Enterprises Ltd. v. Accolade, Ind., 977 F.2d 1510 
(9th Cir. 1992). 
325 Id. 
326 The Printer Engine Programs and the Toner Loading Programs. 

[PAGE 179]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 179 
protection measure327 that effectively controls access to a particular portion of that program328 for the 
sole purpose of identifying and analyzing those elements of the program that are necessary to 
achieve interoperability of an independently created computer program329 with other programs,330 
and that have not been readily available to the person engaging in the circumvention,331 to the extent 
any such acts of identification and analysis do not constitute infringement under this title.332 
In addition to satisfying the goal of Static Control in this rulemaking – i.e., an exemption to 
§1201(a)(1)(A)’s prohibition of the act of circumvention – §1201(f) goes far beyond an exemption 
for §1201(a)(1)(A) by providing exemptions for certain acts within the scope of §§1201(a)(2) and 
(b). While these concerns are beyond the scope of this rulemaking, the point is highly relevant to 
327 The authentication or checksum sequence. 
328 The Printer Engine Program’s functional controls. 
329 An original Toner Loading Program created by Static Control or others. 
330 The Printer Engine Programs. 
331  Static Control. There was some controversy over whether the computer programs 
were available for viewing by Static Control such that circumvention was unnecessary. Since 
Lexmark’s programs were available in the regular toner cartridge, these programs were 
claimed to be “readily available” to Static Control. See, § 1201(f)(1).  The point of what Static 
Control claims to have needed to be available was not the individual TLP and PEP programs, 
however, but the communication between these programs that revealed why the Prebate 
cartridge deactivated the PEP. It was this exchange of information that was unavailable to 
Static Control. Similarly, as Professor Ginsburg pointed out, if merely making information 
available denied the applicability of §1201(f) for creating interoperable works to foster 
competition, this “clever strategy” would be capable of undermining a significant goal of the 
provision. T Jane Ginsburg, May 9, 2003, p. 73.  A canon of statutory construction is to 
favor an interpretation that would avoid an absurd result. 
332 Static Control and Lexmark dispute whether Static Control infringed the copyrights in 
Lexmark’s computer programs, and the district court concluded that it did.  Whether there was or 
was not infringement is irrelevant to our inquiry; the only question is whether Static Control 
could have accomplished what it set out to do without infringing. 

[PAGE 180]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 180 
Static Control’s intended use. Were an exemption recommended in this rulemaking, the benefit of 
such an exemption would end at a point comparable to §1201(f)(1). The statutory exemption goes 
far beyond the limits of this rulemaking. Subsection 1201(f)(2) allows, under the specified 
circumstances, the development and employment of the “technological means to circumvent a 
technological measure” that might be prohibited by §§1201(a)(2) and (b). And §1201(f)(3) allows 
those means to be made available to others, if this making available of the information or means is, 
inter alia, “solely for the purpose of enabling interoperability of an independently created computer 
program with other programs.” Section 1201(f), therefore, has the capacity to satisfy interoperability 
with computer programs, such as the Printer Engine Program, in the marketplace as opposed to an 
exemption in this rulemaking which would be limited to individual acts of circumvention, without 
providing any ability to make such interoperability available to others. 
Taking advantage of the statutory exemption found in §1201(f) provides far greater relief to a 
competitor than could any recommended exemption by the Librarian. An exemption for a particular 
class of works in this rulemaking is limited to the prohibition in §1201(a)(1)(A). Pursuant to 
§1201(a)(1)(E), neither an exemption nor “any determination” made in this rulemaking “may be 
used as a defense in any action to enforce any provision of this title other than this paragraph.” In 
sharp contrast, the statutory exemption found in §1201(f) not only permits circumvention of 
technological measures to analyze and identify interoperable elements of a protected computer 
program, but also provides exemptions to the trafficking provisions in §1201(a)(2) and 1201(b). 
Even if the Register had found a factual basis for an exemption, it would only exempt the act of 
circumvention. It would not exempt the creation and distribution of the means to circumvent or the 
distribution of interoperable computer programs embedded in devices. Since it is clear that Static 

[PAGE 181]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 181 
Control’s goal was not merely to privately circumvent, but rather to facilitate the distribution of 
competitive toner cartridges to others, a recommendation for an exemption in this rulemaking would 
have had little effect on the intended use.333 On the other hand, if reverse engineering to achieve 
interoperability is conducted under the statutory exemption, a competitor may not only reverse 
engineer a computer program in order to create an independently interoperable computer program, 
but may also make the information or means of interoperability available to others if the sole 
purpose is the enabling of interoperability of an independently created computer program with other 
programs, to the extent that doing so is a noninfringing use. Taking advantage of the statutory 
exemption is, therefore, a far more robust remedy for insuring competitive activity in the 
marketplace. 
Since Congress created the §1201(f) statutory exemption to foster competition and 
accommodate the reverse engineering of computer programs to allow the creation of interoperable 
original computer programs, there is no basis for the Register to recommend an exemption where the 
factual record indicates that the statutory scheme is capable of addressing the problem. Where a 
statutory scheme exists for particular activity, persons must utilize such statutory exemptions to 
accomplish their goals or provide evidence why the statutory exemption is unavailable to 
accomplish a noninfringing use, not simply that the user could have accomplished his or her goal 
more conveniently by deviating from the congressional design. Even then, they must justify issuance 
333 It also should be noted that an exemption from the Librarian would only apply when 
the circumvention was performed to engage in a noninfringing use. If Static Control copied 
copyrightable elements of Lexmark’s Toner Loading Program rather than creating an original 
program that could interoperate with the Printer Engine Program, an exemption would not 
apply. 

[PAGE 182]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 182 
of any exemption that would appear to permit more than Congress intended when it enacted the 
statutory exemptions covering the same type of conduct. 
Exemptions to the prohibition on circumvention are available only when the prohibition has 
had adverse effects on users seeking to make noninfringing uses. There is a factual dispute in the 
litigation between Lexmark and Static Control as to whether Static Control reverse engineered 
Lexmark’s Toner Loading Program or whether Static Control simply copied Lexmark’s Toner 
Loading Program in order to interoperate with the Printer Engine Program on certain Lexmark 
printers. Reverse engineering to discover the functional elements of a computer program can be a 
noninfringing use,334 whereas the wholesale copying of a copyrightable computer program is likely 
to be an infringing use. However, even if Static Control is ultimately found to have copied 
Lexmark’s Toner Loading Program rather than to have engaged in reverse engineering  permitted 
under §1201(f), this does not mean that §1201(f) would not be available to Static Control or 
similarly situated persons to accomplish their competitive purpose, so long as they stayed within the 
permitted scope of §1201(f). Instead, such a determination would simply mean that Static Control 
“avoid[ed] the drudgery in working up something fresh”335 or made a business decision that it would 
be too difficult or expensive to create an original interoperable program,336 and therefore made the 
choice to copy rather than take advantage of the statutory exemption found in §1201(f). The 
Librarian is not authorized to re-craft carefully tailored congressional solutions to satisfy, post hoc, 
the actions of users of copyrighted works who ignored the statutory exemption. When Congress has 
334 Sega Enterprises Ltd. v. Accolade, Ind., 977 F.2d 1510 (9th Cir. 1992).
335 Campbell v. Acuff-Rose, 510 U.S. 569, 580 (1994).
336 Apple v. Franklin, 714 F.2d 1240, 1253 (3d Cir. 1993).


[PAGE 183]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003	 Page 183 
crafted an exemption to address a particular kind of noninfringing activity, review of noninfringing 
uses that were not anticipated by Congress and are not addressed by the statutory exemption may be 
appropriate. Yet since it appears that §1201(f) would permit Static Control to achieve its purpose, 
the Register could recommend an exemption only if Static Control proved that the statutory 
exemption is inadequate to achieve the noninfringing purpose. Since Static Control believes that 
§1201(f) exempts its conduct, it has not made this argument. Also, since the Register finds that even 
if Static Control’s past conduct was outside the scope of §1201(f), Static Control’s goal could have 
been achieved within the scope of §1201(f), no exemption is necessary in order to safeguard 
interoperability. Congress has comprehensively addressed the important concern of interoperability 
for competition and functionality within its own statutory exemption. That exemption provides the 
creators of interoperable computer programs with a much broader exemption than any that could 
issue from the Librarian. The Register, therefore, does not find any need for a new exemption simply 
to reinforce what Congress has already provided in a much more satisfactory manner. 
22.	 Proposed Exemption: Computer issues: encryption research, data file formats, recovery of 
passwords, personally identifying material 
A number of commenters raised issues related to the effect of §1201(a)(1) on users of 
computers and the Internet. While there were a number of variations, the primary concerns focused 
on the prohibition’s effect on encryption and security research, recovering or discovering 
information that was encrypted, or protecting personally identifying information. Since the proposals 
for exemption involve varying factual information and analysis, they will be addressed separately. 
One commenter, the CERT Coordination Center (CERT),  proposed exemptions for: 

[PAGE 184]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 184 
1. Those literary works, musical works and audiovisual works, for 
which a person has lawfully obtained a right of use, protected by 
access control mechanisms which include features, flaws or 
vulnerabilities that (a) expose (i) the works to be protected or (ii) other 
assets of the users of such measures--including computers, computers 
systems or computer networks or the data or other protected works 
used with them--to infringement, compromise, loss, destruction, fraud 
and other adverse actions or (b) permit the privacy of such users to be 
compromised.337 
2. Those literary works representing computer software programs and 
databases, for which a person has lawfully obtained a right of use, that 
operate to control access to works protected under the Copyright Act 
but contain features, flaws or vulnerabilities that (a) expose (i) the 
works to be protected or (ii) other assets of the users of such 
measures--including computers, computers systems or computer 
networks or the data or other protected works used with them--to 
infringement, compromise, loss, destruction, fraud and other adverse 
actions or (b) permit the privacy of such users to be compromised.338 
Although the discussion in support of these variations on the same general proposal was 
thoughtful and the thrust of CERT’s argument addresses an important area of concern, the comment 
is essentially a policy argument for a broadened exemption more appropriate for statutory enactment 
by Congress. The Register recognizes that there is an element of Catch-22 in this situation: if the 
activity the proponents wish to engage in is already permitted under any of the exemptions in 
§1201(subsections (d)-(g) and (i)-(j)), there is no need for an exemption; if it is not permitted under 
those provisions although it addresses the same subject matter, the Librarian cannot presume to 
overrule Congress’ determination on the limitations of the statutory exemptions.  But to recognize 
the difficulty of the situation is simply to acknowledge that this rulemaking proceeding is not 
intended to be a substitute for legislation or an opportunity to second-guess the determinations 
337 C29(1). 
338 C29(2). 

[PAGE 185]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 185 
Congress made when it enacted the DMCA.  Rather, the task of the Register and the Librarian is to 
look at developments in the marketplace for digital works to determine whether there are particular 
classes of works of which users are having difficulties making noninfringing uses due to problems 
created by access controls. 
In this case, the comment states that the proposal is consistent with §§1201(e), (g), and (j), 
but does not explain why these existing statutory exemptions are insufficient to satisfy the concerns 
in the proposed exemptions. The comment is completely devoid of information about actual 
problems that have occurred or are likely to occur during the next three years. It is asserted that this 
“proposed new exemption is intended to take into account substantial advances that have occurred in 
both the technological measures that are employed to control access to protected works and, as well, 
the increased sophistication of technologies and procedures through which the security and integrity 
of computers, computer systems and computer networks, and the privacy of individual users, can be 
compromised.”339 In support of this statement, however, there is no factual showing on which to 
assess this claim. While there are five statements on data from the Computer Security Institute’s 
“2002 Computer Crime and Security Survey,” indicating that computer security breaches resulting 
from features, flaws, or vulnerabilities of computers are statistically significant, this data is not 
accompanied by facts that either support the scope of the proposed class or analyze the potential 
applicability of the current statutory exemptions in §§1201(e), (g), (i) and (j). The failure to provide 
specific examples of problems which this proposal addresses, together with the failure to show that 
the congressional exemptions are insufficient to resolve the general problems claimed, either 
currently or in the relevant three-year period, prevent further analysis of the issue. Based on the 
339 C29 at 3. 

[PAGE 186]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 186 
record, the Register cannot determine whether the market has deviated from congressional 
expectations resulting in an unexpected adverse effect on noninfringing uses. 
Another commenter, the U.S. Public Policy Committee of the Association for Computing 
Machinery (ACM), made a similar proposal for a class specified as: 
Literary works, including computer programs and databases, protected 
by access control mechanisms that fail to permit access to recognize 
shortcomings in security systems, to defend patents and copyrights, to 
discover and fix dangerous bugs in code, or to conduct forms of 
desired educational activities.340 
Again, there is no evidence in this comment that identifies a particular harm that the 
proponent demonstrated is not adequately addressed by the statutory exemptions in §§1201(e), (g) 
and (j). The comment presented five hypothetical examples of situations where encryption or 
security research might be necessary, but the commenter did nothing to identify why these could not 
be addressed under the existing statutory framework. 
ACM’s hearing testimony provided some additional factual support for the proposal –  that 
“concerns” for publishing of research at upcoming conferences “may” be adversely affected by 
§1201(a)(1) – but this support was quite limited. Even if such potential harm could be quantified, it 
is not likely that the adverse effects would be causally attributable to the prohibition on 
circumvention in the DMCA.  Rather, the alleged chilling effect on the discussion of the means of 
340 C40. 

[PAGE 187]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 187 
circumvention would be challenged under the trafficking provisions, §§1201(a)(2) and 1201(b).341 
The concern appears to be with publication – making information regarding circumvention available 
to the public. Assuming that publication of scientific research papers could violate §§1201(a)(2) and 
1201(b) – a controversial assumption – the Librarian has no power in this rulemaking to grant any 
exemptions from the prohibitions of those provisions. 
Furthermore, once again there appears to be an important question as to whether this security 
testing, encryption research, etc., could have been conducted lawfully by acting within the 
congressionally-crafted exemptions. Without more specific information about the activity, it is 
impossible to assess the applicability of these statutory exemptions. It is clear that encryption 
research and security testing are very important issues currently facing this country, but they are 
issues that Congress specifically addressed in crafting §1201 as a whole. For the reasons discussed 
above relating to the CERT proposal, the Register finds no basis for recommending an exemption. 
With the limited information provided in these comments, it is impossible to assess the proposal. 
Another comment presented a potentially interesting scenario regarding a contractual 
employee who, after being terminated by a university, refused to provide a password to enable 
access to a university computer system. The commenter proposed the class: “Circumvention of 
341  ACM quoted an email from a Dutch computer scientist stating, “There is no point 
in doing research if I cannot publish my results.”  T Barbara Simon, ACM, May 14, 2003, p. 
102. 

[PAGE 188]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 188 
Software - where the encryption needs to be circumvented due to unavailability of password(s) 
caused by absence, death, or termination.”342 
Although creating an interesting intellectual exercise, the comment was also extremely 
difficult to address, because the factual statement was so vague that it was impossible to understand 
exactly how the sparse factual details fit within the scope of §1201(a)(1).  For example, it was 
unclear whether a copyrighted work was involved, and who the author and copyright owner were. 
For purposes of this rulemaking, a “technological measure that effectively controls access to a work” 
is a measure that “requires the application of information, or a process or a treatment, with the 
authority of the copyright owner...”343  Based on the information provided in the comment, it is 
unclear whether the password controls were applied for purposes of protecting a copyrighted work 
(if there was one) or simply for protecting the privacy of the information about students in the 
student identification system that was password protected.  Without further essential information 
explaining the problem and evidence showing the present or likely scope of this problem, the 
Register was unable to assess the need for this proposed exemption.  Because the proponent failed to 
make its case, the Register cannot recommend this proposed class. 
23. Proposed Exemption: Conversion of data file formats and source code 
A few commenters submitted comments relating to source code or data file formats. These 
comments, however, were at times more difficult to decipher than encryption algorithms. For 
342 C18.
343 §1201(a)(3)(B) (emphasis added).


[PAGE 189]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 189 
example, one proposal sought to exempt source code, because it was asserted that source code 
rendered into binary form effectively encrypts the source code.344  In turn, it was asserted that such 
encrypted source code creates liability for researchers who seek to alert system administrators of 
security flaws. The commenter cites a Red Hat advisory board regarding a claimed vulnerability in 
Red Hat’s Linux operating system that was allegedly kept from U.S. citizens to avoid liability under 
the DMCA. The commenter also cites a legal notice from a Secure Network Operations 
representative raising “§ 1201(b)” liability for posting information on a “buffer overflow exploit” of 
the Tru64 UNIX system. There is another statement regarding a sophisticated attack against “dns 
root servers,” but little additional information on the specific facts involved. 
In all of these allegations, it is unclear whether the prohibition against circumvention 
contained in §1201(a)(1) is implicated. The vague Red Hat situation appears to implicate the 
distribution of information about a technology or component that would enable circumvention rather 
than the act of circumvention itself. Similarly, the “buffer overflow exploit” situation explicitly cites 
the antitrafficking provision of §1201(b). The last example regarding dns root server attacks does 
not provide enough information to determine what kind of technological measure, if any, was 
involved. 
Only adverse effects that are the result of the prohibition on circumvention are relevant to 
this proceeding. As the House Manager’s Report stated: “[a]dverse impacts that flow from other 
sources . . . or that are not clearly attributable [to the] prohibition, are outside the scope of the 
344 C19. 

[PAGE 190]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 190 
rulemaking.”345 A commenter must, at a minimum, provide enough information to determine 
whether the proposal is within the scope of this rulemaking. This commenter has not done so. 
Additionally, in regard to reverse engineering, security flaws, encryption research, etc., the 
commenter must also provide enough information for the Register to analyze whether an existing 
statutory exemption is capable of resolving the adverse effect to a noninfringing use.  Once again, 
the commenter has not provided sufficient information to do so. Finally, in regard to the 
commenter’s designation of a class: “source code – human readable description and/or definition of 
the behavior of a computer program that can be transformed into a format executable by computer 
hardware but effectively unreadable by humans” – it is unclear exactly what the commenter’s 
argument is. To the extent that the argument alleges that the rendering of source code into object 
code is, in itself, encryption, this argument appears flawed. At a minimum, the commenter must 
address this assertion in a factual context, taking into account the statutory definition of a 
technological measure that “effectively controls access to a work”346 and also taking into account the 
existing statutory exemptions that create specific limitations on the exempted circumvention activity. 
In the absence of sufficient information on which to analyze the problem, the Register is unable to 
recommend any exemption. 
Another commenter presents a similar proposed exemption classified as “data file 
formats.”347 While it is not clear that a data file format is necessarily a measure protecting access to a 
345 House Manager’s Report at 6. 
346  See §1201(c)(3)(B). 
347 C23. 

[PAGE 191]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 191 
work, this is particularly true when the “work” being created in a particular format is one’s own.348 
There would not appear to be any liability in converting one’s own work from one format to another, 
so it is far from clear that an exemption is necessary to legally accomplish such a noninfringing use. 
The commenter alleges, for instance, that a current version of Microsoft Word cannot read older 
versions of the file format. In addition to the availability of Microsoft (and other companies’) 
conversion tools offered in their “Help” menus (offering not only conversion from older versions of 
Word, but also conversion of file formats of competitors), conversion of such file formats, while not 
guaranteed, does not generally appear to implicate a technological measure protecting access to a 
work. It would also appear that to the extent that such a file format is unreadable, and to the extent 
that the file format is the product of a “computer program,” one may be able to utilize the reverse 
engineering exemption in §1201(f) in order to access the information for which one has lawful 
access. 
While a file format may be created with the specific purpose of controlling how one may 
access a work, this does not appear to be the type of situation that the commenter is addressing. For 
example, a distributor of a sound recording could encrypt a work for distribution over a secure 
server, e.g., Real Networks, and in the ordinary course of obtaining the work, the user would not 
necessarily have the authority to convert that work to another format. Yet in the scenarios presented 
by the commenter, such as the Rio Animator image animation tool or the Alisec image compression 
software, file conversion or reverse engineering within the scope of §1201(f) may well be authorized 
348  Again, see §1201(c)(3)(B) (“a technological measure ‘effectively controls access to 
a work’ if the measure, in the ordinary course of its operation, requires the application of 
information, or a process or a treatment, with the authority of the copyright owner, to gain 
access to the work.” (Emphasis added.) 

[PAGE 192]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 192 
under current law. Unfortunately, the commenter has provided insufficient information to make that 
determination.  In the absence of the identification of a verifiable or likely adverse effect, such an 
exemption does not appear to be warranted. 
Another commenter proposes an exemption for “data archival mechanisms.”349  It is 
suggested that the file formats used in data archival systems that are subject to “click-wrap 
restrictions” may be enforceable under the DMCA. This appears to be a merger of two previous 
proposals – the enforceability of click-wrap licenses through §1201(a)(1) and the inability to convert 
data file formats due to the prohibition on circumvention. As previously discussed, neither problem 
is necessarily related to §1201(a)(1). The commenter provides insufficient specific information to 
understand the problem or the existence of potential alternatives. Most critically, it is not at all clear 
whether the situation described involves a technological measure that effectively controls access to a 
copyrighted work. The Register simply has insufficient information to recommend an exemption. 
24. Proposed exemption: Privacy and personally identifying information 
Two comments addressed issues relating to privacy and the protection of personally 
identifying information. One commenter proposed a class consisting of: 
sound recordings, literary works (including computer programs and 
databases), and audiovisual works (including motion pictures), 
protected by access control mechanisms by or at the request of the 
copyright holder which require, as a condition precedent to granting 
access, that the user directly or indirectly disclose personally 
identifiable information to the copyright holder other than such 
349  C24. 

[PAGE 193]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 193 
information as is reasonably necessary to complete a bona fide 
business transaction.350 
The proponent cited two factual situations in which access involved or was conditioned on revealing 
personally identifiable information. First, the commenter stated that some Internet website operators 
require the disclosure of name, email address, and other personally identifiable information before 
allowing access to the content on the website. The commenter did not specify what content existed 
on any particular website requiring such disclosure or whether this material was available elsewhere 
without technological protection measures. There were no concrete examples cited and no showing 
of any actual or likely harm. In addition, the comment did not explain why a copyright owner is 
precluded from requesting information and why the consumer who objects could not simply refuse 
and find the content elsewhere in a less objectionable market situation. Absent some showing that 
access to the work is unavailable in some unprotected format and an explanation of what works are 
involved, it is impossible to assess this proposal. Without any showing of present or likely harm, 
consideration for this proposal cannot be sustained. In addition, the commenter failed to identify 
what technological measure is controlling  access to the work and how this implicates the privacy 
concerns of the commenter. 
The second factual situation cited involved litigation against Sunncomm, Inc. and Music City 
Records that resulted in a settlement that agreed to provide notice to consumers of information 
collection practices and to refrain from requiring consumers to disclose their personal information as 
a condition of downloading, playing, or listening to a CD. The commenter’s own explanation of the 
evidence reveals that the current legal system together with market forces are working to resolve 
350 C30(5). 

[PAGE 194]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 194 
possible excesses in the marketplace, and that the particular situation in question had in fact been 
satisfactorily resolved. 
Another commenter raised the issue of “spyware” or software that gathers information about 
a user’s online activities without the knowledge of the user.351 It is not completely clear what access 
control is involved, although there is some suggestion that it is generally encryption of the 
operations of the spyware. The activity of spyware is essentially the equivalent of a Trojan Horse 
that surreptitiously enters the user’s computer and performs functions without the consent of the 
user. Although a user may know that he or she is downloading a program or programs, that user may 
not be aware of the functions that the software is instructed to carry out. There were specific 
software applications discussed, albeit without a great deal of detail, yet the principal problem with 
the proposal is that it does not in any manner discuss the existing statutory exemption in §1201(i) or 
the precise reasons why the commenter believes such an exemption is insufficient (or even whether 
the commenter is aware of the existing exemption). The defect, therefore, in the case made for this 
proposed class is that there was not enough information provided to know whether §1201(i) could 
resolve the problem, as it appears capable of doing. 
Section 1201(i) appears to deal with most variations of the problem of software that collects 
personally identifying information. This exemption permits circumvention of a measure that controls 
access if: 
351 C14(2). 

[PAGE 195]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003	 Page 195 
(A) the technological measure, or the work it protects, contains the 
capability of collecting or disseminating personally identifying 
information reflecting the online activities of a natural person who 
seeks to gain access to the work protected; 
(B) in the normal course of its operation, the technological measure, or 
the work it protects, collects or disseminates personally identifying 
information about the person who seeks to gain access to the work 
protected, without providing conspicuous notice of such collection or 
dissemination to such person, and without providing such person with 
the capability to prevent or restrict such collection or dissemination; 
(C) the act of circumvention has the sole effect of identifying and 
disabling the capability described in subparagraph (A), and has no 
other effect on the ability of any person to gain access to any work; 
and 
(D) the act of circumvention is carried out solely for the purpose of 
preventing the collection or dissemination of personally identifying 
information about a natural person who seeks to gain access to the 
work protected, and is not in violation of any other law. 
Therefore, if spyware does not contain conspicuous notice to the user about the collection 
and dissemination of personally identifying information of that user’s online activities or without 
providing the capability to prevent or restrict such collection and dissemination that it is conducting, 
a user may circumvent the measure for the sole purpose and effect of identifying, preventing or 
disabling such activities. 
25.	 Other comments beyond the scope of the rulemaking: Webcasting, Limitations of Liability 
for Online Service Providers and the Antitrafficking provisions of the DMCA. 
A number of comments discussed issues unrelated to the anticircumvention provision that is 
the focus of this rulemaking. Some of these comments consisted of criticisms of the DMCA 
generally, without citing any particular facts to support such criticism.352 Others attacked particular 
352 See, e.g. C43 and C44. 

[PAGE 196]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 196 
aspects of the DMCA, but aspects outside of the scope of this rulemaking, e.g., criticism of the 
webcasting CARP353  and adverse effects of §512 relating to limitations on liability for online 
service providers.354 
Some comments355 discussed problems with the antitrafficking provisions of §1201(a)(2) and 
1201(b),356 related portions of the statute, but portions that are unquestionably outside the scope of 
this rulemaking. The Librarian is without authority to create exemptions from those provisions.  In 
fact, Congress has specifically stated in §1201(a)(1)(E) that no exemption or determination made 
within the scope of this rulemaking may be used as a defense in any action to enforce any other 
provision of title 17 other than §1201(a)(1), and has thereby reserved to itself the authority to amend 
these provisions. 
353 See, e.g., C45 and C46.
354 See, e.g., C37(3).
355 See, e.g., C2 and C16.
356 17 U.S.C. §§1201(a)(2), 1201(b).


[PAGE 197]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003	 Page 197 
IV.	  Proposed Regulatory Text 
The Register proposes that the Librarian adopt the following regulatory text, which 
designates the classes of works recommended by the Register above. 
Final Regulations 
For the reasons set forth in the preamble, 37 CFR part 201 is amended as follows: 
1. 	The authority citation for part 201 continues to read as follows:
Authority: 17 U.S.C. 702
2. Section 201.40 is amended as follows: 
(a) by revising paragraph (b); and 
(b) by adding new paragraph (c). 
The revisions and additions to § 201.40 read as follows: 
§ 201.40 [Amended] 
* * * * * 
(b) Classes of copyrighted works. Pursuant to the authority set forth in 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C) and 
(D), and upon the recommendation of the Register of Copyrights, the Librarian has determined that 
during the period from October 28, 2003, through October 27, 2006, the prohibition against 
circumvention of technological measures that effectively control access to copyrighted works set 
forth in 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(A) shall not apply to persons who engage in noninfringing uses of the 
following four classes of copyrighted works: 
(1) Compilations consisting of lists of Internet locations blocked by commercially marketed 
filtering software applications that are intended to prevent access to domains, websites or portions of 

[PAGE 198]
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights October 27, 2003 Page 198 
websites, but not including lists of Internet locations blocked by software applications that operate 
exclusively to protect against damage to a computer or computer network or lists of Internet 
locations blocked by software applications that operate exclusively to prevent receipt of email. 
(2) Computer programs protected by dongles that prevent access due to malfunction or 
damage and which are obsolete. 
(3) Computer programs and video games distributed in formats that have become obsolete 
and which require the original media or hardware as a condition of access.  A format shall be 
considered obsolete if the machine or system necessary to render perceptible a work stored in that 
format is no longer manufactured or is no longer reasonably available in the commercial 
marketplace. 
(4) Literary works distributed in ebook format when all existing ebook editions of the work 
(including digital text editions made available by authorized entities) contain access controls that 
prevent the enabling of the ebook's read-aloud function and that prevent the enabling of screen 
readers to render the text into a specialized format. 
(c) Definitions. (1) “Internet locations” are defined to include domains, uniform resource locators 
(URLs), numeric IP addresses or any combination thereof. 
(2) “Obsolete” shall mean “no longer manufactured or reasonably available in the 
commercial marketplace.” 
(3) “Specialized format,” “digital text” and “authorized entities” shall have the same 
meaning as in 17 U.S.C. 121. 