[PAGE 1]
u n i t e d  s t a t e s  c o p y r i g h t  o f f i c e
section 1201 rulemaking:  
Fifth Triennial Proceeding to Determine 
Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention  
recommendation of the register of copyrights  october 2012

[PAGE 2]
          
               
  
    
   
   
    
   
   
             
           
          
 
   
    
   
         
       

[PAGE 3]
i 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: 
Fifth Triennial Proceeding to Determine 
Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention 
 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
 
Table of Contents 
 
I. Background ............................................................................................................................. 3
A. Section 1201(a)(1) ............................................................................................................................  3
B. Responsibilities of the Register of Copyrights and Librarian of Congress  ...................................... 5
C. Defining a class ................................................................................................................................  9
II. History of 2012 proceeding .................................................................................................. 11
A. Commencement ..............................................................................................................................  11
B. Notice of Proposed Rulemaking  .................................................................................................... 11
C. Public hearings and written questions  ............................................................................................  12
D. Consultation with NTIA .................................................................................................................  12
III. Discussion .............................................................................................................................. 13
A. Proposed Class 1:  Literary works in the public domain – digital access ...................................... 13
B. Proposed Class 2:  Literary works distributed electronically – assistive 
technologies .................................................................................................................................... 16
C. Proposed Class 3:  Video game consoles – software interoperability 
(“jailbreaking”) ..............................................................................................................................  26
D. Proposed Class 4:  Personal computing devices – software 
interoperability ...............................................................................................................................  52
E. Proposed Class 5:  Wireless telephone handsets – software 
interoperability (“jailbreaking”)  ..................................................................................................... 65
F. Proposed Class 6:  Wireless telephone handsets – interoperability with 
alternative networks (“unlocking”) ................................................................................................  81
G. Proposed Classes 7 and 8:  Motion picture excerpts – commentary, 
criticism, and educational uses  ..................................................................................................... 101
H. Proposed Class 9:  Motion pictures and other audiovisual works – 
captioning and descriptive audio  .................................................................................................. 143
I. Proposed Class 10:  Motion pictures and other works on DVDs and other 
media – space shifting .................................................................................................................. 157
 
 

[PAGE 4]
 
1 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: 
Fifth Triennial Proceeding to Determine 
Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention 
 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights* 
 
Introduction 
 
The Digital Millennium Copyright Act (“DMCA”), enacted by Congress in 1998,1 
governs many aspects of the digital marketplace for copyright owners by establishing “a 
wide range of rules . . . for electronic commerce” and “defin[ing] whether consumers and 
businesses may engage in certain conduct, or use certain devices, in the course of 
transacting electronic commerce.”2 
 
Title I of the Act, which added a new Chapter 12 to Title 17 of the U.S. Code, 
prohibits circumvention of technological measures employed by or on behalf of copyright 
owners to protect their works (also known as “access controls”).  Specifically, Section 
1201(a)(1)(A) provides, in part, that “[n]o person shall circumvent a technological 
measure that effectively controls access to a work protected under this title.”
3  But 
Congress qualified the language of subparagraph (B) to ensure that the public can still 
engage in noninfringing uses of copyrighted works, such as fair use.
4  Subparagraph (B) 
thus provides that the circumvention prohibition “shall not apply to persons who are users 
of a copyrighted work which is in a particular class of works, if such persons are, or are 
likely to be in the succeeding 3-year period, adversely affected by virtue of such 
prohibition in their ability to make noninfringing uses of that particular class of works 
under this title,” as determined in a rulemaking proceeding that takes place every three 
years.
5 
 
The Librarian of Congress, upon the recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights, who consults with the Assistant Secretary for Communications and 
Information of the Department of Commerce, determines which classes of works are 
entitled to an exemption from the prohibition on circumvention.
6  The resulting 
                                                
* Maria A. Pallante. 
1 Pub. L. 105-304 (1998).  
2 TOM BLILEY, REPORT OF THE HOUSE COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE ON THE DIGITAL MILLENNIUM 
COPYRIGHT ACT OF 1998, H.R. REP. NO. 105-551, pt. 2, at 22 (1998) [hereinafter Commerce Comm. 
Report]. 
3 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(A).  
4 See Commerce Comm. Report at 25 -26, 35. 
5 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(B).  
6 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C); see HOWARD COBLE, REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF CONFERENCE ON THE 
DIGITAL MILLENNIUM COPYRIGHT ACT, H.R. REP. NO. 105-796, at 64 (1998) [hereinafter Conference 
Report]. 

[PAGE 5]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 2 
regulations, which are issued by the Librarian of Congress,7 announce “any class of 
copyrighted works for which the Librarian has determined, pursuant to the rulemaking 
conducted under subparagraph (C), that noninfringing uses by persons who are users of a 
copyrighted work are, or are likely to be, adversely affected, and the prohibition 
contained in subparagraph (A) shall not apply to such users with respect to such class of 
works for the ensuing 3-year period.”8 
 
The 2012 proceeding is the fifth triennial Section 1201
9 rulemaking.  The 
previous rulemakings culminated in regulations that exempted certain classes of works 
from the prohibition against circumvention of access controls.
10  Based on the Register’s 
recommendations, the Librarian must render a new determination on potential 
exemptions every three years.  When making this determination, the Librarian must 
conduct a de novo review of each proposed exemption and cannot rest his decision on the 
records in prior rulemaking proceedings. 
 
Based on the record in this proceeding, the Register recommends that the 
Librarian adopt exemptions with respect to certain classes of works, as discussed and 
more specifically set forth below: 
 
• Literary works distributed electronically, to permit 
blind and other persons with print disabilities to use 
screen readers and other assistive technologies 
 
• Computer programs on wireless telephone handsets, to 
enable interoperability of software applications 
(“jailbreaking”) 
                                                
7 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, 75 Fed. Reg. 43,825 (July 27, 2010) (codified at 37 C.F.R. 201.40) [hereinafter 2010 Final 
Rule]; Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, 71 Fed. Reg. 68,472 (Nov. 27, 2006) (formerly co dified at 37 C.F.R. 201.40) [hereinafter 
2006 Final Rule]; Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access 
Control Technologies, 68 Fed. Reg. 62,011 (Oct. 31, 2003) (formerly codified at 37 C.F.R. 201.40)  
[hereinafter 2003 Final Rule]; Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection 
Systems for Access Control Technologies, 65 Fed. Reg. 64,555 (Oct. 27, 2000) (formerly codified at 37 
C.F.R. 201.40) [hereinafter 2000 Final Rule].  
8 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)( D). 
9 All references to numerical Sections herein refer to Title 17 of the U.S. Code.  
10 Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights in RM 2008 -8, Rulemaking on Exemptions from 
Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control  Technologies (June 11, 
2010) [hereinafter 2010 Recommendation], available at www.copyright.gov/1201/2010/initialed -registersrecommendation-june-11-2010.pdf; Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights in RM 2005 -11, 
Rulemaking on Exemptions from Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for 
Access Control Technologies (Nov. 16, 2006) [hereinafter 2006 Recommendation], available at 
www.copyright.gov/1201/docs/1201_recommendation.pdf; Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
in RM 2002-4, Rulemaking on exemptions from Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection 
Systems for Access Control Technologies (Oct. 27, 2003) [hereinafter 2003 Recommendation], available at 
www.copyright.gov/1201/docs/registers -recommendation.pdf; 2000 Final Rule. 

[PAGE 6]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 3 
   
• Computer programs on wireless telephone handsets that 
were acquired within ninety days of the effective date 
of the exemption, for the purpose of connecting to 
alternative networks (“unlocking”) 
 
• Motion pictures on DVDs or distributed by online 
services, for purposes of criticism or comment in 
noncommercial videos, documentary films, nonfiction 
multimedia ebooks offering film analysis, and for 
certain educational uses by college and university 
faculty and students and kindergarten through twelfth 
grade educators 
 
• Motion pictures and other audiovisual works on DVDs 
or distributed by online services, for the purpose of 
research to create players capable of rendering captions 
and descriptive audio for persons who are blind, 
visually impaired, deaf or hard of hearing 
 
In addition, based on the record, the Register recommends that the Librarian decline to 
adopt exemptions with respect to other proposed classes, as more specifically described 
below:  literary works in the public domain, to enable access to digitally distributed 
works; video game consoles, for purposes of software interoperability; computer 
programs on personal computing devices, for purposes of software interoperability; and 
motion pictures and other works on DVDs and other media, for purposes of space 
shifting. 
 
I. Background 
 
A. Section 1201(a)(1) 
 
As originally drafted, Section 1201(a)(1) consisted of a single sentence (what is 
now the first sentence of Section 1201(a)(1)):  “No person shall circumvent a 
technological measure that effectively controls access to a work protected under this 
title.”
11  The House of Representatives Commerce Committee was concerned, however, 
that including an unqualified prohibition might undermine Congress’ commitment to fair 
use.
12  The Committee acknowledged that the growth and development of the internet had 
a significant positive impact on the access of students, researchers, consumers, and the 
public at large to information and that a “plethora of information, most of it embodied in 
materials subject to copyright protection, is available to individuals, often for free, that 
just a few years ago could have been located and acquired only through the expenditure 
                                                
11 See S. REP. NO. 105-190, at 86 (1998); H.R. REP. NO. 105-551, pt. 1, at 37 (1998).  
12 Commerce Comm. Report at 35.  

[PAGE 7]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 4 
of considerable time, resources, and money.”13  At the same time, the Committee was 
concerned that “marketplace realities may someday dictate a different outcome, resulting 
in less access, rather than more, to copyrighted materials that are important to education, 
scholarship, and other socially vital endeavors.”14  The Committee thus concluded that “it 
could be appropriate to modify the flat prohibition against the circumvention of effective 
technological measures that control access to copyrighted materials, in order to ensure 
that access for lawful purposes is not unjustifiably diminished.”
15 
 
Accordingly, the Commerce Committee proposed a modification of Section 1201 
that it characterized as a “‘fail-safe’ mechanism.”
16  The Committee Report noted that 
“[t]his mechanism would monitor developments in the marketplace for copyrighted 
materials, and allow the enforceability of the prohibition against the act of circumvention 
to be selectively waived, for limited time periods, if necessary to prevent a diminution in 
the availability to individual users of a particular category of copyrighted materials.”17  
As ultimately enacted, the “fail-safe” mechanism in Section 1201(a)(1) directs the 
Register to conduct a rulemaking proceeding and, after consulting with the Assistant 
Secretary for Communications and Information of the Department of Commerce, 
recommend to the Librarian whether he should conclude that “persons who are users of a 
copyrighted work are, or are likely to be in the succeeding 3-year period, adversely 
affected by the prohibition under [Section 1201(a)(1)(A)] in their ability to make 
noninfringing uses under [Title 17] of a particular class of copyrighted works.”
18  In 
addition, the Librarian must publish information on “any class of copyrighted works for 
which the Librarian has determined, pursuant to the rulemaking conducted under 
subparagraph (C), that noninfringing uses by persons who are users of a copyrighted 
work are, or are likely to be, adversely affected, and the prohibition contained in 
subparagraph (A) shall not apply to such users with respect to such class of works for the 
ensuing 3-year period.”
19 
 
As explained by the Commerce Committee, “[t]he goal of the proceeding is to 
assess whether the implementation of technological protection measures that effectively 
control access to copyrighted works is adversely affecting the ability of individual users 
to make lawful uses of copyrighted works.”
20  Thus, the Register and Librarian are to 
“assess whether the prevalence of these technological protections, with respect to 
                                                
13 Id. at 35-36. 
14 Id. at 36. 
15 Id. 
16 Id. 
17 Id. 
18 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C).  
19 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(D).  
20 Commerce Comm. Report  at 37. 

[PAGE 8]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 5 
particular categories of copyrighted materials, is diminishing the ability of individuals to 
use these works in ways that are otherwise lawful.”21   
 
B. Responsibilities of the Register of Copyrights and Librarian of 
Congress 
 
 As set forth above, the primary responsibility of the Register and the Librarian in 
this rulemaking proceeding is to assess whether the implementation of access controls 
within the meaning of Section 1201 impairs the ability of individuals to use copyrighted 
works in ways that are otherwise lawful.  Congress intended that the Register solicit input 
from the public while considering current or likely future adverse impacts, and to make 
recommendations to the Librarian concerning whether exemptions are warranted.
22  In so 
doing, the Register, like the Librarian, is to consider “(i) the availability for use of 
copyrighted works; (ii) the availability for use of works for nonprofit archival, 
preservation, and educational purposes; (iii) the impact that the prohibition on the 
circumvention of technological measures applied to copyrighted works has on criticism, 
comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research; (iv) the effect of 
circumvention of technological measures on the market for or value of copyrighted 
works; and (v) such other factors as the Librarian considers appropriate.”
23  The Register 
must carefully evaluate these factors when considering what, if any, exemptions to 
recommend to the Librarian, who promulgates the final rule that sets forth the exempted 
classes of works. 
  
 In addition, Section 1201(a)(1)(C) requires the Register to consult with the 
Assistant Secretary for Communications and Information of the Department of 
Commerce during the rulemaking process and report and comment on the Assistant 
Secretary’s views when making her recommendation to the Librarian.  The Assistant 
Secretary’s participation helps to explore the effects of the DMCA on electronic 
commerce development and the relationship between copyright law and technology. 
 
1. De novo consideration of classes 
 
 In each rulemaking proceeding, the Register reviews proposed classes on a de 
novo basis.
24  In enacting the DMCA, Congress indicated that “the regulatory prohibition 
[of Section 1201(a)(1)] is presumed to apply to any and all kinds of works, including 
those as to which a waiver of applicability was previously in effect, unless, and until, the 
                                                
21 Id.  Accord STAFF OF H. COMM. ON THE JUDICIARY, 105TH CONG., SECTION-BY-SECTION ANALYSIS OF 
H.R. 2281 AS PASSED BY THE UNITED STATES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ON AUG. 4, 1998 at 6 (Comm. 
Print 1998) [hereinafter House Manager’s Report].  
22 Commerce Comm. Report at 37 (referencing the Administrative Procedure Act requirements, which 
include notice and comment).  
23 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C).  
24 Commerce Comm. Report at 37.  

[PAGE 9]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 6 
[Librarian] makes a new determination that the adverse impact criteria have been met 
with respect to a particular class and therefore issues a new waiver.”25 
 
 Accordingly, the fact that a class has been previously designated creates no 
presumption that redesignation is appropriate.  While in some cases earlier legal analysis 
by the Register may be relevant in analyzing a proposed exemption (particularly when 
there has been no intervening change in the law), the proponent of a class must still make 
a persuasive factual showing with respect to the three-year period currently under 
consideration.  The Register notes, however, that when a class has been previously 
designated, evidence relating to the costs, benefits or marketplace effects ensuing from 
the earlier designation may be relevant to the assessment of whether the existing class (or 
some variation thereof) should be redesignated for the subsequent period.   
 
 Even if an exemption is not renewed, users may still make use of works that were 
lawfully circumvented while an earlier exemption was in effect, so long as no further act 
of circumvention is required. 
 
2. Burden of proof 
 
The proponents of an exemption bear the burden of proof in establishing that the 
Register should recommend it.  As noted above, the statutory prohibition on 
circumvention is presumed to apply to any and all kinds of works unless, and until, the 
criteria for an exemption have been met with respect to a particular class.
26  “[A] 
proponent must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the harm alleged is more 
likely than not; a proponent may not rely on speculation alone to sustain a prima facie 
case.”
27  The language of Section 1201(a)(1)(B) requires a conclusion that the use “is or 
is likely to be noninfringing, not merely that the adversely impacted use could plausibly 
be considered noninfringing.”28  It is not sufficient to demonstrate that a use could 
conceivably be noninfringing, or that the absence of an exemption could result in an 
adverse impact.
29   
 
Moreover, as explained above, the basis for an exemption must be established de 
novo in each triennial proceeding.  This means that a proponent may not simply rely on 
the fact that the Register recommended an exemption in a previous rulemaking.
30  While 
the record in a prior proceeding may be relevant to establish changes in technology, 
usage or marketplace conditions during the intervening period (or the lack thereof), a 
                                                
25 Id. 
26 Id. 
27 2010 Recommendation at 10.  
28 Id. at 12. 
29 Id.  
30 See 2000 Final Rule, 65 Fed. Reg. at 65,563 (citing House Manager’s Report at 8); Commerce Comm. 
Report at 37. 

[PAGE 10]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 7 
proponent seeking a new or renewed exemption must present persuasive, current 
evidence sufficient to fulfill the statutory mandate. 
 
3. Threshold requirements 
 
Proponents who seek to have the Librarian exempt a particular class of works 
from Section 1201(a)(1)’s prohibition on circumvention must satisfy two threshold 
requirements to establish a prima facie case for the proposed class:  (1) uses affected by 
the prohibition on circumvention are or are likely to be noninfringing; and (2) as a result 
of a technological measure controlling access to a copyrighted work, the prohibition is 
causing, or in the next three years is likely to cause, a substantial adverse impact on those 
uses.
31  The Register will then consider the proposed class under the statutory factors set 
forth in Section 1201(a)(1)(C).   
 
a. Noninfringing uses 
  
As noted above, Congress believed that it is important to protect noninfringing 
uses.  There are several types of noninfringing uses that could be affected by the 
prohibition of Section 1201(a)(1), including fair use (delineated in Section 107), certain 
educational uses (Section 110), certain uses of computer programs (Section 117), use of 
public domain works (when subject to the same access control as a copyright-protected 
work), and perhaps other uses.  The Register will look to the Copyright Act and relevant 
judicial precedents when analyzing whether a proposed use is likely to be noninfringing.   
 
A proponent must show more than that a use could be noninfringing.  Instead, the 
proponent must establish that the proposed use is likely to qualify as noninfringing under 
relevant law.  As the Register stated in the last proceeding, there is no “rule of doubt” 
favoring an exemption when it is unclear whether a particular use is a fair use.
32  As 
stated above, the statutory language requires that the use is or is likely to be 
noninfringing, not merely that the use could plausibly be considered noninfringing.  The 
burden of proving that a particular use is or is likely to be noninfringing belongs to the 
proponent.
33    
 
b. Likelihood of substantial adverse impact 
 
The second threshold requirement is to establish that, due to technical measures 
controlling access to copyrighted works, the prohibition on circumvention is causing, or 
is in the ensuing three-year period likely to cause, “substantial effects” on the proposed 
uses.  Under this requirement, a proponent of an exemption must show “distinct, 
verifiable, and measurable impacts,” and more than “de minimis impacts.”
34 
                                                
31 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(B).  
32 2010 Recommendation at 11 -12. 
33 Id. 
34 2003 Final Rule at 62,013 (internal quotation marks omitted).   

[PAGE 11]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 8 
 
To meet the burden of proof, proponents of an exemption must provide evidence 
either that actual harm currently exists or that it is “likely” to occur in the next three 
years.  The amount of evidence required to do so may vary with the factual context of the 
alleged harm.  It is generally necessary to demonstrate actual instances of verifiable 
problems occurring in the marketplace generally to prove actual harm.  Although 
circumstantial evidence may also support a claim of present or likely harm, it must 
reasonably demonstrate that a measure protecting access was the cause of the harm.   
 
Likely adverse effects may also support an exemption.  To demonstrate a 
“likelihood” of adverse impact, the proponent must prove that such impact is more likely 
than not to occur.
35  Claims based on “likely” adverse effects cannot be supported by 
speculation alone.36  Because a showing of likely adverse impact necessarily involves 
some amount of prediction, the proponent of the exemption bears the substantial burden 
of proving that the expected adverse impact is not just conceivable – or sometimes 
possible – but probable. 
 
The identification of existing or likely problems is not, however, the end of the 
analysis.  For an exemption of a particular class of works to be warranted, a proponent 
must show that the problems justify an exemption in light of all of the relevant facts.  The 
identification of isolated or anecdotal problems generally will be insufficient to warrant 
an exemption.
37  Similarly, the mere fact that a particular medium or technology may be 
more convenient to use for noninfringing purposes than other formats is generally 
insufficient to support an exemption.
38    The Register and Librarian will, when 
appropriate, assess the alternatives that exist to accomplish the proposed noninfringing 
uses.  Such evidence is relevant to the inquiry regarding whether the prohibition 
adversely affects the noninfringing use of the class of works.  If sufficient alternatives 
exist to permit the noninfringing use, there is no substantial adverse impact.  Proponents 
of an exemption must show sufficient harm to warrant the exemption from the default 
rule established by Congress, the prohibition against circumvention. 
                                                
35 “Likely” means “probable ,” “in all probability,” or “having a better chance of existing or occurring than 
not.”  2010 Recommendation at 12 n.31 (citing BLACK’S LAW DICTIONARY 638 (abridged 6th ed. 1991)).  
36 See House Manager’s Report at 6 (an exemption based on likely future adve rse impacts during the 
applicable period should be made only in extraordinary circumstances in which the evidence of likelihood 
is highly specific, strong and persuasive).  
37 2010 Recommendation at 194 (“anecdotal evidence, isolated occurrences, and inconveniences will not be 
sufficient to support an exemption”); Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection 
Systems for Access Control Technologies, 76 Fed. Reg. 60,398, 60,400 (Sept. 29, 2011) [hereinafter 2011 
Notice of Inquiry]. 
38 Id. 

[PAGE 12]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 9 
 
4. Statutory factors 
 
 If a proponent satisfies the threshold showing, the Register will continue the 
analysis by looking at the statutory factors set forth in Section 1201(a)(1)(C):   
 
(i) the availability for use of copyrighted works; (ii) the 
availability for use of works for nonprofit archival, 
preservation, and educational purposes; (iii) the impact that 
the prohibition on the circumvention of technological 
measures applied to copyrighted works has on criticism, 
comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or 
research; (iv) the effect of circumvention of technological 
measures on the market for or value of copyrighted works; 
and (v) such other factors as the Librarian considers 
appropriate.
39 
 
At this stage of the analysis, it is critical to balance user and copyright owner 
interests.  The assessment also includes consideration of any other statutory exemptions 
to the prohibition that apply to the uses in question.  If a statutory exemption applies, the 
Librarian may not need to designate a class.     
 
C. Defining a class 
 
A major focus of the rulemaking proceeding is how to define a “class” of works.  
In enacting Section 1201, Congress noted that the class should be neither too broad nor 
too narrow.
40  The Commerce Committee Report provides a bit more guidance in stating 
that “the ‘particular class of copyrighted works’ [is intended to] be a narrow and focused 
subset of the broad categories of works . . . identified in section 102 of the Copyright 
Act.”
41  Notwithstanding the rather open-ended nature of the task, Congress emphasized 
that “[d]eciding the scope or boundaries of a ‘particular class’ of copyrighted works as to 
which the prohibition contained in section 1201(a)(1) has been shown to have had an 
adverse impact is an important issue to be determined during the rulemaking 
proceedings.”
42   
 
Because the term “category” of works generally is understood in copyright law as 
referring to the Section 102 categories, the Register concluded that the starting point for 
any definition of a “particular class” of works in the Section 1201 rulemaking process 
must be one of those categories.  The illustrative list of categories appearing in Section 
102 of Title 17, such as literary works, musical works (including any accompanying 
                                                
39 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C).  
40 2010 Recommendation at 17 (citing House Manager’s Report at 7). 
41 Commerce Comm. Report at 38.  
42 House Manager’s Report at 7.  

[PAGE 13]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 10 
words), and sound recordings, is only a starting point for this decision, however; a “class” 
will generally constitute some subset of a Section 102 category.     
 
While it begins with a Section 102 category of works, or a subcategory thereof, 
the description of a “particular class” of works is ordinarily further refined by reference 
to other factors to ensure that the scope of the class is proportionate to the scope of the 
harm to noninfringing uses.  That is, the scope of any class will necessarily be determined 
by the evidence of the present or likely adverse effects on noninfringing uses.  The 
determination of the appropriate scope of a “class of works” recommended for exemption 
may also take into account the adverse effects an exemption may have on the market for 
or value of copyrighted works.  For example, the class might be defined in part by 
reference to the medium on which the works are distributed, or even to the access control 
measures applied to the works.  But classifying a work solely by reference to the medium 
on which the work appears, or the access control measures applied to the work, would be 
inconsistent with Congress’ intent in directing the Register and Librarian to define a 
“particular class” of works. 
 
In the earliest rulemakings, consistent with the records in those proceedings, the 
Register rejected proposals to classify works by reference to the type of user or use (e.g., 
libraries, or scholarly research).
43  In the 2006 proceeding, however, the Register 
concluded, based on the record before her, that in appropriate circumstances a “class of 
works” that is defined initially by reference to a Section 102 category of works or 
subcategory thereof may additionally be refined not only by reference to the medium on 
which the works are distributed or particular access controls at issue, but also by 
reference to the particular type of use and/or user to which the exemption shall be 
applicable.  The Register determined that there was no basis in the statute or in the 
legislative history that required her to delineate the contours of a “class of works” in a 
factual vacuum.  At the same time, tailoring a class solely by reference to the use and/or 
user would be beyond the scope of what a “particular class of works” is intended to be.
44     
 
The contours of a “class” will depend on the unique factual circumstances 
established in the rulemaking record on a case-by-case basis.
45   Moreover, those factual 
circumstances are considered in the context of the market for copyrighted works in any 
given three-year period.46  The Register will look to the specific record before her to 
assess the proper scope of a class for the ensuing three-year period. 
                                                
43 In the first Section 1201 rulemaking process, the Register determined that “the statutory language 
required that the Librarian identify a ‘class of works’ primarily based upon attributes of the works 
themselves, and not by reference to some external criteria such as the intended use or the users of the 
works.”  2011 Notice of Inquiry, 76 Fed. Reg. at 60 ,402. 
44 See 2006 Recommendation at 9 -10, 15-20. 
45 Id. at 17-18. 
46 Commerce Comm. Report at 36 (“This mechanism would monitor developments in the marketplace for 
copyrighted materials, and allow the enforceability of the prohibition against the act of circu mvention to be 
selectively waived, for limited time periods, if necessary to prevent a diminution in the availability to 
individual users of a particular category of copyrighted materials.”).  

[PAGE 14]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 11 
II. History of 2012 proceeding 
 
A. Commencement  
 
On September 29, 2011, the Register initiated this rulemaking proceeding 
pursuant to Section 1201(a)(1)(C) with publication of a Notice of Inquiry (“NOI”).47  The 
NOI requested written comments from all interested parties, including representatives of 
copyright owners, educational institutions, libraries and archives, scholars, researchers, 
and members of the public concerning whether noninfringing uses of certain classes of 
works are, or are likely to be, adversely affected by the prohibition against circumvention 
of technological measures that control access to copyrighted works.48     
 
During the initial comment period that ended on December 1, 2011, the Copyright 
Office received twenty-two comments, all of which were posted on the Office’s 
website.
49  Based on these comments, the Register identified proposed exemptions for the 
upcoming period. 
  
B. Notice of Proposed Rulemaking 
 
Because some of the initial comments contained similar or overlapping proposals, 
the Copyright Office arranged the proposals into ten classes of works, and set forth and 
summarized each proposed class in a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (“NPRM”) 
published on December 20, 2011.
50  This NPRM did not present the initial classes in the 
form of a proposed rule, but merely as “a starting point for further consideration.”51 
 
The NPRM asked interested parties to submit additional comments and reply 
comments providing support, opposition, clarification, or correction regarding the 
proposed classes of works, and to provide factual and/or legal arguments in support of 
their positions.  The Copyright Office received a total of 674 comments before the 
                                                
47 2011 Notice of Inquiry, 76 Fed. Reg. 60,398  (Sept. 29, 2011).  The last triennial rulemaking proceeding 
was commenced in 2008 and concluded in 2010 (the “2010 Rulemaking”).  Because the Register was 
unable to present her recommendation to the Librarian of Congress prior to October 27, 2009, the then -
existing regulations specifying the classes adopted pursuant to the 2006 rulemaking were extended until 
July 27, 2010, when the last triennial rulemaking was concluded.  See Exemption to Prohibition on 
Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Techno logies, 74 Fed. Reg. 55,138 
(Oct. 27, 2009). 
48 Parties submitting comments were asked to:  specify a class or classes of works adversely affected by the 
prohibition on circumvention of access controls; summarize their argument in favor of designating the c lass 
of works; and provide any facts, evidence, and legal arguments supporting the designation.   
49 As in past Section 1201 rulemaking proceedings, all materials made a part of the record are available 
through the Copyright Office website, www.copyright.go v/1201, or, in the case of certain exhibits that the 
website is unable to host due to technological limitations, upon written request to the Copyright Office.  
50 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, 76 Fed. Reg. 78,866 (Dec. 20, 2011).  
51 Id. at 78,868. 

[PAGE 15]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 12 
comment period closed on February 10, 2012.52  The Office also received eighteen reply 
comments before the reply comment period closed on March 2, 2012.53 
 
C. Public hearings and written questions 
 
On March 15, 2012, the Register published a Notice indicating that public 
hearings would be conducted at the University of California, UCLA School of Law in 
California and at the Library of Congress in Washington, D.C., in May and June 2012, to 
consider the proposed exemptions.  Requests to testify were due April 2, 2012.
54  Public 
hearings were held on five separate days:  at the Library of Congress on May 11, 2012;55 
at University of California, Los Angeles, School of Law on May 17, 2012; and at the 
Library of Congress on May 31, June 4, and June 5, 2012.  Witnesses representing 
proponents and opponents of proposed classes of works offered testimony and answered 
questions from Copyright Office staff.56 
 
Following the hearings, the Copyright Office sent follow-up questions pertaining 
to certain issues to the witnesses who had testified regarding those issues.  The purpose of 
these written inquiries was to clarify for the record certain statements made during the 
hearings and to elicit responses to questions raised at the hearings.
57 
 
D. Consultation with Assistant Secretary for Communications and   
  Information  
 
During the rulemaking process, as contemplated by Congress, the Register sought 
input from the Assistant Secretary for Communications and Information of the 
Department of Commerce, who oversees the National Telecommunications and 
Information Administration (“NTIA”).  NTIA staff were briefed on the rulemaking 
process and informed of developments through a series of meetings and telephone 
conferences.  They were also in attendance at many of the hearings.   
                                                
52 See comments posted on the Office’s website at www.copyright.gov/1201/2012/comments/.  
53 See reply comments posted on the Office’s website at www.copyright.gov/1201/2012/comments/reply/.  
54 Notice of Public Hearings:  Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems 
for Access Control Technologies, 77 Fed. Reg. 15,327 (March 15, 2012).  
55 The May 11, 2012 hearing was designated as a ‘‘Technology Hearing’’ to give prop onents and 
opponents of proposed classes of works an opportunity to conduct demonstrations of various technologies 
pertinent to the merits of the proposals. 
56  Written transcripts of the hearings are available on the Copyright Office website.  See 
www.copyright.gov/1201/hearings/2012/agenda/.  Certain exhibits referenced in the transcripts are 
available at www.copyright.gov/1201/2012/exhibits/.  Exhibits that the Office website could not host due to 
technological limitations are available upon request to th e Copyright Office.  
57  The Copyright Office’s post -hearing questions and the witnesses’ responses thereto are posted on the 
Office website.  See www.copyright.gov/1201/2012/responses/.  Certain exhibits referenced in the post -
hearing questions and replies are available at www.copyright.gov/1201/2012/exhibits/.  Exhibits that could 
not be hosted on the Office website due to technological limitations are available upon written request to 
the Office. 

[PAGE 16]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 13 
 
NTIA formally communicated its views on the proposed classes in a letter 
delivered to the Register on September 21, 2012.58  A discussion of NTIA’s substantive 
analysis of particular proposals is presented in the relevant sections of this 
Recommendation. 
 
III. Discussion 
 
A. Proposed Class 1:  Literary works in the public domain – digital 
access 
 
Proponent Open Book Alliance (“OBA”) proposes that the Register recommend 
the following class:   
 
Literary works in the public domain that are made available 
in digital copies.  
 
1. Proponent’s case 
 
Proponent seeks to circumvent technological measures applied to literary works in 
the public domain. 
 
As explained above, 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(A) provides that “[n]o person shall 
circumvent a technological measure that effectively controls access to a work protected 
under this title.”  Thus, the prohibition on circumvention of technological protection 
measures does not apply to public domain materials because such materials are not 
protected under Title 17.  Nevertheless, the proponent seeks a “clarification” from the 
Librarian that circumvention of technological measures for the purpose of accessing 
literary works in the public domain does not violate 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1).
59 
                                                
58 Letter from The Hon. Lawrence E. Strickling, Assistant Sec retary for Communications and Information, 
National Telecommunications and Information Administration, United States Department of Commerce to 
Maria A. Pallante, Register of Copyrights, U.S. Copyright Office (Sept. 21, 2012) [hereinafter NTIA 
Letter]. 
59 P1 (OBA) at 1.  Throughout this document, the Register uses the following citations to reflect record 
evidence:  P to refer to documents suggesting proposed classes; C to refer to comments on proposed 
classes; R to refer to reply comments on proposed classes ; and T to refer to transcript excerpts.  
Additionally, the Register specifies the party or witness in its citations.  For example, “P1 (O BA)” refers to 
the Open Book Alliance’s comments in support of Proposed Class 1  and “C12 (Joint Creators)” refers to 
the comments of Joint Creators and Copyright Owners in response to Proposed Class 1 .  In the example “T 
Doe, May 17, 2012, at 233,” the “T” indicates a citation to a hearing transcript, “Doe” refers to the last 
name of the witness, “May 17, 2012” refers to the date of the hearing, and “at 233” refers to the page of the 
transcript.  All of the written documents and transcripts reflected in these citations , as well as post-hearing 
follow-up correspondence,  are available on the Office’s website, www.copyright.g ov/1201. 

[PAGE 17]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 14 
 
2. Opposition 
 
Joint Creators and Copyright Owners (“Joint Creators”)60 filed comments in 
response to Proposed Class 1.  Joint Creators do not object to the conclusion that Section 
1201(a)(1) is inapplicable to literary works that are in the public domain, but caution that 
many distributions of such literary works contain ancillary copyrightable elements, such 
as cover art, inserts, photographs, prefaces, and the like.  Joint Creators assert that a 
formal exemption is unnecessary and beyond the scope of the proceeding and, 
alternatively, that even if such an exemption were warranted, the proponent has failed to 
meet its burden.61 
 
3. NTIA’s comments 
 
NTIA “shares [OBA]’s concern that the implementation of [technological 
measures] restricts universal access” to public domain material, and that such restrictions 
“may have a negative impact on educational institutions and research organizations,” as 
well as other negative impacts on the public.
62  NTIA also recognizes, as the Register has 
noted, that “[w]orks in the public domain are not affected by the prohibition on 
circumvention.”
63 Accordingly, NTIA agrees that an exemption is not required for this 
class of works.64 
 
4. Discussion 
 
Section 1201(a)(1)(A) provides that “[n]o person shall circumvent a technological 
measure that effectively controls access to a work protected under this title.”65 (emphasis 
added).  Because public domain works are not “protected under [Title 17],” the 
prohibition on circumvention does not apply to such works.  As the Librarian noted in the 
2010 rulemaking proceeding, “Section 1201 does not prohibit circumvention of a 
technological protection measure when it simply controls access to a public domain 
work; in such a case, it is lawful to circumvent the technological protection measure and 
there is no need for an exemption.”
66 
                                                
60 The trade groups represented by Joint Creators are the Association of American Publishers, the American 
Society of Media Photographers, the Business Software Alliance, the Entertainment Software Association, 
the Motion Picture Association of Ame rica, the Picture Archive Council of America, and the Recording 
Industry Association of America.  C12 (Joint Creators) at 1 -2. 
61 There were several other comments filed in support of the exemption, but none offered significant 
additional facts or argument. 
62 NTIA Letter at 3. 
63 Id. (quoting 2010 Recommendation at 256).  
64 Id. 
65 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(A) (emphasis added). 
66 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,837.  The Register made a similar observation in the 2003 
rulemaking.  See 2003 Final Rule, 68 Fed. R eg. at 62,015. 

[PAGE 18]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 15 
 
As the Joint Creators note, additional questions may arise when a technological 
measure controls access not only to a work in the public domain, but at the same time 
controls access to other works that are protected by copyright.  There is no need for the 
Register to address this issue, however, because proponents neither raised it nor presented 
any evidence relating to it. 
 
5. Recommendation 
 
The Register concludes that the requested exemption is beyond the scope of this 
rulemaking proceeding.  The Register therefore declines to recommend the adoption of 
Proposed Class 1. 

[PAGE 19]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 16 
 
B. Proposed Class 2:  Literary works distributed electronically – 
assistive technologies 
 
Proponents American Council of the Blind (“ACB”) and the American 
Foundation for the Blind (“AFB”) propose that the Register recommend the following 
class:   
 
Literary works, distributed electronically, that:  (1) contain 
digital rights management and/or other access controls 
which either prevent the enabling of the book’s read-aloud 
functionality or which interfere with screen readers or other 
applications or assistive technologies that render the text in 
specialized formats; and (2) are legally obtained by blind or 
other persons with print disabilities (as such persons are 
defined in section 121 of Title 17, United States Code), or 
are legally obtained by authorized entities (as defined in 
such section) distributing such work exclusively to such 
persons. 
 
1. Proponent’s case 
 
Proponents seek an exemption from the prohibition on circumvention in order to 
access literary works that are distributed electronically – i.e., ebooks – that are legally 
obtained by individuals who are blind or print disabled but cannot be used with screen 
readers or other assistive technologies. 
 
a. Background  
 
Ebooks are books in digital formats that are downloaded by users to personal 
computers or portable electronic devices.  Although ebooks are available from a variety 
of sources and in a multiplicity of formats, three dominant reading platforms have 
emerged: Amazon.com’s Kindle, Barnes & Noble’s Nook, and Apple’s iBooks 
application for use with Apple devices such as the iPhone and iPad.  Ebooks offer the 
potential significantly to improve access to literary works for individuals who are blind, 
visually impaired, or otherwise physically disabled such that they cannot read a 
traditional print book.  As the Register observed in 2010: 
 
[t]he benefits of ebooks were immediately apparent to the 
blind and visually impaired.  Ebooks present significant 
advantages to this community of users.  When a book is in 
electronic form, it offers the potential for accessibility that 
is otherwise not available from the print version of a book.  
An ebook is capable of allowing a user to modify the size 
of the print, to activate a “read-aloud” function, or to 
interact with the work by means of a separate screen reader 

[PAGE 20]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 17 
software and hardware.  The modification of print size can 
allow users with visual impairments to access an ebook 
without the need for corrective lenses or external 
magnification.  The “read-aloud” function can render 
written text to synthesized speech, enabling the user to 
listen to a copy of a work by having the computer or device 
voice the text that appears on the screen.  A screen reader 
program can also enable read-aloud functionality, but offers 
additional benefits to the blind and visually impaired.  For 
instance, screen reader software can be coupled with 
hardware to enable rendering written text into Braille, or it 
can facilitate navigation through an ebook that would not 
be available with simple read-aloud options on a computer 
or portable device.67 
 
In 2006 and 2010, the Librarian designated a class consisting of “[l]iterary works 
distributed in ebook format when all existing ebook editions of the work (including 
digital text editions made available by authorized entities) contain access controls that 
prevent the enabling either of the book’s read-aloud function or of screen readers that 
render the text into a specialized format.”
68  Proponents request a variation of that 
language that, essentially, eliminates the requirement that “all existing ebook editions of 
the work . . . contain access controls . . . ,” but which is limited to individuals with print 
disabilities as defined by 17 U.S.C. § 121, or those that “are legally obtained by 
authorized entities [under Section 121] distributing such work exclusively to such 
persons.”  
  
b. Asserted adverse impact 
 
ACB and AFB assert that the exception is necessary because “technological 
measures to control access to copyrighted works have been developed and deployed in 
ways that prevent access to and fair use of [ebooks] by people who are blind or visually 
impaired.”
69  Despite the rapid growth of the ebook market, ACB and AFB assert that 
most ebook titles remain inaccessible due to fragmentation within the industry and 
differing technical standards and accessibility capabilities across platforms: 
 
Of the current major [ebook] distributors (Barnes & 
Noble’s Nook store, Amazon’s Kindle store, and Apple’s 
iBookstore) Apple’s iBooks application is the only 
                                                
67 2010 Recommendation at 247.  
68 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,837; 2006 Final Rule, 71 Fed. Reg. at 68,475; see also 2003 Final 
Rule, 68 Fed. Reg. at 62,014 (“Literary works distributed in ebook format when all existing ebook editions 
of the work (including digital text editions made available by authorized entities) contain access controls 
that prevent the enabling of the ebook’s read -aloud function and that prevent the enabling of screen readers 
to render the text into a specialized f ormat.”). 
69 P2 (ACB and AFB) at 4.  

[PAGE 21]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 18 
mainstream [ebook] reader that is accessible to individuals 
who are blind or visually impaired.  Apple’s full-featured 
screen reader includes word-by-word navigation and 
[B]raille support.  By contrast, all of Barnes & Noble’s 
Nook readers are completely inaccessible to blind users.  
Although Amazon offers text-to-speech features for its 
Kindle books, those features are so limited that the Kindle 
has been described as an inaccessible product with 
accessibility enhancements.  The Kindle for PC with 
Accessibility Plug-in lacks the navigational feature to read 
word-by-word or read the spelling of words.70 
 
Although precise figures remain elusive, press accounts cited by the proponents 
suggest that only a fraction of the publicly available ebooks are accessible; they estimate 
that there are approximately 1.8 million inaccessible ebook titles.  They offer one 
example, The Mill River Recluse by Darcie Chan, ebook editions of which are available 
in each of the three major ebook stores, but they assert that only the iBookstore edition is 
accessible.  An individual with a print disability would thus be required to have an 
iPhone, iPad, or other Apple device in order to access the book.
71  Proponents assert that 
“[t]he cost of purchasing Apple hardware merely to read an accessible version of an 
ebook represents a substantial adverse effect caused by the DMCA’s anti-circumvention 
provision.”
72 
 
The Samuelson-Glushko Technology Law & Policy Clinic at the University of 
Colorado Law School (“Clinic”), another commenting party, urges the Register to 
recommend either the current exemption, or its own proposed version of the exemption, 
which is slightly narrower than the version proposed by the proponents.
73  The Clinic 
believes that its version of the language alleviates the opponents’ concerns while 
achieving the objectives of the initial proposal.  Specifically, the Clinic asserts the 
existence of a “literacy crisis in the blind and print-disabled community,” that requires 
more widespread availability of “text to speech” capabilities, noting that fewer than ten 
percent of the 1.3 million legally blind individuals are able to read Braille, and only ten 
percent of blind children learn how to read it.
74  The Clinic also supports the proponents’ 
                                                
70 Id. at 8 (internal citations omitted).  
71 See T Brunson, June 5, 2012, at 23 (explaining that  different manifestations of a particular platform often 
contain different feature sets). 
72 P2 (ACB and AFB) at 10.  
73 R15 (Samuelson-Glushko Technology Law & Technology Policy Clinic) at 3 (“Literary works, 
distributed electronically, that contain technological measures that control access to such works, when 
circumvention is accomplished to facilitate the rendering of specialized  formats, when the purpose of 
circumvention is for the purpose of improving the ability of blind or other persons with print disabilities, 
who have lawful access to such works, to perceive such works.”).   
74 Id. at 8 (citing The Braille Literacy Crisis in America Facing the Truth, Reversing the Trend, and 
Empowering the Blind,  NAT’L FED’N OF THE BLIND JERNIGAN INST., Mar. 26, 2009). 

[PAGE 22]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 19 
argument that a blind individual should not have to invest in all three major reading 
platforms in order to obtain accessible content. 
 
Finally, the Clinic notes the uncertainty surrounding whether text-to-speech 
technology implicates any of copyright’s exclusive rights, suggesting that the exemption 
would “protect good faith disabled users from possible legal liability.”
75 
 
2. Opposition 
 
Joint Creators76 offered no objection in principle to an exemption that is identical 
to that promulgated in 2010.  They note, however, that the market for literary works is 
evolving rapidly and market share of the major electronic book platforms has increased 
substantially since the last rulemaking.  They also note that the proposed exemption in 
this instance is broader than the current exemption, because it applies to all literary works 
distributed electronically without regard for whether alternatives are readily available on 
the market.  Specifically, Joint Creators “see no reason why the existing exemption 
should be expanded to cover works that can be lawfully obtained in the desired formats 
without engaging in circumvention.”
77 
 
Joint Creators also note that the proposed exemption, which would apply to 
“readers who are blind or visually impaired, or anyone else, who devises means to 
circumvent copy protection measure to allow access by people with print disabilities,”
78 
could run afoul of the prohibition on trafficking in circumvention tools set forth in 
Section 1201(a)(2). 
 
3. Discussion 
 
Since the issue of ebook accessibility was first raised in the 2003 rulemaking, the 
Register has been supportive of the need to ensure that access controls do not prevent 
people who are blind or visually impaired from gaining meaningful access to books 
distributed in electronic formats.  The Register has therefore twice recommended that the 
Librarian designate an appropriate class.
79 
 
                                                
75 Id. at 13. 
76 The trade groups represented by Joint Creators are the Association of American Publishers, the American 
Society of Media Photographers, the Business Software Alliance, the Entertainment Software Association, 
the Motion Picture Association of America, the Picture Archive Council of America, and the Recording 
Industry Association of America.  C12 (Joint Creators) at 1-2. 
77 Id. at 18. 
78 Id. (quoting P2 (ACB and AFB) at 12).  
79 See 2003 Recommendation at 64; 2006 Recommendation at 37.  But see 2010 Recommendation at 246 -
62 (finding, in 2010, that the record was not sufficiently developed to permit the recommendation of the 
proposed class); 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,837 -89 (notwithstanding the Register’s determination, 
the Librarian ultimately designated such a class).  

[PAGE 23]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 20 
As an initial matter, it is worth noting that the proposed exemption is, indeed, 
different from the exemption that the Librarian granted in 2010.  The 2010 exemption 
applies to: 
 
[l]iterary works distributed in ebook format when all 
existing ebook editions of the work (including digital text 
editions made available by authorized entities) contain 
access controls that prevent the enabling either of the 
book’s read-aloud function or of screen readers that render 
the text into a specialized format.80 
 
As noted by Joint Creators, the proposed exemption is broader in that it does not 
require that “all existing ebook editions of the work” be inaccessible in order for the 
exemption to apply.  Notwithstanding this enlargement, however, the proposed class is 
also narrower in that it applies only to works that “are legally obtained by blind or other 
persons with print disabilities.”  The 2010 exemption contains no such limitation on the 
purpose for which technological protection measures may be circumvented. 
 
Significantly, when the Register was first called upon to consider an exemption 
for ebooks in 2003, the marketplace was very different.  At that time, the market was 
nascent.  Ebooks were distributed primarily for use on personal computers, readable with 
freely available software, and “the public’s reception of ebooks [was] tentative.”
81  
Today, ebooks are marketed mainly for use on mobile devices, ranging from dedicated 
ebook readers using proprietary software (e.g., Amazon’s Kindle) to multipurpose 
devices running free software applications (e.g., an Apple iPad running Amazon’s Kindle 
app).  During the intervening period, the market for ebooks has grown dramatically.
82   
 
Nonetheless, there are often substantial costs associated with owning dedicated 
reading devices, and there are inefficiencies associated with having to own more than one 
such device.
83  The restrictions recommended by the Register in prior rulemakings are 
therefore not reflective of the current market conditions. 
 
  Further, according to a market study cited by the proponents, the ebook 
marketplace is dominated by Amazon.com, with “[m]ore than 70 percent of ebook buyers 
us[ing] the store,” which “currently offers 950,000 ebook titles, of which 800,000 cost 
$9.99 or less.”  Moreover, “110 of the 111 titles on the bestseller list of the New York 
                                                
80 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,837- 89. 
81 See 2003 Recommendation at 64.  
82 Cf. Shiv Malik, Kindle ebook sales have overtaken Amazon print sales, says book seller , THE GUARDIAN 
(Aug. 5, 2012) (explaining that in the United Kingdom, Amazon’s ebook sales have exceeded print sales 
according to unaudited figures released by the company and “since t he start of 2012, for every hardback 
and paperback book sold on its site, customers downloaded 114 ebooks.”).   
83 These inefficiencies are compounded, and rise to the level of impediments to accessibility, when the 
owner is blind or visually impaired. 

[PAGE 24]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 21 
Times are available as ebooks for the Kindle.”84  Barnes & Noble is the “second 
heavyweight player in retail, and the strongest competitor to Amazon,” followed by 
Apple’s iBookstore.85  Of the three major platforms, “Apple’s iBooks application is the 
only mainstream ebook reader that is accessible,”86 and even then, “[i]t’s probably an 
exaggeration to say that every book in the iBookstore” is accessible.87 
 
The reasons to require that all ebook editions be inaccessible in order for the 
exemption to apply no longer make sense in the current market environment.  Moreover, 
because the record indicates that the majority of ebooks available through commercial 
channels are either inaccessible or, at best, only somewhat accessible, there is no need to 
analyze specific titles to see if they are inaccessible, as done in the past. 
 
a. Statutory factors 
 
Because the Librarian and the Register must consider “[t]he effect of 
circumvention of technological measures on the market for or value of copyrighted 
works,”
88 there is some merit to the Joint Creators’ position that an exemption should 
apply only when no accessible market alternative exists.  But proponents clarified at the 
hearing that the intent of the exemption is to allow blind or visually impaired individuals 
to access works they have lawfully obtained that, for whatever reason, not natively 
accessible.  More to the point, proponents’ counsel asserted that “[t]he whole point of this 
exemption is to make sure that the person with print disabilities can get access to the 
thing that he or she has purchased or otherwise lawfully obtained.”
89  
 
Generally, public policy favors removing impediments to access for individuals 
with disabilities,
90 and the notion that an individual ought to be required to invest in three 
(or more) competing electronic book platforms would appear to be contrary to that 
policy.  Further, the record supports a finding that a significant number of ebooks are 
inaccessible on any platform, and even those that are accessible may not satisfy the needs 
of every individual with an impairment,91 further illustrating the need for such an 
exemption. 
                                                
84 RÜDIGER WISCHENBART & SABINE KALDONEK, THE GLOBAL EBOOK MARKET: CURRENT CONDITIONS 
AND FUTURE PROJECTIONS 5 (2011). 
85 Id. 
86 P2 (ACB and AFB) at 8.  
87 T Richert, June 5, 2012, at 25.  
88 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(iv).  
89 T Richert, June 5, 2012, at 19.  
90 See, e.g., 42 U.S.C. § 12101(a)(7) (“the Nation’s proper goals regarding individuals with disabilities are 
to assure equality of opportunity, full participation, independent living, and economic self -sufficiency for 
such individuals.”); 17 U.S.C. § 121 (copyright exemption for certain restricted uses of nondramatic 
literary works in favor of individuals who are blind or physically handicapped) . 
91 See T Brunson, June 5, 2012, at 23 (noting that individuals who are blind require different forms of 
accommodation than those with less severe vision impairments).  

[PAGE 25]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 22 
 
Applied properly, the proposed exemption would simply allow an individual with 
a print disability to exploit a lawfully obtained ebook in a manner that enables him or her 
to perceive it on the platform for which it was purchased, without regard to whether 
commercial offerings on other platforms are accessible.  Absent the proposed exemption, 
a blind or visually impaired person with a particular reading device would be required to 
invest in a competing device in the event that a particular ebook were accessible on the 
second platform, but not on the platform in which the individual originally invested.  
Thus, a blind or visually impaired person would essentially have to invest in each of the 
major commercial ebook platforms in order to have access to the full complement of 
accessible material. 
 
Joint Creators assert that the market is evolving in such a way that it will enhance 
accessibility and make content more widely available for accessible uses.  It is clear that 
the technical standards and market models associated with ebook publishing are 
undergoing rapid and significant change, and it is entirely possible that the market will 
evolve in such way that will enhance accessibility.  But, it is just as possible that the 
market will become more diversified, with Apple, Barnes & Noble, Amazon and perhaps 
new entrants taking divergent approaches, resulting in further fragmentation of technical 
formats, protection measures, distribution models, and standards for accessibility. 
 
The Register finds that all four statutory factors favor the exemption because it 
will serve to increase the availability of copyrighted works for a variety of purposes, 
including but not limited to commentary, criticism, research, and educational uses and, 
properly fashioned, will not adversely impact the market for copyrighted works.  With 
respect to the Joint Creators’ concern that the proposed exemption could implicate the 
trafficking provisions of Section 1201(a)(2), based on proponents’ explanations, it 
appears that the beneficiaries of the proposed exemption could distribute accessible 
works created under the exemption, rather than the tools to exploit the exemption.  The 
Register therefore believes that a properly crafted exemption would not run afoul of 
Section 1201(a)(2). 
 
The statute permits the Librarian to consider “such other factors” as appropriate.
92  
The Register notes that the proposed class is not merely a matter of convenience, but is 
instead intended to enable individuals who are blind or visually impaired to have 
meaningful access to the same content that individuals without such impairments are able 
to perceive.  As proponents have explained, their desire is simply to have effective access 
to content that individuals who are blind or visually impaired acquire lawfully, just as 
individuals without such impairments can buy on the mainstream market.  In short, the 
proposed class ensures effective access to a rapidly growing array of ebook content by a 
population that would otherwise go without. 
                                                
92 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(v).  

[PAGE 26]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 23 
 
b. NTIA comments 
 
NTIA supports the adoption of the proposed exemption, noting that: 
 
[r]equiring visually impaired Americans to invest hundreds of 
dollars in an additional device (or even multiple additional 
devices), particularly when an already-owned device is technically 
capable of rendering literary works accessible, is not a reasonable 
alternative to circumvention and demonstrates an adverse effect of 
the various access controls used.
93 
 
NTIA observes that the current “proposal expands the contemplated class of 
works from the current exemption,”94 in that it applies to “literary works, distributed 
electronically” rather than the current exemption’s application to “literary works 
distributed in ebook format.”95  Explaining that “[l]iterary works are distributed 
electronically in a wide range of formats, not all of which are necessarily widely 
understood to constitute an ‘ebook format[,]’”
96  NTIA notes that it “prefers the new, 
more general language as it more precisely resolves the harm demonstrated in the 
record.”
97  
 
4. Recommendation 
 
The record demonstrates that blind or visually impaired individuals are at a 
significant disadvantage with respect to obtaining accessible ebook content because of 
the different platforms, standards, and devices on which ebooks are consumed, and the 
channels through which they are distributed.  The existing fragmentation and the 
considerable uncertainty surrounding the evolution of the marketplace, coupled with the 
lack of any likely market harm or material opposition, compels the Register to support an 
exemption of the type proponents seek. 
 
At the hearing, proponents stated that “it was not [their] intent to create a situation 
where publishers are not getting paid”
98 for their works; they acknowledge that the 
“rights owner should be compensated for [] the price of the mainstream book available to 
the general public.”99  Indeed, as described above, proponents seek nothing more than the 
ability to render accessible those ebooks that are lawfully acquired through customary 
retail channels, but that are inaccessible to certain users:  “What the publisher or rights 
                                                
93 NTIA Letter at 5. 
94 Id. 
95 See 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,839.  
96 NTIA Letter at 5. 
97 Id. 
98 T Richert, June 5, 2012, at 33.  
99 Id. at 34. 

[PAGE 27]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 24 
owner should be compensated for is the price of the mainstream book available to the 
general public because that’s the standard against which we would measure fairness.”100  
Thus, the first prong of the recommended class permits circumvention by blind or other 
persons with disabilities, effectively ensuring that they have access through the open 
market, while also ensuring that rights owners receive appropriate remuneration. 
 
 The second prong of the proposal (the part that would extend the exemption to 
authorized entities) is a new consideration; it has not been the subject of a prior Section 
1201 rulemaking and proponents did not provide extensive analysis of this aspect of their 
proposal.  Nonetheless, the Register finds that the proposal is supported by relevant 
evidence and that authorized entities should enjoy an exemption to the extent required for 
them to carry out their work under Section 121.  However, the proposal as written 
requires some modifications to ensure that it is consistent with, but not an enlargement of, 
Section 121.  In relevant part, Section 121 permits qualified “authorized entities” to 
reproduce and distribute nondramatic literary works provided the resulting copies are in 
“specialized formats exclusively for use by blind or other persons with disabilities.”
101 
 
 The Register notes that several provisions in Section 121 appear ill-suited to the 
digital world and could benefit from comprehensive review by Congress.  Section 121 
was enacted in 1996 following careful consideration of the public interest, including the 
interests of persons with disabilities and the interests of authors and other copyright 
owners.  Although the Register supports a legislative review of Section 121, the issues 
are exceedingly complex, and this proceeding is not the appropriate mechanism by which 
to conduct it.
102  Indeed, the precise contours of how authorized entities might engage 
with, and deploy “specialized formats exclusively for use by blind or other persons with 
disabilities” in the digital environment are not fully developed on the record before the 
Register.  Accordingly, the recommended class has been fashioned to ensure that it 
complies with the current statutory framework in which authorized entities must operate. 
 
The Register therefore declines to recommend the proposed class as initially 
drafted, but instead, recommends a substantially similar exemption that includes 
appropriate limitations to ensure that its application comports both with copyright law 
and proponents’ intent.  Accordingly, the Register recommends the following class 
containing appropriate limiting language, as follows: 
 
Literary works, distributed electronically, that are 
protected by technological measures which either 
                                                
100 Id. 
101 17 U.S.C. § 121(a) (emphasis added). 
102 See generally REPORT OF THE ADVISORY COMMISSION ON ACCESSIBLE INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS IN 
POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION FOR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES, at 43-48 (Dec. 6, 2011), available at 
www2.ed.gov/about/bdscomm/list/aim/meeting/aim- report.pdf (recommending that Congress review the 
scope, effectiveness, and function of Section 121); see also The Authors Guild, Inc. v. Hathitrust , No. 11-
6351 (S.D.N.Y. Oct. 10, 2012), slip op. at 23 (holding that libraries of educational institutions may be 
“authorized entities” under Section 121).  

[PAGE 28]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 25 
prevent the enabling of read-aloud functionality or 
interfere with screen readers or other applications or 
assistive technologies, (i) when a copy of such a work is 
lawfully obtained by a blind or other person with a 
disability, as such a person is defined in 17 U.S.C. § 121; 
provided, however, the rights owner is remunerated, as 
appropriate, for the price of the mainstream copy of the 
work as made available to the general public through 
customary channels; or (ii) when such work is a 
nondramatic literary work, lawfully obtained and used 
by an authorized entity pursuant to 17 U.S.C. § 121. 

[PAGE 29]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 26 
 
C. Proposed Class 3:  Video game consoles – software interoperability 
(“jailbreaking”) 
 
Proponent Electronic Frontier Foundation (“EFF”) and other supporters propose 
that the Register recommend the following class:   
 
Computer programs that enable lawfully acquired video 
game consoles to execute lawfully acquired software 
applications, where circumvention is undertaken for the 
sole purpose of enabling interoperability of such 
applications with computer programs on the gaming 
console. 
 
1. Proponents’ case 
 
Proponent EFF, joined by Andrew “bunnie” Huang (“Huang”), the Free Software 
Foundation (“FSF”), SaurikIT, LLC (“SaurikIT”) and others,
103 seeks an exemption to 
permit the circumvention of access controls on video game console computer code so that 
the consoles can be used with non-vendor-approved software that is lawfully acquired. 
   
a. Background 
 
The leading proponent of this exemption, EFF, a nonprofit public interest 
organization devoted to “maintaining the traditional balance” of copyright law,104 
observes that modern video game consoles are increasingly sophisticated computing 
devices that are capable of running not only games but “entire computer operating 
systems.”  All three major video game manufacturers, however – Sony, Microsoft, and 
Nintendo – have deployed technological restrictions that force console purchasers to limit 
their operating systems and software exclusively to vendor-approved offerings, even 
where there is no evidence that other options will infringe copyrights.
105  These 
restrictions require a console owner who would like to install a computer operating 
system or run a “homebrew” (i.e., independently developed) application to defeat a 
number of technical measures before they are able to do so – a process that proponents 
refer to as “jailbreaking.”  Proponents seek an exemption from Section 1201(a)(1) to 
permit such jailbreaking of video game consoles.  Because the class they propose would 
extend only to “lawfully obtained software programs,” proponents assert that it will not 
                                                
103 Numerous individual users also submitted comments noting their support for the exemption without 
offering substantive facts or legal analysis.   
104 P3 (EFF) at 2.  EFF represents the interests of “thousands of dues -paying members,” including 
consumers, hobbyists, computer programmers, entrepreneurs, students, teachers, and researchers.   
105 Id. at 19. 

[PAGE 30]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 27 
authorize or foster infringing activities and that, in any event, “several additional steps” 
beyond mere jailbreaking are required in order to exploit pirated materials.106 
 
In its comments, EFF explained the circumvention process with reference to 
Sony’s PlayStation 3 (“PS3”), which is also the primary focus of its arguments in support 
of an exemption.  Sony’s PS3 employs a series of technological protections so that the 
console can install and run only authenticated, encrypted code.  One such measure is the 
encryption of the console’s firmware, which restricts access to the console.  The firmware 
must be authenticated by the console’s bootloader – a piece of software that coordinates 
the activation of various parts of the console when it is turned on – and decrypted before 
it can be used.  Once the firmware has been authenticated and decrypted, it, in turn, 
authenticates applications before they can be installed or run on the PS3.
107  Thus, the 
most popular jailbreaking process for the PS3 requires the console’s restrictions to be 
bypassed and a firmware file to be downloaded in order to neutralize the console’s 
authentication processes and permit the use of non-Sony-approved software on the 
system.
108  EFF also states, without elaboration, that Microsoft’s Xbox 360 and 
Nintendo’s Wii employ similar firmware authentication procedures as technological 
protection measures.
109 
 
In further support of its requested exemption, EFF recounts that when Sony 
launched the PS3 in 2006, it included a software application called “OtherOS” that 
permitted users to install Linux and UNIX operating systems on their consoles.  EFF 
provides examples of researchers who were able to use these earlier PS3 consoles in lieu 
of other computer systems to conduct various forms of scientific research, citing an Air 
Force project that made use of 1700 PS3s, as well as two academic projects employing 
clusters of PS3s to create high-performance computers.
110  Some of these researchers 
chose to use clustered PS3s because they were less expensive than the available 
alternatives.
111  In 2010, however, Sony issued a firmware update for the PS3 that 
removed the OtherOS functionality.  PS3 users were not forced to upgrade, but the failure 
to adopt the upgrade precludes access to certain gameplay features and might make repair 
or replacement of the gaming system more difficult.
112  As EFF explains:  “In short, users 
who wish to fulfill the original promise of the PS3 have no choice but to jailbreak the 
                                                
106 Id. at 30-31.  As counsel for EFF expressed:  “I want to be very, very clear here.  It wouldn’t permit 
infringement.  It simply wouldn’t.  We are not asking for any circumvention for unlawful purposes.”  T 
Hoffman, May 17, 2012, at 13.  
107 P3 (EFF) at 29. 
108 Id. at 30. 
109 Id. at 29. 
110 EFF also mentions a distributed computing project called Folding@Home, in which Sony has 
cooperated with Stanford to conduct protein folding research on a worldwide basis through linked PS3s.  
EFF asserts that participation in Folding@Home does not require console jailbreaking.  Id. at 21-22 n.124. 
111 Id. at 20-22; see also id., Appendix C ¶ 2 (State ment of G Khanna) (noting availability of alternative 
computing options) ¶ 7 (Sony supported research by donating four PS3s), Appendix D ¶ 9 (Statement of N 
Pinto) (chart summarizing capabilities and costs of computing alternatives).  
112 P3 (EFF) at 22-23; R 13 (EFF) at 6. 

[PAGE 31]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 28 
console to install an alternative operating system.”113  EFF also notes in passing that 
while Nintendo’s Wii and Microsoft’s Xbox 360 did not launch with support for an 
alternative operating system, “developers have nevertheless managed to install alternative 
operating systems on both consoles via jailbreaking techniques, as well.”114 
 
EFF asserts that none of the three major video game console manufacturers 
currently allows the installation of independently developed applications on their 
consoles unless the developer has obtained approval of the software from the 
manufacturer through a “stringent” process that may require the developer to license 
costly development tools for fees ranging from $1,700 to $10,000 per year.
115  As a 
result, hobbyists and homebrew developers engage in circumvention to defeat technical 
restrictions in order to install software without manufacturer approval.
116  Homebrewers 
have created games and other applications to run on the PS3, Wii, and Xbox consoles. 
 
EFF notes over 450 independently created games and applications for Nintendo’s 
Wii available on the homebrew site WiiBrew.org.  EFF also mentions a “vibrant” 
homebrew community revolving around an annual international competition sponsored 
by NintendoMax, but does not cite particular games or applications developed for that 
platform.
117  With respect to the PS3, EFF references some eighteen games and several 
nongaming applications, including a file backup program called “Multiman” and an 
application that transforms the PS3 into an FTP server that can transfer files to other 
devices over the internet.  EFF notes one PS3 homebrew application that has had 
“remarkable success,” having attracted “thousands” of users.
118  EFF lists a single 
application for Microsoft’s Xbox, the XBMC media center.  EFF observes that “there is 
not a strong homebrew community on the Xbox360,” attributing this phenomenon to a 
Microsoft development program that “allows developers to publish games with relative 
ease.”
119  In a letter responding to post-hearing questions from the Copyright Office, EFF 
notes some additional homebrew activities conducted on legacy consoles and handheld 
video game devices.
120  
                                                
113 P3 (EFF) at 23; R 13 (EFF) at 6.  
114 P3 (EFF) at 23-24. 
115 See id. at 24 n.142 (noting the prices for licensing the software development kits for PS3 and Nintendo 
Wii, respectively).   
116 Id. at 25-26.   
117 Id. 26-28. 
118 R13 (EFF) at 6-7; P3 (EFF) at 27-28.  Apparently, these homebrew applications have been created for 
older versions of the PS3 as, according to SCEA, the most recent version of the PS3 has not been hacked.  
C1 (SCEA) at 10. 
119 P3 (EFF) at 26 n.154.  
120 Letter from Marcia Hoffman, Se nior Staff Attorney, EFF, to David O. Carson, General Counsel, U.S. 
Copyright Office (June 29, 2012).  

[PAGE 32]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 29 
 
b. Asserted noninfringing uses 
 
Proponents’ request for an exemption is premised on their view that 
circumventing access controls on a video console for the purpose of running 
independently created software constitutes a noninfringing use.  As articulated by the 
EFF, “[c]ourts have long found copying and modification to enable device 
interoperability noninfringing under the doctrine of fair use.”121  In support of this 
assertion, they cite the Register’s determination in the 2010 rulemaking that jailbreaking 
an iPhone to enable it to run non-Apple-approved applications constitutes a noninfringing 
fair use.122  They also highlight two Ninth Circuit cases, Sega Enterprises Ltd. v. 
Accolade, Inc.123 and Sony Computer Entertainment, Inc. v. Connectix Corporation,124 
both of which held the reverse engineering of video games for purposes of determining 
requirements for interoperability to be a noninfringing fair use.125  Proponents assert no 
basis other than fair use to establish that the activities in question are noninfringing. 
 
Reviewing the four-factor test for fair use embodied in Section 107,126 proponents 
contend that, as to the first factor – purpose and character of the use – “[b]ecause 
jailbreaking a video game console for purposes of making it interoperable with computer 
operating systems and independently created applications is transformative, personal, 
noncommercial, and confers a public benefit, the first factor weighs heavily” in their 
favor.
127  They contend that the second factor also weighs in their favor, because console 
firmware is “highly factual and functional”; to the extent it is a creative work, its access 
restrictions are implemented “to protect a business model, not the underlying copyrighted 
work.”
128  Regarding the third factor, they state that the amount of console computer code 
                                                
121 P3 (EFF) at 31.   
122 Id.; see also 2010 Recommendation at 91, 100 (“The Register agrees that the activity of an iPhone 
owner who modifies his or her iPhone’s firmware/operating system in order to make it interoperable with 
an application that Apple has not approved, but that the iPhone owner wishes to run on the iPhone, fits 
comfortably within the four corners of fair use.”).  
123 977 F.2d 1510 (9th Cir. 1992).  
124 203 F.3d 596 (9th Cir. 2000).  
125 In Sega, the Ninth Circuit determined that a game developer’s copying and disassembly of a 
competitor’s video game software for the purpose of examining unprotected elements of the code in order 
to render the developer ’s video game compatible with the competitor’s game console was a fair use under 
Section 107 of the Copyright Act.  977 F.2d at 1520.  In Connectix, the Ninth Circuit revisited the question 
of reverse engineering video games, holding that a developer’s dis assembly of Sony software to produce a 
PlayStation “emulator” capable of playing Sony video games constituted a transformative fair use.  203 
F.3d at 607-08. 
126 See 17 U.S.C. § 107.  The factors to be considered in a fair use analysis include:  “(1) the purpose and 
character of the use, including whether such use is of a commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational 
purposes; (2) the nature of the copyrighted work; (3) the amount and substantiality of the portion used in 
relation to the copyrighted work as a whole; and (4) the effect of the use on the potential market for or 
value of the copyrighted work.”   
127 P3 (EFF) at 31-32. 
128 Id. at 32. 

[PAGE 33]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 30 
that is copied to permit interoperability “varies depending on the device”; nonetheless, 
they summarily assert that any copying and modification required to achieve 
interoperability is “necessary and reasonable” and consistent with the Register’s 
determination in the 2010 rulemaking that de minimis changes made to smartphone 
firmware to permit it to be used with non-vendor-approved applications did not defeat a 
finding of fair use.129  Finally, with respect to the fourth factor, proponents contend that 
“because the technological restrictions in question are designed to protect a business 
model, circumventing them and installing legitimate interoperable software will not have 
an adverse effect on the market for the underlying firmware,” thus again favoring a 
finding of fair use.
130 
 
c. Asserted adverse impact 
 
Proponents maintain that manufacturers’ technological restrictions on video game 
consoles not only constrain consumer choice and the value of consoles to their owners, 
but also the incentives for independent developers to create copyrightable systems and 
software that would expand the marketplace for these devices and “promote the progress 
of science and the useful arts in these areas.”
131  More specifically, they claim that 
console access controls are inhibiting scientific research and homebrew development 
activities.  Pointing to the Register’s determination in the last 1201 rulemaking that 
circumvention of technological measures on smartphones to enable interoperability with 
lawfully obtained applications should be permissible, proponents argue that the same 
logic should apply here.  According to proponents, the restrictions on video game 
consoles do not protect the value or integrity of copyrighted works, but instead reflect a 
business decision to restrict the applications that users can run on their devices.
132 
 
Proponents further assert that “[a] large community of console jailbreakers 
currently exists for all three major video game consoles.”  (By contrast, EFF refers to the 
community of “homebrew developers” – presumably a subset of jailbreakers in general – 
as “small and thriving.”
133)  EFF states that console jailbreakers face potential liability 
under Section 1201(a)(1).  As evidence of this, EFF cites recent litigation pursued by 
Sony against an individual and others who developed and published a method for 
jailbreaking the PS3.  EFF explains that in January 2010, George Hotz (also known by 
his online name “GeoHot”) publicly disclosed a method for jailbreaking the PS3 that 
built on the work of a group of researchers known as Fail0verflow.  In response, Sony 
initiated a lawsuit against Hotz and others alleging, among other things, that the 
defendants had conspired to violate the DMCA.
134 
                                                
129 Id. at 32-33 (citing 2010 Recommendation at 97).  
130 Id. at 33. 
131 Id. at 19. 
132 Id. at 20. 
133 Id. at 29, 34.  EFF doe s not provide any numbers in support of these characterizations.  
134 P3 (EFF) at 30; see also Sony Computer Entm’t LLC v. Hotz , No. 2011-CV-00167 (N.D. Cal. filed Jan. 
11, 2011).  The current status of this litigation is not apparent from the record  in this proceeding, but the 

[PAGE 34]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 31 
 
 Finally, a few proponents suggest potential scenarios in which a console might 
need to be jailbroken to effectuate a repair, for example, in order to replace a worn-out 
component such as a hard drive or optical drive.135 
 
d. Argument under statutory factors 
 
Proponents assert that the significance of the statutory factors delineated in 
Section 1201(a)(1)(C)136 is “diminished” in the context of video game consoles because, 
“as with smartphones in the 2006 and 2010 rulemaking proceedings, ‘the access controls 
do not appear to actually be deployed in order to protect the interests of the copyright 
owner of the value or integrity of the copyrighted work; rather they are used by[sic] to 
limit the ability of [users to run third party applications], a business decision that has 
nothing whatsoever to do with the interests protected by copyright.’”137  They proceed 
nonetheless to address the statutory factors, arguing that, as to factor one, permitting 
circumvention of video game console for purposes of interoperability will increase the 
availability of copyrighted works by stimulating the development of new firmware and 
games.
138  Regarding factor two, they assert that there is no reason to believe that console 
firmware will be less available for nonprofit uses, so this factor is neutral.139  With 
respect to the third factor, they claim that video game jailbreaking has lead to 
“substantial” developments in scholarship and scientific research and a jailbreaking 
exemption would further promote such activities.140  Looking to the fourth factor, they 
maintain that jailbreaking is unlikely adversely to affect the market for copyrighted works 
because jailbroken consoles will still be “tethered” to the authorized game distributors 
and the proposed exemption is “narrowly tailored” to permit only noninfringing uses; 
moreover, permitting circumvention “will probably increase the availability of 
copyrighted console firmware rather than diminish it” because interoperability will 
stimulate research and development efforts.
141  Finally, as an “other” factor to consider 
pursuant to Section 1201(a)(1)(C)(v), they urge that technological restrictions imposed by 
                                                                                                                                            
Register notes that court records show that a permanent injunction was entered against Hotz on April 12, 
2011.  See Final J. Upon Consent and Permanent Inj., Hotz, No. 2011-CV-00167 (Apr. 12, 2011). 
135 See, e.g., C15 (Huang) at 1; Statem ent of Andrew “bunnie” Huang, PhD, June 29, 2012; C411 (K. 
Wiens) at 1-2; C284 (J Turner) at 1.  As discussed below, however, no commenter identified any actual 
instances of repair attempts by users.  
136 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C).   
137 P3 (EFF) at 34 (citing 2006 Recommendation at 52) (alteration in original).  
138 Id. 
139 Id. 
140 Id. at 35. 
141 Id. at 36. 

[PAGE 35]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 32 
manufacturers to preserve their business interests are not an aim of copyright law and 
should therefore be considered “unrelated to the purpose of this proceeding.”142 
 
2. Opposition 
 
Opponents of Proposed Class 3 include the trade group Entertainment Software 
Association (“ESA”),143 Joint Creators,144 and Sony Computer Entertainment America 
LLC (“SCEA” or “Sony”), which manufactures and distributes video game consoles, 
including the PS3.  Opponents filed extensive comments in response to EFF’s request for 
an exemption. 
 
ESA characterizes video game consoles as “the center of an intellectual property 
ecosystem which makes copyrighted content readily and legally accessible, offering a 
tremendous benefit to creators, distributors and, most importantly, the public at large.”  It 
further states that “[t]his entire system, however, is predicated on effective, secure access 
controls and legal protection to support them – the very type of access controls Congress 
envisioned when it passed 1201.”  It asserts that to grant EFF’s requested exemption 
“would enable and encourage widespread content theft and piracy, destabilizing the 
distribution system that earns revenues for authors and encourages the production of new 
copyrighted works.”  It contends that the exemption is unwarranted because it would 
favor “speculative benefits accruing to a relatively infinitesimal contingent of ‘hobbyists’ 
who have ample alternative development opportunities and platforms available for their 
use already.”
145 
 
ESA explains that there are at least two potential access controls at issue here:  
first, “the encryption of the console’s firmware,” and second, the operation of the 
firmware itself, which “prevents the installation of unauthorized software” by performing 
an authentication check.  ESA explains that to play a homebrew game – or pirated 
content or applications that enable unlawful copying – the user must circumvent not only 
the encryption on the console’s firmware, but also modify the firmware to defeat the 
authentication check access control.  It adds that once the user modifies the firmware, 
when the user launches an application (whether homebrew or pirated), the modified 
firmware will operate but the access controls will be circumvented – effectively allowing 
the console to run unauthorized content.
146 
                                                
142 Id.; see also id. at 18 (“In both 2006 and 2010, the Register frowned on firmware manufacturers 
advancing copyright claims in their functional computer program s to support anti-competitive business 
practices.”). 
143 ESA represents “all of the major platform providers and nearly all major video game publishers in the 
United States,” including the manufacturers of the three consoles on which EFF focuses its comments , the 
Sony PS3, the Microsoft Xbox 360, and Nintendo’s Wii.  C5 (ESA) at 2.  
144 The trade groups represented by Joint Creators are the Association of American Publishers, the 
American Society of Media Photographers, the Business Software Alliance, the Entert ainment Software 
Association, the Motion Picture Association of America, the Picture Archive Council of America, and the 
Recording Industry Association of America.  C12 (Joint Creators) at 1 -2. 
145 C5 (ESA) at 1-2. 
146 Id. at 7-8. 

[PAGE 36]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 33 
 
According to ESA, copyrighted video games – as well as other expressive works, 
including movies and music – are available through video game consoles “precisely 
because platform providers use access controls to restrict access to these works.”
147  
Thousands of video games are published for gaming consoles each year, some of which 
are created and owned by console manufacturers.
148  ESA’s members and their content 
partners rely on the availability and effectiveness of console access controls in 
determining whether to make their copyrighted works available through such consoles.  
“Absent the access controls, copyright owners would be concerned that their content 
could easily be infringed, and the incentive to make such content available through [video 
consoles] would be greatly diminished.”  Thus, in opponents’ view, the exemption sought 
by EFF would in fact decrease the availability of copyrighted works.
149 
 
Joint Creators report that consumers have purchased over 65 million Xbox 
consoles, 55 million PlayStation 3 consoles, and 95 million Nintendo Wiis.  They state 
that each of these devices (and many others) rely on access controls protected by Section 
1201.
150  Joint Creators assert that some portion of consumers have chosen these devices 
because of the benefits of access controls – such as ensuring the availability of highquality, legitimate content and protection from malware and security threats – and that 
the Register should consider this in evaluating the costs and benefits of exemptions 
proposed by “an extremely small minority of users.”  They argue that consumers and 
developers benefit from the existing robust marketplace, which offers real choices among 
products and services.
151 
 
SCEA’s comments focus on its PS3 console (the dominant example addressed in 
EFF’s proposal).  SCEA confirms that the technological restrictions controlling access to 
the PS3 protect both its firmware and the copyrighted video games that are developed for 
that system.  It described these measures as an “integrated system” that begins with the 
bootloader – the first piece of software to execute when the console is powered on – and 
continues with a series of integrity checks to detect any unauthorized modification of the 
PS3 firmware that could cause harm.  Once the firmware is fully loaded, it acts as a 
technological protection on the video games and other applications that are run on the 
PS3.
152 
 
As explained by SCEA, allowing circumvention of the PS3 access controls would 
mean that the basic security checks could be skipped and the firmware freely modified to 
bypass or eliminate the process by which the video games are authenticated for use on the 
                                                
147 Id. at 2-3. 
148 Id. at 2, 30; C1 (SCEA) at 7 (noting that SCEA owns 15 to 20% of the games for the PS3 platform).  
149 C5 (ESA) at 2-3, 36-37. 
150 R12 (Joint Creators) at 1 -2. 
151 Id. at 2. 
152 C1 (SCEA) at 11-12. 

[PAGE 37]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 34 
console.153  Thus, it would be “virtually certain that successful hackers, under the guise of 
the exemption, will create the tools that enable even novice users to make, distribute, 
download, and play back illegal copies of games.”  SCEA urges that in evaluating EFF’s 
exemption request, “the Register cannot ignore this serious market reality.”154 
 
Throughout their comments, opponents stress piracy as an overriding concern, 
noting that once a user circumvents a console’s security measures – even for an 
ostensibly benign purpose – it becomes a vehicle for unauthorized content.  In their view, 
EFF’s attempt to limit the exemption to interoperability with lawful applications will 
make no difference in practice, because “all known methods for circumventing game 
console [technological protection measures] necessarily eliminate the measures’ ability to 
preclude the play, reproduction and distribution of infringing content.”
155  They further 
assert that “[i]t is not feasible to distinguish between facilitating lawfully acquired 
applications and facilitating applications that are not lawfully acquired.”
156 
 
Opponents take issue with EFF’s argument that the proposed exemption should 
not be concerning because “additional steps” beyond circumvention are needed to play 
pirated content.  ESA points out that EFF does not claim that the circumvention methods 
for the Xbox and Wii require “additional steps” to play pirated content and, in fact, they 
do not.
157  More generally, ESA explains that the hacking packages for consoles either 
require no further applications to enable illegal content, or are made available with any 
additional software that might be required.
158 
 
In support of this last contention, opponents provide documentation of “hacking 
packages” that come bundled with applications to play pirated content.
159  They also note, 
again with supporting materials, that the homebrew channel installed with a popular Wii 
hacking package, HackWii, “automatically includes applications that enable the console 
to play pirated content and is necessarily incapable of distinguishing between pirated 
software and so-called homebrew applications.”160  They point out, with further support 
                                                
153 Id. at 12. 
154 Id. at 2. 
155 C12 (Joint Creators) at 29  (emphasis in original) ; see also C5 (ESA) at 4; T Genetski, May 17, 2012, at 
22. 
156 C1 (SCEA) at 4. 
157 C5 (ESA) at 32. 
158 Id. at 32-33. 
159 Id. at 32 & n.101, Ex. B (examples of websites offering jailbreak methods for the Wii and PS3 as well as 
access to pirated “backup” content).  
160 Id. at 32-33 & nn.102, 103, Ex. E.  As Dylan Rhoads, a senior software engineer and anti -piracy expert 
at Nintendo, explains:  
To my knowledge, virtually all of the hacking packages that are 
available today come bundled with applications that permit users to 
play pirated content.  For example, the HackMii installer package is 
commonly used to hack the Wii home console.  During the process of 
hacking the console, it installs a “Homebrew” channel on the Wii’s 

[PAGE 38]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 35 
in the record, that the “Multiman” backup system referenced by EFF as a “prime 
example” of a useful application enabled by jailbroken PS3s is used “to decrypt and copy 
protected PS3 games so they can be illegally distributed.”161  Similarly, documentary 
evidence submitted by opponents demonstrates that the PS3 FTP file server application 
described by EFF is used as a means to transfer illegal files.
162  Opponents also furnish 
multiple examples of advertisements for jailbreaking services that include (for an all-in 
price) a library of pirated games.
163 
 
Opponents point to online forums and other sources that specifically reference 
George Hotz’s hack of the PS3 – described sympathetically by EFF in its proposal – as 
permitting users to play pirated games and content, and provide representative 
postings.
164  The documentation evidences a broadly shared perception in the gaming 
community that jailbreaking leads to piracy.165  Notably, some of those providing 
commentary made the further observation that such piracy would negatively impact the 
development of new games.166 
 
                                                                                                                                            
home menu through which users can access homebrew gam es and 
applications.  This Homebrew channel includes applications that enable 
the console to play pirated content.  
Id.  Statement 1 ¶ 8 (D Rhoads); see also id. Ex. B at 2, 4 (Wii hacking site that states, “[w]ith the Wii 
Homebrew Channel installed, you wi ll save hundreds, as you can play free games, movies and music,” then 
instructs users to “[d]ownload Wii game(s) from The Pirate Bay.”).  
161 C1 (SCEA) at 41 & n.112; see also C5 (ESA) Ex. C at 1 (downloading of Multiman included as a step 
in web tutorial on “[h]ow to hack PS3 and play pirated games”).  
162 C1 (SCEA) at 41& n.11; C5 (ESA) Ex. C at 2 (instruction to download PS3 FTP file server program to 
hacked console to permit transfer of pirated games). 
163 See, e.g., C5 (ESA) Ex. D at 7 (“NEVER PAY FOR A GAME AGAIN WITH MY SERVICES”), 10 
(“Mod your PsP for free games!”), 11 ($150 package includes 1000 free Super Nintendo Games and 200 
free Wii games), and 19 (offering Wii “upgrading” packages with hundreds of games).  
164 C5 (ESA) at 32 & n.100; see, e.g., id. Ex. B at 22  (“GeoHot, the hacker responsible for publishing the 
key online, may well be ‘totally against piracy’, but the pirates in question are gleefully touting ‘GeoHot’s 
custom firmware’ as their springboard.  D’oh.”), and 24 (“[T]he big deal about this latest [George Hotz] 
hack is that … PS3s will happily boot up pirated game discs or package files and believe they’re 100% 
legit.”).  
165 See, e.g., id. Ex. B at 29 (“Problem is, regardless of intention (aka, Homebrew), the more common use 
will be victomized[ sic] piracy.  Put another way, the gate is open, irrepairably[sic] so ….”), 30 (“The 
majority of the ‘homebrew community’ simply exists for the reason of pirating current games and not 
paying for them.”), 31 (“[E]veryone here knows that its for piracy, no need to hide behind the old ‘dude, I 
swear its only for homebrewzz and eemulatorz … im not a thief dude!’ shitty lie.”), 37 (“Homebrew (which 
always leads to piracy) is cancer and stupid.”), and 39 (“From homebrew piracy is born, there is just no 
way to stop it.  And lets be honest I would rather get free games then buy them.”). 
166 See, e.g., id. Ex. B at 26 (“But when everyone has easy access to free games and nobody pays for them, 
the developers get zero money.  What’s the point of having infinite access t o free games when no developer 
can stay in business to make new ones?”), and 30 (“Developers aren’t going to look at the numbers and just 
assume that a bunch of those people bought the game after pirating it, they are just going to see a bunch of 
people who played the game for free.  Thus they are going to react accordingly….”).  

[PAGE 39]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 36 
SCEA elaborates on the hacking issue by commenting specifically on the events 
surrounding a 2010 breach of its PS3 system.  In that case, hackers announced that they 
had successfully circumvented the technological measures on PS3 firmware, which was 
accomplished by exploiting vulnerabilities in Linux operating in the OtherOS 
environment.167  The hackers stated that they did not endorse or condone piracy.  One 
hacker, however, subsequently published PS3’s encryption keys on the internet.  Almost 
immediately, the keys were used to create jailbreak software to allow unauthorized code 
to be run on PS3 consoles, which in turn permitted the use of illegally made games.
168 
Sony “saw an immediate rise in the number of illegal copies but no increase in homebrew 
development,” while sales of legitimate software “declined dramatically.”
169  As a result 
of the hack, Sony decided it had no choice but to discontinue OtherOS and issued a 
system upgrade that disabled OtherOS functionality for those who wished to maintain 
access to Sony’s PlayStation network.  According to SCEA, since the removal of 
OtherOS, the PS3 has not been successfully hacked.
170 
 
Mindful of the exemption established by the Librarian in the prior proceeding to 
permit jailbreaking of smartphones to render them interoperable with non-approved 
applications, opponents urge that video game consoles are not the equivalent of iPhones 
for purposes of Section 1201.  Opponents argue that, in contrast to Apple’s use of access 
controls on its iPhone in furtherance of a restrictive business model rather than copyright 
interests, the technological measures on game consoles legitimately protect the creation 
and dissemination of copyrighted works by discouraging pirated content and protecting 
creators’ investment in new games.
171  Opponents distinguish the development of a video 
game – a long and intensive process “akin to … motion picture production” involving a 
team of developers that can cost tens of millions of dollars – from the relative ease and 
inexpensiveness of creating a smartphone application.
172  According to opponents, the 
development of new video games would be significantly impaired without reliable 
technological protections to protect developers’ investments.
173  In addition, opponents 
maintain that, based on the evidence, “it is simply not the case that there are thousands of 
independently developed video games,” so the record here is not comparable to the one 
the Register considered in the 2010 smartphone proceeding.
174 
 
                                                
167 Although not stated in its comments, it appears that one of the groups of hackers SCEA references may 
have been George Hotz, against whom it pursued legal action.  See supra note 134. 
168 C1 (SCEA) at 13. 
169 Id. at 13, 29. 
170 Id. at 10. 
171 C5 (ESA) at 5, 24. 
172 C1 (SCEA) at 46-47, 51-52. 
173 Id. at 46-47; C5 (ESA) at 2-3. 
174 C1 (SCEA) at 37, 46 (noting that the total number of active PS3 homebrew developers appears to be ten 
or fewer and, since the beginning of 2011, only a “few dozen” homebrew PS3 games have been released 
(including adaptations of existing games for alternative platforms)); cf. 2010 Recommendation at 85 
(reviewing iPhone statistics).  

[PAGE 40]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 37 
In addition, opponents argue that the proponents of Class 3 have failed to meet 
their burden of establishing that the technological measures protecting video game 
consoles have had or are likely to have a substantial adverse effect on noninfringing uses 
of console computer programs.  They assert that the uses identified by EFF as being 
harmed by console manufacturers’ access restrictions – the ability to conduct scientific 
research on gaming consoles and the ability to run alternative Linux software on consoles 
in order to develop homebrew applications – are insufficient to support the exemption 
sought.175 
 
More specifically, opponents point out that EFF identifies only a “handful” of 
researchers who have been or might be affected by Sony’s discontinuation of OtherOS 
(and the ability to install Linux) on the PS3, which researchers are apparently interested 
in harnessing less expensive computer power rather than engaging in criticism or 
commentary of copyrighted works.
176  They further note that EFF could not cite “a single 
example of a researcher who has sought to use a PS3 for research purposes and been 
denied access by Sony.”
177 
 
With respect to the need to jailbreak consoles to permit the operation of Linuxbased homebrew programs, opponents contend that the record is similarly meager.  They 
note that while EFF’s request focuses on the PS3, the homebrew community for that 
device is small, as evidenced by the fact that less than one-tenth of one percent of PS3 
users (fewer than 2,000 in all) have made use of the PS3’s OtherOS feature.
178  In any 
event, they say, there are over 4,000 devices on which Linux can be run without the need 
for circumvention, and homebrew games and applications can be played on a wide array 
of open platform devices.179 
 
Opponents further observe that each of the three major video game console 
manufacturers has a program to support independent developers in creating and 
publishing compatible games.
180  For example, SCEA licenses independent developers 
with good ideas for games – “no matter how small” – and has a program to provide 
funding for small developers.
181  Nintendo offers an inexpensive program to develop 
games for its Wii console, without circumvention, that has generated over 300 video 
games.  Opponents also point to proponents’ concession that independent developers are 
able to publish games “with relative ease” through Microsoft’s development program for 
                                                
175 C5 (ESA) at 9; C12 (Joint Creators) at  26-28. 
176 C5 (ESA) at 9-13; see also T Hoffman, May 17, 2012, at 48 -49 (confirming same).  Opponents also 
make note of the Folding@Home projecting, in which 20,000 PS3s are actively involved.  Id. at 32; C1 
(SCEA) at 42. 
177 C5 (ESA) at 9-11. 
178 Id. at 10. 
179 Id. at 13-14. 
180 Id. at 14-15. 
181 C1 (SCEA) at 42-43. 

[PAGE 41]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 38 
the Xbox 360, and note that there are over 2,000 “indie” titles currently available for the 
Xbox console that do not require hacking to access.182 
 
Opponents also dispute proponents’ suggestion that circumvention is necessary to 
repair broken game consoles, explaining that “[e]ach console maker offers authorized 
repair options.  Such services are available free of charge for consoles that remain under 
warranty and for a nominal fee thereafter.”
183  
 
Taking issue the with the Register’s 2010 conclusion that Section 1201(f) 
supported a finding of fair use with respect to the jailbreaking of smartphones,
184 
opponents argue that, in any case, that fair use finding does not apply here.  They seek to 
distinguish the Sega and Connectix decisions on the ground that the copying in those 
cases was limited to intermediate copying for the purpose of reverse engineering; unlike 
in the case of console jailbreaking – which makes only minimal alterations to the code to 
disable access controls and then reuses the code in its “slightly altered” form – the final 
products in Sega and Connectix did not include protected expression from the 
originals.185  Opponents argue under the first fair use factor that the use in question is not 
a transformative one in light of the “abundant evidence that the primary reason many 
users seek to hack the [consoles] is not to create new and different works, but to avoid 
paying the customary cost of existing works or devices – which courts have recognized as 
a commercial use.”
186  With respect to the second fair use factor, they point out that 
console code protects highly expressive copyrighted works.187  They assert that a finding 
of fair use based on the fact that only de minimis changes are made to a protected work 
turns the third fair use factor (amount and substantiality of the portion used) on its 
head.188  As for the fourth factor, they assert that if access controls can be legally 
circumvented, this will decrease the market for legitimate content and, in turn, decrease 
demand for the circumvented firmware.
189 
 
Finally, opponents urge that even if proponents have met their burden of 
demonstrating a substantial adverse effect flowing from console access controls, the 
proposed exemption does not meet the multifactor test of Section 1201.  According to 
proponents, “hacking a [console] necessarily enables piracy,” while maintaining the 
integrity of video game consoles has the effect of increasing – not decreasing – the 
                                                
182 C5 (ESA) at 14-15. 
183 Letter from Christian Genetski, Senior Vice President & General Counsel, ESA, to David O. Carson, 
General Counsel, U.S. Copyright Office, at 3.  
184 C5 (ESA) at 40.  Opponents contend that, in enacting Section 1201(f), Congress “clearly defined the 
outer bounds of when circumvention is permissible,” and that the Register should not deviate from 
Congress’ determination through a fair use analysis.  Id. at 40-41. 
185 Id. at 19-21. 
186 Id. at 22-23. 
187 Id. at 25. 
188 Id. at 25-27. 
189 Id. at 28. 

[PAGE 42]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 39 
availability of copyright works.  Proponents assert that granting the proposed exemption 
would cause developers to withdraw works from the video game marketplace, with the 
net result of fewer copyrighted works being created and less access to works for the 
public.190 
 
3. Discussion 
 
 Proponents of the Class 3 exemption bear the burden of establishing, by a 
preponderance of the evidence, that as a result of the prohibition embodied in Section 
1201(a)(1), they are, or are likely to be in the next three years, adversely affected in their 
ability to make noninfringing uses of the proposed class of works.
191  Proponents invoke 
the Register’s 2010 determination in favor of an exception to permit the jailbreaking of 
smartphones to render them interoperable with lawfully obtained applications in support 
of their proposed exemption to permit circumvention of video game consoles.  But in 
order to obtain an exemption, a proponent cannot expect to ride the coattails of an 
exemption granted in an earlier proceeding for a different – or even the same – class of 
works.  Rather, the Register must determine, based on a de novo review of the current 
record evidence pertaining to that class, whether an exception to Congress’ default rule 
prohibiting circumvention of technological measures is warranted for the succeeding 
three years.   
 
a. Noninfringing uses 
 
 Before turning to whether proponents have demonstrated a substantial adverse 
impact on the activities they seek to protect, it is important to consider whether 
proponents have satisfied their burden of demonstrating that the uses in question are, in 
fact, noninfringing.   
 
Although, as drafted, proponents’ proposed class would permit copying and 
modification of console computer code to permit interoperability with any type of 
lawfully obtained application, proponents focus principally on two categories of use to 
justify their request: scientific research and homebrew activities, which include the 
development of video games and other applications.  Based on these, proponents assert 
that the copying and modification of computer programs to render them interoperable 
with independently created software and applications constitutes a “transformative, 
personal, noncommercial” fair use.
192  Proponents rely heavily on the Ninth Circuit’s 
                                                
190 Id. at 27-28, 30-31, 34. 
191 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C).  
192 Apparently, proponents do not seek to rely on Section 117, which permits the lawful owner of a 
computer program to copy or adapt it as an “essential step” in using the program with a machine, so long as 
it is not used in any other manner.  17 U.S.C. § 117(a).  In a footnote, SCEA urges that Section 117 is 
inapplicable, in part because, in Sony’s view, console owners do not own the console software.  See C1 
(SCEA) at 32 n.83;  see also T Genetski and Metalitz, May 17, 2012, at 64 -65 (observing that proponents 
have not invoked Section 117).  The Register concludes, in any event, that there is insufficient evidence in 
the record (including in relation to the question of ownership) to support a finding that Section 117 would 
immunize the activities in question.   

[PAGE 43]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 40 
decisions in Sega and Connectix, in which the reverse engineering of video game 
software was held to be a fair use.193  They also point to the Register’s determination in 
the 2010 rulemaking proceeding that circumvention of an iPhone’s restrictions to permit 
it to run non-Apple-approved applications was a fair use, asserting that the same should 
hold true here.   
  
 Section 107 provides that “the fair use of a copyrighted work …for purposes such 
as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching …, scholarship, or research” is not a 
violation of copyright law and sets forth a four-factor framework for purposes of 
determining whether a particular use is fair.
194   Fair use is a fact-specific inquiry 
requiring case-by-case consideration.195  While the Register’s legal analysis of fair use 
considerations in the smartphone context is somewhat relevant, it is not the end of the 
story.  As evidenced by the record in this proceeding, video game consoles present a 
different set of circumstances – circumstances that must be considered de novo with 
respect to the class of works proposed.  
  
 In the case of the iPhone, the Register determined that the alteration of the 
phone’s firmware (fewer than 50 bytes of code out of 8 million, or 1/160,000
th of the 
work) was not transformative in light of the modest modifications made to the code 
which, while allowing the use of non-Apple-approved applications, did not alter the 
fundamental purpose of the work – i.e., to operate the phone essentially as intended.
196  
Nonetheless, drawing on Congress’ endorsement of certain reverse engineering practices 
in Section 1201(f), as well as the Ninth Circuit’s holdings in Sega and Connectix, the 
Register concluded that making such modifications for purposes of rendering the 
iPhone’s firmware interoperable with independently created applications was a favored 
use under the law, as well as a personal and noncommercial one.
197  In arriving at this 
conclusion, the Register also relied upon compelling evidence that Apple’s objections to 
installation of unapproved software “had nothing to do with its interests as the owner of 
copyrights in the computer programs embodied in the iPhone, and running the 
unapproved applications has no adverse effect on those interests.  Rather, its objections 
relate to its interests as a manufacturer and distributor of a device.”
198  That is, Apple’s 
access controls served to promote a restrictive business model rather than meaningful 
copyright interests. 
  
 As for video game consoles, the record is different.  Although EFF asserts that the 
console manufacturers’ access controls serve only to protect a business model rather than 
bona fide copyright interests, they have not made a persuasive case in this regard.  Unlike 
                                                
193 See supra note 125. 
194 17 U.S.C. § 107. 
195 Campbell v. Acuff-Rose, 510 U.S. 569 (1994). 
196 2010 Recommendation at 93 -95, 97. 
197 Id. at 95-96. 
198 Id. at 82, 93. 

[PAGE 44]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 41 
in the case of iPhones, the record demonstrates that access controls on gaming consoles 
protect not only the console firmware, but the video games and applications that run on 
the console as well.  The evidence also shows that video games are far more difficult and 
complex to produce than smartphone applications, requiring teams of developers and 
potential investments in the tens of millions of dollars.  The manufacturers themselves are 
the creators and owners of a significant portion of these copyrighted works.  In sum, 
while the access controls at issue may serve to further manufacturers’ business interests, 
it is true that they also protect highly valuable expressive works, many of which are 
owned by the manufacturers, in addition to console firmware itself. 
  
 For this and other reasons, the fair use analysis for video consoles diverges from 
that in the smartphone context.   
  
 The first factor to be considered under Section 107 is the “purpose and character” 
of the use, including whether it is commercial in nature, and whether it is 
“transformative” in that it “adds something new, with a further purpose of different 
character, altering the first with new expression, meaning or message.”199  In the case 
where a console as jailbroken to play independent gaming or entertainment content 
(whether pirated or not), the use would not appear to be transformative.  The use is not 
for purposes of comment or criticism; rather, the circumvented console code is serving 
the same fundamental purpose as is served by the unbroken code.  
  
 When console computer code is circumvented for purposes of scientific research, 
however, the use clearly departs from the original purpose of the work.  Moreover, 
research is an expressly favored purpose under Section 107.
200  EFF does not provide any 
technical detail concerning the nature or extent of the modifications required to create a 
cluster of PS3s for purposes of scientific research, but it is possible that the alterations are 
more meaningful than in the smartphone context.  In any event, the use of console code 
for research purposes would appear to be a transformative one.  Similarly, to the extent a 
video console is being converted into a backup device or file server (setting aside for the 
moment the question of whether the purpose is to facilitate infringement, as opponents 
assert), this, too, could be considered transformative in nature.  Such a use adds “a further 
purpose” to the copyrighted work.  Finally, it would appear that, when undertaken by 
individual device owners for lawful purposes, at least some such transformative uses may 
be personal and noncommercial in nature.
 201  
  
 In sum, as to the first fair use consideration, the Register notes that in general, 
interoperability is a favored purpose under the law.  Certain of the research activities and 
                                                
199 Id. at 94-95; 17 U.S.C. § 107(1).  
200 17 U.S.C. § 107. 
201 By contrast, we note that the copying of copyrighted works to avoid paying the customary price of those 
works – i.e., piracy – has been recognized by courts to be a commercial use.  See, e.g., Harper & Row, 
Publishers, Inc.  v. Nation Enters. , 471 U.S. 539, 562 (1985) (concern is “not whether the sole motive of 
the use is monetary gain but whether the user stands to profit from exploitation of the copyrighted material 
without paying the custo mary price”).     

[PAGE 45]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 42 
functional applications that proponents claim would be enabled by circumvention may 
well constitute transformative, and possibly personal and noncommercial, uses.  On the 
other hand, jailbreaking a console to play games and other entertainment content (even if 
lawfully acquired) is not a transformative use.  The Register concludes that, while the 
results are mixed, the first fair use factor offers some support for an exemption.202 
  
 The second factor of the fair use analysis requires the Register to examine the 
nature of the copyrighted work for which the exemption is sought.  Even though it may 
well include creative elements, the record here indicates that video console computer 
code exists largely for the purpose of playing other, expressive works, and is to a 
significant degree functional in nature.
203  The second fair use factor therefore slightly 
favors the requested exemption.   
  
 Factor three requires the Register to consider the amount and substantiality of the 
work used.  Proponents do not offer much in this regard.  In the case of the iPhone, the 
evidence indicated that after being minimally altered, the vast majority of jailbroken 
firmware was reused.  There is no similar showing here.  In making its case with respect 
to factor three, EFF observes merely that the amount copied for purposes of 
interoperability will vary.  This would appear to make sense, as different gaming 
platforms presumably require different modifications, and the adaptation of console code 
for the purpose of linking PS3s for research purposes, for example, could be quite a 
different undertaking from the alteration of the same code to play non-vendor-approved 
games.  But the record is devoid of meaningful information about the extent of copying 
and amount of modification that is required for the proffered uses. 
  
 As the Register determined in the 2010 rulemaking, extensive copying, for 
purposes of interoperability, while disfavored under the Section 107 analysis, does not 
necessarily defeat fair use.
204   Here, however, the Register has no basis in the record to 
assess this question.  Proponents have not met their burden of establishing the degree of 
copying or types of modification required for the noninfringing uses they seek to enable.  
The Register therefore concludes that this factor is indeterminate. 
 
 Factor four considers the effect of the use on the potential market for or value of 
the copyrighted work.  As articulated by the Supreme Court in Campbell v. Acuff-Rose, 
this requires us to consider “not only the extent of market harm caused by the particular 
actions of the [user], but also ‘whether unrestricted and widespread conduct of the sort 
                                                
202 In arriving at this conclusion, we are mindful that opponents have offered a substantial amount of 
evidence demonstrating that circumvention of console access controls, even when initially undertaken for a 
lawful purpose, is inextricabl y linked with piracy – certainly not a favored purpose under the fair use 
analysis.  The Register believes that the piracy concern is most appropriately addressed in the context of the 
fourth fair use factor (market harm) and under the first statutory fact or of Section 1201(a)(1) (availability of 
copyrighted works).  
203 See Sega, 977 F.2d at 24 -26. 
204 See 2010 Recommendation at 97 -100. 

[PAGE 46]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 43 
engaged in by the [proponent of fair use] . . . would result in a substantially adverse 
impact on the potential market.’”205   
  
 Proponents’ assertion that the circumvention of console access controls does not 
cause market harm essentially boils down to the proposition that because the Register 
determined in 2010 that the jailbreaking of smartphones does not cause market harm, 
there is no harm here.
206  As expressed by proponents:  “The Register concluded in the 
previous rulemaking that the fourth factor was not designed to protect manufacturers 
from potential incidental damage, such as security concerns or device integrity, that 
might arise from users jailbreaking their devices.”
207  As explained above, such a 
generalized and retrospective approach is inadequate in light of Congress’ directive that 
the Librarian conduct a de novo review of the current evidence in each triennial 
proceeding to determine whether an exemption is warranted. 
  
 The record here shows that access controls on video game consoles not only 
preserve the integrity of the consoles, but also ensure the legitimacy of the content that is 
played on those devices.  Opponents make a strong case, supported by substantial 
evidence in the record, that the circumvention of console restrictions – even when 
initially undertaken for salutary purposes – is inextricably linked to and tends to foster 
piracy.
208  That is, once circumvented and altered to permit unauthorized applications, the 
console computer code does not discriminate between lawful and unlawful content.  The 
record includes multiple examples of jailbreaking packages that are bundled with 
unauthorized content or the ability to access it.  Notably, a popular homebrew channel of 
what is apparently the most active independent development community, Wii-based 
homebrewers, also facilitates access to illegal content.  Numerous online comments 
posted by gaming enthusiasts suggest that once a gaming platform is compromised, 
piracy ensues.   
  
 This effect is well illustrated by the events surrounding the circumvention of 
Sony’s PS3 platform.  In that instance, the hackers publicly stated that they did not 
condone piracy.  But once the fruits of their labors were published online, software 
quickly became available that permitted illegally-made games to be run on jailbroken 
consoles, with a corresponding rise in illegal copies – and with no increase in 
independent development.  As a result of the circumvention, Sony found it necessary to 
replace the compromised PS3 platform with a new one that eliminated the vulnerability.   
  
                                                
205 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 590. 
206 See P3 (EFF) at 15-16. 
207 Id. at 15-16. 
208 It is possible that, in the case of scientific researc hers or others operating in a relatively isolated setting, 
some sort of confidentiality requirement could be imposed in an effort to mitigate such an effect, but 
proponents have not limited their proposal in this way (and it is not clear that they would want to).  
Moreover, even if a violator faced legal consequences after the fact, the publication of a circumvention 
methodology could not be undone.  

[PAGE 47]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 44 
 In short, opponents have provided compelling, uncontradicted evidence that 
circumvention of access controls to permit interoperability of video game consoles – 
regardless of purpose – has the effect of diminishing the value of, and impairing the 
market for, the affected code, because the compromised code can no longer serve as a 
secure platform for the development and distribution of legitimate content.209  The record 
also supports a finding that the more widespread the practice of circumvention is, the 
greater the negative consequences. 
  
 Instead of countering this evidence with a factual showing to prove opponents 
wrong, EFF instead invokes the limiting language in its proposal to assert that such uses 
would not be permitted.
210  While this is true as far as it goes, it does not satisfy 
proponents’ obligation to address the real-world impact of their proposed exemption.  
Accordingly, the Register finds that factor four weighs against a finding of fair use. 
 
Reviewing the question of fair use in its totality, the Register finds that factor one 
is mixed, factor two slightly favors the use, factor three is indeterminate, and factor four 
weighs somewhat strongly against a finding of fair use.  Overall, the Register finds that 
proponents have failed to fulfill their obligation to establish persuasively that fair use can 
serve as a basis for the exemption they seek.   
 
Finally, with respect to the question of noninfringing uses, proponents briefly 
mention a third type of arguably protected activity, the repair of outmoded gaming 
consoles.  Such a use of console code could fall within Section 117(c), a statutory 
exception which permits the owner of a machine to make or authorize the making of a 
copy of a computer program for purposes of maintenance or repair.
211  To the extent 
console repair activity falls within the Section 117(c) exception, such an activity would 
be noninfringing or it might be a fair use of the code.  But, as discussed below, 
proponents have failed to meet their burden with respect to this use, which is presented 
only in hypothetical terms.  They do not document a single example of an actual repair 
(or forgone repair), or offer analysis as to why the activity should be exempted. 
                                                
209 Of course, piracy also diminishes the value of the copyrighted games and applications that are pirated, a 
subject that we discuss below under the first of the statutory factors.  
210 EFF also dismisses opponents’ piracy concerns as the type of concern rejected by the Second Circuit in 
Consumers Union, Inc. v. Gen. Signal Corp., 724 F.3d 1044 (2d Cir. 1983), where the court held that the 
alleged damage to the reputation of Consumers Union as an unbiased tester of consumer products resulting 
from the defendant’s quotation of plaintiff’s copyrighted report to promote defendant’s product was not a 
cognizable injury under the fourth fair use factor because it did not focus on the potential market for or 
value of the copyrighted work.  Id. at 1051.  Here, by contrast, proponents have made a substantial showing 
that piracy causes harm to the market for and value of the con sole computer code itself.  Lexmark Int’l, Inc. 
v. Static Control Components, Inc. , 387 F.3d 522 (6th Cir. 2004), also relied upon by proponents, is 
likewise inapposite, as that court found that, based on the record below, the printer cartridge “lock -out” 
code allegedly infringed by the defendant did not qualify for copyright protection and, moreover, was 
distinguishable from the protectable video console authentication code at issue in a different case.  Id. at 
537-42, 543.  
211 17 U.S.C. § 117(c).  

[PAGE 48]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 45 
 
b. Adverse impact 
 
Even if proponents had satisfied their burden of establishing noninfringing uses, 
they fail to demonstrate that video game console access controls have or are likely to 
have a substantial adverse impact on such uses. 
 
The record confirms that manufacturers’ technological restrictions on video game 
consoles effectively control access to video game firmware and software, and are 
therefore subject to the prohibition of Section 1201(a)(1).
212  Proponents identify two 
broad categories of activities that are threatened by the resulting prohibition – scientific 
research and homebrew software development – both of which, proponents say, depend 
upon the ability to circumvent console restrictions to render console computer code 
interoperable with other programs.  EFF offers no statistics as to how many video 
consoles have been jailbroken by consumers.  Commenter Huang, citing “personal 
correspondence with HBC developers,” asserts that over two million users have installed 
the Nintendo Wii homebrew channel and, based on a website source, that there are “at 
least” hundreds of thousands of Xbox users who run the XBMC application and millions 
more who have downloaded the same app for their PCs.”
213  Even crediting this 
unsubstantiated information, the record does not say what proportion of these users took 
these steps to engage in scientific research or homebrew activities, as opposed to the 
consumption of unauthorized content. 
  
 With respect to scientific research activities, it appears that in recent years there 
have been three academic research projects and one military project that have employed 
                                                
212 In their comments and at the rulemaking hearing, Joint Creators urge that proponents have failed to meet 
their threshold burden of establishing that the statutory exception to the prohibition on circumvention that 
permits certain types of reverse engineering, Sec tion 1201(f), does not apply.  In proposing Class 3, EFF 
mentions Section 1201(f) in passing as lending support for its argument that the circumvention of console 
access controls to achieve interoperability is a transformative, and fair, use.  Proponents, however, do not 
analyze the applicability of Section 1201(f) or take a position as to whether it already protects the activities 
they assert are being impaired.  If it did protect these activities, of course, there would be no adverse effect 
under Section 1201(a)(1) and no need to consider an exemption within the current rulemaking.   
 
 Section 1201(f) creates a statutory exception to Section 1201(a)(1)’s prohibition on circumvention 
for certain reverse engineering activities.  The Register was faced with a n analogous question of statutory 
interpretation concerning the applicability of Section 1201(f) to circumvention of smartphone restrictions in 
the 2010 Rulemaking.  There, the Register concluded that “an iPhone owner who ‘jailbreaks’ does not fall 
within the four corners of the statutory exemption of Section 1201(f)” because the owner “is not the person 
who has ‘identif[ied] and analyz[ed] those elements of the [phone’s software] program that are necessary to 
achieve interoperability.’” 2010 Recommendation  at 94-95 & n.318.  Again, here the proposed exemption 
is one of general applicability that would permit anyone to jailbreak a video console – not just those who 
develop a jailbreaking process through “identification and analysis” of programmatic elements.   There is, 
then, at a minimum, significant doubt as to whether Section 1201(f) would immunize the circumvention 
activities in which proponents seek to engage.  The Register therefore proceeds with the analysis of 
Proposed Class 3 based on the assumption t hat 1201(f) is inapplicable.  
213 C15 (Huang) at 2. 

[PAGE 49]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 46 
clustered PS3 game consoles in lieu of other, more expensive computing alternatives.214  
There is nothing in the record to suggest that the PS3 computer code was itself the 
ultimate object of the research efforts identified by EFF.  Rather, the PS3s were 
employed as a means to a laudable – but unrelated – end that could also have been 
achieved using an alternative (albeit more costly) computing system.  In addition, the 
record suggests that Sony has cooperated with at least some of these research initiatives; 
indeed, EFF confirmed at one of the hearings in this proceeding that it is unaware of any 
instance in which Sony turned away a researcher seeking to use PS3s for a scientific 
endeavor.  EFF does not offer any other examples of scientific research conducted on a 
gaming platform other than the PS3.  Nor does it cite any specific research project that 
has been forgone as a result of an inability to circumvent console restrictions. 
 
As to the use of video consoles for homebrew activities, the record is uneven.  
Although proponents do not focus on the technical aspects of Nintendo’s Wii in their 
proposal, most of the homebrew games and other applications they identify appear to 
have been generated for circumvented Wiis; EFF notes 450 plus offerings available on 
the WiiBrew.org website.  As for the PS3, the record is thin; proponents identify fewer 
than twenty games and a handful of applications, including the “Multiman” backup utility 
and an FTP file server adaptation (the legitimacy of both of which are questioned by 
opponents).  With respect to the Xbox 360, EFF concedes that there is no significant 
homebrew activity.  There appears to be a smattering of activity on legacy systems and 
handheld devices.  The record provides scant information as to how popular any of these 
applications are.  One independently developed application is deemed “remarkably 
successful” with “thousands” of users; presumably others have had fewer.  
  
 Concerning the use of video game consoles to operate Linux software generally, 
the record shows that less than 1/10th of one percent of PS3 users availed themselves of 
the (now discontinued) OtherOS option, which permitted users to run Linux on their 
PS3s.  At the same time, there are over 4,000 alternative devices on which Linux can be 
run without the need for circumvention.  Such devices can be used to develop and run 
Linux-based video games and other applications.   
 
According to ESA, the three leading video game manufacturers have sold over 65 
million Xbox consoles, 55 million PS3 consoles, and 95 million Nintendo Wiis.  
Undoubtedly, some of these machines are no longer in use.  Nonetheless, these numbers 
provide some context in which to assess whether Section 1201(a)(1) is substantially 
interfering with the noninfringing uses described by proponents in support of Proposed 
Class 3.   
 
The Register concludes that proponents have failed to establish that the 
prohibition on circumvention, as applied to video game console code, is causing 
substantial adverse effects.  With respect to scientific research, a small number of 
research projects involving only one type of gaming console, the PS3, suggest a de 
minimis impact, if any.  This conclusion is reinforced by record evidence indicating that 
                                                
214 One of these, Folding@home, apparently does not require circumvention of the PS3 console.  

[PAGE 50]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 47 
Sony has in fact cooperated with and been a supporter of research efforts, including 
research conducted on PS3 consoles.  Moreover, the record shows that alternative 
computing resources for such projects are available in the marketplace.  The fact that the 
alternatives are (or at one time were) more expensive than assembling a group of PS3s is 
simply an economic reality that does not provide the basis for an exemption.  
 
Nor does the record support a finding that Section 1201(a)(1) is having a 
substantial adverse impact on lawful homebrew activities.  The most significant level of 
homebrew activity identified by EFF appears to have occurred in relation to the Wii, but 
the record is sparse with respect to the PS3, as well as for legacy and handheld devices, 
and evidently nonexistent for the Xbox 360.  Nor is there much indication in the record as 
to the level of demand for such homebrew programs as there are.  It seems that at least 
some homebrew applications attract only thousands of users, or fewer, from the tens of 
millions of console owners.   
 
Most importantly, however, it is apparent from the record that independent 
development of video games and other applications can be pursued on thousands of other 
Linux-based devices and other platforms, as well as through various programs offered by 
the console manufacturers themselves, which appear to draw participants even though 
there may be participation fees.  As the Register has frequently stated in the Section 1201 
context, “‘mere inconveniences … do not rise to the level of a substantial adverse impact’ 
on noninfringing uses.”
215  Those who wish to develop and play homebrew games and 
applications have abundant alternatives to circumvention. 
 
Finally, as noted above, proponents have offered no factual basis in support of 
their suggestion that users are having difficulty repairing their consoles as a result of 
Section 1201(a)(1).  Proponents fail to document any actual instances of users seeking to 
make repairs.  Moreover, opponents state that console owners can have their devices 
repaired by the manufacturer for free or, if no longer under warranty, for a reasonable 
fee; proponents do not dispute this assertion.  On this record, the repair concern appears 
to be purely speculative.  Indeed, when questioned at one of the rulemaking hearings 
about the need for an exemption to repair broken consoles, counsel for lead proponent 
EFF candidly acknowledged that she didn’t “know the details.”
216   
 
c. Statutory factors 
 
 Proponents argue that the significance of the statutory factors delineated in 
Section 1201(a)(1)(C) is “diminished” in the context of video game consoles because, in 
their view, console access controls are deployed to limit the ability to run third-party 
applications, which is “a business decision that has nothing whatsoever to do with the 
interests protected by copyright.”
217  The Register does not agree. 
  
                                                
215 2010 Recommendation at 223 & n.731.  
216 T Hoffman, May 17, 2012, at 63 -64; see also C15 (A Huang) at 1; P3 (EFF) a t 23. 
217 P3 (EFF) at 34. 

[PAGE 51]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 48 
 The first statutory factor asks the Librarian to consider the impact of the 
challenged technological measure on the availability for use of copyrighted works.   
  
 The Register concludes that console access controls encourage the development 
and dissemination of highly creative copyrighted works by facilitating secure platforms 
for the development and distribution of video games and other applications.  In addition 
to artwork, graphics and sound effects, a sophisticated video game may include storyline, 
character development, voiceovers, music and other expressive elements.  Such a work is 
far more challenging and expensive to create than the typical smartphone application, for 
example; like a motion picture, it involves a team of creators and may require funding in 
the millions of dollars.  It is difficult to imagine that one would choose to make such an 
investment without some hope that it could be recouped by offering the resulting product 
through channels that provide some measure of protection against unauthorized copying 
and distribution. 
  
 Homebrew activities conducted on circumvented platforms also yield new 
copyrightable works.  As discussed above, however, such activities may be pursued on 
myriad alternative devices and platforms without resorting to circumvention – including, 
in the case of gaming applications, through manufacturer-sanctioned development 
programs. 
  
 Nor is there any evidence in the record to suggest that users’ access to 
copyrighted works is negatively impacted by an inability to repair their consoles. 
 
 On balance, it appears that console access controls, because they encourage the 
creation and distribution of valuable expressive works and do not foreclose independent 
channels of creative development, have the effect of increasing, rather than decreasing, 
the availability of copyrighted works.      
  
 The second statutory factor considers the impact of access controls on the 
availability of works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational purposes.  This 
factor appears to be of limited relevance in the context of video game console code; the 
Register agrees with proponents that it is neutral.218 
  
 The third factor addresses the impact of the technological restriction on criticism, 
comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship or research.   
  
 Proponents cite a small number of examples of scientific research projects that 
have been facilitated by one particular gaming platform, the Sony PS3.  Researchers have 
been able to link together PS3s to function as high-performance computers.  In these few 
cases, resourceful scientists chose to use PS3s in lieu of more expensive market 
alternatives.  There is no showing, however, that any research project has been unable to 
proceed due to a console access control.  In fact, Sony has supported research efforts and 
proponents acknowledge that they are unaware of any instance in which Sony has turned 
                                                
218 Id. at 34. 

[PAGE 52]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 49 
away a researcher.  In sum, it does not appear that the prohibition on circumvention is 
having a negative impact on scientific research efforts, and there is no showing with 
respect to the other favored activities referenced in the third statutory factor. 
  
 Factor four of the statutory test concerns the effect of circumvention of access 
controls on the market for or value of copyrighted works. 
  
 As discussed above in connection with the fourth fair use factor, the record 
demonstrates that, due to the particular characteristics of the video game marketplace, the 
circumvention of access controls protecting a console computer program so that it can be 
copied and modified for the purpose of enabling unauthorized applications has the effect 
of decreasing the market for, and value of, that program, as it can no longer serve to 
facilitate a secure gaming platform.  Further, by enabling the ability to obtain and play 
pirated games and other unauthorized content, the dismantling of console access controls 
undermines the value of legitimate copyrighted works in the marketplace, many of which 
require a substantial investment of creative and financial resources to create.   
  
 Proponents urge that piracy is an irrelevant consideration with respect to Class 3 
as the exemption they seek is only for purposes of allowing interoperability with 
“lawfully obtained applications.”  But the Register cannot ignore the factual record 
before her.  Even if piracy is not the initial or intended purpose for circumvention and 
modification of console software, the record substantiates opponents’ assessment that in 
the case of video games, console jailbreaking leads to a higher level of infringing activity.  
Notably, the uncontradicted evidence establishing the relationship between 
circumvention and piracy distinguishes the case of video consoles from that of 
smartphones, where the record did not support the same finding. 219  It also suggests that 
the restriction limiting Class 3 to “lawfully obtained” applications – which the Register 
has found effective in some other contexts – does not provide adequate assurance here.  
Simply to suggest, as proponents do, that unlawful uses are outside the scope of the 
exemption and therefore of no concern is not a persuasive answer.  
  
 Finally, it is important to consider any additional factors that may be appropriate 
in evaluating the request for an exemption.  In this regard, proponents assert that, as the 
Register determined in the case of the Apple iPhone, the access controls at issue here 
exist to serve the manufacturer’s business objectives rather than genuine copyright 
interests.   
  
                                                
219 Apple did make the argument that circumvention of the iPhone access controls would facilitate piracy, 
but the Register did not find this argument compelling based on the record before her.  See 2010 
Recommendation at 95 (“The fact that a jailbroken [iPhone] might be used to play pirated content hardly 
makes the purpose and character of the use here … a disfavored use.”) (emphasis added).  The Register 
observed that the concern that an exemption would expose copyrighted  content residing on smartphone 
handsets to be exposed to unlawful copyright and distribution was without foundation, as “no factual basis 
for such speculation has been presented.”  Id. at 102.  Here, by contrast, the showing with respect to piracy 
is compelling, and cannot be dismissed.   

[PAGE 53]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 50 
 Proponents are correct that the access controls protecting video game console 
code facilitate a business model – as many technological restrictions do.  But here, unlike 
what the record showed in relation to smartphones in the 2010 proceeding, that is not the 
sole purpose.  Console access controls protect not only the integrity of the console code, 
but the copyrighted works that run on the consoles.  In so doing, they provide important 
incentives to create video games and other content for consoles, and thus play a critical 
role in the development and dissemination of highly innovative copyrighted works.   
4. NTIA comments 
 
NTIA “supports the innovative spirit epitomized by independent developers and 
researchers whose needs proponents contemplate in this class,”220 but notes that “the 
evidence in the record is insufficient to support the considerable breadth of the proposed 
class.”221  NTIA asserts that the record is unclear with respect to the need for an 
exemption to enable software interoperability, and that there is compelling evidence that 
there are reasonable alternatives available for research purposes.
222  NTIA “is also 
cognizant of the proposal’s likely negative impact on the underlying business model that 
has enabled significant growth and innovation in the video game industry.”
223 
 
Although NTIA does not support the exemption as requested by the proponents, it 
does support an exemption that is limited to allow videogame console owners to repair or 
replace hardware components, or to “obtain unlicensed repairs when the console is out of 
warranty or when the console and authorized replacement parts are no longer on the 
market.”
224  Such a narrowly crafted exemption, asserts NTIA, “would not undermine 
console manufacturers’ existing business models or hinder innovation in the video game 
industry.”
225 
 
As explained above, the Register finds that the record lacks any factual basis upon 
which to recommend the designation of a class, even one that is limited to repair 
activities, as suggested by NTIA in its letter.
226 
 
5. Recommendation 
 
 The Register finds that the evidentiary record fails to support a finding that the 
inability to circumvent access controls on video game consoles for purposes of rendering 
them interoperable with independent software applications has, or over the course of the 
                                                
220 NTIA Letter at 6. 
221 Id. (citation omitted). 
222 Id. 
223 Id. 
224 Id. at 7. 
225 Id. 
226 NTIA relies on comments submitted by Huang in support of an exemption for repairs, but, as explained 
above, Huang offers only hypothetical asse rtions without any specific evidence.  See id. nn.39 & 40. 

[PAGE 54]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 51 
next three years will likely have, a substantial adverse impact on the ability to make 
noninfringing uses of console computer programs.  The Register therefore declines to 
recommend the adoption of Proposed Class 3.   

[PAGE 55]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 52 
 
D. Proposed Class 4:  Personal computing devices – software 
interoperability 
 
Proponent Software Freedom Law Center (“SFLC”), joined by other commenting 
parties, proposes that the Register recommend the following class:  
 
Computer programs that enable the installation and 
execution of lawfully obtained software on a personal 
computing device, where circumvention is performed by or 
at the request of the device’s owner. 
 
1. Proponents’ case 
 
Lead proponent SFLC, supported by others, including FSF, Mozilla Corporation 
(“Mozilla”), SaurikIT, New Yorkers for Fair Use (“NYFU”), and Huang, seeks an 
exemption to permit the circumvention of access controls on computer programs on 
personal computing devices to enable the installation of other software – including 
alternative operating systems – when that software is lawfully obtained.  The exemption 
would allow circumvention by the device owner or by someone acting at the device 
owner’s request. 
 
a. Background 
 
SFLC, a nonprofit legal services organization dedicated to “protecting and 
advancing free software,”
227 explains that there are two broad categories of access 
controls on personal computing devices:  “application locks,” which effectively prevent 
users from installing certain software applications, and “OS locks,” which effectively 
prevent users from installing replacement operating systems.228  Citing the Librarian’s 
2010 exemption to permit jailbreaking of smartphones to enable interoperability, SFLC 
asserts that “the restrictions addressed by the [smartphone] exemption have become 
commonplace on other mobile computing devices and have begun to appear on personal 
computers.”
229  Accordingly, SFLC contends that the smartphone exemption should be 
“expanded to give owners of all personal computing devices the same access to 
applications as owners of mobile phones have ….  [It] should be expanded to clearly 
encompass circumvention for the purpose of installing any software the user chooses, 
including a new operating system.
230 
 
SFLC explains that the mobile device market, which includes not only 
smartphones but also tablet computers, is dominated by Google’s Android operating 
                                                
227 P4 (SFLC) at 1 & n.1.   
228 P4 (SFLC) at 3. 
229 Id. at 2. 
230 Id. 

[PAGE 56]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 53 
system and Apple’s iOS, which together account for ninety-four percent of the market.  
In addition, the two most popular ebook readers, Amazon’s Kindle and Barnes & Noble’s 
Nook, are Android-based devices.231  According to SFLC, “[a]ll of the restrictions 
addressed by the [smartphone] exemption are reproduced on the new formats.”  The iOS 
on the iPhone and iPad limits applications to those obtained from Apple’s store.
232  In the 
case of Android, users are allowed to install applications obtained from channels other 
than Google’s Android Marketplace, but Android withholds “many vital privileges” (i.e., 
important device functionalities) from alternatively sourced applications.
233  In addition, 
even though the Kindle and Nook are Android-based, Amazon and Barnes & Noble have 
substituted their own exclusive distribution channels, which cannot be avoided without 
jailbreaking.
234   
 
SFLC warns that the problem it describes is now spreading to the personal 
computer: 
 
A similar fate threatens personal computers:  a majority of 
new laptop and desktop personal computers shipped in the 
next year are expected to incorporate hardware controls that 
allow manufacturers to prevent the installation of 
unauthorized operating systems.  In theory, these controls 
will merely make it difficult but not impossible, for a user 
to install their choice of operating system.  In practice, 
however, there is a very real danger that the controls will 
impose an OS lock in many personal computers.
235 
 
Or, as commenter NYFU sums up the situation: “Today Apple has, and soon, if we do 
not stop them, Microsoft will have, practical ownership of millions of computers used by 
millions of people in the United States of America.”
236 
 
SFLC observes that Apple and Microsoft have recently established app stores for 
their respective operating systems that “closely follow the model of their mobile 
predecessors.”  Although these more recent app stores are “not yet the sole distribution 
                                                
231 Id. at 3-4.  
232 SaurikIT cites the example of Mozilla’s Firefox, an alternative browser, which has a 25% market share 
on personal computers (making it the second most popular browser in that market), but which has not been 
approved by Apple.  See C14 (SaurikIT) at 3.  
233 P4 (SFLC) at 4.  In a similar vein, commenter SaurikIT observes that developers of iPhone applications 
are not able to engage the “proximity sensor” on the phone (which allows the device to sense when it is 
next to the user’s face) and that, until recently, the iPhone’s camera was not allowed to function as a video 
recorder.  Application developers also face restrictions fro m device makers as to when their software can 
run –  e.g., the frequency with which it can perform a task or whether it can run continuously “in the 
background.”  C14 (SaurkiIT), at 3 -4. 
234 P4 (SFLC) at 4.   
235 Id. at 8. 
236 C16 (NYFU) at 1. 

[PAGE 57]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 54 
channel for either operating system, … Microsoft at least is moving quickly to make [its] 
Windows 8 store exactly that.”  And, per SFLC, Apple will be “severely restricting” the 
functionality of apps distributed via the Mac App Store.237   
 
SFLC acknowledges that the stated justification for OS locks is to protect device 
owners from malicious software by making it impossible for viruses to gain access to, or 
replace, a device’s operating system.  But in SFLC’s words, “[t]his ‘security feature’ is 
undiscerning:  it will reject the device owner’s intentional installation of an operating 
system just as it will reject a virus’s payload.”
238  SFLC observes that “[t]o the extent the 
firmware lock being circumvented merely prevents unauthorized operating systems from 
running, it does not protect access to a copyrighted work of the device producer, but 
rather prevents access to a competing copyrighted work to which the device owner has a 
license.”
239  SFLC asserts that while OS locks may protect against malware, they also 
prevent users from removing covert spyware that reports a user’s activity to the carrier, 
manufacturer or software supplier; according to SFLC, the only way for a user to disable 
this capability is to replace the preinstalled operating system with a spyware-free 
system.
240   
 
According to SFLC, many users – particularly Android users – have replaced the 
operating systems on their mobile devices with modified systems, which are known as 
“mods.”  SFLC states that Android mods are noninfringing because fundamental 
components of Android are licensed under free software licenses (unlike other popular 
mobile operating systems).  The most popular Android mod has been installed nearly 
700,000 times, but users who install it face the specter of Section 1201(a)(1) liability 
because the “vast majority” of handsets capable of running Android employ OS locks.
241  
According to SFLC, mods permit access to additional functionalities and applications, in 
addition to facilitating the removal of hidden spyware.  SFLC notes that “[u]nlike in the 
PC market, there are as yet no producers of commodity mobile phone software; nearly all 
modern handsets are produced by vendors with ties to proprietary operating systems.
242 
 
SFLC explains that the UEFI Forum, an industry trade association, has 
established a standard for the interface between computer operating systems and 
hardware that includes a feature called “secure boot” which can be used as an OS lock.
243  
SFLC characterizes the UEFI “secure boot” standard as follows: 
 
The UEFI specification does not define a means for users to 
disable the OS lock, only how it will operate when enabled:  
                                                
237 P4 (SFLC) at 4-5. 
238 Id. at 5. 
239 Id. at 11. 
240 Id. at 5-6. 
241 Id. at 6. 
242 Id. at 7. 
243 Id. at 8. 

[PAGE 58]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 55 
it requires a secure boot-enabled machine to load only an 
operation system that corresponds to an approved 
cryptographic signature in the machine’s firmware.  The 
easiest way for a manufacturer to implement the 
specification as required by the Window Logo Program is 
to include only Microsoft’s key in the firmware.  The 
specification does not prevent manufacturers from allowing 
users to disable the lock or add non-Microsoft keys, but 
neither does it require or encourage them to, and the market 
incentives discourage it ….244 
 
In correspondence responding to a post-hearing inquiry from the Copyright Office, SFLC 
elaborates that Microsoft has established a program to enable developers to “have their 
operating systems signed by Microsoft” –  i.e., to acquire a secure boot key – for a fee of 
ninety-nine dollars.
245 
 
SFLC notes that Microsoft has announced that it will require hardware 
manufacturers for the forthcoming Windows 8 operating system to enable secure boot 
“by default.”  It asserts that because Microsoft controls nearly ninety percent of the 
operating system market, secure boot will be a “nearly ubiquitous” feature on personal 
computers in the next year.  According to SFLC, this will “decimate” what is now a 
thriving market for alternative PC operating systems.
246 
 
b. Asserted noninfringing activities 
 
SFLC asserts that “it is not infringing for the owner of a device to install 
applications that have not been approved by the device’s manufacture.”  According to 
SFLC, this conclusion – which it draws from the Register’s analysis and findings in the 
2010 rulemaking proceeding – applies with equal force to application locks on devices 
other than smartphones, as well as to OS locks.  SFLC notes that in 2010, the Register 
determined that circumvention for the purpose of achieving interoperability was either 
“noninfringing or fair.”  SFLC further opines that, while modification of a preinstalled 
operating system is sometimes necessary to circumvent an application lock, the same is 
not true of OS locks, as removal of a device’s default operating system does not implicate 
any of the exclusive rights of the owner of the operating system.  Further, SFLC asserts, 
the installation of an alternative operating system that is licensed is also a noninfringing 
act.
247 
                                                
244 Id. at 9. 
245 Letter from Aaron Williamson, Senior Staff Counsel, Software Freedom Law Center, to David O. 
Carson, General Counsel, U.S. Copyright Office (July 9, 2012), at 3 -4. 
246 P4 (SFLC) at 8-9.  Per SFLC, Wikipedia lists over 200 more GNU/Linux -based alternatives as well as 
approximately eighty more based on Berkeley Systems Distribution, another type of popular free software.  
Id. at 9. 
247 Id. at 10-11.  SFLC makes the further point that manufacturers can and do limit device warranties to 
exclude harm caused by modification of an operating system.  Id. at 10; see also C14 (SaurikIT) at 4- 5 
(noting warranty restrictions).  

[PAGE 59]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 56 
 
c. Asserted adverse impact 
 
SFLC states that “nearly every mobile phone on the consumer market, including 
most Android phones, prevents the installation of unauthorized operating systems via a 
[technological protection measure].”  The same restrictions are now found on tablets and 
ebook readers.  Accordingly, absent an exemption, the owners of these devices are 
vulnerable to claims under Section 1201(a)(1).
248  According to SFLC, hundreds of 
thousands of users have installed new operating systems on their mobile devices, but the 
threat of liability hampers such efforts and such users’ ability to share techniques and 
experience.
249   
 
With respect to personal computers, SLFC asserts that the expansion of the app 
store model to personal computers threatens to provide operating system vendors with 
“monopolistic control” over what has previously been an unrestricted market.
250  In 
particular, users will be hampered by the implementation of UEFI secure boot on the 
majority of new PCs over the next year.
251  In SLFC’s estimation, free software 
communities lack the organizational structure and “clout” to negotiate with 
manufacturers to ensure that their own keys are included in secure boot firmware; OS 
locks could therefore have “devastating results for free software operating systems.”  
Absent the requested exemption, community-based free software operating systems, 
which depend upon open access to computer platforms, will have little chance of 
succeeding.
252 
 
In addition to limiting consumer choice, SFLC asserts, the failure to permit users 
to replace operating systems with user-chosen upgrades and alternative software inhibits 
the ability to extend the useful life of personal computing devices.  This has a negative 
impact on efforts to refurbish computers for distribution to needy communities as well as 
an adverse environmental impact.
253   
 
Finally, commenter Huang notes that the prohibition embodied in Section 
1201(a)(1) could make it difficult to repair a device if the repair requires circumvention 
of an access control on the device.
254 
 
                                                
248 P4 (SFLC) at 4. Huang echoes SFLC’s assertions in his co mments:  “Without these exemptions, the 
owner’s right to modify, repair, improve and develop for devices that incorporate now -ubiquitous 
cryptographic technology is hampered by the potential legal ramifications of jailbreaking.”  C15 (Huang) at 
1; see also C3 (FSF) at 3 (noting expansion of access controls on personal computing devices).  
249 P4 (SFLC) at 12. 
 
250 Id. at 5. 
251 Id. at 12. 
252 Id. at 9-10, 12. 
253 Id. at 7-8. 
254 C15 (Huang) at 1. 

[PAGE 60]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 57 
d. Argument under statutory factors 
 
SFLC maintains that the proposed exemption will enhance user access to 
copyrighted works by expanding the availability of operating systems “in two 
dimensions” – that is, by enabling users to upgrade to newer versions of their default 
operating systems and by permitting them to install entirely different operating systems.  
It contends that the availability of free software operating systems on mobile devices will 
serve as a foundation of new research and development, which is being stifled by OS and 
application locks.  In SFLC’s view, an exception will also promote criticism and 
comment by helping to counter censorship.  Here SFLC cites Apple’s rejection from its 
store of two apps of which it apparently disapproved:  a game that was critical of Apple 
and a comic book rendering of James Joyce’s Ulysses that contained nudity.255   
 
Finally, SFLC states that, as established in the 2010 proceeding, “Apple uses its 
control over the sole iOS application distribution channel to restrain competition.”
256  
According to SFLC, this anticompetitive control now extends to the iPad as well.  Thus, 
in its view, the exemption that is available to mobile phone users should be extended to 
owners of all kinds of devices.257 
 
2. Opposition 
 
Proposed Class 4 is opposed by Joint Creators,258 who argue that the proposed 
exemption “targets every device and every platform, and creates an open-ended standard 
for circumvention.”
  In their view, if granted, the exemption “would strip any copyright 
owner, distributor, or licensee from exercising any choices with respect to how to 
construct a distribution system related to personal computing, and would thus expose 
copyright owners and their business partners to unnecessary risk, piracy, and 
unpredictability.”
 259  Joint Creators characterize proponents’ request as, “at best, 
premature,” and maintain that proponents have failed to meet the substantial burden 
required for an exemption.
260   
 
Joint Creators are of the view that the unauthorized reproduction and modification 
of an operating system for the purpose of running non-approved applications is not a fair 
use, and assert that the fair use argument in favor of jailbreaking relies upon an 
                                                
255 P4 (SFLC) at 12-13 (but noting that Apple subsequently reversed its deci sion on the Ulysses comic 
book). 
256 Id. at 13. 
257 Id.  
258 The trade groups represented by the Joint Creators are the Association of American Publishers, the 
American Society of Media Photographers, the Business Software Alliance, the Entertainment Software 
Association, the Motion Picture Association of America, the Picture Archive Council of America, and the 
Recording Industry Association of America.  C12 (Joint Creators) at 1 -2. 
259 Id. at 29-30. 
260 Id. at 31-32. 

[PAGE 61]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 58 
inappropriate extension of existing case law.261  They further assert that Section 1201(f) 
is inapplicable because “jailbreaking by consumers is not for the purpose of developing 
software.”262 
 
Joint Creators contend that the “primary effects” of such an exemption “would be 
to enable distribution of pirated applications, and to remove technical limitations that 
would otherwise protect trial versions of applications.”
263  According to Joint Creators, 
circumvention of technical measures on computer programs is accomplished “primarily 
to unlock trial versions of software, or enable access to pirated copies or unauthorized 
modified versions.”
264  Further, malicious developers often insert malware within pirated 
applications.265  
 
Joint Creators stress that proponents’ arguments in favor of the proposed class are 
based on speculation, rather than facts.  They assert that proponents’ comments present 
“theories” about what might occur with respect to personal computers and fail to 
demonstrate that the scenarios they portray are more likely than not, as required to 
establish the need for an exception.
266  In particular, with respect to the UEFI secure boot 
feature, proponents have not identified a single UEFI computer platform that precludes 
the installation of an alternative operating system.  Further, they note, proponents in fact 
concede that neither Apple nor Microsoft currently limits installation of applications for 
personal computers to those purchased through stores affiliated with their respective 
companies.
267  Opponents observe that users have access to personal computers in the 
marketplace on which they can install their own operating systems without engaging in 
circumvention.
268 
 
Joint Creators assert that technical measures such as “code signing” permit the 
immediate downloading of applications and prevent modified or pirated applications 
from executing.  In addition, such access controls enable copyright owners to make trial 
versions of software available for evaluation.  Thus, “[f]ar from limiting the availability 
of software applications, these platforms and their protection mechanisms have 
contributed to an unprecedented number of applications being made available to 
                                                
261 T Feder, June 5, 2012, at 197 -98.  The cases they reference in this regard are Sega Enters. Ltd. v. 
Accolade, Inc., 977 F.2d 1510 (9th Cir. 1992), and Sony Computer Entm’t, Inc. v. Connectix Corp. , 203 
F.3d 596 (9th Cir. 2000), both of which involved the reverse engineering of video game consoles.  
262 Id. at 199. 
263 C12 (Joint Creators) at 29 -30. 
264 Id. at 30. 
265 Id. at 31. 
266 Id. at 31-32. 
267 Id. at 31. 
268 T Metalitz, June 5, 2012, at 206.  

[PAGE 62]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 59 
users.”269  Further, Joint Creators note, proponents admit that alternatives to 
circumvention are “readily available.”270   
 
Finally, Joint Creators assert that the proposed class – in purporting to immunize 
circumvention “performed … at the request of the device’s owner” – amounts to a 
request to exempt the provision of circumvention services, which is prohibited under 
Section 1201(a)(1)(E).
271 
 
3. Discussion 
 
Proponents request an extraordinarily broad class comprising every personal 
computer device with a computer program that could be circumvented to permit the 
installation of alternative software.  Proponents seek to extend the requested exemption 
not only to the owners of such devices, but to those who would perform circumvention on 
a device owner’s behalf. 
 
 Proponents address two wide-ranging categories of works in their comments.  The 
first is computer programs on mobile personal computing devices – including Apple and 
Android-based smartphones, tablets and ebook readers – which proponents assert are 
almost always subject to technical protection measures in the form of application locks 
and OS locks.  The second is computer programs on personal computers, which 
proponents suggest will likely soon be subject to technical restrictions akin to those now 
prevalent in the mobile device market.   
 
a. Noninfringing uses 
 
Proponents do not offer much in support of their claim that the uses for which 
they seek an exemption are noninfringing, even though this is a threshold requirement 
before an exemption can be considered.  Instead, proponents choose to rest their case 
upon the Register’s conclusion in the 2010 rulemaking – in the context of smartphones – 
that it is not an infringement to install applications that have not been approved by a 
device’s manufacturer.  They claim that, in granting the 2010 exemption, the Register 
also “implicitly recognized” the noninfringing purpose of circumventing OS locks, and 
note that the removal of a device’s default operating system does not require the 
reproduction, derivation, distribution, performance or display of the deleted system.
272  
Proponents do not bother to recount the Register’s 2010 findings or the analysis upon 
                                                
269 C12 (Joint Creators) at 30.  At the hearing on Proposed Class 4, a representative of the Business 
Software Alliance (in turn represented by Joint Creators) stated that there are over 100 million smartphone 
users in the United States and tens of millions of tablet users, that there are over a million apps available 
from thousands of software developers for the top mobile pla tforms, and that tens of billions of apps have 
been downloaded.  T Feder, June 5, 2012, at 193.  
270 C12 (Joint Creators) at 30.   
271 Id. at 32.   
272 P4 (SFLC) at 10. 

[PAGE 63]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 60 
which they rely, as, in their view, to do so would only be “duplicative.”273  Proponents’ 
conclusory declaration that the expansive set of uses upon which they premise their 
request are noninfringing is inadequate in the context of this rulemaking.  As often stated, 
a proponent of a proposed class is required to demonstrate de novo – through specific 
facts and legal analysis – that an exemption is warranted. A proponent cannot “extend” or 
“expand” a previously granted exemption simply by invoking an earlier proceeding.274  
 
Here the claimed noninfringing uses – which presumably would occur across a 
broad spectrum of devices – are described in only the most general terms and are 
unsupported by a factual showing or meaningful analysis.  It is not clear, for example, 
whether proponents are relying on fair use or are simply claiming that the activities in 
question do not implicate copyright interests, or both.  Proponents suggest that no Section 
106 right is implicated by the removal of an operating system, though they do not 
elaborate.
275  Indeed, proponents do not define what is (or is not) a personal computing 
device, let alone explain the technical operation of the access controls at issue, or what is 
involved in circumventing them.
276   
 
The record is also murky on the especially critical issue of whether the removal of 
an operating system from a device in its entirety – an activity proponents seek to facilitate 
through this rulemaking process – requires the circumvention of technical measures 
before erasing the operating system, or whether it is possible to remove an operating 
system without prior circumvention (even if such removal also simultaneously removes 
the access controls for that operating system).  At the hearing on Proposed Class 4, the 
Copyright Office sought clarification on this point from the parties, but the results were 
inconclusive.  The best reading of the discussion is that, in some cases, it might be 
possible to remove an operating system without first circumventing an access control (as 
perhaps in the case of a complete “reflashing” of a device’s system), and in others it 
might not be, and that it boiled down to a factual question that could not be satisfactorily 
answered by proponents.
277   
 
To the extent an operating system can be removed without having first to gain 
access to the work through an act of circumvention, even if such work is protected for 
other purposes by technological measures, such removal does not constitute a violation of 
Section 1201(a)(1).  This is because upon deletion of the work, any such technological 
                                                
273 Id. 
274 See, e.g., 2010 Recommendation at 14 (“In each rulemaking proceeding, proposed classes  are reviewed 
de novo.  The fact that a class was previously designated by the Librarian creates no presumption that 
redesignation is appropriate, but rather the proponent of such a class must make a prima facie case in each 
three-year period.”). 
275 P4 (SFLC) at 10. 
276 By contrast, in the 2010 smartphone proceeding, the Register had a record before her that permitted her 
to analyze these issues.  See, e.g., 2010 Recommendation at 83 -84, 97. 
277 T Metalitz, Feder, Williamson, & Sulzberger, June 5, 2012, at 255 -65. 

[PAGE 64]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 61 
measure is no longer “effectively control[ling] access” to the work.278  In such a case, of 
course, an exemption is unnecessary.   
 
Finally, proponents fail to address whether Section 117, an exception to a 
copyright owner’s exclusive rights under Section 106 that permits the owner of a 
computer program to copy or adapt a program to permit it to be used in conjunction with 
a machine,279 might be relevant in at least some of the situations with which they are 
concerned.  On this record, the Register could not address whether Section 117 might 
apply.  To the extent Section 117 was to apply, however, it could serve to support 
proponents’ claim of noninfringing uses.
280   
 
b. Adverse impact 
 
As a second threshold requirement for an exemption, proponents must 
demonstrate that the prohibition of Section 1201(a)(1) is having, or is likely to have, 
substantial adverse effects on noninfringing uses.   
 
Proponents offer generalized observations about the use of access controls in the 
mobile device marketplace.  Proponents rely heavily on the Register’s 2010 conclusion 
proceeding that Apple’s use of technical measures on its iPhone did not protect 
copyrighted works, but instead protected a restrictive business model.  As explained 
above, however, the Register’s earlier finding does not serve as precedent in the current 
proceeding.  Rather, any determination concerning the purpose and impact of Apple’s 
access controls in this proceeding – or any manufacturer’s access controls, for that matter 
– must be made based on evidence of marketplace conditions as they exist today or are 
likely to exist over the next three years.   
 
 Proponents fail to offer specific facts or analysis in support of their requested 
exemption.  To take but one example, proponents mention Amazon’s Kindle and Barnes 
& Noble’s Nook ebook readers as being burdened by access controls.  But they do not 
detail the technical restrictions in question, what is required to circumvent them, or 
whether these devices are being circumvented in meaningful numbers today.  Nor, if such 
is the case, do they explain users’ actual objectives in circumventing these devices, 
whether there is a market for independently distributed ebooks (or some other relevant 
market) that is going untapped or, if so, how sizeable it is.  These are but a few of the 
questions that would be relevant in determining whether an exception to permit 
jailbreaking of ebook readers is justified that cannot be answered on this record.
281 
                                                
278 See 17 U.S.C. §1201(a)(1); see also 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,831 (“[C]omplete reflashing 
does not even constitute circumvention of an access control because it actually deletes the copy of the 
entire work that had been protected by the acce ss control, thereby permanently denying access to that 
work.”); 2010 Recommendation at 13 (“In order for the prohibition to apply to a work, the technological 
protection must control access to a copyrighted work.”).  
279 17 U.S.C. § 117(a)(1).  
280 Cf. 2010 Recommendation at 86 -91 (analyzing Section 117 in the smartphone context).  
281 We further observe that proponents fail to examine Section 1201(f)(1), a statutory exception to the 
prohibition on circumvention that permits reverse engineering for the purposes of interoperability for 

[PAGE 65]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 62 
  
With respect to the second category, personal computers, much of the concern 
appears to be centered on Microsoft’s to be launched Windows 8 operating system and its 
“secure boot” functionality.  But proponents’ own statements indicate that this concern is 
speculative.  It appears undisputed in the record that, at least as of today, purchasers of 
personal computers are able to install alternative operating systems without resorting to 
circumvention.  Proponents concede that the UEFI specification allegedly adopted by 
Microsoft “does not prevent manufacturers from allowing users to disable the lock or add 
non-Microsoft keys,” 282 and acknowledge Microsoft’s program permitting developers to 
acquire keys for ninety-nine dollars.  Against this backdrop, proponents assert that OS 
locks “threaten” personal computers, while at the same time allowing that “[i]n theory, 
these controls will merely make it difficult but not impossible, for a user to install their 
choice of operating system.”
283 Proponents add that “should OS locks obstruct users from 
installing whatever software they choose on devices they own,” they should not be 
subject to DMCA liability.
284  These types of prognostications are clearly in the realm of 
the hypothetical.  
 
Indeed, on this record, there is an open question as to whether an OS lock 
preventing the operation of an alternative operating system is a technological measure 
protecting a copyrighted work with the meaning of Section 1201(a).
285  Based on the 
information provided, it is difficult to say, and it is also possible that the analysis of 
different types of OS locks might yield varying answers. 
 
Proponents’ suppositions concerning the features of forthcoming software fall 
short of making a case that the harmful effects they posit are more likely to occur than 
not.  Mere speculation cannot support an exception to Section 1201(a)(1); rather, 
predicted adverse effects are only cognizable “in extraordinary circumstances in which 
the evidence of likelihood of future adverse impact is highly specific, strong and 
persuasive.”
286  Proponents offer no such evidence here.   
                                                                                                                                            
certain reasons.  To the extent it applied, it might obviate the need for an exemption because Section 
1201(a)(1) would have no adverse effect.  But on this record , the Register was not able to assess whether 
Section 1201(f)(1) might h ave a bearing on the proposed class.  
282 P4 (SFLC) at 9.   
283 Id. at 8. 
284 Id. at 10 (emphasis added).  
285 Proponents themselves raise this question when they observe that “[t]o the extent the firmware lock 
being circumvented merely prevents unauthorized operating systems from running, it does not protect 
access to a copyrighted work of the device producer, but rather prevents access to a competing copyrighted 
work to which the device owner has a license.”  Id. at 11. 
286 House Manager’s Report at 6.  

[PAGE 66]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 63 
 
c. Class definition 
 
As an additional consideration with respect to this particular proposal, the 
Register notes that the granting of an exemption for such a sweeping class as proposed 
here is without precedent throughout the history of Section 1201 rulemakings.  The 
Register has noted previously that, aside from indicating that the correct starting point of 
the class definition is a category of work listed in Section 102,287 Congress provided little 
guidance on this point in enacting Section 1201.  As the Register has explained, the 
House Manager’s Report
288 indicates that the class should neither be too broad nor too 
narrow.  Somewhat more helpful is language from the Commerce Committee Report 
stating that “the ‘particular class of copyrighted works’ [is intended to] be a narrow and 
focused subset of the broad categories of works … identified in section 102.”
289  
Although Congress appeared to contemplate a degree of flexibility, the Register’s task of 
defining the proper class is nonetheless a critical one; Congress emphasized that 
“[d]eciding the scope of boundaries of a ‘particular class’ of copyrighted works as to 
which the prohibition contained in section 1201(a)(1) has been shown to have had an 
adverse impact is an important issue to be determined during the rulemaking 
proceedings.”
290 
 
 In the past, faced with a proposed class with respect to which the proponents 
offered substantial and persuasive evidence, but for which the definition proposed was 
not fully congruent with the proponents’ showing, the Register has – to the extent a 
sufficient basis exists in the record – refined the class definition to ensure that it is 
appropriately tailored to her findings.
291  But such refinement is only possible when the 
proponent of the proposed class has otherwise succeeded in demonstrating that some 
version of its exemption is warranted.  In order to so demonstrate, a proponent must 
present specific and compelling evidence of noninfringing uses that are being, or are 
likely to be, substantially adversely affected by the prohibition of Section 1201(a)(1). The 
mere possibility that some users of some works encompassed by a proposed class are or 
may be adversely affected is not sufficient.  It is the evidentiary record that determines 
the “narrow and focused subset” of works that are properly included in the class.  The 
Register cannot delineate the appropriate contours of a class “in a factual vacuum.”
292   
 
 Here, as discussed above, proponents have failed to support the proposed 
exemption with demonstrable facts.  Thus, even if there might be particular subsets 
                                                
287 17 U.S.C. § 102. 
288 2010 Recommendation at 17 (citing House Manager’s Report at 7). 
289 Commerce Comm. Report at 38.  
290 House Manager’s Report at 7.  
291 2010 Recommendation at 16 (explaining that “[t]he records in [the 2010] and prior rulemakings have 
demonstrated that in  many cases, [an initial] subset of a category of works should be further tailored in 
accordance with the evidence in the record.”). 
292 Id.  

[PAGE 67]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 64 
within their very broad proposal that might deserve consideration, there is no record from 
which the Register could even begin to make such a determination.293 
 
As a final matter, the Register notes that to the extent that the class proponents 
seek to exempt would effectively permit the provision of circumvention services to others 
– as the last clause of Proposed Class 4 would appear to do – it must be rejected.  The 
provision of circumvention services to others is forbidden under Section 1201(a)(2) of the 
DMCA.
294  Section 1201(a)(1)(E) specifies that an exemption granted under Section 
1201(a)(1)(C) – that is, through the instant proceeding – is inapplicable to any prohibition 
of Section 1201 other than Section 1201(a)(1), which addresses a user’s own acts of 
circumvention.
295 
d. NTIA comments 
 
NTIA “is not convinced that Secure Boot constitutes ‘a technological measure 
that effectively controls access to a work’ protected by U.S. copyright law.’”296 It further 
notes that “[t]here is no evidence that Secure Boot restricts access to Windows 8 or any 
other work for purposes of protecting copyright.”  NTIA thus does not support the 
designation of the proposed class. 
 
4. Recommendation 
 
The Register recognizes that the concern expressed by proponents – that a broad 
implementation of restrictive access controls could preclude users from installing 
operating systems and applications of their choice on a wide variety of personal 
computing devices – is a significant one.  As the Register has noted previously, 
interoperability is generally favored under the law.
297  It is not difficult to assume that in 
some cases, at least, technological measures of the nature suggested by proponents could 
be troubling.  But here, proponents rely heavily on speculation and fail to present specific 
and compelling evidence in support of a focused exemption.  The Register therefore 
declines to recommend the adoption of Proposed Class 4.
298   
                                                
293 The Register notes that, to the extent the proponents’ proposed class is directed at smartphones and 
tablet computers, it is possible that some of their concerns may be addressed in the context of the Register’s 
consideration of Proposed Classes 5 and 6, in which the evidentiary records are considerably more robust.  
294 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(2) provides that “[no] person shall manufacture, import, offer to the public, 
provide, or otherwise traffic in any technology, product, service, devices, component, or part thereof” that 
is “primarily designed or produced for the purpose of circumvent[ion],” “has only limited commercially 
significant purpose or use other than circumvent[ion],” or “is marketed by that person or another acting in 
concert with that person with that person’s knowledge for use in circumvent[ion]”; see also 2010 
Recommendation at 169 -70. 
295 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(E).  
296 NTIA Letter at 9 (quoting 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(A)).  
297 2010 Recommendation at 91 -94 
298 In light of the Register’s conclusion that proponents have failed to make a prima facie showing in 
support of an exemption, there is no need to consider th e Section 1201 statutory factors. 

[PAGE 68]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 65 
 
E. Proposed Class 5:  Wireless telephone handsets – software 
interoperability (“jailbreaking”) 
  
 Proponent EFF, supported by other commenters, proposes the Register recommend 
the following class of works: 
 
Computer programs that enable wireless telephone handsets 
(“smartphones”) and tablets to execute lawfully obtained 
software applications, where circumvention is undertaken 
for the purpose of enabling interoperability of such 
applications with computer programs on the handset or 
tablet. 
 
1. Proponent’s case 
 
Proponent EFF, joined by The New America Foundation, New Media Rights, and 
Mozilla,299 seeks an exemption to permit the circumvention of access controls on wireless 
devices so that the devices can be used with non-vendor-approved software that is 
lawfully acquired. 
 
a. Background 
 
 In 2010, the Register recommended, and the Librarian designated, a class that 
permitted circumvention of technological measures on certain telephone handsets known 
as “smartphones.”
300  That exemption permitted users to circumvent 
 
[c]omputer programs that enable wireless telephone 
handsets to execute software applications, where 
circumvention is accomplished for the sole purpose of 
enabling interoperability of such applications, when they 
have been lawfully obtained, with computer programs on 
the telephone handset.301 
 
 In recommending the class, the Register found that many such phones are protected 
by access controls,
302 that proponent’s intended use – to render certain lawfully acquired 
                                                
299 The Office also received comments from numerous individual users who noted their support for the 
exemption but did not offer substantive factual or legal analysis.  
300 Although none of the parties defined “smartphone” in t his proceeding, the Register notes that, in 2010, 
the Copyright Office defined smartphones as “mobile phones with advanced data features and keyboards.”  
2010 Recommendation at 77 n.256.  While the Register is required to review the factual record de novo in 
each rulemaking, the record is clear that each of the parties implicitly applies the same definition of 
“smartphone” here.  Moreover, no party has questioned this definition of “smartphone.”  Accordingly, the 
Register adopts the same definition in this rulemaking. 
301 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,839.  
302 Id. at 85-86. 

[PAGE 69]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 66 
applications interoperable with the handset’s software – was fair,303 and that the access 
controls adversely affected that use.304  The Register also found that the statutory factors 
prescribed by 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C) weighed in favor of granting the exemption.305  
Colloquially, the exemption permitted users to “jailbreak” or “root” certain devices.306 
  
 EFF seeks the designation of an expanded version of that which was designated in 
2010, citing dramatic growth in mobile phone market, along with continued widespread 
use of technological measures to prevent users from installing unauthorized applications 
on such phones.307  EFF’s proposal also expands the exemption to include “tablets,” such 
as Apple’s iPad, which, says EFF, have “enjoyed similar radical popularity over the past 
two years.”
308 
 
The New America Foundation’s Open Technology Initiative (NAF) filed 
comments in support of the proposal, encouraging the Register to expand the class to 
include “a broad range of mobile devices,”
309 and asserting that jailbreaking does not 
infringe on any copyright interests.310 
 
Several other organizations offered comments in support of the proposal.  New 
Media Rights asserts that “[t]he ability to jailbreak is essential for competition and 
innovation,”
311 and that it “provides consumer protection since it fosters increased 
competition that leads to more choice, less censorship, and pressure for official app stores 
to improve their systems.”
312  Mozilla contends that jailbreaking promotes choice in 
software applications for smartphone users, promotes innovation and development of 
new applications, enables critical software testing, and promotes open access to the 
internet.
313  The Free Software Foundation asserts that “[u]sers should be allowed to 
install whatever software they like on their devices.”314 
 
The Office received several hundred additional comments in support of the 
proposed exemption.  Although several such comments provided examples of how the 
                                                
303 Id. at 100. 
304 Id. 
305 Id. at 101-02. 
306 According to the EFF, “‘[j]ailbreaking’ is the term people tend to use for iPhones, and ‘rooting’ is a 
term that people tend to use for Android de vices, but the basic idea is the same, and it is to get full 
administrative access to the device.”  T Hofmann, May 17, 2012, at 104. 
307 P5 (EFF) at 2-3. 
308 Id. at 4. 
309 C6 (New America Foundation) at 5.  
310 Id. at 5. 
311 C13 (New Media Foundation) at 2.  
312 Id. at 3. 
313 C9 (Mozilla) at 2-4. 
314 C3 (Free Software Foundation) at 3. 

[PAGE 70]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 67 
current jailbreaking exemption has been used, none offered significant additional facts or 
substantive legal arguments. 
 
b. Asserted noninfringing uses 
 
EFF asserts that “[c]ourts have long found copying and modification to enable 
device interoperability noninfringing under the doctrine of fair use.”315  Proponent also 
notes that the Register found jailbreaking to be a fair use in the 2010 rulemaking, further 
asserting that “[n]othing in the factual or legal record since the last proceeding suggests 
that a change in this position is warranted.”
316  
 
In brief, EFF asserts that jailbreaking constitutes a transformative use akin to 
those uses found to be fair in several leading cases on the issue,317 thus tipping the first 
factor in favor of fair use.318  EFF asserts that the second factor favors fair use as well, 
because the portion of the copyrighted firmware exploited by jailbreaking is functional,319 
and because “it is customary for operating systems to enable third-party interoperability”; 
therefore, “the copyright owner’s exclusive rights are not infringed when a user runs an 
application without the manufacturer’s consent.”320 
 
With respect to the third factor, EFF asserts that, although “the amount of 
firmware copied for the various smartphone and tablet jailbreaks varies depending on 
device and version,” in each case, “the amount copied is necessary and reasonable for the 
legitimate purpose” of achieving interoperability.
321  Finally, with respect to the fourth 
factor, EFF asserts that “jailbreaking does not foreclose sales of smartphone or tablet 
firmware, nor are users jailbreaking their devices to compete in the marketplace for 
firmware sales.”
322 
 
c. Asserted adverse impact 
 
EFF asserts that “the last three years have seen dramatic growth in the adoption of 
smartphones and tablets as consumers increasingly shift from traditional personal 
computers to mobile devices.”
323  Specifically, EFF cites data  “showing that 35% of all 
American adults are now smartphone owners” and that “smartphone penetration will 
                                                
315 P5 (EFF) at 11 (internal citations and footnotes omitted).  
316 Id. 
317 Id. at 11-12 (citing Sega, 977 F.2d 1510; Connectix, 203 F.3d 596; Kelly v. Arriba Soft Cop. , 336 F.3d 
811 (9th Cir. 2003);  and Perfect 10, Inc. v. Amazon.com, Inc. , 508 F.3d 1146 (9th Cir. 2007)).  
318 P5 (EFF) at 11-12. 
319 Id. at 13-14. 
320 Id. at 14. 
321 Id. at 15. 
322 Id.  
323 Id. at 3. 

[PAGE 71]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 68 
[have]  reach[ed] more than 50% of subscribers by the end of 2011.”324  EFF also asserts 
that “[i]n the final quarter of 2010, more than 100 million smartphones were shipped in 
the United States alone, surpassing the number of personal computers sold by almost 8 
million units.”325 
 
EFF asserts that “[m]anufacturers typically configure a device’s firmware to 
prevent unauthorized applications from accessing certain functions of the phone or 
tablet,” and that such firmware is often encrypted “to prevent users from changing the 
default configuration.”
326  In response to such restrictions, “online communities have 
emerged to support jailbreaking to enable a device to become interoperable with 
unauthorized independently created activities.”
327  EFF argues that the technological 
restrictions on phones and tablets have an adverse effect on consumer choice and 
competition.
328  Specifically, it notes that Apple, whose devices “refuse to run any 
unapproved third-party software” unless the device can identify a “special encrypted 
software key” associated with the software,
329 has strict rules about the type of programs 
approved for sale through its own “App Store,” the only authorized source of iPhone and 
iPad applications.
330   
 
EFF alleges that although Android-based devices331 are generally less restricted 
than Apple devices, most still employ “technological measures to block functionality and 
prevent the installation of certain types of software.”
332  EFF asserts that many device 
manufacturers “fail[] to support and upgrade the operating systems on Android  
smartphones to their most current versions, exposing owners to security 
vulnerabilities,”
333 imposing “significant costs on application developers who cannot 
count on consumers running the latest version,” threatening “consumers who cannot rely 
on manufacturer support if a security vulnerability is discovered,” and shortening “the 
lifespan of the devices because owners are forced to purchase new models to avoid these 
risks.”
334  EFF also claims that technological measures inhibit innovation by “interfering 
                                                
324 Id. 
325 Id. 
326 Id. at 5.  EFF explains that “firmware” is “internal software that is among the first  aspects of the 
operating system to ‘boot -up’ when the device is powered on.”  Id. 
327 Id. 
328 Id. 
329 Id. at 6. 
330 Id. at 5-6. 
331 According to EFF, Android is a “free, open- platform smartphone and tablet operating system introduced 
by Google and the Open Handset Alliance in 2007.  . . .  Today, Android is the best -selling mobile platform 
in the world.  In October 2011, there were 190 million Android devices in use, with 32.9 million sold in the 
fourth quarter of 2010 alone  – seven times the number sold in the four th quarter of 2009.”  Id. at 4 (internal 
citations omitted). 
332 Id. at 6.  
333 Id. at 7. 
334 Id. 

[PAGE 72]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 69 
with the ability of tablet and smartphone owners to install the third-party software that 
they would prefer to use,”335 and by restraining competition by limiting the number of 
developers permitted to offer marketplace alternatives.336 
 
d. Argument under statutory factors 
 
EFF asserts that “[t]he availability of firmware for smartphones or tablets would 
not be adversely affected by permitting” the exemption,337 and claims that the 
smartphone sales have increased despite the fact that jailbreaking was exempted from the 
prohibition on circumvention in 2010.
338  With respect to the second factor, EFF alleges 
that, consistent with the Register’s conclusion in 2010, “[t]here is no reason to believe 
that the availability of smartphone or tablet firmware for nonprofit uses will be harmed 
by” a jailbreaking exemption, rendering the factor neutral.
339  Likewise, on the third 
factor, EFF believes there is no reason to believe that the proposed exemption would 
“curtail the availability of criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or 
research,” and notes that “[t]o the contrary, smartphone and tablet jailbreaking have 
spurred both valuable commentary and important security research.”
340  With respect to 
the fourth factor, EFF asserts that jailbreaking “will have no independent negative impact 
on the actual market for the firmware bundled with the machines,” but rather, “the 
proposed exemption is likely to stimulate the market for such works by providing 
developers with incentives to develop third party applications, thus making these devices 
– together with their copyrighted firmware – more attractive to consumers.”
341 
 
Finally, beyond the four stated statutory factors, the EFF urges the Register to 
consider that technological measures are intended not to protect the copyrighted 
firmware, but, rather, to “preserve various aspects of the manufacturers’ business 
interests,”
342 asserting that the Register has previously “frowned on firmware 
manufacturers advancing copyright claims in their functional computer programs to 
support anti-competitive business practices.”
343 
                                                
335 Id. at 8. 
336 Id. 
337 Id. at 16. 
338 Id. 
339 Id. at 17. 
340 Id. (describing a prominent iOS jailbreak that “has lead [sic] a vibrant discussion of, and corrections to, 
a security vulnerability in the process by which Safari, the iPhone’s native web browser, opens PDF 
files.”). 
341 Id. at 18. 
342 Id. 
343 Id. 

[PAGE 73]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 70 
 
2. Opposition 
 
Joint Creators344 oppose the proposal, arguing that “Congress already codified the 
contours of acceptable circumvention related to interoperability in [Section] 1201(f).”345  
They also allege that because “tablet” is a term that “provides no real limitation on the 
scope of the proposed exemption,” the proposal fails to describe a particular class of 
works as required by the statute.346     
 
Joint Creators further assert that technological measures help prevent piracy of 
copyrighted applications,
347 and that “[w]ithout access controls that verify the legitimacy 
of newly installed applications, modified firmware facilitates use of infringing copies of 
applications.”348  They maintain that under the fourth statutory factor, “the relevant 
consideration is not limited to just the impact on the market for or value of device 
firmware,” but also includes “the impact on the market for or value of all copyrighted 
works utilized in connection with the firmware and the device it resides on.”
349  They 
argue that the Office erred in 2010 when it concluded that a copyright owner’s “‘interests 
as a manufacturer and distributor of a device’ are somehow entirely separable from its 
interests in its copyrighted works.”350  They urge the Office to “thoroughly consider how 
circumvention that enables access to the firmware harms the overall content ecosystem 
that tethered devices enable copyright owners to exploit.”
351  
 
Finally, Joint Creators allege that circumvention is not necessary to achieve 
proponent’s intended ends.  This is because the market has provided alternatives, such as 
“[m]obile phones and tablets running the Android operating system [that] are available 
completely unlocked.”
352 
 
3. Discussion 
 
As previously indicated, this rulemaking requires a de novo review of the 
evidence presented; “[t]he fact [that] a class was previously designated by the Librarian 
                                                
344 The trade groups represented by Joint Creators are the Association of American Publishers, the 
American Society of Media Photographers, the Business Software Alliance, the Entertainment Software 
Association, the Motion Picture Association of America, the Picture Archive Council of America, and the 
Recording Industry Association of America.  C12 (Joint Creators) at 1 -2. 
345 Id. at 19. 
346 Id. at 22. 
347 Id. at 21. 
348 Id. 
349 Id. at 20 (emphasis in original). 
350 Id. at 21 (citing 2010 Recommendation at 93). 
351 Id. at 21.   
352 Id. at 22. 

[PAGE 74]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 71 
creates no presumption that redesignation is appropriate, but rather the proponent of such 
a class must make a prima facie case in each three year period.”353  Nonetheless, where, 
as here, the Register of Copyrights has previously developed a legal analysis, and there 
has been no pertinent change in statutory or case law – and no new persuasive arguments 
have been offered in the current proceeding – it is appropriate to rely upon the earlier 
legal analysis, provided that the evidence in the present record supports it.
354 
 
a. Applicability of Section 1201(f) 
 
Joint Creators assert that the proposed exemption is unnecessary and beyond the 
scope of the rulemaking because Section 1201(f) defines “the contours of acceptable 
circumvention related to interoperability.”
355  Specifically, Joint Creators assert that the 
proponents have not established that Section 1201(f) does not already permit the conduct 
in which proponents seek to engage; and, “if it were established that Congress chose not 
to include the conduct at issue within § 1201(f),”
356 then proponents have failed to 
establish that the Librarian has the authority to upset that decision through this 
proceeding. 
 
It appears that Section 1201(f) is intended to permit (1) circumvention for the 
purpose of identifying and analyzing elements of computer programs necessary to 
achieve interoperability; and (2) development of means to circumvent a technological 
protection measure to enable such analysis and interoperability of an independently 
created computer program. The Register notes that the second permitted act under 
Section 1201(f) provides an exemption from liability only with respect to Sections 
1201(a)(2) and 1201(b).  The statutory provision that is the subject of this rulemaking 
proceeding, Section 1201(a)(1), is not mentioned.
357 
 
The Register is thus confronted with an arguably ambiguous statute, the apparent 
purpose of which does not appear precisely to match its language.  The Register could 
construe Section 1201(f) as covering proponents’ intended conduct, and thus decline to 
recommend the exemption, but a court may well disagree, subjecting a jailbreaker to 
potential liability.  Thus, because it is unclear, at best, whether Section 1201(f) applies in 
this circumstance – that is, because the Register cannot determine with a reasonable 
degree of certainty how a court would decide the matter – the Register is compelled to 
proceed with an evaluation of the merits of EFF’s case.
358 
                                                
353 2010 Recommendation at 14.  
354 See 2006 Recommendation at 40 (finding that relying on a prior legal analys is was appropriate because 
“the factual posture [was] essentially the same as it was” during the prior rulemaking, and because no new 
arguments had been presented). 
355 C12 (Joint Creators) at 19.  
356 Id. 
357 17 U.S.C. § 1201(f)(2).  
358 One might argue that Congre ss “occupied the field” with respect to interoperability when it enacted 
Section 1201(f), and that the Register cannot expand that field through this rulemaking.  The Register 
would agree if Congress’s intent was more clear.  The Register notes that, in 20 00, the Copyright Office 

[PAGE 75]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 72 
 
b. Noninfringing uses 
 
EFF asserts that jailbreaking for the purpose of achieving software 
interoperability is a fair use.  Joint Creators do not directly challenge EFF’s fair use 
analysis, but question the Copyright Office’s fair use finding in the 2010 proceeding.
359  
In 2010, the Register concluded that “[a] review of the four [fair use factors] leads to the 
conclusion that making minor alterations in the firmware of an iPhone (or any 
smartphone) in order to permit independently created software applications to run on the 
[smartphone] is a fair use.”
360 
 
With respect to the first fair use factor, which addresses the nature of the use, the 
Register in 2010 determined that although jailbreaking does not “fall within the four 
corners of the statutory exemption in Section 1201(f), the fact that [a smartphone owner] 
is engaging in jailbreaking in order to make the iPhone’s firmware interoperable with an 
application specifically created for the [smartphone] suggests that the purpose and 
character of the use are favored.”
361  The Register also explained that although 
proponents did not assert that jailbreaking was a transformative use, “a use need not be 
transformative in order to be a fair use.”
362  The Register ultimately concluded that the 
first factor favored fair use because the person engaged in jailbreaking is doing so simply 
to use the firmware on the device that it was designed to operate, owned by the 
jailbreaker, for precisely the purpose for which it was designed.
363 
 
                                                                                                                                            
expressed a cautionary note about going beyond Section 1201(f).  See 2000 Final Rule, 65 Fed. Reg. at 
64,570-71.  At the time, the Office was addressing reverse engineering of DVDs, a topic that bears little 
resemblance to the present issue.  Moreover, that review of Section 1201(f) took place just two years 
following its enactment.  Any concerns about going beyond where Congress went when it enacted the 
statute are now mitigated by the fact that this is the fifth triennial rulemaki ng, fourteen years following the 
enactment of the DMCA, and the Register is called upon to consider changes in the marketplace that 
Congress could not have foreseen – precisely the reason why Congress tasked the Office and the Library of 
Congress with this rulemaking. 
359 C12 (Joint Creators) at 20 n.32.  
360 2010 Recommendation at 92 -93. 
361 Id. at 93-94.  In an attendant footnote, the Register explained that Section 1201(f) did not cover a 
smartphone owner’s conduct because such an owner:  
is not the person who h as ‘identif[ied] and analyz[ed] those elements of 
the program that are necessary to achieve interoperability of an 
independently created computer program with other programs.’  See 
Section 1201(f)(1).  Rather, the [smartphone] owner will be the 
beneficiary of that person’s efforts and will be using the means 
provided by that person to install and run the independently created 
application on his or her [smartphone].  
See id. (alterations to Section 1201(f)(1) in original).  
362 Id. at 95.  Indeed, the Register o bserved that jailbreaking is “unlikely” to be considered transformative 
“in light of the modest modifications” made to the firmware.  Id. 
363 Id. at 93. 

[PAGE 76]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 73 
With respect to the nature of the work used, the Register observed that this second 
factor was “perhaps more important than usual in cases involving interoperability of 
computer programs.”364  The Office noted that the operating system is a “highly 
functional work[] used to operate a device,”365 and that the functional elements of such 
software – those that are modified in the course of jailbreaking – “may or may not be 
copyrightable.”366  The Register also noted that “it is customary for [firmware] to enable 
third party programs to interoperate with them.”367  The Register ultimately concluded 
that “the second factor decisively favors a finding of fair use.” 
 
Regarding the third factor – which considers the amount of the work used – the 
Register found that although jailbreaking often requires a complete copy of the firmware 
to be made, the modification is de minimis, and the firmware is ultimately used for the 
very same purpose for which it was originally intended, which undermined the 
significance of the factor.
368  The Register concluded that although the factor “arguably 
disfavor[ed] a fair use finding, the weight to be given to it under the circumstances [was] 
slight.”
369   
 
Finally, with respect to the fourth factor, which addresses market harm, the Office 
observed that opponents’ real concern was harm to its reputation, rather than 
displacement of sales of its firmware for iPhones.
370  The Office concluded that such a 
concern is “not what the fourth fair use factor is intended to address.”371 
 
The Register next observed that three of the four factors tipped decisively in favor 
of fair use, concluding that: 
 
[W]hen one “jailbreaks” a smartphone in order to make the 
operating system on that phone interoperable with an 
independently created application that has not been 
approved by the maker of the smartphone or the maker of 
the operating system, the modifications that are made 
purely for the purpose of such interoperability are likely to 
be fair uses.  Case law and Congressional enactments 
reflect a judgment that interoperability is favored.
372 
 
                                                
364 Id. at 95. 
365 Id. at 96 (citation omitted). 
366 Id. 
367 Id. 
368 Id. at 97. 
369 Id. 
370 Id. at 99. 
371 Id. at 98. 
372 2010 Recommendation at 100.  

[PAGE 77]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 74 
Joint Creators challenge the Register’s conclusion with respect to the first factor, 
asserting that “concluding that a use is ‘favored’ because it constitutes the exact opposite 
of a transformative use is erroneous.”373  The Register notes that the complaint misstates 
the 2010 finding.  The Register did not conclude that the opposite of a transformative use 
renders the first factor favorable to a fair use finding; rather, it concluded that 
transformative use is not the only consideration that may cause the first factor to tip in 
favor of fair use.
374  Joint Creators also assert that the Copyright Office treats operating 
system software as “less deserving of protection than other works.”375  The Office does 
not view operating system software as less deserving of appropriate protection, but 
recognizes that certain features of operating systems are “highly functional,”376 which is a 
relevant consideration in the fair use analysis. 
 
Turning to the current proceeding, the Register notes that the factual record with 
respect to fair use is substantially the same as it was in 2010, and there have not been any 
significant developments in pertinent case law that would cause the Register to reevaluate 
the analytical framework applied in 2010.  The purpose and character of the use is 
noncommercial and personal so that individual owners of smartphones may use them for 
the purpose for which they were intended.  The nature of the copyrighted work – 
firmware – remains the same as it was in 2010, and it remains true that one engaged in 
jailbreaking need only modify the functional aspects of the firmware,
377 which may or 
may not be subject to copyright protection.  Those engaged in jailbreaking use only that 
which is necessary to engage in the activity, which is often de minimis,
378 rendering the 
third factor potentially unfavorable, but nevertheless of minimal consequence.  With 
respect to market harm, it is worth noting that, exemption notwithstanding, the 
proliferation of smartphones has increased since the last rulemaking,
379 suggesting that 
the fourth factor calculus favors a fair use finding even more than it did in 2010.380 
 
c. Adverse impact 
 
Proponents have established that the prohibition is adversely affecting, and is 
likely to continue to have, an adverse impact on certain uses of mobile devices in which 
                                                
373 C12 (Joint Creators) at 20.  
374 2010 Recommendation at 95 (“a use need not be transformative in order to be a fair use; indeed, the 
language of Section 107(1) does not state or imply that a use must be transformative in order to be fair.”) 
(citing Campbell, 510 U.S. at 579). 
375 C12 (Joint Creators) at 20 n.32.  
376 2010 Recommendation at 96.  
377 P5 (EFF) at 13-14. 
378 Id. at 15. 
379 P5 (EFF) at 3-4. 
380 As in 2010, the Register cautions that “[b]ecause fair use involves a case -by-case analysis, the Register 
refrains from concluding that such activity will invariably constitute fair use.”  2010 Recommendation at 
100 (internal citation omitted).  

[PAGE 78]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 75 
the firmware, a copyrightable work, is protected by technological measures.381  The 
evidence in the record demonstrates that smartphones have been widely adopted and 
suggests that consumer acceptance of such devices will continue to increase in the 
future.382  Moreover, the evidence presented by EFF about the success of unauthorized 
application sales,383 and the individual comments received with respect to this class, 
supports the contention that technological protection measures have an adverse effect on 
users and developers. 
 
Joint Creators assert that users who want to install unauthorized applications on 
their smartphones and related devices do not need to circumvent, because the 
“marketplace for smartphone and tablet apps has matured since the last proceeding, and 
alternatives to circumvention now exist,”384 including the availability of “completely 
unlocked” devices running the Android operating system.385  The record reveals, 
however, that while Android is generally an open platform, its openness allows those 
implementing it to place certain restrictions on downstream users.  As EFF explains: 
 
Stock versions of Android allow the user to install any 
third-party application, even if they do not have root access 
to their phone.  However, device manufacturers—perhaps 
compelled by contractual obligations with carriers—often 
build non-stock versions of Android that restrict users who 
lack root access.  These restrictions can take many forms, 
but among them is the ability to prevent users from 
installing any application not obtained through a 
whitelisted app market.  Gaining root access to the Android 
operating system allows a user to bypass these 
manufacturer-imposed restrictions.
386 
 
Thus, while it is fair to say that Android is an open platform for developers, and 
that some Android-based devices may well be “open” in some sense, the record supports 
a finding that a significant number of Android-based devices are “locked” in the same 
way that Apple’s iPhone is locked.  While the development of unlocked market 
                                                
381 The existence of such technological measures is not at issue.  The record supports a finding that there 
are a significant number of mobile devices that are protected by technological measures.  As EFF describes, 
“[m]anufacturers typically configure a device’s firmware to prevent unauthorized applications from 
accessing certain functions” and such firmware is often encrypted “to prevent users from changing the 
default configuration.”  P5 (EFF) at 5.  Moreover, opponents do not contest the existence of such measures.  
382 P5 (EFF) at 3. 
383 See, e.g., P5 (EFF) at 5 (asserting that Cydia, an online marketplace  for unauthorized applications for 
jailbroken iPhones and iPads, reports 1.5 million visitors every day and generates $10 million in annual 
revenue). 
384 C12 (Joint Creators) at 19.  
385 Id. at 22. 
386 Letter from Marcia Hoffman, Senior Staff Attorney, Electronic  Frontier Foundation, to David O. 
Carson, General Counsel, U.S. Copyright Office (July 2, 2012), at 3.  

[PAGE 79]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 76 
alternatives is promising, the record is clear that the vast majority of mobile devices sold 
today contain technological measures that restrict users’ ability to install unauthorized 
applications.  Perhaps in the ensuing three years, market alternatives will evolve further, 
and unlocked devices will become the rule rather than the exception.   On the present 
record, the Register concludes that there remain a significant number of users that are 
adversely impacted by the technological measures applied to such devices. 
 
d. Statutory factors 
 
The first statutory factor requires the Register to consider the impact of the 
exemption on the “availability for use of copyrighted works.”387  As the Register 
concluded in 2010, 
 
[d]espite the enormous choices available to consumers, the 
record reveals that restrictions that do not implicate 
copyright interests are placed on independently created 
interoperable computer programs.  Thus, the existing 
market creates legal barriers for the use of copyrighted 
works.  An exemption would encourage the availability of 
additional applications for use on smartphones.  At the 
same time, there is no reason to believe that an exemption 
would discourage smartphone manufacturers and those who 
create the operating systems for those smartphones from 
continuing to do so.
388 
 
The record clearly supports the proposition that neither smartphone manufacturers 
nor those who create operating systems for such phones have been adversely affected by 
the exemption.  Since the 2010 exemption was granted, consumer adoption of 
smartphones has grown dramatically, and consumer choices have increased, as described 
previously. Moreover, the fact that neither Apple nor Google, the two dominant providers 
of smartphones and smartphone operating systems, objected to the proposed class during 
this proceeding, is strong evidence that there is unlikely to be a negative market 
impact.
389 
 
With respect to applications for use on smartphones, Joint Creators assert that 
jailbroken mobile devices lead to increased opportunities for piracy, arguing that 
“[m]yriad infringing applications are available to run on hacked devices.”
390  In support 
of that claim, opponents cite a handful of scattered press accounts,391 but are “unable to 
                                                
387 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(i).  
388 2010 Recommendation at 101.  
389 Apple did oppose the jailbreaking exemption in 2010.  
390 C12 (Joint Creators) at 21.  
391 Id. n.34. 

[PAGE 80]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 77 
quantify” the harm.392  The Register acknowledges that piracy is a significant and 
legitimate concern of the copyright community, but the evidence on the record 
demonstrates, at best, only a tenuous relationship between jailbreaking of smartphones 
and piracy.  Further, the proposed class is limited to those executing “lawfully obtained 
software applications.”393  On this record – where there is no substantial showing that 
jailbreaking of smartphones leads to piracy – the Register believes that this qualification 
offers sufficient protection to copyright owners.
394 
 
The first factor, therefore, favors exempting the proposed class.  
 
Neither factor two,395 concerning nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational 
purposes, nor factor three,396 concerning the impact on criticism, comment, and the like, 
is implicated by the proposed exemption.  These factors are therefore neutral. 
 
With respect to the fourth factor, the “effect of circumvention of technological 
measures on the market for or value of the copyrighted works,” the Register is not 
persuaded that the proposed exemption would adversely affect the value of the 
copyrighted firmware that is the class of works directly affected by the exemption.  As 
the Copyright Office observed in 2010, “it is quite possible that the exemption could 
increase the market for or value of such works, since the availability of additional 
applications to be used on smartphones may well make them more attractive to 
consumers.”397  There is nothing on the record to suggest that the increase in smartphone 
proliferation will slow if the exemption is granted.  Accordingly, the fourth factor favors 
granting the proposed exemption. 
 
e. Applicability to “tablets” 
 
After submitting its initial proposal, EFF proposed that the Register define “tablet 
computer,” for the purpose of this exemption, as: 
 
(a) a personal mobile computing device, typically featuring a 
                                                
392 Letter from Jesse M. Feder, Director of International Trade and Intellectual Property, Business Software 
Alliance to David O. Carson, General Counsel, U.S. Copyright Office (July 2, 2012), at 2. 
393 Joint Creators assert that the limitation provides  “hollow protection at best” because the language does 
not expressly prohibit infringing conduct.  C12 (Joint Creators) at 21.  The Register notes, however, that the 
regulation that implements the Librarian’s determination of appropriate exemptions has consistently recited  
that such exemptions apply only “to persons who engage in noninfringing uses ” of the designated classes of 
works.  See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40 (emphasis added).  Thus, the regulatory text has traditionally made  clear 
that parties who circumvent in order to engage in infringing conduct simply cannot avail themselves of the 
protections afforded by the designated exemptions.  
394 The Register notes that the record here differs markedly from that for Proposed Class 3, in which the 
evidence indicates a  strong correlation between circumvention of video game platforms and piracy.  
395 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(ii).  
396 Id. at § 1201(a)(1)(C)(iii). 
397 2010 Recommendation at 102.  

[PAGE 81]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 78 
touchscreen interface, 
 
(b) that contains hardware technically capable of running a wide 
variety of programs,  
 
(c) that is designed with technological measures that restrict the 
installation or modification of programs on the device, and  
 
(d) is not marketed primarily as a wireless telephone handset.398 
 
Joint Creators object, asserting that the definition is “exceptionally broad” and contains a 
number of “vague” qualifiers that “merely highlight[] the boundless nature of the 
proposal.”399  Joint Creators further assert that the proposal “does nothing to distinguish 
among the myriad mobile devices offered for distinct purposes,” and questions whether it 
is appropriate to define a “particular class of works”
400 in the context of “human interface 
characteristics” or for what purpose a device is marketed.401 
 
 The Register appreciates the appeal of designating an exemption that applies to 
smartphones as well as to devices that are, in many ways, arguably larger versions of 
smartphones.  At the same time, there is significant merit to the opposition’s concerns 
that the contours of this aspect of the proposed class are broad and ill defined.  That is, 
there is a wide range of devices that might fall within the proposed, or some other, 
definition of “tablet,” and significant distinctions among them in terms of the way they 
operate, their intended purpose, and the nature of the applications they can accommodate.  
For example, an ebook reading device might be considered a “tablet,” as might a 
handheld video game device or a laptop computer.  Indeed, as Joint Creators note, the 
definition of “personal mobile computing device” may itself be susceptible to a wide 
array of interpretations, each of which could be subject to its own analysis in this 
proceeding.  At least in this case, the record does not permit the Register to conduct the 
appropriate analysis with respect to the various types of devices that might fall within 
proponents’ broadly conceived “tablet” category. 
 
f. NTIA comments 
 
NTIA notes that “the record shows substantial and unprecedented support for this 
exemption,”
402 pointing to the hundreds of comments received from individuals as well 
as the petition signed by over 25,000 individuals in support of this exemption.403  NTIA 
                                                
398 E-Mail from Marcia Hoffman, Senior Staff Attorney, Electronic Frontier Foundation to Ben Golant, 
Assistant General Counsel, U.S. Copyright Office (June 6, 2012).  
399 Letter from Steven J. Metalitz, Counsel for the Joint Creators to David O. Carson, General Counsel, 
U.S. Copyright Offic e (June 15, 2012) [hereinafter Joint Creators’ Letter ]. 
400 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(B).  
401 Joint Creators’ Letter at 2.  
402 NTIA Letter at 11. 
403 Id. 

[PAGE 82]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 79 
notes that the record shows numerous noninfringing uses enabled by jailbreaking,404 and 
asserts that “the mobile application market has thrived, and continues to do so, despite – 
and possibly in part because of – the current exemption.”405  NTIA is further persuaded 
that the proposed class “should apply across platforms and devices where it is necessary 
to jailbreak or root devices,” including both mobile phones and tablets,
406 so that the 
exemption will “better reflect[] today’s technology.”407  NTIA supports EFF’s proffered 
definition of “tablet,” noting that the definition “appropriately does not constrain the 
physical dimensions” of the device subject to the exemption.408 
 
The Register and NTIA are in agreement that an appropriate exemption for 
smartphones is warranted but, as described above, the Register has determined that there 
is no current basis to extend such an exemption to include “tablets.” EFF’s proffered 
definition is broad and the record does not support a finding that the proposed exemption 
is necessary or appropriate for all of the various the devices that may fall within it. 
 
4. Recommendation 
 
For the reasons described above, with respect to smartphones, the proponent has 
satisfied its burden that technological measures applied to smartphone firmware have an 
adverse effect on noninfringing uses.  The statutory factors also tip in favor of granting 
the exemption. 
 
EFF has made a laudable effort in developing a definition that aims to capture the 
key characteristics of “tablets,” but the record simply does not provide a sufficient basis 
upon which to develop an appropriate definition for this diverse category of devices that 
would permit the Register to extend the proposed exemption beyond the smartphone 
exemption that the record supports.  Perhaps in future rulemakings, as mobile computing 
technology evolves, such a definition will be more attainable; on this record, however, 
the Register must decline to recommend that the exemption include tablets. 
 
                                                
404 Id. (describing various noninfringing uses).  
405 Id. at 12. 
406 Id. at 14. 
407 Id. 
408 Id. 

[PAGE 83]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 80 
Accordingly, in keeping with the record, the Register recommends that the 
Librarian designate a modified version of the proposed class that does not extend to 
tablets:409 
 
Computer programs that enable wireless telephone 
handsets to execute lawfully obtained software 
applications, where circumvention is accomplished for 
the sole purpose of enabling interoperability of such 
applications with computer programs on the telephone 
handset. 
                                                
409 At the hearing, opponents questioned the absence of the word “sole,” which a ppeared in the 2010 
exemption (“…where circumvention is accomplished for the sole purpose of enabling interoperability … ”), 
from this rulemaking’s proposal.  T Metalitz, May 17, 2012, at 96.  EFF asserted that it believed “sole” and 
“sole purpose” had the same meaning and that it had no objection to keeping the word “sole” in the 
exemption language.  T Hofmann, May 17, 2012, at 98.  Because the record does not contain any 
significant discussion about the impact of the change, and because the parties appear to be in agreement, 
the Register’s recommendation includes the phrase “sole purpose.”  

[PAGE 84]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 81 
 
F. Proposed Class 6:  Wireless telephone handsets – interoperability with 
alternative networks (“unlocking”) 
 
 Proponent Consumers Union (“CU”) proposes the Register recommend the 
following class of works: 
 
6A: Computer programs, in the form of firmware or 
software, including data used by those programs, that 
enable mobile devices to connect to a wireless 
communications network, when circumvention is initiated 
by the owner of the device to remove a restriction that 
limits the device's operability to a limited number of 
networks, or circumvention is initiated to connect to a 
wireless communications network. 
 
 Proponent Youghiogheny Communications, LLC (“Youghiogheny”) proposes the 
Register recommend the following class of works: 
 
6B:  Computer programs, in the form of firmware or 
software, including data used by those programs, that 
enable wireless devices to connect to a wireless 
communications network, when circumvention is initiated 
by the owner of the copy of the computer program 
principally in order to connect to a wireless 
communications network and access to such 
communications network is authorized by the operator of 
such communications network. 
 
 Proponents MetroPCS Communications, Inc. (“MetroPCS”) and The Competitive 
Carriers Association (“RCA”) propose the Register recommend the following class of 
works: 
 
6C:  Computer programs, in the form of firmware or 
software, including data used by those programs, that 
enable wireless devices to connect to a wireless 
communications network, when circumvention is initiated 
by the owner of the copy of the computer program solely in 
order to connect to a wireless communications network and 
access to such communications network is authorized by 
the operator of such communications network. 

[PAGE 85]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 82 
 
1. Proponents’ case 
 
 Proponents seek an exemption to permit circumvention to enable wireless devices 
to interoperate with networks other than the network on which the device was originally 
used. 
 
a. Background 
 
 In 2006 410 and again in 2010411 the Register recommended, and the Librarian 
designated, a class of works that permitted the circumvention of technological protection 
measures applied to firmware in wireless handsets for the purpose of switching to a 
wireless network other than the network on which the phone was originally used. 
 
Each of the three proposals presently before the Register seeks to expand the 2010 
exemption by replacing “wireless telephone handsets” with “wireless devices,” to cover 
tablets and other wireless devices whose markets have evolved since the 2010 
rulemaking.  Because the central features of each proposal are substantially the same, the 
Register considers the three together. 
 
The New America Foundation’s Open Technology Initiative (“NAF”) filed 
comments in support of an exemption, encouraging the Register to expand the class to 
include “a variety of dynamic multipurpose devices,”
412 as well as to include both new 
and used devices.413  NAF also urges the Register to drop the requirement that unlocked 
phones may be used on networks only when the user has approval of the network’s 
operator, arguing that some networks “want to support an open network rather than 
require authorization.”414  Finally, NAF contends that the class should be updated to 
include “wireless communications networks,” as opposed to “wireless 
telecommunications networks,” and that unlocking does not infringe on any copyright 
interests.
415 
                                                
410 The 2006 class exempted “[c]omputer programs in the form of firmware that enable wireless telephone 
handsets to connect to a wireless telephone communication network, when circumvention is accomplished 
for the sole purpose of lawfully connecting to a wireless telephone communication network.”  2006 
Recommendation at 42.  
411 The 2010 class exempted “[c]omputer programs, in the form of firmware or software, that enable used 
wireless telephone handsets to connect to a wireless telecommunications network, when circumvention is 
initiated by the owner of the copy of the computer program solely in order to connect to a wireless 
telecommunications network and access to the network is authorized by the operator of the network.”  2010 
Recommendation at 105.  
412 C6 (New America Foundation) at 7.  
413 Id. at 8. 
414 Id. at 9. 
415 C6 (New America Foundation)  at 9-10. 

[PAGE 86]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 83 
 
b. Asserted noninfringing uses 
 
CU advances four theories of noninfringing use: (1) that the connection between a 
wireless device and the mobile network constitutes a “procedure, process, system, [or] 
method of operation” which is not entitled to copyright protection under 17 U.S.C. § 
102(b);416 (2) that the use of software locks to prevent customer switching constitutes 
copyright misuse;417 (3) that the modification to the firmware is noninfringing under 
Section 117;418 and (4) that “[r]e-flashing a handset does not change the underlying 
mobile phone software, but rather . . . [the] underlying variables intended by the software 
designer to be changed.”
419 
 
Youghiogheny, MetroPCS, and RCA each assert that switching networks or 
carriers does not implicate copyright interests at all,
420 and even if it did, such conduct 
would be permitted under Section 117.421   
 
 MetroPCS also asserts that its proposal is aimed at circumventing only that which 
is necessary to cause the wireless device to interoperate with other networks, not the 
technological measures that protect other copyrighted content on the device,
422 and that 
there are no technological impediments to implementing separate locks for network 
access and downloadable content.
423 
 
c. Asserted adverse impact 
 
CU asserts that “there is no dispute that mobile device locks constitute 
technological protection measures that control access to arguably protectable works,”424 
citing the Register’s 2010 Recommendation as support for its proposition.  CU describes 
a variety of locking mechanisms that it asserts are used by wireless carriers to prevent 
consumers from switching among them.425  Both Youghiogheny and MetroPCS, 
companies with significant interests in the wireless industries,426 assert the existence of 
                                                
416 P6A (CU) at 8-10. 
417 Id. at 10-13. 
418 Id. at 13 (citing the 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,831).  
419 Id. at 14 (citing Comment 5B (MetroPCS) in the 2008 Rulemaking and 2010 Final Rule 75 Fed. Reg. at 
43,831). 
420 P6B (Youghiogheny) at 4 -5; P6C (MetroPCS) at 16; P6C (RCA) at 4.  
421 P6B (Youghiogheny) at 4 -5; P6C (MetroPCS) at 16 -17; P6C ( RCA) at 4-5. 
422 P6B (Youghiogheny) at 25.  
423 Id. at 27. 
424 P6A (CU) at 5. 
425 Id. at 5-7 (citing the 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,830).  
426 See P6B (Youghiogheny) at 3; P6C (MetroPCS) at 7.  

[PAGE 87]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 84 
software locks that limit the use of phones that “are technically capable of being used to 
receive service on multiple compatible wireless providers’ networks.”427 
 
CU alleges that if the exemption is not granted, individuals will not be permitted 
to unlock their old devices.
428  They note that “huge numbers”429 of people have already 
unlocked their phones under the 2006 and 2010 exemptions, and assert that ending the 
exemption “will lead to higher device prices for consumers, increased electronic waste, 
higher costs associated with switching service providers, and more widespread mobile 
customer lock-in.”430  CU asserts that individuals would also not be able to unlock new 
devices that they obtain at a discount from a wireless carrier and then sell at a higher 
market price, so as to “recover[] the value they invest in the subsidy scheme.”
431  CU also 
notes that it would continue to be a violation of the anticircumvention provision to unlock 
tablets and other wireless devices.
432 
 
Youghiogheny asserts that software locks are impediments to a competitive 
marketplace.
433  It notes that absent the exemption, consumers are forced to continue to 
do business with the carrier that sold the device to the consumer in the first instance, or to 
discard the device.434  The proposed exemption would allow carriers like Youghiogheny 
“let customers who want to save money continue the use of their prior devices rather than 
force them to buy new ones.”
435 
 
MetroPCS asserts that the exemption is particularly important in this rulemaking 
cycle because the industry is converging around new wireless communications 
technology, and “[c]ustomers should not be bound to a particular network in perpetuity 
simply to have continued use of the latest cutting edge wireless devices they acquired.”
436  
MetroPCS further asserts that although unlocked devices are available for purchase from 
certain carriers, those who want to use an older device are not accommodated,
437 noting 
that the mere possibility that “certain carriers may unlock devices of customers who have 
fulfilled their contracts does not eliminate the need for the exemption.”438 
                                                
427 P6B (Youghiogheny) at 3; P6C (MetroPCS) at 14 -15. 
428 P6A (CU) at 24. 
429 Id. (citing a June 2011 press report that over one million unlocked iPhones are on the T -Mobile 
network). 
430 Id. at 24. 
431 Id. 
432 Id. at 26. 
433 P6B (Youghiogheny) at 4.  
434 Id. at 5. 
435 Id. 
436 P6C (MetroPCS) at 9.  
437 Id. at 19. 
438 Id. (emphasis in original).  

[PAGE 88]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 85 
 
RCA, a trade association whose membership is comprised primarily of small 
wireless carriers, asserts that connecting a wireless device to a network does not implicate 
copyright law “and thus does not infringe on the rights of any copyright holder.”
439  RCA 
also asserts that cell phone locks “bind wireless devices to specific carriers, not for the 
purpose of protecting copyrighted material, but rather to enforce their business models, 
and therefore significantly hinder a consumer’s freedom to choose his or her wireless 
provider.”
440  RCA alleges that before the first exemption was designated in 2006: 
 
“[c]hurn rates had been decreasing for a number of years,” 
as more and more consumers, facing the significant and 
escalating cost of purchasing new devices when switching 
wireless providers, opted to stay with their current provider.  
Since then, industry-wide churn rates have increased, now 
that consumers can unlock their wireless devices and use 
them on other networks.441 
 
d. Argument under statutory factors 
 
CU asserts that the four statutory factors weigh in favor of the exemption.442  
Specifically, it contends that the availability for use of copyrighted works will be 
enhanced because “[a]lthough unlocked mobile devices are widely sold, the benefits of 
an unlocked device are not available to the vast majority of current device owners.”
443  
CU also asserts that the availability for use of works for nonprofit, archival, preservation, 
and educational purposes will be advanced because of the significant amount of webbased software and the number of educational applications available for the Android 
platform.
444  CU contends that the third factor, concerning the impact on criticism and 
commentary, is neutral, and that the fourth factor, which evaluates the market for 
copyrighted works, favors granting the exemption because “the programs that facilitate 
communications connectivity are typically developed by device manufacturers, then 
purchased or licensed by carriers.”
445  CU adds that “[c]ircumvention of device locks will 
not significantly affect the market for these programs.”446 
 
                                                
439 P6C (RCA) at 4. 
440 Id. at 5. 
441 Id. at 6 (quoting Fifteenth FCC Wireless Competition Report  ¶¶ 261-62) (internal citations omitted) 
(alterations in original)).  
442 P6A (CU) at 14. 
443 Id. at 15. 
444 Id. 
445 Id. at 17. 
446 Id. 

[PAGE 89]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 86 
CU also encourages the Librarian and the Register to consider the consumer 
impact of the wireless carriers’ subsidy-based business models that lock customers into 
long contracts,447 unfairly penalize low-income consumers,448 and prevent consumers 
from recovering the value of their investments.449  CU asserts that mobile locks harm the 
environment because old phones are easier to throw out than to use on another carrier’s 
network,450 and they allege that device portability would encourage market innovation 
and bring cheaper products to market451 and foster competition among wireless 
carriers.452 
 
MetroPCS offers a similar analysis of the statutory factors, asserting with respect 
to the first factor, that absent the proposed exemption, “a high percentage of wireless 
customers are being restricted from full and fair use of their lawfully acquired wireless 
devices and lawfully licensed copyrighted works after fulfillment of their initial carrier 
contract terms.”
453  The exemption is necessary, says MetroPCS, so that the “operating 
system . . . and all copyrighted works which are licensed without regard to the serving 
carrier” are “available for use by the customers” that own the device.
454  
 
With respect to the second and third factors, MetroPCS asserts that it is not aware 
of any harm resulting from the 2006 and 2010 exemptions.
455 
 
 On the fourth factor, MetroPCS argues that enabling a customer to switch carriers 
“has little or no effect” on the market for device firmware or for devices themselves, and 
posits that such activity might actually increase the value of devices, and thus the 
firmware embedded in them.
456 
 
2. Opposition 
 
CTIA—The Wireless Association (“CTIA”), a trade association comprised of 
various commercial wireless service providers, objects to the proposals, as drafted, but 
notes that its members do not object to a “narrowly tailored and carefully limited 
exception” to permit individual customers of wireless carriers to unlock phones for the 
                                                
447 Id.  
448 Id. at 19. 
449 Id. at 21. 
450 Id. at 22.  MetroPCS also advances an environmental argument.  See  C6C (MetroPCS) at 28.  
451 Id. at 23. 
452 Id. 
453 P6C (MetroPCS) at 11.  
454 Id. 
455 Id. at 12. 
456 Id. 

[PAGE 90]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 87 
purpose of switching networks.457  Specifically, CTIA supports an exemption that is “no 
broader than”: 
 
Computer programs, in the form of firmware or software, 
that enable used wireless telephone handsets to connect to a 
wireless telecommunications network, when circumvention 
is undertaken by an individual customer of a wireless 
service provider who owns initiated by the owner of the 
copy of the computer program solely for noncommercial 
purposes in order to connect to a wireless 
telecommunications network other than that of the service 
provider and access to the network is authorized by the 
operator of the network.
458 
 
CTIA asserts that the practice of locking cell phones is an essential part of the 
wireless industry’s predominant business model, which involves subsidizing the cost of 
wireless handsets “in exchange for a commitment from the customer that the phone will 
be used on that carrier’s service (and/or that it will not be used elsewhere), so that the 
subsidy can eventually be recouped through payment of recurring and usage charges.”
459 
CITA alleges that the industry has been challenged by “large scale phone trafficking 
operations” that buy large quantities of pre-paid phones, unlock them, and resell them in 
foreign markets where carriers do not subsidize handsets.
460  Those engaged in bulk 
unlocking, says CTIA, profit by “stealing the subsidies that carriers intended to benefit 
consumers.”
461 
 
CTIA also alleges that the proposed exemptions are not necessary because “the 
largest nationwide carriers . . . have liberal, publicly available unlocking policies,”
462 and 
because “[u]nlocked (unsubsidized) phones are freely available from third party providers 
– many at low prices.”463 
 
Broadly, CTIA also argues that the proponents have failed to meet their burden,
464 
and that the Librarian and the Register improperly failed to apply the burden during the 
2010 rulemaking.465  CTIA also asserts proponents’ claim that unlocking phones is 
protected under Section 117 is flawed because the owners of cell phones are not owners 
                                                
457 C2 (CTIA) at 2.  
458 Id. at 64 (alterations in original).  
459 Id. at 6. 
460 Id. 
461 Id. at 7. 
462 Id. at 8-9 (describing unlocking policies for T -Mobile, Verizon Wireless, AT&T, and Virgin Mobile). 
463 Id. at 5 (citing various lists of unlocked cell phones available in the marketplace).  
464 Id. at 17-23. 
465 Id. at 24-26. 

[PAGE 91]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 88 
of the software on those phones,466 that unlocking is not an “essential step” to operating 
the phone,467 that the proponents have failed to properly address – or have misapplied – 
the statutory factors,468 and that there are alternatives to circumvention that achieve the 
proponents’ intended objectives.469 
 
Joint Creators470 take no position on the proposals, but encourage the Register 
closely to consider the state of the record with respect to the proponents’ proposed 
expansion of the current exemption.
471 
 
3. Discussion 
 
The Register is compelled to note that the record developed by the proponents is 
lacking and they improperly rely on the Copyright Office’s 2010 Recommendation as 
evidence for many of their factual assertions.  Merely citing to conclusions drawn by the 
Register in past rulemakings does not itself create a factual record for purposes of a 
current rulemaking.  As the Register has noted many times in the past, the record must be 
developed and reviewed de novo in each proceeding; a proponent is required to present a 
prima facie case, based on current evidence, that it is entitled to the proposed 
exemption.
472  
 
RCA encourages the Register and the Librarian to “adopt a presumption that the 
unlocking exemption remains valid beyond the traditional three year period,” asserting 
that the three-year limitation is “nowhere to be found in Section 1201.”
473  RCA is correct 
that the requirement does not exist in the statute itself; rather, it appears in the legislative 
history, which states unambiguously that “the assessment of adverse impacts on 
particular categories of works is to be determined de novo” in each triennial rulemaking 
proceeding.
474  Accordingly, the Register has consistently applied such a standard in 
evaluating proposed exemptions under Section 1201. 
                                                
466 Id. at 35-37. 
467 Id. at 37-38. 
468 Id. at 38-42. 
469 Id. at 42-45. 
470 The trade groups represented by Joint Creators are the Association of American Publishers, the 
American Society of Media Photographers, the Business Software Alliance, the Entertainment Software 
Association, the Motion Picture Associatio n of America, the Picture Archive Council of America, and the 
Recording Industry Association of America.  C12 (Joint Creators) at 1 -2. 
471 Id. at 32-33. 
472 See 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,8236 (“Proposed classes are reviewed de novo.  The existence 
of a previously designated class creates no presumption or consideration of a new class, but rather the 
proponent of such a class of works must make a prima facie case in each three-year period.”); 2006 Final 
Rule, 71 Fed. Reg. at 68,478 (“ [P]roponents of renewal of an existing exemption must make their case de 
novo …”); 2003 Final Rule, 68 Fed. Reg. at 62,013 (“Although a similar class was exempted in the first 
rulemaking, proponents are required to make their case anew every three years.”).  
473 P6C (RCA) at 7. 
474 H.R. REP. NO. 105-551, pt. 2, at 37 (1998).  

[PAGE 92]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 89 
 
a. Noninfringing uses 
 
Proponents assert that the owners of mobile phones are also the owners of the 
copies of the computer programs on those phones and that, as owners, they are entitled to 
exercise their rights under Section 117,475 which gives the owner of a copy of a computer 
program the privilege to make or authorize the making of another copy or adaptation of 
that computer program under certain circumstances, such as to permit the program to be 
used on a particular machine.
476  CTIA asserts that the Section 117 privileges do not 
apply because owners of wireless devices do not necessarily own the software on those 
devices, and that proponents have “presented no evidence that the present-day customer 
agreements vest ownership of the copies of copyright-protected software in the owner of 
a wireless phone.”
477  Indeed, CTIA asserts that most wireless carriers’ agreements 
“confirm that the software is licensed – not sold – to the owner of the phone.”478  CTIA 
also argues that the privilege does not extend to the customer’s conduct because the 
making of a new copy or adaptation in order to use the mobile phone on a network other 
than the original network is not an “essential step” in the operation of a locked phone.479 
 
The Register confronted similar arguments in the 2010 proceeding.
480  In 2010, 
the Office reviewed relevant case law governing the determination of who “owns” a copy 
of a computer program for purposes of Section 117 when a license or agreement imposes 
restrictions on the use of the computer program, concluding that the state of the law was 
unclear.
481  The Office nevertheless determined that the proponents had made a prima 
facie case that mobile phone owners are the owners of the copies,482 and that the 
opponents had rebutted that evidence only as it related to certain carriers for which 
customer agreements were entered into the record.483  The Register concluded that “[t]he 
record therefore leads to the conclusion that a substantial portion of mobile phone owners 
also own the copies of the software on their phones.”
484 
 
The Register also concluded that making RAM copies of the software in order to 
operate the wireless handset – even if on another network – is noninfringing under 
                                                
475 P6A (CU) at 13; P6B (Youghiogheny) at 5; P6C (MetroPCS) at 16 -17; P6C (RCA) at 4- 5. 
476 See 17 U.S.C. § 117. 
477 C2 (CTIA) at 35. 
478 Id. at 36-37 (emphasis in original) (citing pertinent portions of customer agr eements for AT&T, T -
Mobile, Verizon Wireless, and Sprint).  
479 Id. at 37-38 (quoting 17 U.S.C. § 117(a)(1)).  
480 See generally 2010 Recommendation at 105- 74. 
481 2010 Recommendation at 132.  
482 Id. at 132. 
483 Id. (“With respect to iPhones and with respect to phones  sold by Virgin Mobile and T -Mobile, 
opponents of the proposed class have arguably rebutted [proponents ’] case.”). 
484 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,831.  

[PAGE 93]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 90 
Section 117 because the statute “unambiguously states that it is not an infringement for 
the owner of a copy of a computer program to make a copy when the making of that copy 
is an essential step in the utilization of that software in conjunction with the machine.”485  
The Office found that because “the software cannot be used in the phone (a device that, 
for purposes of Section 117, qualified as a ‘machine’) unless the RAM copies are made, 
the making of those copies clearly is an essential step in its utilization.”
486 
 
 Finally, the Register recognized that making modifications within the computer 
program embedded in the phone to operate on another wireless carrier’s network would 
in some cases not even implicate Section 117 “because the elimination and insertion of 
codes or digits, or completely reflashing a phone, cannot be considered an infringement 
of the computer program controlling the device.”
487  In other cases, where more 
substantial changes were required, the Register determined that although such changes 
could implicate the right to create derivative works, they might be privileged under 
Section 117.  This provision permits the making of “a new copy or adaptation” that is 
created as an essential step in the utilization of the computer program in conjunction with 
a machine.
488 
 
 CTIA criticized the Register’s conclusions with respect to Section 117, alleging 
that the Copyright Office “improperly shifted the burden of proof” when it concluded that 
proponents had made a prima facie case that mobile phone owners owned the software on 
those phones, while also “acknowledg[ing] that the agreements and evidence that were 
submitted supported the conclusion that owners of the phones were not owners of the 
software on those phones.”489  CTIA further asserts that the Librarian erred when he: 
 
faulted the wireless network opponents for the state of the 
evidentiary record, stating that “they have not presented 
evidence that this [phone owners’ lack of software 
ownership] is always the case” and that “[t]he record 
therefore leads to the conclusion that a substantial portion 
of mobile phone owners also own the copies of the 
software on their phones.”
490 
 
                                                
485 2010 Recommendation at 133.  
486 Id. at 133-34 (citing the Report of the National Commission on New  Technological Uses of Copyrighted 
Works at 13). 
487 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,831 (“When specific codes or digits are altered to identify the new 
network to which the phone will connect, those minor alterations of data also do not implicate any of  the 
exclusive rights of copyright owners.  And complete reflashing does not even constitute circumvention of 
an access control because it actually deletes the copy of the entire work that had been protected by the 
access control, thereby permanently denyi ng access to that work.”).  
488 Id. 
489 C2 (CTIA) at 25 (emphasis in original).  
490 Id. at 26 (emphasis and alterations in original).  

[PAGE 94]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 91 
CTIA mischaracterizes the Register’s 2010 findings.  It is true that the Office 
determined that proponents had made a prima facie case that owners of mobile phones 
owned the software on their phones, but it also determined that opponents had “arguably 
rebutted that case” only “with respect to those phones sold by Virgin Mobile and TMobile.”491   
 
Further, the Register found that: 
 
[I]t is impossible to conclude from the record in this 
proceeding that proponents’ case with respect to ownership 
has been rebutted with respect to any other particular 
carrier.  In other words, the Register cannot conclude that 
in all cases, or even in most cases, the wireless carrier 
retains ownership of the copies of the software that are 
fixed in the phones that they sell.
492 
 
Thus, it is not that the Register reversed the evidentiary burden as CTIA contends, but 
rather, that the Register reviewed the evidence on the record before her and concluded 
that proponents had established a prima facie case that mobile phone owners also own the 
software on those phones.  Opponents were free to rebut that case, and they did so, but 
only as to certain wireless carriers.  The record thus reflected, as the Register explained, 
that “a substantial portion of mobile phone owners also own the copies of the software on 
their phones.”493  That conclusion was entirely consistent with the record as well as the 
procedural parameters of this rulemaking. 
 
With respect to the determination of software “ownership,” the Register observed 
that “given the uncertain state of the law … it is difficult to predict with confidence 
whether a court would conclude who is the owner of the copy of the software on [a] 
phone.”494  Then, the parties relied primarily upon Krause v. Titleserv, Inc.495 as the 
leading authority regarding ownership of computer programs.496  Since the Register 
rendered her 2010 Recommendation, the case law has evolved.  In 2010, the Ninth 
Circuit issued its decision in Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc.,497 holding that “a software user is a 
licensee rather than an owner of a copy where the copyright owner (1) specifies that the 
user is granted a license; (2) significantly restricts the user’s ability to transfer the 
software; and (3) imposes notable use restrictions.”
498 
                                                
491 2010 Recommendation at 132.  
492 Id. at 132-33. 
493 Id. at 133. 
494 Id. at 132. 
495 402 F.3d 119 (2d Cir. 2005).  
496 2010 Recommendation at 124.  
497 621 F.3d 1102 (9th Cir. 2010).   
498 Id. at 1111.  Vernor’s factors differ from the factors set forth in Krause, the case relied upon by the 
parties in the Office’s last rulemaking proceeding.  Unlike Vernor, the Second Circuit in Krause looked at:  

[PAGE 95]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 92 
 
Proponents have made only a cursory attempt at responding to Vernor.  Indeed, 
“despite the recognized importance of the underlying agreements pursuant to which the 
software is distributed, not one proponent has cited to any agreement by any carrier that 
sells copies of its software.”
499  CTIA, in contrast, cites to agreements from several major 
national wireless carriers in an effort to “confirm that the software on the mobile handsets 
is licensed – not sold – to the owner of the phone.”
500  In its reply comments, MetroPCS 
asserts that wireless carrier agreements likely fail to establish lack of customer ownership 
under Vernor because wireless providers do not impose notable use restrictions.
501  
Specifically, it contends that “to MetroPCS’ knowledge, no wireless provider has taken 
the position that customers are unable to sell devices that they no longer use, or transfer 
them to a spouse, child or friend.”
502 
 
The Register concludes that the state of the law remains unclear.  Although 
Vernor and Krause are useful guideposts in considering the status of software ownership, 
they are controlling precedent in only two circuits and are inconsistent in their approach; 
whether and how those standards would be applied in other circuits is unknown.  
Moreover, although CTIA contends that the four agreements in the record unequivocally 
support a finding that the software is merely licensed to, rather than owned by, the 
user,
503 in reviewing those agreements, the Register believes that the question may be a 
closer call.504 
 
Thus, the Register concludes that although proponents have failed to present any 
evidence in support of ownership, the lack of certainty in the law makes it impossible for 
proponents to have established their case in any event.  Put differently, even if proponents 
had submitted agreements to support a claim that wireless handset software is owned 
rather than licensed, the uncertain state of the law would still preclude the Register from 
                                                                                                                                            
(1) whether substantial consideration was paid for the copy; (2) whether the copy was created for the sole 
benefit of the purchaser; (3) whether the copy was customized to serve the purchaser’s use; (4) whether the 
copy was stored on property owned by the  purchaser; (5) whether the creator reserved the right to repossess 
the copy; (6) whether the creator agreed that the purchaser had the right to possess and use the programs 
forever regardless of whether the relationship between the parties terminated; and  (7) whether the purchaser 
was free to discard or destroy the copy anytime it wished.  Krause, 402 F.3d at 124. 
499 T Joseph, May 31, 2012, at 49. 
500 C2 (CTIA) at 36 (citing pertinent portions of agreements from AT&T, Sprint, T -Mobile, and Verizon 
Wireless). 
501 See R6 (MetroPCS) at 16- 17. 
502 Id. at 17. 
503 C2 (CTIA) at 35-37. 
504 For example, the Verizon Wireless agreement cited by CTIA for this purpose does not appear to contain 
any transfer or use restrictions, although it does specify that the agreement is a lice nse and not an 
ownership transfer.  See C2 (CTIA) at 36-37.  Similarly, although the Sprint agreement specifies a license, 
and contains transfer restrictions, it is unclear, at best, whether the agreement contains use restrictions.  See 
id. at 37.  It is worth noting that none of the agreements cited appear to contain restrictions as stringent as 
those in Vernor.  See 621 F.3d at 1104-05 (describing activation codes and license tracking); id. at 1105 
(describing “required destruction of copies of previous v ersions” of the software).  

[PAGE 96]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 93 
developing conclusions sufficient to permit determination of the software ownership 
issue.  In view of the legal uncertainty, the record compels a finding that some subset of 
wireless customers – that is, anyone considered to own the software on their phones 
under applicable precedent – is entitled to exercise the Section 117 privilege. 
 
CTIA also contends that because unlocking a wireless phone is not an “essential 
step” in the operation of that phone, Section 117 is inapposite.
505  CTIA criticizes the 
Register’s reliance on Krause in the 2010 rulemaking, noting that in that case, the 
software at issue “was a custom ordered program created for a particular user who 
changed computer systems,” which is “significantly different than standardized phone 
software sold and purchased for use on a specific network.”506  The Register disagrees, 
and concludes again that  
 
[m]odifications to the firmware or software on the phone 
may be necessary to make the device functional with 
another service and better serve the legitimate needs of the 
consumer.  From a copyright perspective, these individual 
changes benefit the purchaser despite the fact that some 
wireless carriers would like to have complete control over 
the device by restricting its use to their service.  But this 
was precisely the concern that was expressed in many parts 
of the CONTU Report – that protection for computer 
programs had the capacity to lead to anti-competitive 
practices and that the use of copyright in computer 
programs was a means to that anti-competitive end.
507 
 
b. Adverse impact 
 
It is undisputed that certain wireless devices are “locked” to a particular carrier’s 
network and that such locks are embedded in software protected by technological 
measures.
508   
 
Although proponents provide broad, generalized assertions of the harm that will 
ensue to consumers and small wireless carriers in the event that the exemption does not 
continue, none provide evidence of the “distinct, verifiable and measurable impacts” that 
are required to satisfy the proponents’ burden of proof.
509  For example, MetroPCS 
                                                
505 C2 (CTIA) at 37-38. 
506 Id. at 38. 
507 2010 Recommendation at 137 (citing CONTU Report at 23).  
508 See generally P6A (CU) at 5-7 (discussing various types of carrier locking mechanisms); P6B 
(Youghiogheny) at 3 n.1 (describing locki ng mechanisms); C2 (CTIA) at 4 -10, 61-62 (discussing wireless 
industry business models and the role of carrier locking mechanisms).  
509 2010 Recommendation at 10 (“The required showing of ‘substantial’ adverse effect is drawn from the 
legislative history, wh ere the requirement is variously stated as substantial adverse impact, distinct, 
verifiable, and measurable impacts, and ‘more than de minimis’ impacts.’  Similarly, for proof of “likely” 

[PAGE 97]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 94 
asserts that “[a]s a general matter, the behavior of the nationwide carriers – which have 
had the most aggressive device locking policies – has not improved since the current 
exemption was approved,”510 but provides only scattered anecdotal evidence to support 
the claim. 
 
Similarly, Youghiogheny asserts simply that, without the exemption, a device 
owner who seeks to switch carriers would either be unable to do so, or would be forced to 
discard the device because it remains tethered to the carrier that the owner no longer 
wishes to use.
511  “The resulting harm is substantial,” says Youghiogheny, “not only 
through forced termination of the non-infringing activity, but also in presenting 
substantial risks and uncertainties for smaller carriers like Youghiogheny that let 
customers who want to save money continue use of their prior device rather than force 
them to buy new ones.”
512  
 
Likewise, CU asserts, in extremely broad terms, that the adverse effects are 
simply that “it will become illegal under the DMCA for mobile device owners to unlock 
their own used devices,”
513 and that, as to new devices, “some consumers who unlock 
new phones to sell them may actually be committing crimes.”514  In support of its claim, 
CU cites to the prior rulemaking, portions of the DMCA, and a small handful of press 
accounts about the popularity of unlocking.515 
 
RCA asserts: 
 
Unlocking is particularly important for rural and regional 
carriers that lack the scope and scale to gain access to the 
latest, most iconic devices directly from the equipment 
manufacturer which, in turn, prevents rural customers from 
accessing the latest devices.  Conversely, a failure to extend 
the exemption would have a substantial “adverse effect on 
noninfringing uses” of wireless devices and their associated 
firmware, software, and data.
516 
 
 CTIA argues that the proposed exemption is unnecessary because the market 
already provides a variety of wireless devices, some subsidized and locked to a particular 
                                                                                                                                            
adverse effects on noninfringing uses, the Register found that a pro ponent must prove by a preponderance 
of evidence that the harm alleged is more likely than not; a proponent may not rely on speculation alone to 
sustain a prima facie case of likely adverse effects on noninfringing uses.”) (citations omitted).  
510 P6C (MetroPCS) at 2.  
511 P6B (Youghiogheny) at 5.  
512 Id. 
513 P6A (CU) at 24. 
514 Id. at 25. 
515 Id. 
516 P6C (RCA) at 3 (citing 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,830).  

[PAGE 98]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 95 
carrier, others unlocked, but available at a higher cost.517  In support of its claim, it 
provides links to a number of retailers that offer unlocked wireless phones,518 and 
provides lists of over one hundred unlocked devices available through major national 
retailers such as Best Buy, Wal-Mart, and Radio Shack.519  Moreover, CTIA asserts that 
“[w]ireless carriers are willing to unlock handsets in a wide variety of circumstances,”520 
in support of which it cites to unlocking policies for several major national cell phone 
carriers.521 
 
 Although proponents acknowledge that unlocked mobile devices are widely 
available for purchase,
522 they contend that an exemption is still necessary because some 
devices sold by carriers are permanently locked, and because a number of the unlocking 
policies contain restrictions and limitations, or such policies do not apply to all devices 
available from the carrier.
523  
 
Thus, say proponents, “the benefits of an unlocked device are not available to the 
vast majority of current device owners.”524 As MetroPCS argues, “[w]hile some unlocked 
wireless devices may be available for purchase, this prospect does not address the needs 
of the individual consumer who already has purchased a wireless device,”525 and that, as 
in 2010, “[t]here are still legacy phones … that are locked and cannot be used on an 
alternative wireless network.”
526  RCA notes that a recent Federal Communications 
Commission study found that “the cost of purchasing a new device represents a 
significant deterrent to consumers wishing to switch wireless providers.”
527 
 
 The Register concludes that the record before her supports a finding that, with 
respect to new wireless handsets, there are ample alternatives to circumvention – that is, 
the marketplace has evolved such that there is now a wide array of unlocked phone 
options available to consumers.  While it is true that not every wireless device is available 
unlocked, and it is true that wireless carriers’ unlocking polices are not free from all 
restrictions and sometimes require that certain procedural requirements be met, the record 
                                                
517 C2 (CTIA) at 4-5. 
518 Id. at 5. 
519 Id. at Ex. A (listing unlocked phone models available through carriers or national retailers); id. at Ex. B 
(showing market prices for unlocked phones available on prepaid plans through national retailers).  
520 Id. at 8. 
521 Id. at 8-9 (summarizing unlocking policies for T -Mobile, Verizon Wireless, AT&T, and Virgin Mobile, 
which CTIA asserts constitute “the vast majority of the cell phone market”).  
522 P6A (CU) at 15. 
523 See R8 (CU) at 9-10.  
524 P6A (CU) at 15. 
525 P6C (MetroPCS) at 19.  
526 P6C (MetroPCS) at 2 -3 (quoting 2010 Recommendation at 154).  
527 P6C (RCA) at 5 (citing Implementation o f Section 6002(b) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act 
of 1993; Annual Report and Analysis of Competitive Market Conditions with Respect to Mobile Wireless, 
Including Commercial Mobile Services, Fifteenth Report, 26 FCC Rcd. 9664 ¶¶ 254 -55 (2011)). 

[PAGE 99]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 96 
clearly demonstrates that there is a wide range of alternatives from which consumers may 
choose in order to obtain an unlocked wireless phone.  On this record, the Register 
concludes that with respect to newly purchased phones, proponents have not satisfied the 
burden of showing adverse effects related to a technological protection measure.  
 
With respect to “legacy” phones, however – that is, used (or perhaps unused) 
phones previously purchased or otherwise acquired by a consumer – the record supports a 
different finding.   The record demonstrates that there is significant consumer interest and 
demand in using legacy phones on carriers other than the one that originally sold the 
phone to the consumer.  The record also supports a finding that owners of legacy phones 
– particularly phones that have not been used on any wireless network for some period of 
time – may have difficulty obtaining unlocking codes from wireless carriers.  
 
The Register observes that CTIA cites to various wireless carrier agreements as 
the basis for its position that unlocking codes are readily available in most 
circumstances.
528  Because such agreements are typically in effect only during the period 
of time that a handset owner is actually a customer of the service, it calls into question 
how a user of a legacy phone that has not been used on its original carrier’s network for 
some time might obtain such a code.
529  Moreover, wireless carrier agreements frequently 
change,530 and though the record reflects that current agreements with certain carriers 
explicitly permit unlocking under certain circumstances, and when certain reasonable 
administrative burdens have been met, it is uncertain whether this will remain true in the 
future, or whether prior iterations of the agreement, under which legacy phones may have 
been sold, contain those same provisions. 
                                                
528 See C2 (CTIA) at 8-9. 
529 See T Desai, May 31, 2012, at 25:  
AT&T and T -Mobile will help some of their customers unlock their 
devices to their networks, but only if the unlocking is requested by an 
individual who is a current, or at least a past, customer of t he company.  
This means that in the case of a customer who receives a used device 
free or at low cost that is – that is locked to another carrier . . . as far as 
we can tell, it is not possible to get the carrier to which the device is 
locked to provide th e unlocking service.  
Of the four agreements cited by CTIA, two explicitly refer to former customers (AT&T and T -Mobile), and 
one supplies the unlocking code in the agreement itself (Verizon).  See C2 (CTIA) at 8-9.  The Register 
notes that these agreements  represent only a portion of the wireless industry and that it remains unclear 
whether other wireless carriers have similar provisions in their agreements.  Put differently, 
notwithstanding the additional clarity that these three agreements provide with re spect to their respective 
carriers, there remain a significant number of wireless handset users for whom unlocking policies are, at 
best, unclear. 
530 See, e.g., Verizon Wireless Customer Agreement, www.verizonwireless.com/customer -agreement.shtml 
(last visited Oct. 9, 2012 at 11:00 am) (“We may change prices or any other term of your Service or this 
agreement at any time, but we’ll provide notice first, including written notice if you have Postpay Service.  
If you use your Service after the change takes effe ct, that means you’re accepting the change.”); AT&T 
Wireless Customer Agreement § 1.3, www.wireless.att.com/learn/articles -resources/wireless-terms.jsp (last 
visited Oct. 9, 2012 at 11:00 am) (“We may change any terms, conditions, rates, fees, expenses, or  charges 
regarding your Services at any time.”).  

[PAGE 100]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 97 
 
c. Statutory factors 
 
Proponents’ comments provide little useful guidance on the statutory factors.  
Indeed, two of the proponents fully fail to address them at all.531  
 
The first factor requires a consideration of the impact of the prohibition on the 
availability for use of copyrighted works.  CU asserts that “the benefits of an unlocked 
device are not available to the vast majority of current device owners,”
532 while 
MetroPCS contends that “wireless device locking makes [wireless handsets] less useful 
for customers and limits their legitimate ability to receive copyrighted works.”
533 
 
None of the proponents addresses the most relevant inquiry for this factor, which 
the Register has interpreted to include whether the availability of the work in a protected 
format enhances or inhibits public use of the work, whether the protected work is 
available in other formats, and, if so, whether such formats are sufficient to accommodate 
noninfringing uses.  Notwithstanding the dearth of analysis supplied by proponents, the 
Register will proceed to evaluate the first factor. 
 
The work, for purposes of this analysis, is the copyrightable firmware or locked 
legacy phones protected by the access control that proponents seek to circumvent.  There 
is no indication that mobile handset firmware is sold in any way other than with the 
handset for which it is developed, and no indication that there are alternative “formats” 
available that would not require circumvention – that is, there is no evidence that users of 
locked legacy phones can simply install an alternative operating system that does not 
include carrier locks.  Accordingly, the first factor favors an exemption. 
 
Neither factor two nor three is implicated by the proposed class.  These factors are 
therefore neutral. 
 
The fourth factor requires the Register to consider the impact of circumvention on 
the market for or value of the copyrighted works.  Again, proponents offered virtually no 
assistance on this factor, supplying little more than unsubstantiated assertions and 
citations to the Register’s prior findings.  Proponents assert that “carriers will continue to 
market new devices to consumers, and will continue to pay manufacturers for the rights 
to accompanying firmware and software.”
534  For its part, CTIA contends that “there is 
reason to believe that such marketing and concomitant development of copyrighted 
operating software and firmware would, in fact, decrease, thereby lowering the market 
value of that software and firmware, because unauthorized unlocking would lower the 
                                                
531 See P2B (Youghiogheny); P2C (RCA).  
532 P2A (CU) at 15. 
533 P2C (MetroPCS) at 11 (footnote omitted).  
534 P6A (CU) at 17. 

[PAGE 101]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 98 
incentive of creators to invest in innovation and create future works.”535  Neither provides 
specific evidence to support its respective claims.  
 
A review of the total record, however, supports a finding that the market for 
software at issue – firmware sold with mobile handsets for the purpose of allowing the 
handset to operate – is unlikely to be affected by enabling consumers to alter that 
software for the purpose of using the handset on another carrier.  There is nothing in the 
record to suggest that the market for firmware has declined in the six years following the 
first granting of an unlocking exemption; to the contrary, CTIA has noted that the market 
has evolved significantly in recent years, leading to “a myriad of choices in which to 
obtain a handset and initiate service.”536  The fourth factor therefore favors an exemption. 
 
d. NTIA comments 
 
NTIA asserts that the exemption is warranted despite the increasing availability of 
unlocked phones in the marketplace, and the trend toward wireless carriers’ unlocking of 
phones in certain circumstances.537  It asserts that the unlocking policies of most wireless 
carriers are not reasonable alternatives to circumvention because many such policies 
apply only to current customers or subscribers,
538 because some carriers will refuse to 
unlock certain devices,539 and because unlocking policies are often contingent upon the 
carrier’s ability to obtain the necessary code.540  Further, “NTIA does not support the 
notion that it is an appropriate alternative for a current device owner to be required to 
purchase another device to switch carriers.”
541 
 
NTIA also supports the proponents’ requests to include wireless devices other 
than handsets, and the expansion of the class to include “data used by” wireless handset 
software or firmware.
542 Finally, NTIA suggests that the Register recommend a class that 
permits circumvention for the purpose of connecting a wireless device to a “wireless 
network that offers telecommunications and/or information services,”
543 to “capture[] the 
essence of what the proponents are seeking and reflect[] the current state of the wireless 
industry.”
544 
 
                                                
535 C2 (CTIA) at 41 (emphasis in original).  
536 Id. at 4. 
537 NTIA Letter at 14-15. 
538 Id at 16. 
539 Id. (citations omitted). 
540 Id. 
541 Id. at 17 (citation omitted). 
542 Id. at 18-19. 
543 Id. at 18. 
544 Id. at 20. 

[PAGE 102]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 99 
The Register and NTIA are in agreement that as to phones that consumers have 
already acquired from a carrier, or previously acquired phones that consumers obtain on a 
secondary market, an appropriate exemption is warranted.  As discussed above, however, 
the Register finds that there is a wide variety of new unlocked phones available on the 
market that constitute reasonable alternatives to jailbreaking.  Further, the Register finds 
that the record does not support the additional changes to language that the proponents 
seek due to a lack of evidentiary support. 
 
4. Recommendation 
 
The record supports a finding that proponents have met their burden of 
establishing that the technological measures applied to mobile handset firmware have an 
adverse effect on a noninfringing use of that firmware in some cases, namely, when the 
user owns the firmware on a legacy phone.  However, the broad contours of proponents’ 
proposed exemption are not supported by the evidentiary record.  Accordingly, the 
Register must decline classes 6A, 6B, and 6C as proposed.
545   
 
In keeping with the Register’s findings based on the limited record before her, the 
Register recommends that the Librarian designate the below-described class, which is a 
narrower, “lesser included class” of those that were proposed.  The marketplace has 
evolved such that consumers now have access to a variety of unlocked phones.  But 
consumers may not be able to unlock legacy phones without circumvention and carriers 
are unwilling to unlock phones in many cases.  The recommended class more properly 
reflects the current state of the market as indicated by the evidence presented in this 
proceeding.   
 
The recommended class provides a ninety-day transitional period for those who 
may acquire phones shortly after the new exemption becomes effective.  As explained 
above, in designating an exempted class, the Register is to begin with a category of works 
set forth in Section 102, but has considerable latitude to shape the recommended class to 
achieve its intended purpose.  The Register believes that a transition period is appropriate 
to permit affected parties to familiarize themselves with the changed rule.  In taking this 
                                                
545 Proponents’ proposals contain a number of features that would broaden the class beyond that designated 
in 2010.  Most notably, each of the proponent s seeks to include “wireless devices” or “mobile devices” 
rather than “wireless telephone handsets” as found in the current exemption.  See P6A (CU) at 2-4; P6B 
(Youghiogheny) at 2; P6C (MetroPCS) at 4 -6; P6C (RCA) at 9- 11.  The record is, however, entirely devoid 
of any evidence to support the contention that, with respect to tablets, there is a “distinct, verifiable, and 
measurable adverse effect on noninfringing uses,” as is required by this rulemaking.  MetroPCS baldly 
asserts, for example, that “all of  the reasons cited by the Copyright Office as to why wireless devices 
should be included in the exemption would apply equally to those functionally equivalent wireless 
communications devices.”  P6C (MetroPCS) at 5.  Similarly, RCA asserts, without any evidentiary support, 
that “[t]he rationale for exempting traditional telephone handsets applies with equal force to other wireless 
devices, which larger wireless providers can ‘lock’ to their networks just as easily as traditional ‘telephone 
handsets.’”  P6C (RCA) at 9.  At the hearing on this class, however, proponents were unable to confirm that 
tablets are restricted by the same technological measures that restrict mobile handsets.  See T Carson, Moy, 
Golant, and Berry, May 31, 2012, at 104 -07.  Likewise, there is no evidence in the present record to support 
proponents’ various other expansion proposals, which are presented largely in summary fashion.  The 
Register therefore declines to incorporate those requests into the recommended class.  

[PAGE 103]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 100 
approach, the Register looks to precedent in copyright law allowing for similar periods of 
adjustment before new rules take effect.546 
 
Computer programs, in the form of firmware or 
software, that enable a wireless telephone handset 
originally acquired from the operator of a wireless 
telecommunications network or retailer no later than 
ninety days after the effective date of this exemption to 
connect to a different wireless telecommunications 
network, if the operator of the wireless communications 
network to which the handset is locked has failed to 
unlock it within a reasonable period of time following a 
request by the owner of the wireless telephone handset, 
and when circumvention is initiated by the owner, an 
individual consumer, who is also the owner of the copy 
of the computer program in such wireless telephone 
handset, solely in order to connect to a different wireless 
telecommunications network, and such access to the 
network is authorized by the operator of the network. 
                                                
546See, e.g., 17 U.S.C. § 708(b)(5) (120 -day period before new fee schedule proposed by Register can take 
effect); 17 U.S.C. § 803(d)(2)(B) (new rates set by Copyright Royalty Board take effect on first day of 
second month after publication in Federal Register); 17 U.S.C. § 913(a) (no applications for registration 
accepted and no civil actions to be commenced until 60 days after amendment of Copyright Act to grant 
protection to semiconductor chips). 

[PAGE 104]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 101 
 
G. Proposed Classes 7 and 8:  Motion picture excerpts – commentary, 
criticism, and educational uses 
 
Proponents have submitted eight proposals requesting the designation of classes 
to allow the circumvention of lawfully made and acquired motion pictures and other 
audiovisual works protected by various access controls where the person engaging in 
circumvention seeks to engage in a noninfringing use.   
 
The proposals are comprised of three subgroups: 
 
• First, proponents of exemptions for noncommercial videos seek to use 
clips from motion pictures to create new noncommercial videos, such as 
remix or mash-up videos, for criticism, comment, and other noninfringing 
uses.   
 
• Second, proponents of exemptions for commercial uses by documentary 
filmmakers, fictional filmmakers, and multimedia ebook authors seek to 
use clips from motion pictures to create documentary films, fictional (i.e., 
nondocumentary) films, and multimedia ebooks for fair uses such as 
criticism or comment.   
 
• Finally, proponents of exemptions for educational uses seek to use clips 
from motion pictures for criticism, comment, or other educational 
purposes by college and university professors and faculty, college and 
university students, and kindergarten through twelfth grade educators. 
 
Because each proposal involves the use of clips from motion pictures or 
audiovisual works, the eight possible exemptions encompassed by Proposed Classes 7 
and 8 are addressed collectively.  
 
 The proposed classes consist of the following: 
 
Proponent University of Michigan Library (“UML”) proposes that the Register 
recommend the following class:   
 
7A:  Motion pictures on DVDs that are lawfully made and 
acquired and that are protected by the Content Scrambling 
System when circumvention is accomplished solely in 
order to accomplish the incorporation of short portions of 
motion pictures into new works for the purpose of criticism 
or comment, and where the person engaging in 
circumvention believes and has reasonable grounds for 
believing that circumvention is necessary to fulfill the 
purpose of the use in the following instances: (i) 
educational uses by college and university professors and 

[PAGE 105]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 102 
by college and university film and media studies students; 
(ii) documentary filmmaking; (iii) noncommercial videos. 
 
Proponent Electronic Frontier Foundation (“EFF”) proposes that the Register 
recommend the following class:   
 
7B:  Audiovisual works on DVDs that are lawfully made 
and acquired and that are protected by the Content 
Scrambling System, where circumvention is undertaken for 
the purpose of extracting clips for inclusion in primarily 
noncommercial videos that do not infringe copyright, and 
the person engaging in the circumvention believes and has 
reasonable grounds for believing that circumvention is 
necessary to fulfill the purpose of the use.  
 
Proponent EFF proposes that the Register recommend the following class:   
 
7C:  Audiovisual works that are lawfully made and 
acquired via online distribution services, where 
circumvention is undertaken for the purpose of extracting 
clips for inclusion in primarily noncommercial videos that 
do not infringe copyright, and the person engaging in the 
circumvention believes and has reasonable grounds for 
believing that circumvention is necessary to fulfill the 
purpose of the use, and the works in question are not 
readily available on DVD.  
 
Proponents International Documentary Association, Kartemquin Educational 
Films, Inc., National Alliance for Media Arts and Culture, and Independent Filmmaker 
Project (“Joint Filmmakers”) propose that the Register recommend the following class:   
 
7D:  Motion pictures that are lawfully made and acquired 
from DVDs protected by the Content Scrambling System 
and Blu-ray discs protected by Advanced Access Content 
System, or, if the motion picture is not reasonably available 
on DVD or Blu-ray or not reasonably available in sufficient 
audiovisual quality on DVD or Blu-ray, then from digitally 
transmitted video protected by an authentication protocol or 
by encryption, when circumvention is accomplished solely 
in order to incorporate short portions of motion pictures 
into new works for the purpose of fair use, and when the 
person engaging in circumvention reasonably believes that 
circumvention is necessary to obtain the motion picture in 
the following instances: (1) documentary filmmaking; or 
(2) fictional filmmaking.  
 

[PAGE 106]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 103 
Proponents Mark Berger, Bobette Buster, Barnet Kellman, and Gene Rosow 
(“Joint Ebook Authors”) propose that the Register recommend the following class:   
 
7E:  Motion pictures that are lawfully made and acquired 
from DVDs protected by the Content Scrambling System 
or, if the motion picture is not reasonably available on or 
not reasonably available in sufficient audiovisual quality on 
DVD, then from digitally transmitted video protected by an 
authentication protocol or by encryption, when 
circumvention is accomplished solely in order to 
incorporate short portions of motion pictures into new 
works for the purpose of fair use, and when the person 
engaging in circumvention reasonably believes that 
circumvention is necessary to obtain the motion picture for 
multimedia e-book authorship.  
 
Proponent Library Copyright Alliance (“LCA”) proposes that the Register 
recommend the following class:   
 
7F:  Motion pictures on DVDs that are lawfully made and 
acquired and that are protected by the Content Scrambling 
System when circumvention is accomplished solely in 
order to accomplish the incorporation of short portions of 
motion pictures into new works for the purpose of criticism 
or comment, and where the person engaging in 
circumvention believes and has reasonable grounds for 
believing that circumvention is necessary to fulfill the 
purpose of educational uses by college and university 
professors and by college and university film and media 
studies students.  
 

[PAGE 107]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 104 
Proponents Peter Decherney, Katherine Sender, Michael X. Delli Carpini, 
International Communication Association, Society for Cinema and Media Studies, and 
American Association of University Professors (“Joint Educators”) propose that the 
Register recommend the following class:   
 
7G:  Audiovisual works (optical discs, streaming media, 
and downloads) that are lawfully made and acquired when 
circumvention is accomplished by college and university 
students or faculty (including teaching and research 
assistants) solely in order to incorporate short portions of 
video into new works for the purpose of criticism or 
comment. 
 
Proponent Media Education Lab at the Harrington School of Communication and 
Media at the University of Rhode Island (“MEL”) proposes that the Register recommend 
the following class:   
 
8.  Lawfully accessed audiovisual works used for 
educational purposes by kindergarten through twelfth grade 
educators.  
 
1. Proponents’ case 
 
a. Background 
 
i.   Noncommercial videos 
 
Proponents of exemptions for noncommercial videos seek to use clips from 
motion pictures to create noncommercial videos, such as remix or mash-up videos, for 
the purpose of criticism, comment, or other noninfringing uses.  
 
The Office received three proposals for exemptions (7A, 7B, and 7C) regarding 
the ability to circumvent for the purpose of creating noninfringing noncommercial 
videos:  (1) motion pictures or audiovisual works on DVDs that are protected by the 
Content Scrambling System (“CSS”), or (2) audiovisual works available via online 
distribution services and protected by various technological measures.
547  All of the 
proposals seek exemptions similar to the Register’s 2010 recommendation548 for the 
                                                
547 See P7A (UML); P7B (EFF) at 36 -57; P7C (EFF) at 57 -65. 
548 2010 Recommendation  at 1-2.  Specifically, in 2010, the Librarian recommended the following class for 
exemption: 
Motion pictures on DVDs that are lawfully made and acquired 
and that are protected by the Content Scrambling System 
when circumvention is accomplished solely in o rder to 
accomplish the incorporation of short portions of motion 
pictures into new works for the purpose of criticism or 
comment, and where the person engaging in circumvention 

[PAGE 108]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 105 
creation of noncommercial videos,549 which are sometimes referred to as “vids” by their 
creators (known as “vidders”) and admirers. 
 
 UML’s proposal (7A) requests an exemption largely identical to the Register’s 
2010 recommended exemption for motion pictures on CSS-protected DVDs, which 
encompassed educational uses and documentary filmmaking in addition to 
noncommercial videos.
550  However, UML’s supporting language indicates that the 
exemption should apply both to motion pictures and to audiovisual works generally.  
UML’s comments in support of its proposal, however, focus only on educational uses.
551   
 
The other two proposals relating to noncommercial videos, by EFF (7B and 7C), 
seek to expand the Register’s previously recommended exemption in several significant 
ways.
552  EFF’s proposals indicate that the exemptions should not depend on uses that 
involve criticism or comment, but instead should require only that the use be 
noninfringing.  EFF’s proposals also seek to broaden the 2010 exemption to cover 
“primarily noncommercial videos.”  It states that limiting the exemptions to uses that do 
not involve any form of profit could improperly exclude fair uses such as videos created 
by a film critic who hosts the videos on a website running ads to help cover operation 
costs, or video editors who are commissioned to create political commentary videos or 
other fair use works.
553   
 
Both EFF and UML request that exemptions for noncommercial videos extend to 
all audiovisual works.
554  EFF states that the proposed exemption should include all 
audiovisual works, including movies, television shows, commercial news, DVD extras, 
etc.  It asserts that use of the term “motion pictures,” as opposed to “audiovisual works,” 
creates uncertainty because there is no clear definition of these terms other than in the 
Copyright Act.  Alternatively, EFF requests that the proposed exemption clarify that it 
reflects the statutory definition of “motion pictures.”555   
                                                                                                                                            
believes and has reasonable grounds for believing that 
circumvention is necessa ry to fulfill the purpose of the use in 
the following instances: (i) Educational uses by college and 
university professors and by college and university film and 
media studies students; (ii) Documentary filmmaking; (iii) 
Noncommercial videos.  
549 Id. 
550 Id.  
551 P7A (UML) at 3. 
552 P7B (EFF) at 36-57; P7C (EFF) at 57 -65. 
553 P7B (EFF) at 46, 48 -49 (citing In the Cut: Salt (deconstructing scenes in the film Salt), Prime Time 
Terror (regarding treatment of the war on terror and the war on drugs), and Dove OnSlaught(er ) (video 
remix commissioned by GreenPeace)).  For ease of discussion, except as otherwise noted, the Register’s 
analysis of “noncommercial videos” is meant to encompass EFF’s proposals pertaining to “primarily 
noncommercial videos.”  
554 Id. at 37-38; P7A (EML) at 3. 
555 P7B (EFF) at 38.   

[PAGE 109]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 106 
 
As a general matter, the proposed class for noncommercial videos involves the 
remixing and/or modification of a preexisting work or works to criticize or comment on 
some aspect of the underlying works (e.g., a film criticism or analysis) or to make a 
broader societal statement (e.g., a political commentary).
556  Creators of noncommercial 
videos believe that commenting upon a visual work in its native medium is necessary and 
more effective to communicate their particular perspectives.
557  As described by the 
Organization for Transformative Works (“OTW”), which provided comments in support 
of EFF’s proposal, noncommercial videos “include clips from popular television shows 
or film [and] rework these clips in such a way that comments on or critiques the original 
source.”
558  Proponents point out that noncommercial videos may be categorized into 
various genres, such as film trailer remixes, film analysis, movie mistakes, and “YouTube 
Poop.”
559   
 
The noncommercial videos that proponents offer as examples allegedly include 
some form of comment or criticism.
560  While EFF acknowledges that some 
noncommercial videos may be infringing, it asserts that many noncommercial videos do 
not infringe.561  For support, EFF presents evidence from a 2008 study by Professor 
Michael Wesch, which found that between 2,000 and 6,000 fair use noncommercial 
videos using protected material were uploaded each day to YouTube.562  Additionally, 
EFF offers updated information from Dr. Wesch indicating that his data continues to 
show that users upload remix noncommercial videos at the same rate as in 2011.
563  EFF 
and OTW point to several specific noncommercial videos that were created from motion 
pictures on CSS-protected DVDs and technologically protected online distribution 
services.
564    
 
ii.   Commercial uses by documentary filmmakers, 
fictional filmmakers, and multimedia ebook authors 
 
Proponents of exemptions for filmmakers and ebook authors seek to use clips 
from motion pictures in certain types of commercial works – namely, documentary films, 
                                                
556 Id. at 36-45. 
557 P7C (EFF) at 54. 
558 R9 (OTW) at 2. 
559 P7B (EFF) at 39-40 (“YouTube Poop” is defined as “absurdist remixes that ape and mock the lowest 
technical and aesthetic standards of remix culture to comment on remix cult ure itself.”). 
560 See id. at 44 nn.247, 249 & 252, 46 nn.259, & 261- 63, 47 nn.265-66, 48 n.277, 49 n.280, 54 n.300- 02; 
P7C (EFF) at 58 n.320; R9 (OTW) at 4 n.3, 10 n.33, 12 n.41, 13 n.44, and 28 n.78.  
561 P7B (EFF) at 46. 
562 Id. at 39. 
563 Id. at 39 n.234. 
564 See, e.g., id. at 48-49 (citing “Primetime Terror”); P7C (EFF) at 58 (citing “It Depends on What You 
Pay”); R9 (OTW) at 20 -22 (citing “The Test”).  

[PAGE 110]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 107 
fictional (i.e., dramatic) films, and multimedia ebooks – to engage in fair uses such as 
criticism or comment.   
 
The Office received three proposals (7A, 7D, and 7E) that address the same types 
of uses in different kinds of media.  All of these proposals request exemptions related to 
the ability to circumvent motion pictures or other audiovisual works for use by creators of 
noninfringing commercial works.
565  Proposals 7A and 7D address such commercial uses 
in the context of documentary and fictional films, while Proposal 7E addresses 
commercial uses in the context of multimedia ebooks offering film analysis.  Because 
these three proposals – while discussing different media – all focus on commercial uses 
of motion picture excerpts, the three suggested classes are discussed together. 
 
As noted above, UML’s proposal (7A) requests an exemption very similar to the 
exemption recommended by the Register in 2010.  The UML proposal, which primarily 
addresses educational uses, does not provide factual or legal support in connection with 
uses by documentary filmmakers.
566   
 
The proposal by Joint Filmmakers (7D) seeks to expand the previously 
recommended exemption for documentary filmmaking in several ways.  First, proponents 
argue that the exemption should include fictional filmmakers.  Second, Joint Filmmakers 
indicate that the proposed exemption should not depend on uses that involve criticism or 
comment, but should instead require only that the use be noninfringing.  Finally, they 
propose that the exemption include not only motion pictures on CSS-protected DVDs, 
but also Blu-ray discs protected by Advanced Access Content System (“AACS”) or, if 
the motion picture is not reasonably available on DVD or Blu-ray or is not reasonably 
available in sufficient audiovisual quality on DVD or Blu-ray, then motion pictures that 
are digitally transmitted and protected by an authentication protocol or encryption.
567 
 
Joint Ebook Authors’ proposal (7E) seeks an exemption for the use of short 
portions of motion pictures for the purpose of multimedia ebook authorship.  Like Joint 
Filmmakers, Joint Ebook Authors indicate that the proposed exemption should not 
depend on uses that involve criticism or comment, but should instead merely require that 
the use be noninfringing.  Joint Ebook Authors propose that the exemption include not 
only motion pictures on CSS-protected DVDs, but should also extend to digitally 
transmitted video protected by an authentication protocol or encryption if the motion 
picture is not reasonably available, or available in sufficient audiovisual quality, on 
DVD.
568 
                                                
565 P7A (UML); P7D (Joint Filmmakers); P7E (Joint Ebook Authors).  
566 P7A (UML). 
567 P7D (Joint Filmmakers).  
568 P7E (Joint Ebook Authors).  

[PAGE 111]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 108 
 
iii.   Educational uses 
 
Proponents of exemptions for educational uses seek to use clips from motion 
pictures for purposes of criticism or comment, or other educational purposes, by college 
and university professors and faculty, college and university students, and kindergarten 
through twelfth grade educators.   
 
The Office received four proposals (7A, 7F, 7G, and 8) for exemptions related to 
the ability to circumvent motion pictures or audiovisual works for use by educators 
and/or students.
569  These proposals seek exemptions similar to one that was 
recommended in the 2010 rulemaking for creation of new works for the purpose of 
criticism or comment by college and university professors and by college and university 
film and media studies students.
570   
 
The proposals by UML (7A) and LCA (7F) request an exemption that, with 
respect to uses by educators, tracks the Register’s 2010 recommendation for an 
exemption for circumvention of CSS-protected DVDs.  Although not reflected in the text 
of their proposed exemption, UML asserts in its comments that the exemption should 
apply not only to motion pictures, but also more broadly to audiovisual works, and should 
also be expanded to apply to students across all disciplines of study.
571   
 
Additionally, Joint Educators572 (7G) propose exemptions to permit 
circumvention of audiovisual works in order to enable college and university students, as 
well as faculty, to incorporate short portions of video into new works for purposes of 
criticism or comment.  Joint Educators request that the exemption include all forms of 
video delivery technology, including Blu-ray and digital transmission.
573  They maintain 
that alternatives to circumvention, including screen capture software, are inadequate.574  
They also request that the 2010 exemption be expanded to include students across all 
disciplines of study.575  
 
Finally, MEL (8) requests an exemption for the circumvention of protections on 
lawfully accessed audiovisual works that are used for educational purposes by 
kindergarten through twelfth grade educators.
576  While MEL does not include a 
requirement for the creation of new works, or that the uses be for the purposes of 
                                                
569 P7A (UML); P7F (LCA); P7G (Joint Educators); P8 (MEL).  
570 2010 Recommendation at 72.  
571 P7A (UML) at 3. 
572 P7G (Joint Educators).  
573 Id. at 12-18. 
574 Id. at 18-20. 
575 Id. at 20-25. 
576 P8 (MEL). 

[PAGE 112]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 109 
criticism or comment, the Register observes that a majority of the uses offered in support 
of the proposal involve, or seemingly would involve, use of audiovisual materials to 
facilitate educational activities.  Similarly, most of the uses cited as examples involve 
criticism or comment.577 
 
b. Asserted noninfringing uses 
 
i.   Noncommercial videos 
 
A threshold question is whether creators of noncommercial videos are making, or 
are likely to make, noninfringing uses of copyrighted works.  The only exception to 
copyright owners’ exclusive rights that proponents assert should apply to this activity is 
fair use and, therefore, the requisite four-factor analysis is required.  EFF and OTW assert 
that the statutory fair use factors generally support a finding of fair use with respect to the 
use of motion picture clips by noncommercial video creators.
578   
 
Proponents assert that, under the first fair use factor, noncommercial videos are 
generally favored.579  EFF and OTW allege that noncommercial videos are inherently 
transformative because they use excerpts to create new works that do not substitute for 
the original.  They also note that the proposed exemption is limited to “primarily 
noncommercial” purposes.580  EFF states that such activity generally is favored in fair use 
analysis.581  It points to specific noncommercial videos that combine clips from motion 
pictures to comment on media treatment of various social issues.582  It explains that 
“[c]ommentary is central to the activity of vidders” and that such uses are precisely what 
Section 107 was designed to protect.
583   
 
 EFF and OTW also assert that, while the second fair use factor affords greater 
protection for creative works, courts have acknowledged that this factor is likely to be of 
little importance in cases involving the creation of transformative works.
584  EFF adds 
that in many cases, including political commentary videos, the source work will often be 
                                                
577 Id. 
578 P7B (EFF) at 46-49; P7C (EFF) at 59 -60; R9 (OTW) at 14-17.   
579 P7B (EFF) at 46-49; P7C (EFF) at 59 -60; R9 (OTW) at 14- 17. 
580 P7B (EFF) at 46-49; P7C (EFF) at 59 -60; R9 (OTW) at 14- 17. 
581 P7B at 46 (citing Campbell, 510 U.S. at 579); Castle Rock Entm’t, Inc. v. Carol Pub. Group, Inc ., 150 
F.3d 132, 141 (1998)). 
582 Id. at 46-47 (citing hnassif, Planet of the Arabs ; Tijana Mamula, Homophobic Friends , Political Remix 
Video; White and Nerdy; Obsessive24, Piece of Me); P7C (EFF) at 59-60 (citing Gianduja Kiss, It Depends 
on What You Pay, Monsters From th e Vids). 
583 P7B (EFF) at 46-47.   
584 Id. at 47 (citing Campbell, 510 U.S. at 598 (concluding that the second factor “adds little to the first” 
when the use is transformative); Blanch v. Koons, 467 F.3d 244, 256 (2006)); P7C (EFF) at 60; R9 (OTW) 
at 15. 
 

[PAGE 113]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 110 
factual, such as news footage.585  Finally, it notes that the works from which clips are 
drawn are usually widely and voluntarily disseminated, which favors fair use.586   
 
EFF and OTW add that that the third fair use factor favors noncommercial video 
creators because the excerpts taken from film or television programs generally will 
comprise only a small fraction of the original work.587 
 
 Regarding the fourth factor, EFF argues that, where noncommercial expression is 
concerned, copyright owners bear the burden of proving that the use in question 
undermines the economic value of the copyrighted work.
588  It notes that most 
noncommercial videos depend on viewers having high levels of familiarity with the 
original works, and that they therefore do not supplant the market for the original works, 
and often enhance and support it.
589  EFF adds that, to the extent that noncommercial 
videos comment on the original works, licensing is unlikely or impossible.590  OTW 
voices a similar view.591  EFF offers that the fair use analysis that favors creators of 
noncommercial videos is not altered for vids that are commissioned or that reflect a 
limited degree of commerciality.
592  It points to three examples of commissioned vids that 
it claims are highly transformative in nature.593  It also indicates that indirect participation 
in commerce should not disqualify such noncommercial videos from benefiting from fair 
use.594 
 
ii.   Commercial uses by documentary filmmakers, 
fictional filmmakers, and multimedia ebook authors 
 
Joint Filmmakers and Joint Ebook Authors urge that their proposed exemptions 
should not depend on uses that involve criticism or comment, but instead should require 
                                                
585 P7B (EFF) at 47 (citing Harper & Row, 471 U.S. at 563). 
586 Id. (citing Kelly, 336 F.3d at 820; Arica Inst., Inc. v. Palmer , 970 F.2d 1067, 1078 (1992) (plaintiff’s 
work was “a published work available to the general public,” and the second factor thus favored  the 
defendant)). 
587 Id. at 47-48 (citing Wright v. Warner Books , 953 F.2d. 731 (1991); Monster Comms., Inc. v. Turner 
Broadcasting Sys., 935 F. Supp. 490 (S.D.N.Y. 1996); Religious Tech. Ctr. v. Pagliarina , 908 F. Supp. 
1353 (E.D. Va. 1995)); P7C (EFF) at 60; R9 (OTW) at 15- 16 (citing Obsessive24, new vid - Fall of Man - 
Supernatural - Castiel/Dean; Handlebars; The Price). 
588 P7B (EFF) at 48. 
589 Id. 
590 Id. at 48 (citing Campbell, 510 U.S. at 592-93). 
591 R9 (OTW) at 16. 
592 P7B (EFF) at 48-49. 
593 Id. (citing, among others, Prime Time Terror and Dove Onslaught(er)). 
594 Id. (citing Campbell, 510 U.S. at 579; Perfect 10, 508 F.3d at 1166; Bill Graham Archives v. Dorling 
Kindersley Ltd., 448 F.3d 605, 610 (2006); Hustler Magazine Inc. v. Moral Majority Inc., 796 F.2d 1148, 
1152-53 (1986)). 
 

[PAGE 114]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 111 
only that the use is noninfringing.595  Neither Joint Filmmakers nor Joint Ebook Authors 
offer a full analysis of the proposed uses under the four fair use factors.  However, 
proponents describe numerous examples of actual or prospective uses of motion pictures 
for documentary films,596 fictional films,597 and multimedia ebooks addressed to film 
criticism or analysis.598  In so doing, they indicate that the proposed uses would facilitate 
lawful criticism and comment, relying on case law to support their claims.599  They also 
cite the ability of filmmakers and authors to look to various “best practice” guidelines for 
fair use in order to responsibly engage in lawful use.
600  With regard to documentary 
films, proponents rely upon the Register’s previous finding that uses of short clips from 
motion pictures constitute a noninfringing fair use.
601 
 
iii.   Educational uses 
 
Proponents offer only limited analysis regarding the threshold question of whether 
the requested exemptions for educational uses are noninfringing.  UML and Joint 
Educators merely imply that the proposed uses are lawful under the fair use provisions in 
Section 107 or the educational exemptions in Section 110.
602  LCA refers to the 
Librarian’s previous findings that uses of short clips from motion pictures, similar to 
those that are the subject of the current requests, constitute noninfringing fair uses and 
asserts that the grounds for that finding remain true today.
603  MEL offers an analysis of 
the proposed uses as noninfringing under each of the four fair use factors.604  It asserts 
that:  (1) the first factor favors the requested exemption because of the nonprofit 
educational nature of the uses at issue; (2) the second factor favors the requested 
exemption because it will apply to works that are of special pedagogical interest or 
importance; (3) the third factor favors the requested exemption because the clips that will 
be used are usually short portions of the entire work; and (4) the fourth factor favors the 
requested exemption because the works used must be lawfully acquired, the new works 
will not normally be used outside of the educational environment, and the brief clips used 
are unlikely to substitute for the entire work in the market.605  MEL also highlights the 
                                                
595 P7D (Joint Filmmakers) at 1- 7, 19-21; P7E (Joint EBook Authors) at 6 -7, 11-13. 
596 P7D (Joint Filmmakers) at 8- 13, 19. 
597 Id. at 6-7, 19. 
598 P7E (Joint EBook Authors) at 7 -9. 
599 P7D (Joint Filmmakers) at 6- 7, 19-21 (citing, e.g., Campbell, 510 U.S. 569; Wade Williams Dist., Inc. v. 
Am. Broad. Co., Inc. , 00 CIV. 5002 (LMM), 2005 WL 774275 (S.D.N.Y) (Apr. 5, 2005) at *9; Hofheinz v. 
Discovery Commc’ns, Inc., 2001 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 14752 at *13)); P7E (Joint EBook Authors) at 6 -7, 11-
12 (citing e.g. Campbell, 510 U.S. 569; Folsom v. Marsh, 9 F. Cas. 342 (C.C.D. Mass. 1841)). 
600 P7D (Joint Filmmakers) at 6- 7; P7E (Joint EBook Authors) at 6.  
601 P7D (Joint Filmmakers) at 6.  
602 P7A (UML) at 3-4; 7G (Joint Educators) at 3.  
603 P7F (LCA) at 2-3. 
604 P8 (MEL) at 12-13. 
605 Id. 

[PAGE 115]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 112 
transformative nature of the uses and notes that Section 107 specifically mentions 
teaching as illustrative of a fair use.606 
 
c. Asserted adverse impact 
 
i. Noncommercial videos 
 
EFF argues that the prohibition on circumvention adversely affected the 
noninfringing activities of creators of noncommercial videos prior to the last exemption, 
and will do so again if the proposed exemption is not granted.  It points out that, to the 
extent that the provision prohibits ripping DVDs to extract clips, the law places creators 
in legal jeopardy when they engage in authorship that would otherwise be protected by 
fair use.
607  EFF states that without an exemption, a climate of fear inhibits even obvious 
fair uses.608  It also points out that creators of noninfringing works are deterred from 
lawfully challenging DMCA “takedown” notices sent to online service providers who 
host and link to noncommercial videos.  It notes that the creator of a noncommercial 
video who files a counternotice pursuant to 17 U.S.C. § 512(g) to restore a video to a host 
site is exposed to a potential circumvention claim from the copyright owner who sent the 
takedown demand.609 
 
EFF and OTW argue that the various alternatives that the opponents propose are 
not adequate substitutes.  They assert that alternatives such as screen capture technology 
or making a recording with a smartphone can be cumbersome and are not as simple and 
straightforward as the circumvention of DVDs or online video.
610   
 
Proponents also reject opponents’ suggested alternative of licensing clips.
611  
OTW notes that opponents do not offer evidence that there is any mechanism by which a 
noncommercial user – as opposed to a commercial entity – could select and receive 
suitable high-quality content from a range of movies and television shows.612  Proponents 
also argue that licensing is not a substitute for fair use as a matter of law, and that 
copyright owners cannot deprive transformative users of the right to make unauthorized 
uses by expressing a willingness to license.
613  
                                                
606 R16 (MEL) at 8-9. 
607 P7B (EFF) at 49-51, P7C (EFF) at 62- 63. 
608 P7B (EFF) at 49-51, P7C (EFF) at 62- 63. 
609 P7B (EFF) at 49-51, P7C (EFF) at 62- 63. 
610 P7B (EFF) at 43 (citing Vidder Vidyutpataka; R9 (OTW) at 18).  
611 P7B (EFF) at 49-51; R9 (OTW) at 31-32. 
612 R9 (OTW) at 31-32. 
613 Id.; P7B (EFF) at 48. 

[PAGE 116]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 113 
 
ii. Commercial uses by documentary filmmakers, 
fictional filmmakers, and multimedia ebook authors 
 
Proponents of the exemptions for documentary and fictional filmmakers and 
multimedia ebook authors assert that the requested uses would be adversely affected 
without exemptions permitting the circumvention of DVD CSS, AACS, and various 
access controls that protect digitally transmitted video.614  They note that licensing clips 
is not a suitable option because it can be costly and is often unrealistic for those seeking 
to create works that comment negatively on the subject film, its characters, or the 
rightsholder.
615  They assert that obtaining content through the “analog hole” method616 – 
i.e., by recording a screen with a camera or smartphone, or using screen capture software 
– is insufficient because the quality of the images is too low.
617  They also assert that 
distribution outlets such as television stations require that material be submitted in highdefinition format, which the alternative methods normally do not produce.  They add that 
distribution outlets also limit the amount of content that is able to meet high-definition 
requirements through an “up-converting” process, which involves reformatting content 
from standard definition to high definition.
618  In their reply comments, Joint Filmmakers 
assert that the suggestion that alternatives to circumvention meet their needs reveals a 
misunderstanding of the technical requirements faced by filmmakers in light of 
broadcaster and distributor standards.
 619   
 
Based on proponents’ submissions, however, it is also apparent that distribution 
outlets such as PBS are willing to make accommodations when a filmmaker cannot 
obtain higher-quality material.
620  The record also shows that the stated standards are not 
enforced in an overly strict manner.621  Indeed, proponents did not identify instances 
where filmmakers were refused access to distribution outlets based either on a 
shortcoming in video quality or a format concern.   
 
                                                
614 P7D (Joint Filmmakers) at 21- 24; P7E (Joint EBook Authors) at 11 -15. 
615 P7D (Joint Filmmakers) at 4- 6. 
616 The “analog hole” method involves connecting the analog output of an authorized player to th e input of 
a computer or other capture device, which results in somewhat degraded images.  
617 P7D (Joint Filmmakers) at 15- 18; P7E (Joint EBook Authors) at 15.  
618 P7D (Joint Filmmakers) at 15- 18; P7E (Joint EBook Authors) at 10 -11. 
619 R11 (International Docume ntary Association, Kartemquin Educational Films, Inc., and National 
Alliance for Media Arts and Culture ) at 4-5. 
620 P7D (Joint Filmmakers) at 11 (citing PBS Technical Operating Specifications: Program Submission 
(2010 Edition), 2 (stating PBS will accept vi deo that is acquired in standard definition (SD) and up -
converted to Sony HDCAM video format for submission), 3 (“2.1.4:  Except in the case of use or archival 
content where no better copies are available , the image must be free of picture impairments asso ciated with 
legacy analog equipment such as lag, smear, scratches, videotape dropouts, head switching, composite 
video artifacts.” (emphasis added)). 
 
621 T Quinn, June 4, 2012 at 239 -40. 

[PAGE 117]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 114 
iii. Educational uses 
 
LCA offers numerous examples of educator and student uses that it asserts are 
lawful fair uses and would be adversely affected by the prohibition in Section 
1201(a)(1).622  UML, too, offers examples of educator and student uses that it similarly 
asserts are noninfringing and would be negatively impacted absent the requested 
exemption.
623  The types of uses LCA and UML cite include professorial use of motion 
picture clips to teach foreign languages, film history, and filmmaking techniques.624 
 
Joint Educators cite numerous uses that they assert are lawful and would be 
adversely affected without the requested exemption.625  These include the use of motion 
picture clips by professors to teach students across a broad range of disciplines.  They 
note that, in addition to film and media students, students outside these disciplines are 
asked to submit video presentations and will be adversely impacted without the requested 
exemption.626   
 
MEL explains several situations where kindergarten through high school teachers 
may seek to use clips of motion pictures for classroom purposes.
627  MEL also references 
claims from kindergarten through twelfth grade educators asserting a need to use motion 
pictures in their curricula.628  MEL contends that these situations establish that adverse 
effects will ensue without the requested exemption.629   
 
During the hearings, proponents amplified their comments by highlighting several 
additional prospective uses of short portions of video by educators and students that they 
claim would be adversely affected absent the requested exemption.
630   
 
Both Joint Educators and LCA reject the notion that circumvention alternatives 
are suitable for the requested uses.631  Joint Educators contend that the material offered 
on the licensing websites identified by opponents is limited to a very narrow catalog as 
compared to the vast offerings available through DVD or online distribution services.632  
LCA asserts that, even if the Register determined that screen capture is lawful, that would 
                                                
622 P7F (LCA). 
623 P7A (UML). 
624 P7F (LCA) at 4-19; P7A (UML) at 2- 3. 
625 P7G (Joint Educators) at 6- 11. 
626 Id. at 21-24. 
627 P8 (MEL) at 2-3. 
628 Id. at 5-9. 
629 Id. at 9-11. 
630 See, e.g., T Decherney, June 4, 2012, at 87 -89; T Hobbs, June 4, 2012, at 99 -100. 
631 P7F (LCA) at 3, 12, 15; P7G (Joint Educators) at 18 -20. 
632 See, e.g., T Decherney, June 4, 2012, at 72.  

[PAGE 118]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 115 
be of little comfort to users who are concerned with being sued by copyright owners who 
may not share the Register’s view about the legal status of screen capture software.633 
 
d. Argument under statutory factors 
  
i. Noncommercial videos 
 
EFF argues that the proposed exemptions will not negatively impact the digital 
distribution of motion pictures because the exemptions are narrowly tailored.  It asserts 
that, because the proposed exemptions require lawful acquisition of a copy, it will 
encourage lawful purchases, whereas the lack of an exemption would encourage unlawful 
acquisition of unprotected motion pictures.
634  It also asserts that the alternatives to 
circumvention are inadequate.635  EFF notes that the proposed exemptions are not 
explicitly aimed at archival, preservation, or educational uses.636  However, it argues that 
a refusal of the exemptions would have a chilling effect on criticism and comment, which 
are central to vidding.
637  It also points to the uses of noncommercial videos in the 
context of teaching, scholarship, and research.638  It argues that the transformative uses 
would not affect the market for or value of motion pictures.  It adds that the current 
exemption has allowed for the creation of socially beneficial and entirely legitimate 
noncommercial videos, including important forms of creative expression.639   
 
ii. Commercial uses by documentary fi lmmakers, 
fictional filmmakers, and multimedia ebook authors 
 
Proponents assert that the Section 1201 statutory factors favor their requested 
uses.640  They argue that the proposed exemptions will not negatively impact the digital 
distribution of motion pictures because the exemptions are narrowly tailored to a class of 
users who responsibly engage in fair use activities and who circumvent only when 
necessary to prevent particular harm.
641  They also note that both documentary films and 
multimedia ebooks are intrinsically educational in purpose, and assert that the requested 
exemptions would advance criticism and comment.
642  Proponents also point to uses of 
                                                
633 R1 (LCA) at 3 (citing Ass’n for Info. Media & Equip. v. Regents of the Univ. of Cal. , 2011 U.S. Dist. 
LEXIS 154011 (C.D. Cal. Oct. 3, 2011)  (suit filed against UCLA alleging that use of software that copies 
the analog output of a  DVD violates DMCA)).  
634 P7B (EFF) at 51-53; P7C (EFF) at 63 -64. 
635 P7B (EFF) at 36-38 
636 Id. at 53; P7C (EFF) at 64. 
637 P7B (EFF) at 53-55; P7C (EFF) at 64.  
638 P7B (EFF) at 53-55; P7C (EFF) at 64.  
639 P7B (EFF) at 55-57; P7C (EFF) at 64.  
640 P7D (Joint Filmmakers)  at 28-33; P7E (Joint EBook Authors) at 16 -19. 
641 P7D (Joint Filmmakers) at 28- 30; P7E (Joint EBook Authors) at 16 -18.   
642 P7D (Joint Filmmakers) at 31- 32; P7E (Joint EBook Authors) at 18 -19. 

[PAGE 119]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 116 
documentary films and ebooks in the context of teaching, scholarship, and research.643  
They argue that uses by documentary filmmakers, fictional filmmakers, and multimedia 
ebook authors under the proposed exemptions will not affect the market for or value of 
motion pictures.644  They add that the proposed exemptions will allow the creation of 
socially beneficial works.645   
 
iii. Educational uses 
 
Proponents did not offer any explicit analysis of the proposed uses under the 
statutory factors. 
 
2. Opposition 
a. Noncommercial videos 
Joint Creators646 and DVD Copy Control Association (“DVD CCA”) oppose the 
proposals pertaining to noncommercial videos and, more generally, the use of motion 
pictures contained on CSS-protected DVDs.
647  Joint Creators also oppose the use of 
motion pictures acquired via online distribution services.648 
 
Joint Creators first question whether proponents have met the required statutory 
burden for an exemption.649  They assert that access controls have increased the 
distribution of copyrighted works.650  They also urge the Register precisely to analyze the 
alleged noninfringing uses to determine whether they are, in fact, noninfringing.651  They 
assert that proponents fall short of establishing that particular videos constitute lawful 
uses.652  Joint Creators also challenge the proposal to broaden the exemption to cover 
“primarily” noncommercial videos653 because the term appears to include all videos that 
                                                
643 P7D (Joint Filmmakers) at 31- 32; P7E (Joint EBook Authors) at 1 8-19. 
644 P7D (Joint Filmmakers) at 32- 33; P7E (Joint EBook Authors) at 19 -20. 
645 P7D (Joint Filmmakers) at 32- 33; P7E (Joint EBook Authors) at 19 -20. 
646 The trade groups represented by Joint Creators are the Association of American Publishers, the 
American Society of Media Photographers, the Business Software Alliance, the Entertainment Software 
Association, the Motion Picture Association of America, the Picture Archive Council of America, and the 
Recording Industry Association of America.  C12 (Joint Creators ) at 1-2. 
647 Id. at 39-40; C8 (DVD CCA) at 23- 36. 
648 C12 (Joint Creators) at 39 -40.  Joint Creators do not refer to motion pictures contained on AACS -
protected Blu-ray discs in the context of noncommercial videos apparently because proponents for these 
uses did not request an exemption to circumvent AACS.  
649 Id. at 5-14. 
650 Id. at 11-14. 
651 Id. at 35. 
652 Id. at 39. 
653 Id. 

[PAGE 120]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 117 
are not themselves advertisements.654  They also take issue with the proposal to extend 
the exemption to cover all noninfringing uses, which would remove the existing 
exemption’s requirement that the use be for purposes of criticism or comment.655  Joint 
Creators argue that such an extension would encourage people to test the limits of fair 
use, thus posing too much risk in light of the alternatives to circumvention.
656   
 
Joint Creators take issue with EFF’s position that all creators of noncommercial 
videos always need the highest quality clips possible, noting that it is contrary to the 
Register’s previous finding.
657  They go on to state that, given EFF’s position, confining 
the exemption to circumstances in which a person believes and has reasonable grounds 
for believing that circumvention is necessary is not a meaningful limitation.
658  Finally, 
they indicate that allowing circumvention of protections on motion pictures acquired via 
online distribution services would negatively impact the market and value for those 
works.
659   
 
DVD CCA asserts that there are several alternatives to circumvention, including 
clip licensing, screen capture software, and video recording via smartphone, that would 
enable proponents affordably and effectively to copy short portions of motion pictures 
without the requested exemption.
660  It states that proponents fail to establish a prima 
facie case that the prohibition against circumvention of CSS-protected DVDs has resulted 
in a substantial adverse effect on the noninfringing use of the protected works.
661  It 
further asserts that, because proponents allegedly fail to draw any nexus between the use 
of any particular work and CSS content protection technology, there is no evidence to 
demonstrate a substantial negative impact on the requested uses.
662 
b. Commercial uses by documentary filmmakers, fictional 
filmmakers, and multimedia ebook authors 
 
DVD CCA opposes exemptions for documentary filmmakers, claiming that the 
case made for the exemption is weak.663  However, it notes that, if an exemption is 
granted for documentary filmmakers, it should be narrowed to allow use of only short 
                                                
654 Id. 
655 Id. 
656 Id. at 39-40. 
657 Id. at 40 (citing 2010 Recommendation at 75). 
658 Id. 
659 Id. 
660 C8 (DVD CCA) at 8 -16, and 44. 
661 Id. at 44-48. 
662 Id. at 47. 
663 Id. at 18. 

[PAGE 121]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 118 
portions of motion pictures for fair use purposes, and only where such material is not 
reasonably available through noncircumventing means.664   
 
DVD CCA then explains its view that none of the examples offered in support of 
the proposed exemptions for documentary filmmakers, fictional filmmakers, or 
multimedia ebook authors sufficiently establishes that CSS is preventing the proposed 
uses.
665 DVD CCA asserts that there are several alternatives to circumvention, including 
clip licensing, screen capture software, and video recording via smartphone that would 
enable proponents affordably and effectively to copy short portions of motion pictures 
without the requested exemption.
666   
 
Joint Creators oppose the requested exemptions by noting that, while some of the 
proposed uses may indeed qualify as noninfringing fair uses, others do not.
667  They add 
that it appears as if the uses, especially those by fictional filmmakers, could be 
accomplished without circumvention by capturing motion picture segments with a 
camera instead of by circumventing discs or online streams.668  In particular, they urge 
that the proposed exemption for circumvention of AACS-protected Blu-ray discs should 
not be approved.  They point out that proponents concede that up-conversion processes 
allow them to meet the content standards of broadcasters and distributors.  They also note 
that this proceeding is not designed to generate exemptions based on evidence of 
“[a]dverse impacts that flow from … marketplace trends, other technological 
developments, or changes in the roles of . . . distributors or other intermediaries.”
669   
 
 The Advanced Access Content System Licensing Administrator (“AACS LA”) 
also opposes the requested exemptions as they apply to AACS-protected Blu-ray discs.
670  
It asserts that proponents have failed to make their prima facie case that proponents face 
substantial adverse effects with respect to content available only on Blu-ray.
671  AACS 
LA points out that several alternatives exist to circumvention.672  It argues that the use of 
high-quality content on Blu-ray is merely a matter of convenience.673 
 
                                                
664 Id. 
665 Id. at 44-47. 
666 Id. at 8-16, and 44. 
667 C12 (Joint Creators) at 40 -41. 
668 Id. at 41. 
669 Id. at 40-42 (citing House Manager’s Report at 6).  
 
670 C4 (AACS LA) at 18 -26. 
671 Id. 
672 Id. at 8-15. 
673 Id. at 18-26. 

[PAGE 122]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 119 
c. Educational uses 
 
DVD CCA and Joint Creators do not oppose the granting of an exemption 
covering circumvention of CSS for a variety of college and university uses that involve 
copying short portions of motion pictures, but assert that the exemption should be 
revisited, refined, and limited to conduct that is clearly noninfringing and simultaneously 
requires high quality.
 674  They oppose extending any exemption to kindergarten through 
twelfth grade educators or to university and college students and faculty except as to 
certain narrowly prescribed uses.
 675  They state that proponents for these requested 
exemptions fail to show a prima facie case of substantial adverse impact.676  They also 
point to the variety of alternatives to circumvention that facilitate the requested uses.  
They contend that, in light of these alternatives, the current prohibition amounts to little 
more than an inconvenience.677   
 
AACS LA opposes the requested exemptions for educational uses to the extent 
that it would apply to AACS-protected Blu-ray discs.
678  It argues that proponents of an 
exemption for college and university students and faculty fail to establish a substantial 
adverse effect on noninfringing uses of works distributed on AACS-protected Blu-ray 
discs.679  AACS LA further objects that the proponents of an exemption for kindergarten 
through twelfth grade educators have not shown any regular use of works on AACS 
protected Blu-ray discs.
680   
 
AACS LA asserts that, because the transition from DVD to Blu-ray is far from 
complete, any exemption that extends to Blu-ray is premature.
681  It maintains that 
proponents have failed to establish why alternatives to circumvention are 
unsatisfactory.682  Additionally, it notes that there is no established need for the highquality level of content available on Blu-ray discs and that alternative sources provide 
sufficient quality for the requested uses.
683 
                                                
674 C8 (DVD CCA) at 17 -18; C12 (Joint Creators) at 34 -35; R12 at 36-37. 
675 C8 (DVD CCA) at 39 -43; C12 (Joint Creators) at 36 -37, 42-43. 
676 C8 (DVD CCA) at 42 -43. 
677 Id. 
678 C4 (AACS LA) at 32 -43. 
679 Id. 
680 Id. at 39-40. 
681 Id. at 37. 
682 Id. at 33-35. 
683 Id. at 40-43. 

[PAGE 123]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 120 
 
3. Hearing and Post-Hearing Technical Demonstrations and                  
Other Evidence 
 
Proponents and opponents of Proposed Classes 7 and 8 were invited to augment 
their written comments by presenting additional evidence at public hearings as well as by 
responding to a number of written questions posed by the Copyright Office following the 
hearings.  Some parties took the opportunity to elaborate on their written submissions by 
presenting video and other demonstrative evidence to illustrate their points. 
 
Proponents of the noncommercial video exemption exhibited video evidence to 
demonstrate the need to access high-quality motion picture content.  They presented the 
video “Buffy vs Edward,” which explores gender dynamics in the Buffy the Vampire 
Slayer television show and the Twilight film series.684  The creator of this vid, Jonathan 
MacIntosh, explained that the production of vids requires detailed enough clips to enable 
cropping and zooming while avoiding blurry, distorted, or pixelated video.  He referred to 
instances where focus on specific gestures and actions, and the quality of the excerpted 
material, was relevant to the desired commentary.
685  Other proponents for 
noncommercial videos reiterated the importance of the ability to portray similar visual 
effects.
686  Proponents asserted that quality levels are significant because it is difficult to 
communicate to and maintain the attention of today’s audiences without high-quality 
video.
687  
 
The record indicates that the proponents for noncommercial use exemptions 
provided several motion picture examples that could qualify as documentary videos, 
including Prime Time Terror, which analyzed how terror-related plots are portrayed in 
popular media, and In the Cut: Salt, which examined filmmaking techniques employed in 
the 2010 film Salt.
688  Even though offered in relation to noncommercial uses, these 
examples are thus also pertinent to documentary films in general because they are 
illustrative of documentary filmmakers’ need to be able to portray the “sensual and subtle 
qualities of an image.”
689  
 
Proponents for documentary filmmakers amplified their written comments at the 
hearings by describing several films that would benefit from the proposed exemption.
690   
For example, proponents discussed the documentary film A Good Man, about the dancer 
                                                
684 T MacIntosh, May 17, 2012, a t 142-45; see also P7B (EFF) at 54 n.302.  
685 T MacIntosh, May 17, 2012, at 142 -45. 
686 T Turk, June 4, 2012, at 326 -28. 
687 Id. at 280-81. 
688 T Tushnet, June 4, 2012, at 340 -41 (referencing the videos Primetime Terror (commenting on depictions 
of the war on terror) and In the Cut: Salt (deconstructing scenes in the film Salt)). 
689 T Quinn, June 4, 2012, at 158.  
690 In this regard, the Register observes that Joint Filmmakers’ case would have benefited from further 
demonstrative evidence exemplifying documentary film uses.   

[PAGE 124]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 121 
Bill T. Jones, which includes a scene in which Jones speaks about his awareness that he 
“was a black body being viewed by white bodies.”691  To illustrate this point, the film 
includes a clip allowing viewers to see every detail of Jones’ body, including his rippling 
muscles and sweat.  Proponents also described a prospective film about a film critic.  
Proponents explain how viewers will need to see high quality images from films that the 
critic addresses in order to understand how to perceive the images.
692   
 
No actual examples of fictional film uses were offered at the hearings.  Instead, 
witnesses chose to describe films that would benefit from the proposed exemption. The 
uses described by proponents included a fictional film that incorporates a “dozen” motion 
picture clips to tell the story of a projectionist who notices an “extra” character in a scene 
who appears in multiple films shown in the projectionist’s theater.
693  Proponents also 
described a fictional film involving characters obsessed with the film Mad Max 2 who 
proceed to build a Mad Max-inspired automobile in a deranged effort to take over the 
world.694  Another example involved a proposed series of short films focusing on a 
family that likes to watch movies on television, and “the whole episode would be them 
riffing off the film that they had watched.”
695  Other fictional projects under development 
mentioned at the hearings included a film that would incorporate scenes of Mumbai from 
the movie Mission Impossible as a contrast to a different experience of Mumbai in the 
newer film, and a film that would use BBC news footage to depict “the voice of the 
empire” in a fictionalized account of asylum seekers.
696  Proponents for fictional 
filmmakers indicated that alternatives to circumvention would be difficult and expensive 
to achieve for independent filmmakers.
697  
 
The hearings also addressed quality requirements that documentary and fictional 
filmmakers confront when trying to distribute their videos to the public.  Proponents 
offered explanation and citation to the standards required by the Public Broadcasting 
Service (“PBS”), which generally call for high-definition motion picture material.  
Proponents and opponents discussed the nature of these requirements as well as the 
technological ability to up-convert lower-quality material to meet such requirements.
698
 
Regarding the proposed exemption for multimedia ebooks, proponents made an 
audiovisual presentation to demonstrate how motion picture clips would be used in a 
prospective ebook.  Proponents showed how the excerpts would permit analysis and 
                                                
691 T Quinn, June 4, 2012, at 157.   
692 Id. 
693 T Donaldson, May 17, 2012, at 148 -49.  
694 Id. at 149-50; see also P7D (Joint Filmmakers) at 19.  
695 T Donaldson, May 17, 2012, at 149.  
696 T Thrush, May 17, 2012, at 154 -55. 
697 T Donaldson, May 17, 2012, at 149.  
698 See, e.g., T Ruwe, Marks, Morrissette, Cohen, and Quinn, June 4, 2012, at 238 -43. 

[PAGE 125]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 122 
commentary on the films that are the subject of the ebook.699  Proponents explained how 
minute details in the images – such as precise images of dust, subtle reflections, 
specialized lighting, and even a splattering of water – were pivotal to the desired criticism 
and comment, and that such details could not be captured other than through 
circumvention.700   
 
With respect to the proposed educational use exemptions, proponents presented a 
video showing high school educators using motion picture content in class to instruct 
history and English students.
701   Proponents also described uses by both educators and 
students across various areas of study.702  They noted that, in today’s classrooms, students 
participate more directly in the pedagogical process, including making in-class 
presentations that require access to high-quality media clips.703  Proponents further 
asserted that high quality is necessary “because the depth of analysis rises with the 
quality of the images used.”
704  For example, they described uses by a seventh-grade 
teacher instructing her students on the differences between film and television media, 
including the subtleties of production value and production techniques.
705  They indicated 
that using lower-quality material can dilute the emotional impact and the force of the 
message, thus weakening the effect and educational value of the use.
706  In an effort to 
establish that DVD-level quality is insufficient for educational purposes, proponents 
compared DVD images to Blu-ray images.
707 
   
Proponents for educational uses also discussed the importance of students’ ability 
to manipulate high-quality video.  Proponents referred to a sociology class assignment in 
which students created voiceovers for a series of clips that involved students looking at 
commodities such as diamonds and the way they are portrayed in popular media.  Taking 
the example of diamonds, proponents noted that film quality was significant to the 
students’ use because an audience might respond differently to an image of a clear and 
sparkling diamond versus one that is muddy and blurred.
708 
 
                                                
699 T Buster, June 4, 2012, at 168 -78. 
700 Id. at 243-44; T Cohen, June 4, 2012, at 178 -80. 
701 Spiro Bolos, a supporter of Proposed Class 8 exemption for kindergarten through tw elfth grade 
educators, showed a video of students being shown clips from films to enable comparison to works of 
literature.  See T Bolos, June 4, 2012, at 42 -43 
702 T Decherney, June 4, 2012, at 9 -11 (e.g., uses by biology professors and urban studies profes sors); T 
Hobbs, June 4, 2012, at 32 ( e.g., K-12 classes on film studies, science and fine and performing arts).  
703 T Decherney, June 4, 2012, at 10 -11. 
704 Id. at 12-13. 
705 T Hobbs, June 4, 2012, at 99 -100. 
706 T Band, June 4, 2012, at 21 -22; T Hobbs, June 4, 2012, at 31.  
707 T Decherney, June 4, 2012, at 13 -16; see also id. at 90.  
708 Id. at 87-91. 

[PAGE 126]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 123 
At the hearings, opponents responded to the proposed exemptions by discussing 
and demonstrating alternative options for obtaining motion picture excerpts for inclusion 
in new works.  Much of the discussion focused on screen capture software and video 
recording via smartphone, two means of copying film clips that may not involve 
circumvention.   
 
A significant point of contention at the hearings was whether screen capture 
software and smartphone video recording yield sufficient results for the proposed uses.  
Both DVD CCA and OTW made presentations to demonstrate the quality of video that 
could be obtained via these alternative methods.
709  Proponents criticized the quality of 
smartphone recordings, asserting that such recordings include unacceptable distortions of 
the video and audio quality.
710  Another significant limitation was that the lower part of 
the screen was cut off.711  Screen capture technology appeared to offer more complete 
results, although the images were somewhat diminished in quality; the evidence indicated 
loss of particular frames, occasional fuzziness, loss of sense of depth, and some degree of 
pixelation.712  
 
In a series of post-hearing questions sent to hearing participants, the Copyright 
Office sought further input as to whether screen capture software, which is available for 
less than fifty dollars
713 is, or could be, sufficient for various uses alleged to be adversely 
affected by the prohibition.714  In response, opponents indicated that screen capture 
technology produced sufficient results for the proposed uses,715 while proponents asserted 
that the results were wholly insufficient for the proposed uses.716   
                                                
709 See, e.g., T Marks, June 4, 2012, at 190; T Turk, June 4, 2012, at 285. 
710 See, e.g., T Morrissette, June 4, 2012, at 148.  
711 T Marks, June 4, 2012, at 50, 190; Taylor, May 11, 2012, Tech Demonstration Hearing Friday May 11, 
2012 (no transcript) (smartphone recordings cut off the bottom portion of motion pictures intended to be 
recorded).  
712 See, e.g., T Turk, June 4, 2012, at 286 -87. 
713 See T Marks, June 4, 2012, at 190; see also T Tushnet, June 4, 2012, at 264 (more expensive types of 
screen capture software can cost up to $300).  
714 The questions posed and responses received are available in their entirety on the Copyright Office’s 
website.  See www.copyright.gov/1201/2008 /questions/index html.  Exhibits referenced in the responses 
are available upon request to the Copyright Office. 
715 DVD CCA stated that the quality of both the clip and the individual frames is excellent.  See Bruce 
Turnbull and David Taylor (Counsel to DVD  CCA) to David O. Carson, General Counsel, U.S. Copyright 
Office (July 24, 2012).  
716 In addition to addressing quality per se, proponents argued that images produced by screen capture are 
not meant to function with certain video creation tools and that the technology itself does not operate 
properly when using certain operating systems.  See , e.g., Letter from Francesca Coppa, Rebecca Tushnet, 
and Tisha Turk, on behalf of the OTW, and Corynne McSherry, of the EFF, to David O. Carson, General 
Counsel, U.S. Copyright Office (Aug. 1, 2012).  However, they failed to provide evidence that no 
reasonably available alternative operati ng systems or editing software were  available for use.  In fact, the 
record indicates that popular editing software is compatible with screen capture software.   See Letter from 
Jack I. Lerner, of the USC Intellectual Property and Technology Law Clinic, and Michael C. Donaldson, of 
Donaldson & Callif LLP, to David O. Carson, General Counsel, U.S. Copyright Office (Aug. 2, 2012) 

[PAGE 127]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 124 
 
One proponent, Peter Decherney, on behalf of educational users, offered 
extensive analysis of the relative image qualities.717  Mr. Decherney compared various 
still frames reproduced via screen capture to images copied from DVDs, noting the 
distinctions between them – such as the quality of a reflection in a subject’s eye – in 
terms of the emotional and contextual effects that each image conveyed.  He explained 
that the higher level of detail available through circumvention also conveys more 
information about how the film may have been created.718  Mr. Decherney stated that 
such distinctions are significant to students and professors, as the level of analysis rises 
and falls with the fidelity of an example: “[A] student who relies on the unreliable screen 
captured version [of a work] is in danger of getting it wrong, like an art history student 
who refuses to take off his dark sunglasses in the museum.”
719   
 
In its post-hearing questions, the Office also sought to clarify the legal status of 
screen capture software, asking whether use of the technology depends upon the 
circumvention of access controls in violation of Section 1201(a)(1).
720  In their responses, 
the parties generally agreed that at least some forms of screen capture software do not 
circumvent access controls and thus do not violate the prohibition.  Some respondents, 
however, qualified their analyses by noting they had not examined every type of screen 
capture technology available and were limited to publicly available information regarding 
the technologies that they did examine.
721   
                                                                                                                                            
(screen captured images, once transcoded, can be edited using programs like Avid and Final Cut Pro).  
Furthermore, with regard to operating systems, opponents provided testimony that screen capture software 
exists that is compatible with a variety of operating system s.  T Marks, June 4, 2012, at 50.  
717 Letter from Peter Decherney, Associate Professor and Director, Cinema Studies Program, University of 
Pennsylvania, to David O. Carson, General Counsel (Aug. 2, 2012) [hereinafter the Decherney Letter].  
718 Id. at 2. 
 
[I]f you look at images 3 and 4, you can see the discrepancy between 
the screen captured and ripped images.  Focusing on the detail of the 
captain’s eye, we can see how much more information is revealed in 
the ripped version.  Among other details, we can see th e light reflected 
in the captain’s eye.  Filmmakers place lights below main characters to 
achieve this effect, which is entirely lost in the screen captured version.  
The gleam in the captain’s eye makes him appear alert and alive, and 
we respond to him.  The washed out captain of the screen captured 
version, on the other hand, is passive, stunned by the experience rather 
than reacting to it, and our identification with him is hindered.  
719 Id. 
720 The questions posed and responses received are available in the ir entirety on the Copyright Office’s 
website. 
721 See, e.g., Letter from Corynne McSherry, Intellectual Property Director, EFF, to David O. Carson, 
General Counsel, U.S. Copyright Office (July 18, 2012); Letter from Steven J. Metalitz on behalf of Joint 
Creators, to David O. Carson, General Counsel, U.S. Copyright Office (July 18, 2012).  

[PAGE 128]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 125 
 
4. Discussion 
 
The current proposals for exemptions to allow the circumvention of lawfully 
obtained motion pictures722 protected by access controls for various commercial, 
noncommercial, and “primarily noncommercial” purposes share a unifying feature in that 
in each case, proponents seek an exemption for the purpose of reproducing short clips to 
facilitate alleged noninfringing uses.  Creators of noncommercial videos seek to use 
portions of motion pictures to create noninfringing works involving criticism or comment 
that they assert are transformative.  Documentary filmmakers and multimedia ebook 
authors seek to reproduce portions of motion pictures in new works offering criticism or 
commentary.  Fictional filmmakers wish to incorporate motion pictures into new films to 
convey certain messages.  Film and media studies professors seek to assemble motion 
picture excerpts to demonstrate concepts, qualities, and techniques.  Other educators seek 
to reproduce clips of motion pictures to illustrate points for classroom discussion.  
 
At the outset, it should be noted that certain of the proposed exemptions for 
Proposed Classes 7 and 8 reference “audiovisual works” as opposed to “motion pictures.”  
The Register observes that Section 101 defines “motion pictures” as “audiovisual works 
consisting of a series of related images which, when shown in succession, impart an 
impression of motion, together with accompanying sounds, if any.”
723  Section 101 
defines “audiovisual works” somewhat more broadly, as 
 
works that consist of a series of related images which are 
intrinsically intended to be shown by the use of machines 
or devices such as projectors, viewers, or electronic 
equipment, together with accompanying sounds, if any, 
regardless of the nature of the material objects, such as 
films or tapes, in which the works are embodied.
724   
 
Under the Copyright Act “motion pictures” are thus a subset (albeit a very large one) of 
“audiovisual works.”  The record for Proposed Classes 7 and 8 is directed to uses of 
motion pictures such as movies, television shows, commercials, news, DVD extras, etc.  
It does not focus on uses of audiovisual works that would not be considered motion 
pictures under the Copyright Act.
725  Based on the record, there is no basis for 
considering exemptions beyond motion pictures.  In analyzing these proposed classes, the 
                                                
722 As discussed below, for purposes of copyright law, the term “motion pictures” includes not only movies 
but also works such as television shows and extra material on DVDs.  
723 17 U.S.C. § 101. 
724 Id. 
725 The record for all requested uses in Proposed Classes 7 and 8 includes only fleeting references to 
audiovisual works that are not also motion pictures .  Such references are not detailed in the descriptions of 
proposed uses.  See, e.g., T Hobbs, June 4, 2012, at 34 -35 (referring to a proposed educational use of 
“Madden” video games).  

[PAGE 129]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 126 
Register therefore treats the requested exemptions for “audiovisual works” as requests 
relating to motion pictures.  
 
It is well established, and the record confirms, that CSS is a technological 
measure that controls access to motion pictures on DVDs, and that AACS is a measure 
that controls access to motion pictures on Blu-ray discs.  In addition, proponents assert 
that the various systems that protect motion pictures available via online distribution 
services also constitute access controls within the meaning of Section 1201(a).726  For 
example, proponents identify and describe in detail Adobe’s Real Time Messaging 
Protocol Encryption (“RTMPE”) technology, which adds an encryption layer to 
streaming media in order to protect online services such as Hulu and UnBox.
727  EFF 
identifies another Adobe product, SWF Verification, as another access control.728  It 
similarly identifies Windows Media DRM as a technological measure that controls access 
to motion pictures offered via download.729   
 
For their part, Joint Creators state that certain download and streaming platforms 
that offer motion picture access, including some referenced by proponents, are 
“underwritten by the legislative promise of secure and robust protection for such 
content.”
730  In light of proponents’ descriptions of various access controls applied to 
motion pictures available via online distribution services, combined with opponents’ 
apparent agreement that content owners widely rely on such controls to protect streamed 
and downloaded content, the Register concludes that a significant number of platforms 
that offer motion pictures via online distribution services use methods that constitute 
technological measures controlling access to those works.
731 
 
a. Noninfringing uses 
 
i. Noncommercial videos, commercial uses by 
documentary filmmakers and multimedia ebook 
authors, and educational uses 
 
Proponents of exemptions to cover noncommercial videos, commercial uses by 
documentary filmmakers and multimedia ebook authors, and uses in educational contexts 
have shown that a significant number of the proposed uses reproduce short excerpts of 
                                                
726 P7C (EFF) at 61; P7D (Joint Filmmakers) at 39 -43.   
727 P7C (EFF) at 61; P7D (Joint Filmmakers) at 39 -43.  EFF notes that Adobe itself considers RTMPE  and 
related technologies to be technological protection measures.  See P7C (EFF) at 62 (citing Adobe’s 
complaint in Adobe Sys. Inc. v. Applian Techs., Inc., N.D. Cal. Case No. 09 -cv-0228-WHA (filed Jan. 2, 
2009)). 
728 P7C (EFF) at 61. 
729 Id. at 62. 
730 C12 (Joint Creators) at 13-14.  
731 The Register notes that the landscape for access controls protecting motion pictures offered via online 
distribution services is constantly changing.  See, e.g., T Weirick, May 17, 2012, at 160. 

[PAGE 130]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 127 
motion pictures for purposes of criticism and commentary.  Such uses fall within the 
favored purposes referenced in the preamble of Section 107 and therefore are likely to be 
fair uses.732  
 
More specifically, turning to the first fair use factor, proponents’ stated uses tend 
to be transformative in nature, making brief uses of motion pictures for the purpose of 
criticism, comment, teaching and/or scholarship rather than for the works’ original 
purpose.  In the case of noncommercial videos, clips from motion pictures may make a 
point about some perceived theme or undercurrent in the subject works, for example, 
violence against women.
733  In other situations, motion pictures clips may be used and 
remixed in order to make political statements about matters of public policy.734  In 
educational settings, motion pictures clips are used in film studies classes to deconstruct 
and reveal filmmaking techniques.735  In addition, professors and college and university 
students may use clips to serve educational needs in other types of courses.736  Educators 
of younger students may use clips to illustrate points in classroom lessons and/or raise 
issues for discussion.737   
 
Further, despite the commercial aspect of uses by documentary filmmakers and 
multimedia ebook authors,
 the activities of these creators are often transformative in 
nature.738  In many instances, such creators use copyrighted works in order to offer 
                                                
732 17 U.S.C. § 107: 
Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 106 and 106A, the fair use 
of a copyrighted work, including such use by reproduction in copies or 
phonorecords or by any other means specified by that section, for 
purposes such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching 
(including multiple copies for classroom use), scholarship, or research, 
is not an infringement of copyright.  
733 R9 (OTW) at 9. 
734 P7B (EFF) at 44 (citing Move Your Money (commenting on the financial bailout)).  
735 P7G (Joint Educators) at 10; P7F (LCA) at 13 -14, 16-17. 
736 P7G (Joint Educators)  at 20-24 (citing uses such as university instructors assigning students to create 
presentations on various topics including film, media studies, anthropology, history, and chemistry).  
737 See, e.g., P8 (MEL) at 4-10 (citing uses such as kindergarten through twelfth grade teachers showing 
clips from various film titles to allow students to compare specific film techniques and styles, to teach 
nuances of stage production, and to illustrate character archetypes, tones, and plot l ines); T Hobbs, June 4, 
2012, at 99-100 (discussing uses of film clips to demonstrate differences in production in film versus 
television content); T Bolos, June 4, 2012, at 42 (discussing uses such as showing clips from films to 
enable comparison to works  of literature that may share important themes) . 
738 P7D (Joint Filmmakers) at 8- 13 (citing examples of motion picture clips used to illustrate a documentary 
filmmaker’s point, including The Real Rocky (a documentary that used short clips from the Rocky films and 
Battle Cry to explore the inspiration behind the Rocky film series) and SpOILed (a documentary that used 
clips from Black Gold and Quest for Fire to illustrate how the oil industry got its start in the United 
States)); see also Campbell, 510 U.S. at 580, 594 (finding that parodies produced for commerce could be 
fair use when the parodic work uses “some elements of a prior author’s composition to create a new one 
that, at least in part, comments on that author’s works,” and declining to impose a presum ption that a 
commercial use was not fair).  

[PAGE 131]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 128 
criticism or commentary on the works in question.  Documentary filmmakers may use 
motion picture clips to provide material that is directly relevant to the filmmaker’s 
subject matter and message.739  Multimedia ebook authors have demonstrated how they 
may use clips to present film analysis.740  When a short excerpt from a motion picture is 
used for purposes of criticism and comment, even in a commercial context, it may well 
be a productive use that serves the essential function of fair use as a free speech 
safeguard.741  While the Register does not necessarily conclude that a court would find 
each and every one of proponents’ examples to be transformative, the record amply 
supports the conclusion that a substantial number of the proffered examples likely would 
be considered transformative.   
 
Concerning the second fair use factor, a motion picture is generally creative in 
nature and thus at the core of copyright’s protective purposes.
742  The Supreme Court has 
stated, however, that in relation to certain transformative uses, the second factor is of 
limited assistance in evaluating whether the use is fair.743  As indicated above, the 
Register determines that a substantial number of proponents’ examples are 
transformative.  Accordingly, the Register also concludes that the second fair use factor, 
while not favorable, is not especially relevant here.  
 
Under the third fair use factor, an essential component of the proposals is that 
only a short portion of the work is used.744  The record evidence suggests that most of 
proponents’ cited uses involve only brief portions of the underlying work.  For example, 
the evidence demonstrates that, in a great many noncommercial videos, not only is each 
relevant clip very short (rarely longer than a few seconds), but even multiple clips from 
the same motion picture, when used together, comprise an extremely small fraction of the 
entirety of the source material.
745  In relation to a typical movie of perhaps 120 minutes, 
the excerpts are a quantitatively small amount, comparable to brief quotations from a 
                                                
739 P7D (Joint Filmmakers) at 8- 9, 11-13 (citing uses such as filmmakers’ inclusion of clips from popular 
films and news footage to analyze political cultural issues and the nature of various subcultures, and to 
explore historical figures).  
740 P7E (Joint EBook Authors) at 7 -9 (citing uses such as using clips to analyze cinematic storytelling 
techniques or the interplay of history and specific film genres).  
741 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 583-85. 
742 Given that this analysis is  generalized, and does not review specific uses, the assessment of the actual 
nature of a copyrighted work will vary from case to case.  However, the record in this rulemaking generally 
revealed examples of motion pictures on the creative , rather than factual, side of the spectrum.  
743 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 579. 
744 The Register observes that EFF’s proposed exemptions do not include the term “short portions of 
motion pictures,” but instead use the term “clips.”  See P7B (EFF) at 36, 57.  The Register further n otes that 
MEL’s proposal does not include a description of the amount of the work used, but several described uses 
involve short portions of motion pictures.  See P8 (MEL) at 1, 4, 11, 12.  For purposes of this fair use 
analysis, the Register will treat ME L’s proposal as limited to short portions of works.  In general, as 
discussed below, the Register observes that the only uses sought by the proponents that she considers to be 
potential fair uses for purposes of the present analysis are ones that use short  portions of motion pictures, or 
“clips” constituting short portions of motion pictures.  
745 R9 (OTW) at 15. 

[PAGE 132]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 129 
book.746  Similarly, as demonstrated at one of the hearings, ebook authors seek to use 
brief, discrete film segments to analyze cinematic storytelling.747  The record indicates 
that, in educational settings, the proposed uses are also usually short relative to the length 
of the entire work.748  Although the portions used may constitute important elements of 
the underlying works, the transformative nature of such uses renders them unlikely to 
adversely affect or supersede the potential market for or value of those works.  As the 
Supreme Court has suggested, in certain situations, using the heart of the work may be 
the optimal way to avoid taking too much quantitatively, particularly when it is necessary 
to “conjure up” the work used.
749  
 
Under the fourth factor, when the use of the work is transformative, such as for 
the purpose of criticism or comment as described above, it is less likely that there will be 
interference with the primary or derivative markets for the underlying work.  Indeed, 
opponents did not identify any proposed use that has harmed or likely will harm the 
market for or value of any copyrighted motion picture.
750  Furthermore, there is nothing 
in the record to establish that the proponents’ planned uses would diminish the value of 
the copyright-protected motion pictures.
751   
 
On balance, the fair use analysis demonstrates that many of the uses in which 
noncommercial video creators, documentary filmmakers, multimedia ebook authors, and 
educational users seek to engage are likely to be fair.  Importantly, the Register is not 
making any judgment as to whether any particular use offered by the proponents is in fact 
fair, and it is conceivable that some may not be.  Nonetheless, there is ample basis to 
conclude that some significant number (and probably many) of the proposed uses likely 
                                                
746 While, in some cases, creators used multiple clips from the same motion picture or larger percentages of 
interviews contained on a DVD, the questio n of whether the amount used was reasonable in relation to the 
purpose is a fundamental fair use question that should be addressed under the rubric of fair use analysis, not 
precluded per se as a result of the prohibition on circumvention.  There undoubted ly were some examples 
introduced into record that used an amount of the work that could disqualify the user from relying on  fair 
use.  See, e.g., C20 (Rife) at 3 (Luminosity’s Vogue/300 , an extensive montage of scenes from the movie 
300 mixed with Madonna’ s recording “Vogue”). 
747 T Buster, June 4, 2012, at 168 -77. 
748 See, e.g., P8 (MEL) at 12.  
749 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 588-89: 
But if quotation of the opening riff and the first line may be said to go 
to the “heart” of the original, the heart is also what most r eadily 
conjures up the song for parody, and it is the heart at which parody 
takes aim.  Copying does not become excessive in relation to parodic 
purpose merely because the portion taken was the original’s heart.  If 2 
Live Crew had copied a significantly l ess memorable part of the 
original, it is difficult to see how its parodic character would have come 
through. 
750 Opponents do, however, allege that several of the exemptions that would allow circumvention would 
harm the market for works protected by access controls.  That matter is addressed below in the context of 
the 1201 statutory factors.  
751 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 591-92. 

[PAGE 133]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 130 
would qualify as noninfringing under Section 107. 
  
ii. Commercial uses by fictional filmmakers 
 
The Register concludes that the same fair use analysis cannot be applied to 
fictional filmmakers, at least on the record presented.  It is true that the use of motion 
picture excerpts in a fictional film may enhance the film, but that does not necessarily 
mean that the use is fair.  Notably, fictional films differ from the categories of use 
described above because there is no basis to assume that fictional films’ primary purpose 
is to offer criticism or comment.  Rather, the purpose of a fictional film is typically 
entertainment. 
 
This is not to say that a fictional filmmakers’ use of a motion picture excerpt 
cannot be a fair use.  Under appropriate circumstances, it may well be.  But fictional film 
proponents have chosen merely to describe their desired uses and have not presented 
concrete examples – such as existing films that make use of preexisting material in a 
clearly transformative manner – that permit the Register to make a finding of fair use in 
this context.  As it stands, the record does not allow the Register to reach a satisfying 
determination as to the nature of the fictional filmmakers’ proposed uses, the amount of 
the underlying works fictional filmmakers generally seek to use, or whether or how such 
uses might affect the market for the original works.  In short, the Register cannot conduct 
an adequate fair use analysis based on the evidence presented. 
 
Moreover, the Register notes that, to the extent they are discernible from 
proponents’ descriptions, a number of the examples cited by proponents do not appear 
readily to lend themselves to a conclusion that the proposed uses would likely be 
considered fair.  The use of an earlier work to flesh out characters and motivations in a 
new work, or to develop a storyline, does not inherently serve the purpose of criticism or 
comment on the existing work.  Indeed, the use of an earlier work or works as the basis 
for a new work could give rise to a concern that the new use might supplant the 
derivative market for the existing work. 
 
  The Register therefore concludes, on the record before her, that proponents for 
fictional filmmakers have failed to establish that the uses in which they seek to engage 
are likely to be noninfringing. 
b. Adverse impact 
 
Other than with respect to fictional film uses,
752 proponents have established that 
certain noninfringing uses contemplated by Proposed Classes 7 and 8 can be achieved if 
circumvention is allowed.  This does not necessarily mean, however, that the prohibition 
on circumvention is having an adverse effect on noninfringing uses.  Specifically, the 
                                                
752 In light of the finding that fictional filmmakers have failed to demonstrate substantial noninfringing 
uses, and the deficient record with respect to this category of uses, the Register does not evaluate the 
proposed fictional film uses for purposes of adverse impact or the Section 1201 statutory factors.  

[PAGE 134]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 131 
Register must still determine whether it is possible that proponents may make 
noninfringing uses without circumventing access controls.   
 
As a general matter, the Register concludes that motion pictures are not widely 
and reasonably available in other formats not subject to technological protections.  In the 
past, motion pictures were still available in VHS format.  However, VHS tapes are no 
longer commercially distributed.
753  While the various avenues of motion picture 
distribution are alternatives to one another, the record indicates that all of the most 
popular forms of commercial distribution of motion pictures, including DVD, Blu-ray, 
and online distribution services, are protected by access controls.  
 
Opponents point to clip licensing, smartphone video recording, and screen capture 
software as alternatives that allow proponents affordably and effectively to copy short 
portions of motion pictures to achieve the desired uses without resorting to 
circumvention.
754   
 
The record clearly shows that clip licensing is not a reasonable alternative.  The 
record establishes that the scope of content offered through reasonably available licensing 
sources is far from complete.
755  Furthermore, requiring a creator who is making fair use 
of a work to obtain a license is in tension with the Supreme Court’s holding in Campbell 
v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc.
756 that rightsholders do not have an exclusive right to markets 
for commentary on or criticism of their copyrighted works. 
 
 Alternatively, opponents propose that users could use smartphone cameras to 
record relevant excerpts of motion pictures.
757  Previously, the Register found that a 
similar alternative to circumvention – the “camcording” of content from an output 
monitor – imposed a significant cost that was more than a mere inconvenience.
758  
Opponents argue that, by contrast, the cost associated with smartphone recording does 
not amount to more than an inconvenience.  Proponents dispute this, asserting that the 
cost can be significant.
759  In the context of the proposed exemptions, the record 
regarding the true cost of smartphone recording is unclear.   
 
                                                
753 P7D (Joint Filmmakers) at 1.  
754 C8 (DVD CCA) at 8 -16, and 44. 
755 R17 (Joint Educators) at 5 -7. 
756 510 U.S. 569 (1994).  
757 See, e.g., C8 (DVD CCA) at 13 -14; T Marks, June 4, 2012, at 50, 190; Taylor, May 11, 2012 , Tech 
Demonstration Hearing (no t ranscript, video of submitted smartphone recording presentation 
“120511cop1330_Taylor” is availa ble upon request to the Copyright Office).  
758 2010 Recommendation at 59.  
759 T Bolos, June 4, 2012, at 77 (noting that, while smartphones appear to be cheap, they incur monthly 
charges that may be significant). 

[PAGE 135]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 132 
A number of proponents criticize the quality of smartphone recordings by 
asserting that they yield inferior video and audio quality.760  There is also a concern that 
smartphone recordings may not capture the entire image as it is meant to appear on the 
screen.761  The Register recognizes that there is room for continued debate regarding the 
image quality obtainable via smartphone recordings, and is unable to conclude on this 
record that smartphone recordings serve as a sufficient alternative to circumvention.   
 
In the previous proceeding, the Register found that screen capture technology 
offered a cost-effective alternative technique to allow reproduction of motion pictures.  
The Register also determined, however, that some significant number of noninfringing 
uses, though not all, would be adversely affected if limited to this alternative.  This 
finding of some substantial adverse impact was based on the fact that the screen capture 
software examined resulted in image quality that was significantly inferior to that 
available via circumvention, coupled with the fact that some users required high-quality 
images that could only be obtained via circumvention in order to accomplish the desired 
noninfringing use.
762 
 
Unlike in the last proceeding, when the Register raised screen capture technology 
as a possible alternative to circumvention,
763 in the current proceeding it is opponents 
who challenge the notion that exemptions are warranted in light of the availability of 
screen capture technology as a reasonable alternative to circumvention.  DVD CCA and 
AACS LA point out that the image quality has greatly improved since the last 
proceeding.  While neither opponent endorses screen capture technology generally or any 
particular software program, they both identify Applian’s Replay Video Capture as a 
possible solution.  They note that, while in the previous proceeding the Register found 
that video capture software lacked the requisite quality for certain of the noninfringing 
uses, no such finding should be presumed in the current proceeding.764   
 
Both proponents and opponents address various types of screen capture 
technology.  The presented information shows that at least some versions of this 
technology are not cost-prohibitive for the types of use at issue.
765  Aside from the 
question of cost, however, proponents offer extensive evidence and commentary in an 
                                                
760 R11 (International Documentary Association, Kartemquin Educational Films, Inc., and National 
Alliance for Media Arts and Culture)  at 7; T Morrissette, June 4, 2012, at 148.  
761 T Marks, June 4, 2012, at 190 ; Taylor May 11, 2012 , Tech Demonstration Hearing, Friday, May 11, 
2012 (no transcript, video of submitted smartphone recording presentation “120511cop1330_Taylor” is 
available upon request to the Copyright Office) (the Register notes that the submitted smartphone 
recordings cut off the bottom portion of motion pictures intended to be recorded).  
762 2010 Recommendation at 60 -61. 
763 2010 Recommendation at 28 n.81 (citing T Kasunic, May 1, 2009, at 57 -59). 
764 C4 (AACS LA) at 11 -13; C8 (DVD CCA) at 11- 13 (citing See If You Can Watch It, You Can Record It 
With Replay Video Capture, Applian.com). 
765 See, e.g., T Marks, June 4, 2012, at 190 (screen capture software technology is available for less than 
$50). 

[PAGE 136]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 133 
effort to establish that the results of screen capture are insufficient for their needs.766  
Based on the video evidence, the accompanying explanations offered in the hearings, and 
the post-hearing input from proponents and opponents, the Register determines that the 
screen capture images, while improved in quality since the last proceeding, are still of 
lower quality than those available by circumvention of access controls on motion 
pictures.  The images available from screen capture technology are somewhat diminished 
in clarity and depth, and may exhibit some degree of pixelation.
767  As there is no serious 
question that screen capture technology produces lower-quality images than those that are 
available by circumvention, the remaining consideration is whether screen capture 
images are suitable for proponents’ desired noninfringing uses.   
 
Documentary filmmakers suggest that the lower-quality images generated by 
screen capture are not suitable for the dissemination of their films.  The Register found a 
similar argument persuasive in the previous rulemaking based on certain distribution 
standards generally requiring that films adhere to specific quality standards that cannot be 
met by screen capture.
768  Unlike in the last proceeding, however, the Register is not 
convinced on the present record that the distribution requirements would give rise to 
significant adverse effects.  In this proceeding, the parties have explained the standards in 
greater detail, including the fact that certain accommodations are made with respect to 
pre-existing materials.  Proponents did not make a persuasive showing that distribution is, 
or will be, adversely impacted due to a format or quality concern.  Without such 
evidence, the Register is not able to conclude that the inability to obtain higher-quality 
images through circumvention has adverse effects on documentary filmmakers as a result 
of distribution standards.   
 
Nonetheless, the record does support the conclusion that, in some cases, for other 
reasons, the inability to circumvent to make use of higher-quality material available on 
DVDs and in protected online formats is likely to impose significant adverse effects on 
documentary filmmakers, as well as on noncommercial video makers, multimedia ebook 
authors, and certain types of educational users. 
 
Creators of noncommercial videos provided the most extensive record to support 
the need for higher-quality source material.  Based on the video evidence presented, the 
Register is able to conclude that diminished quality likely would impair the criticism and 
comment contained in noncommercial videos.  For example, the Register is able to 
perceive that Buffy vs Edward and other noncommercial videos would suffer significantly 
because of blurring and the loss of detail in characters’ expression and sense of depth.
769  
                                                
766 See responses and exhibits set forth on the Office’s website.  
767“Pixelation” is defined “in computer graphics and digital photography  [as] … caus[ing] (an image) to 
break up into pixels, as by overenlarging the image: When enlarging a photograph, first increase the 
resolution to avoid pixelating it.”  See dictionary.reference.com/browse/pixelation,  last visited Oct. 24, 
2012 at 8:30am.  “Pixelated” means “displayed in such a manner that individual pixels are discernible .”  
See www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/pixelated , last visited Oct. 24, 2012 8:30am. 
768 2010 Recommendation at 65-66. 
769 See Decherney Letter at 2 -3. 

[PAGE 137]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 134 
But the record does not support a finding that all noncommercial videos necessarily 
require high-quality images.  Some noncommercial videos offered into the record could 
apparently accomplish the proposed noninfringing use without a high level of image 
detail.  For example, the noncommercial video Planet of the Arabs appears to convey the 
desired comment on the treatment of Arabs by American media quite successfully despite 
diminished image quality.
770   
 
Although the record is not as robust in the case of documentary filmmakers and 
multimedia ebook authors, it is sufficient to support a similar finding that for certain uses 
– i.e., when trying to convey a point that depends upon the ability to perceive details or 
subtleties in a motion picture excerpt – documentary filmmakers and ebook authors likely 
will suffer adverse effects if they are unable to incorporate higher-quality images.  It may, 
for example, be important to show rippling muscles
771 or particles of dust772 to make a 
point.  Similarly, educational uses that depend upon close analysis of film or media 
images may be adversely impacted if students are unable to apprehend the subtle detail or 
emotional impact of the images they are analyzing, such as the full brilliance of a 
diamond
773 or the glint of an eye.774  Again, however, where precise detail is not required 
for the particular use in question – for example, where a clip is presented simply to 
illustrate a historical event – lower-quality screen capture images may be fully adequate 
to fulfill the noninfringing use. 
   
For uses that do not require higher-quality images, the Register finds that screen 
capture is a satisfactory alternative to circumvention.  On the present record, the Register 
reiterates her previous determination that the use of some types of video capture software 
is, for purposes of Section 1201(a)(1), “comparable to camcording the screen – a process 
that has been identified as a noncircumventing option for accomplishing noninfringing 
uses.”
775  Proponents, however, maintain that even if the Register acknowledges now, as 
she did in 2010, that certain types of video capture software are noncircumventing, this is 
of little value, as there is no assurance that all copyright owners share this view.
776   
Proponents observe, for example, that litigation has been instituted over the use of similar 
methods of acquiring content protected by access controls.
777   
 
In light of the unsettled legal landscape, as discussed below, the Register finds 
that there is a need for limited exemptions to address the possible circumvention of 
                                                
770 See P7B (EFF) at 46 (citing hnassif, Planet of the Arabs). 
771 T Quinn, June 4, 2012, at 157.  
772 Id. at 168-178; T Cohen, June 4, 2012, at 178- 80. 
773 T Decherney, June 4, 2012, at 87 -91. 
774 Decherney Letter at 2.  
775 2010 Recommendation at 60 -61. 
776 See, e.g., T Tushnet, June 4, 2012, at 261 -62. 
777 R1 (LCA) at 3 (citing Ass’n for Info. Media & Equip. v. Regents of the Univ. of Cal. , 2011 U.S. Dist. 
LEXIS 154011 (C.D. Cal. Oct. 3, 2011)  (suit filed against UCLA alleging that use of software that copies 
the analog output of a DVD violates DMCA)).  

[PAGE 138]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 135 
protected motion pictures when using screen capture technology to reproduce short 
portions for purposes of criticism or comment. 
 
Finally, documentary filmmakers and educational users (including college and 
university professors and students and kindergarten through twelfth grade educators) seek 
an expanded exemption to circumvent AACS-protected Blu-ray discs, in addition to CSSprotected DVDs and protected online formats.
778  The evidentiary record establishes that 
there is some amount of motion picture material that may be available only on Blu-ray 
discs, such as bonus material
779 or, more rarely, entire films released exclusively on Bluray.780  However, the few cited uses of Blu-ray-exclusive content are insignificant in 
number.  Moreover, as discussed above, with respect to documentary filmmakers in 
particular, the Register is not persuaded that Blu-ray content is necessary to meet 
applicable distribution standards.  The Register therefore concludes that the record does 
not reflect a substantial adverse impact due to the inability to use motion picture materials 
contained on Blu-ray discs. 
 
c. Statutory factors 
 
The record demonstrates that CSS technology protecting DVDs, AACS 
technology protecting Blu-ray discs, and various systems protecting motion pictures 
available via online distribution services are technological protection measures that 
effectively control access to copyrighted works.  It also shows that there are significant 
amounts of noninfringing uses in which noncommercial video creators, documentary 
filmmakers, multimedia ebook authors, and certain educational users seek to engage that 
are, or are likely to be, adversely affected by the prohibition on circumvention.  The final 
step in this review is to consider the series of factors set forth in Section 1201(a)(1)(C).  
 
With respect to the first factor,
781 which addresses the availability of copyrighted 
works, the Register previously determined that it is questionable whether CSS protection 
remained a critical factor in the decision to release motion pictures in digital format, 
noting that DVD had become the dominant form of distribution, and remained so despite 
the wide availability of circumvention tools.  Specifically, she stated that “while CSSprotected DVDs may very well have fostered the digital distribution of motion pictures to 
the public, there is no credible support for the proposition that the digital distribution of 
motion pictures continues to depend on the integrity of the general ‘principle’ that the 
                                                
778 See P7D (Joint Filmmakers) at 23 -24.  Fictional filmmakers also seek access to Blu -Ray content, but, as 
discussed above, they have not made the requisite showing with respect to noninfringing uses.  
Noncommercial video makers and multimedia ebook authors do not request an exemption for Blu -ray 
discs.  See P7B (EFF); P7C (EFF); P7E (Joint Ebook Authors).  
779 7G (Joint Educators) at 16 (Blu -ray-only Fight Club: 10th Anniversary Edition including bonus material 
not available on any of the previous DVD releases); 7D (Joint Filmmakers) at 12 (Blu- ray-only Star Wars 
release with special features).  
780 7G (Joint Educators) at 16 (Blu -ray-only Terminator Salvation Director’s Cut ); 7D (Joint Filmmakers) 
at 12 (Blu-ray-only Mortal Kombat: Legacy ). 
781 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(i).  

[PAGE 139]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 136 
circumvention of CSS is always unlawful.”782  Likewise, the record here does not support 
a finding that there can be no exception to the prohibition on circumvention for the 
purpose of facilitating noninfringing uses or that the overall availability of motion 
pictures will suffer if such an exemption is adopted.  Accordingly, the first statutory 
factor does not weigh against properly tailored exemptions to permit the fair use of 
protected motion picture material. 
 
Turning to the second statutory factor,783 the availability for use for nonprofit 
archival, preservation, and educational uses, the focus on education is, of course, relevant 
to the proposals relating to educational uses, as well as to a lesser degree those relating to 
documentary films, documentary videos, and multimedia ebooks offering film criticism.  
However, this factor would not appear to have any significant bearing with respect to 
many noncommercial videos.  Overall, this factor is neutral to favorable vis-à-vis the 
proposed exemptions. 
 
The third factor,784 the impact that the prohibition on circumvention has on 
criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, and research, is a critical 
consideration in relation to noncommercial videos, documentary filmmaking, multimedia 
ebook authorship, and educational uses.  Each of these proposed categories seeks to 
enable criticism, comment, teaching, and/or scholarship.  This factor therefore weighs 
strongly in favor of appropriately tailored exemptions to foster such uses. 
 
The fourth factor,
785 the effect of circumvention on the market for or value of 
copyrighted works, is relevant to all of the above-referenced uses.  Motion pictures 
involve significant effort and expense to create and, once created, frequently become a 
vital part of American culture.  The motion picture industry has a legitimate interest in 
preventing motion pictures from being copied in their entirety or in a manner that would 
adversely impact the market for or value of these works, including reasonable derivative 
markets.   
 
Significantly, however, proponents do not seek to copy motion pictures in their 
entirety.  Rather, the record reflects the need to use only a quantitatively small percentage 
of the protected works.  The Register concludes that the use of such small portions in the 
contexts described within the approved exemptions is unlikely to supplant the market for 
motion pictures.  
 
Proponents claim that their requested uses will enhance the market for 
copyrighted works.
786  Conversely, opponents argue that the integrity of access controls, 
which may be negatively affected by even limited exemptions permitting circumvention, 
                                                
782 2010 Recommendation at 57.  
783 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(ii).  
784 Id. at § 1201(a)(1)(C)(iii).  
785 Id. at § 1201(a)(1)(C)(iv).  
786 See, e.g., P7B (EFF) at 48. 

[PAGE 140]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 137 
is an important factor in preserving the value of copyrighted works.787  The Register 
recognizes that there is some merit to each of these positions.  On the record in this 
proceeding, however, neither view has been firmly established.  Thus, the Register 
concludes, on the whole, that the fourth factor does not strongly favor, but also does not 
weigh against, properly conceived exemptions to enable criticism and commentary.     
 
d. NTIA comments 
 
NTIA believes an appropriate exemption is necessary because the proposed 
beneficiaries lack sufficient alternatives to circumvention.
788  It asserts that “generally, 
the technological alternatives [to circumvention] produce low-quality videos, and 
associated license agreements often impose significant content limitations on the final 
work product.”789  It notes that documentarians are “particularly hindered” by poor video 
quality because of the media industry’s “strict technical standards,”790 and that, as to 
educational uses, the availability of screen capture software may not be universal due to 
high costs and limited budgets.791  NTIA notes that clip services are limited in scope and 
may not meet the needs of all users, and that licensing negotiations are “expensive and 
burdensome, especially when the licensee seeks to critique the copyrighted work.”
792 
 
NTIA proposes that the Register recommend a class that encompasses “[m]otion 
pictures and other similar audiovisual works on DVDs or delivered via Internet 
Protocol,” asserting that the class should encompass “audiovisual works,” which is 
broader than “motion pictures,” because the former best fits the evidentiary record.
793  
NTIA also proposes to replace “for the purpose of criticism or comment” with “for the 
purpose of fair use,” and would expand the applicable circumstances beyond 
documentary filmmaking to include educational uses by college and university professors 
and college students, educational uses by kindergarten through twelfth grade educators, 
primarily noncommercial videos, and nonfictional or educational multimedia ebooks.
794 
 
As discussed above, the evidentiary support in favor of an exemption is not 
uniform across the several individual proposals within Proposed Classes 7 and 8.  On the 
record presented, the Register finds that, when a higher-quality excerpt is essential to a 
particular use, an exemption to permit circumvention of CSS-protected DVDs and 
protected online formats is appropriate.  For uses where high-quality material is not 
                                                
787 T Weirick, May 17, 2012, at 160; T Mackechnie, May 17, 2012, at 167.  
788 NTIA Letter at 21. 
789 Id. 
790 Id. (citations omitted). 
791 Id. (citations omitted). 
792 Id. (citations omitted). 
793 Id. at 21-22 and n.132. 
794 Id. at 21-22. 

[PAGE 141]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 138 
critical, screen capture technology provides an adequate alternative to circumvention, and 
an exemption to permit the use of such technology is appropriate. 
 
5. Recommendation 
 
As indicated above, proponents have sufficiently identified particular 
technological access control measures and established that a significant number of the 
proposed uses are likely noninfringing.  Proponents seeking an exemption for 
noncommercial videos, commercial documentary films, commercial multimedia ebooks 
offering film analysis, and certain educational uses have established that such uses are, or 
likely will be, adversely affected by the prohibition against circumvention when there is a 
need to use high-quality motion picture material to convey intended criticism or 
commentary.   
 
In addition, for uses in these categories that do not require high-quality content, 
the Register recommends limited exemptions to address the possibility of circumvention 
when using screen capture technology to reproduce motion picture excerpts from CSSprotected DVDs and protected online formats.   
 
The Register’s recommended exemptions are set forth below.  In making these 
recommendations, the Register offers some observations.   
 
To the extent, if any, proponents seek to exempt uses of motion pictures that 
exceed short portions or clips, such a request is not supported by the record.  The 
noninfringing uses presented by proponents in support of their proposals generally 
consist of short portions or clips.  Consistent with the analysis above, the use of only 
short segments is critical to the Register’s determination that a significant number of the 
desired uses are fair.  
 
Similarly, to the extent that proponents seek an exemption for ebook authors 
beyond multimedia nonfiction titles offering film analysis, their request is not supported 
by the record.  It may well be the case that there are additional fair uses by multimedia 
authors that would support a more broadly defined exemption, but no such uses were 
identified.  Rather, the uses that proponents rely upon were limited to nonfiction 
multimedia ebook titles offering film analysis.
795 
 
Further, to the extent proponents seek an expanded exemption covering 
unspecified “noninfringing” or “fair” uses where circumvention is not undertaken for the 
purpose of criticism or comment, their request also lacks support in the record.  The 
record indicates proponents’ view that criticism or comment is central to the purpose of 
creating noncommercial videos.
796  It is also an essential purpose of the proposed 
documentary filmmaking, multimedia ebook, and educational uses.  Consistent with the 
                                                
795 P7E (Joint EBook Authors) at 7 -9. 
796 P7B (EFF) at 46; R9 (OTW) at 13, 15.  

[PAGE 142]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 139 
analysis above, on this record, the Register considers the desire to engage in criticism or 
commentary to be a critical factor in establishing fair use in these contexts.797   
 
To the extent proponents for noncommercial videos seek an expanded exemption 
covering “primarily noncommercial videos” – as opposed to “noncommercial videos” – 
they have not demonstrated a meaningful number of such uses that would qualify as 
noninfringing.
  It is true that a work may be commercial in nature and still be 
transformative.798  However, proponents identify only a single video that allegedly falls 
within this category in that it generated advertising revenue.799  It is not clear from the 
record, however, why this example should be considered “primarily noncommercial” as 
opposed to “primarily commercial.”  Moreover, a single cited use is an insufficient basis 
upon which to conclude that “primarily noncommercial” uses are more likely than not to 
be noninfringing.   
 
On the other hand, proponents have established a sufficient basis for clarifying 
that the proposed exemption for noncommercial works may include videos created 
pursuant to a paid commission, provided that the commissioning entity uses the work 
solely in a noncommercial manner.  In this regard, proponents cite several examples of 
videos that were created pursuant to a paid commission by a noncommercial entity that 
were then used for noncommercial purposes.
800  Based on this, the Register finds that the 
definition of “noncommercial videos” should clarify that noncommercial videos may 
include videos created pursuant to a paid commission, provided the commissioning entity 
uses the work solely in a noncommercial manner.  Although such commissioned works 
might also reasonably be described as having a commercial aspect, the requirement that 
the video be for the purpose of criticism or comment renders any minimal commercial 
purpose less significant.
801   
 
With respect to educational uses, the Register finds that the record supports a 
determination that college and university professors and other faculty, as well as students, 
in film studies and other courses focused on close analysis of media excerpts may 
sometimes need to reproduce content from CSS-protected DVDs and protected online 
formats to enable such analysis.  Because the exemption is limited to educational 
activities involving close analysis, there is no basis to limit the exemption only to 
professors.  Non-professor faculty at colleges and universities should also be permitted to 
take advantage of the exemption when there is a pedagogical need for high-quality source 
material.  In addition, the record supports a finding that instructors of younger students 
                                                
797 The Register thus rejects the broader formulations suggested by  certain proponents that the use simply 
be “noninfringing” or “for the purpose of fair use.”  See , e.g., P7E (Joint Ebook Authors) at 14 -15.  As 
noted, such formulations are not supported by the record, which is focused on uses offering criticism or 
commentary.  Nor do they provide a sufficiently refined explanation of the nature of the use to which the 
exemption would apply.  
798 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 584-85. 
799 P7B (EFF) at 46. 
800 Id. at 48-49. 
801 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 584-85. 

[PAGE 143]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 140 
sometimes engage in close analysis of motion picture excerpts in media-oriented courses.  
As discussed above, however, the record does not support an across-the-board finding 
that all faculty and students in higher education, or all kindergarten through twelfth grade 
educators, need to circumvent protected motion picture formats.  Instead, screen capture 
technology is sufficient for uses that do not require close analysis.  General-purpose 
classroom uses should be satisfied by the use of screen capture software. 
 
Prospective users of the recommended exemptions should take care to ensure that 
they satisfy each requirement of the narrowly tailored exemptions before seeking to 
operate under their benefits.  Creators and educators should consider whether there is an 
adequate alternative before engaging in circumvention under a recommended exemption.  
The Register further notes that screen capture technology should only be employed when 
it is reasonably represented, and offered to the public, as enabling the reproduction of 
motion picture content after such content has been lawfully decrypted – that is, when it is 
offered as a noncircumventing technology.   
 
Finally, users of the limited exemptions should be prepared to defend their 
activities in light of the alternatives as they exist at the time of their use of the exemption, 
including any further innovations in screen capture or other technologies that may 
produce higher-quality results than are obtainable as of this Recommendation.   
 
Based on the foregoing analysis, the Register recommends that the Librarian 
designate the following classes:  
 
Motion pictures, as defined in 17 U.S.C. § 101, on DVDs 
that are lawfully made and acquired and that are 
protected by the Content Scrambling System, where the 
person engaging in circumvention believes and has 
reasonable grounds for believing that circumvention is 
necessary because reasonably available alternatives, 
such as noncircumventing methods or using screen 
capture software as provided for in alternative 
exemptions, are not able to produce the level of highquality content required to achieve the desired criticism 
or comment on such motion pictures, and where 
circumvention is undertaken solely in order to make use 
of short portions of the motion pictures for the purpose 
of criticism or comment in the following instances: (i) in 
noncommercial videos; (ii) in documentary films; (iii) in 
nonfiction multimedia ebooks offering film analysis; 
and (iv) for educational purposes in film studies or 
other courses requiring close analysis of film and media 
excerpts, by college and university faculty, college and 
university students, and kindergarten through twelfth 
grade educators.  For purposes of this exemption, 
“noncommercial videos” includes videos created 

[PAGE 144]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 141 
pursuant to a paid commission, provided that the 
commissioning entity’s use is noncommercial.   
 
Motion pictures, as defined in 17 U.S.C. § 101, that are 
lawfully made and acquired via online distribution 
services and that are protected by various technological 
protection measures, where the person engaging in 
circumvention believes and has reasonable grounds for 
believing that circumvention is necessary because 
reasonably available alternatives, such as 
noncircumventing methods or using screen capture 
software as provided for in alternative exemptions, are 
not able to produce the level of high-quality content 
required to achieve the desired criticism or comment on 
such motion pictures, and where circumvention is 
undertaken solely in order to make use of short portions 
of the motion pictures for the purpose of criticism or 
comment in the following instances: (i) in 
noncommercial videos; (ii) in documentary films; (iii) in 
nonfiction multimedia ebooks offering film analysis; 
and (iv) for educational purposes in film studies or 
other courses requiring close analysis of film and media 
excerpts, by college and university faculty, college and 
university students, and kindergarten through twelfth 
grade educators.  For purposes of this exemption, 
“noncommercial videos” includes videos created 
pursuant to a paid commission, provided that the 
commissioning entity’s use is noncommercial.   
 
Motion pictures, as defined in 17 U.S.C. § 101, on DVDs 
that are lawfully made and acquired and that are 
protected by the Content Scrambling System, where the 
circumvention, if any, is undertaken using screen 
capture technology that is reasonably represented and 
offered to the public as enabling the reproduction of 
motion picture content after such content has been 
lawfully decrypted, when such representations have 
been reasonably relied upon by the user of such 
technology, when the person engaging in the 
circumvention believes and has reasonable grounds for 
believing that the circumvention is necessary to achieve 
the desired criticism or comment, and where the 
circumvention is undertaken solely in order to make use 
of short portions of the motion pictures for the purpose 
of criticism or comment in the following instances: (i) in 
noncommercial videos; (ii) in documentary films; (iii) in 

[PAGE 145]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 142 
nonfiction multimedia ebooks offering film analysis; 
and (iv) for educational purposes by college and 
university faculty, college and university students, and 
kindergarten through twelfth grade educators.  For 
purposes of this exemption, “noncommercial videos” 
includes videos created pursuant to a paid commission, 
provided that the commissioning entity’s use is 
noncommercial.  
 
Motion pictures, as defined in 17 U.S.C. § 101, that are 
lawfully made and acquired via online distribution 
services and that are protected by various technological 
protection measures, where the circumvention, if any, is 
undertaken using screen capture technology that is 
reasonably represented and offered to the public as 
enabling the reproduction of motion picture content 
after such content has been lawfully decrypted, when 
such representations have been reasonably relied upon 
by the user of such technology, when the person 
engaging in the circumvention believes and has 
reasonable grounds for believing that the circumvention 
is necessary to achieve the desired criticism or 
comment, and where the circumvention is undertaken 
solely in order to make use of short portions of the 
motion pictures for the purpose of criticism or comment 
in the following instances: (i) in noncommercial videos; 
(ii) in documentary films; (iii) in nonfiction multimedia 
ebooks offering film analysis; and (iv) for educational 
purposes by college and university faculty, college and 
university students, and kindergarten through twelfth 
grade educators.  For purposes of this exemption, 
“noncommercial videos” includes videos created 
pursuant to a paid commission, provided that the 
commissioning entity’s use is noncommercial.   

[PAGE 146]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 143 
 
H. Proposed Class 9:  Motion pictures and other audiovisual works – 
captioning and descriptive audio 
 
 Proponents Telecommunications for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing, Inc., Gallaudet 
University, and the Participatory Culture Foundation (“PCF”) propose that the Register 
recommend the following four classes of works: 
 
9A:  Motion pictures and other audiovisual works delivered 
via Internet protocol (IP) protected by technological 
measures that control access to such works when 
circumvention is accomplished to facilitate the creation, 
improvement, or rendering of visual representations or 
descriptions of audible portions of such works for the 
purpose of improving the ability of individuals who may 
lawfully access such works to perceive such works. 
 
9B:  Motion pictures and other audiovisual works delivered 
via Internet protocol (IP) protected by technological 
measures that control access to such works when 
circumvention is accomplished to facilitate the creation, 
improvement, or rendering of audible representations or 
descriptions of visual portions of such works for the 
purpose of improving the ability of individuals who may 
lawfully access such works to perceive such works. 
 
9C:  Motion pictures and other audiovisual works on fixed 
disc-based media protected by technological measures that 
control access to such works when circumvention is 
accomplished to facilitate the creation, improvement, or 
rendering of visual representations or descriptions of 
audible portions of such works for the purpose of 
improving the ability of individuals who may lawfully 
access such works to perceive such works. 
 
9D:  Motion pictures and other audiovisual works on fixed 
disc-based media protected by technological measures that 
control access to such works when circumvention is 
accomplished to facilitate the creation, improvement, or 
rendering of audible representations or descriptions of 
visual portions of such works for the purpose of improving 
the ability of individuals who may lawfully access such 
works to perceive such works. 

[PAGE 147]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 144 
 
1. Proponents’ case 
 
Proponents seek to circumvent technological measures applied to content 
distributed via the internet and “fixed-disc media” for the purpose of creating, improving, 
and rendering captions and descriptive audio tracks to enable individuals with disabilities 
to perceive such works, and for the purpose of conducting research and development on 
technologies to enable such accessibility.   
 
a. Background 
 
 Although proponents’ written filings were not entirely clear, at the hearing it 
became apparent that proponents’ primary interest is in the development of players 
capable of merging commercially accessible content delivered on fixed-disc media and 
via the internet with captions and audible descriptions of video programming 
(“descriptive audio”) that are created separately, generally by parties other than the 
copyright owner of the original copyrightable work.802 
 
Proponents assert that content distributed via the internet uses “server-based 
authentication mechanism[s] in conjunction with trusted client code that handles license 
validation, license restrictions, and decryption of content.”
803  They provide a description 
of several currently used protection measures, but note that “the market for IP-delivered 
video is currently in a state of flux with respect to digital rights management (“DRM”), 
leaving uncertain which product or products distributors . . . will settle upon.”
804  They 
further assert that “it is increasingly likely that a substantial portion of IP-delivered video 
uses, and will continue to use, DRM technologies,” pointing to “the insistence of content 
creators that manufacturers of video-playback devices employ strong DRM to control 
access to their works.”
805  With respect to fixed-disc media, proponents point to the 
widely used Content Scramble System (“CSS”) and the newer Advanced Access Content 
System (“AACS”) used to protect DVDs and Blu-ray discs, respectively.
806   
 
Proponents allege that circumvention is necessary to achieve their objectives 
because they require access to the “playhead,” that is, the technical timing information 
embedded in internet-delivered and fixed-disc-based content that would allow proper 
synchronization of the captions and descriptive audio with the underlying video content 
to which it applies.
807 
                                                
802 T Reid, June 5, 2012, at 124.  
803 P9A-D (Telecommunications for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing, Inc. (“TDI”) and Participatory Culture 
Foundation (“PCF”)) at 11.  
804 Id. at 12. 
805 Id. at 14. 
806 Opponents do not challenge the notion that internet-based and fixed-disc content is protected by 
technological measures.  
807 See, e.g., id. at 17. 

[PAGE 148]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 145 
 
b. Asserted noninfringing uses 
 
Proponents claim that creating or improving captions and descriptive audio is a 
fair use, asserting that the Librarian has previously stated that making an ebook 
accessible to the visually impaired is a noninfringing use.808  Proponents also make a 
broad assertion that a footnote in Sony Corporation of America v. Universal City Studios, 
Inc. should be construed to mean that any use of a copyrighted work to enhance 
accessibility for an individual with disabilities is presumptively fair.
809 
 
Proponents’ analysis of the four fair use factors810 asserts that (1) the purpose and 
character of the use – enhancing accessibility and conducting research and scholarship for 
the same – weighs in favor of fair use; (2) the nature of the works ranges from purely 
creative to primarily factual, rendering the second factor either neutral or tipping in favor 
of fair use; (3) although adding captions or descriptive video may use the entirety of a 
video, it uses only the audio or video portion, respectively, and thus is not “qualitatively 
substantial enough to reduce the demand for” the underlying works,
811 tipping the third 
factor in favor of fair use; and (4) that enhanced accessibility features will improve the 
market for the underlying works because they will become available to a wider audience. 
 
c. Asserted adverse impact 
 
Proponents assert that although some of the content in question is already 
captioned or provides descriptive audio, most does not.  “Because video delivered via IP 
and fixed media often lacks proper captions and video descriptions,” say proponents, 
“denying the requested exemptions could result in diminished availability of works for 
deaf and blind consumers.”
812  Proponents also note generally that the DMCA has a 
“chilling effect” on accessibility research.813 
 
Proponents acknowledge that the recently passed Twenty-First Century 
Communications and Video Accessibility Act (“CVAA”) “likely will require a 
substantial amount of digitally distributed programming to be captioned.”814  However, 
                                                
808 Id. at 23. 
809 T Reid, June 5, 2012, at 85 (citing Sony Corp. of Am. v. Universal City Studios, 464 U.S. 417, 455 n.40 
(1984) (“[m]aking a copy of a copyrighted work for the convenience of a blind person is expre ssly 
identified by the House Committee Report as an example of fair use, with no suggestion that anything more 
than a purpose to entertain or to inform need motivate the copying.”)); cf.  The Authors Guild, Inc. v. 
Hathitrust, No. 11-6351 (S.D.N.Y. Oct. 10,  2012), slip op. at 21 -22 (holding that creating accessible 
versions of certain copyrighted literary works falls “safely within the protection of fair use.”).  
810 See 17 U.S.C. § 107. 
811 P9A-D (TDI and PCF) at 12 (internal citation omitted).  
812 Id. at 10. 
813 Id. at 8. 
814 Id. at 5 (citing to Pub. L. 111 -265 (2010)). 

[PAGE 149]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 146 
they assert that the CVAA does not extend to a wide range of content, including that 
which is distributed exclusively online (e.g., content that does not appear first on 
broadcast or cable television).815  The CVAA does not apply to “video clips” of 
programs, even when they derive from broadcast programming on which captions are 
otherwise required.
816   
 
In recent rulemaking proceedings under the CVAA, many content producers and 
distributors asserted that the creation or improvement of captions and descriptive audio is 
burdensome and would require permission from the copyright owners.  Proponents argue 
that such statements illustrate the content industry’s unwillingness to provide such 
accessibility unless forced to do so.  Indeed, proponents note that, notwithstanding the 
assertions of opponents, the MPAA has separately asserted that “voluntarily captioning a 
limited amount of programming would require eight years to phase in.”
817  Proponents 
note that Netflix provides captions or subtitles on fewer than 5,000 of its nearly 12,000 
titles and that programming with erroneous captions or descriptions should not be 
considered “accessible.”
818  
 
Further, proponents observe that when captions do exist, they are often “riddled 
with errors,” and they point to a website that aims to capture humorous caption errors.
819  
Proponents also assert that many DVDs contain subtitles, but not “captions” conforming 
to a particular technical standard that is useful to accessibility devices.  Similarly, “the 
default character size, color, and opacity of the captions may hamper accessibility.”820  
With respect to descriptive audio, proponents observe that, where such tracks exist, they 
may be played back at “a volume that is inappropriate relative to the original audio 
track.”
821 
 
d. Argument under statutory factors 
 
Proponents argue that protection of fixed-disc media and internet streams 
“inhibits the availability of the works for effective use by the millions of Americans who 
are deaf, hard of hearing, blind, or visually impaired.”
822  They further assert that 
although some programming is available in alternative, unprotected formats, the market 
                                                
815 Id. 
816 R7 (TDI and PCF) at 6- 7. 
817 R7 (TDI and PCF) at 8 (emphasis in original) (citing letter from Jared S. Sher, Counsel to the Motion 
Picture Association of America, to Marlene H. Dortch, Secretary,  Federal Communications Commission 
(Dec. 15, 2011)). 
818 Id. at 8-9. 
819 P9A-D (TDI and PCF) at 19 -20 (citing captionfail.com).  Proponents also note that although such errors 
may seem amusing, “if you’re actually watching that and trying to figure out what wa s actually said, it 
wouldn’t be so funny.”  T Reid, June 5, 2012, at 112.  
820 P9A-D (TDI and PCF) at 21.  
821 Id. at 22. 
822 Id. at 29. 

[PAGE 150]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 147 
is trending toward protected online-only content, much of which is exempted from the 
captioning and descriptive audio requirements of the CVAA.823   
 
Proponents explain that the prohibition on circumvention has a “decidedly 
negative” impact on teaching, scholarship, research, and criticism.
824  Not only does the 
prohibition stifle the research and development associated with the development of 
accessible technologies, it also restricts the amount of content that is perceptible by 
individuals with disabilities.825 
 
Finally, proponents argue that the exemption would “likely have a positive effect 
on the value of copyrighted works” because “[t]he addition and improvement of captions 
and video description of a copyrighted work will increase the value of that work by 
expanding its potential market.”
826 
 
2. Opposition 
 
AACS LA and DVD CCA filed separate but substantially similar comments.
827  
They argue that the marketplace has evolved and will continue to evolve in such a way 
that satisfies accessibility needs.
828  AACS LA also asserts that the proposed exemption 
potentially could harm future growth of the marketplace solutions for accessibility 
concerns.
829 
 
At the hearing, the AACS LA offered a free license “to enable [] developers to 
work with the AACS technology to develop compatible implementations to enable 
accessibility programs and to add accessibility features to interoperate with the normal 
playback” of protected content.
830  Although DVD CCA was not officially represented at 
the hearing, the representative of AACS LA, who was present, also sits on the board of 
DVD CCA.  He indicated that DVD CCA would likely also “give a free license for 
research to improve accessibility … and also be eager to work with player manufacturers 
to license those so that it could be one seamless operation.”
831 
                                                
823 Id. at 29-30. 
824 Id. at 32. 
825 Id. at 33 (“The anticircumvention measures serve to prevent meaningful access to countless signi ficant 
works by deaf, hard of hearing, blind, and visually impaired consumers.  If those consumers cannot access 
these works, they cannot meaningfully partake in criticism of these copyrighted works.”) . 
826 Id. at 34. 
827 C4 (AACS LA); R8 (DVD CCA).  
828 C4 (AACS LA) at 29-30; R8 (DVD CCA) at 19- 21. 
829 C4 (AACS LA) at 30.  
830 T Marks, June 5, 2012, at 68. 
831 Id. at 144.  Following the hearing, counsel for DVD CCA confirmed that “DVD CCA is ready to work 
with relevant parties to develop a free license for the stated [r esearch & development] purposes and to work 
with those same, or other, relevant parties to develop a license for the products and implement such 
technologies, in each case to the extent that such licenses are necessary in order to use DVD CCA’s CSS 

[PAGE 151]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 148 
 Joint Creators 832 also assert that voluntary efforts and regulatory compliance are 
sufficient marketplace drivers for accessible materials.  They maintain that the proposed 
classes are overbroad as they are “drafted to allow for uses unrelated to improving 
accessibility for disabled persons.”833  Joint Creators further assert that the proponents 
have failed to meet their burden:  that circumvention is unnecessary; that proponents have 
presented only scattered examples of errors in captions; that such errors are little more 
than a “mere inconvenience”; and that the proposed underlying uses may infringe the 
reproduction, distribution, and adaptation rights of the copyright owners.  They do not 
undertake a comprehensive attack on proponents’ fair use analysis, however. 
 
3. Discussion 
 
a. Noninfringing uses 
 
The scope of proponents’ intended uses is difficult to discern from proponents’ 
original request.  The papers are fraught with broad generalizations as to how certain 
technologies might be adapted to accommodate the needs of the blind, visually impaired, 
deaf, and hard of hearing.  Beyond a few scattered examples, however, it is very difficult 
to discern what, precisely, proponents seek to do with their proposed exemption. 
 
Proponents articulate three broad categories of conduct: (1) conducting research 
and development on accessible technologies to develop a player capable of presenting or 
manipulating captions or descriptive audio; (2) creating such captions or descriptive 
audio or corrections thereto; and (3) presenting such captions or descriptive audio along 
with the underlying lawfully acquired work so that individuals with disabilities may 
perceive them.834  Still, the precise contours of certain aspects of the proponents’ 
intended exploitation of the proposed exemption remain elusive.  The record is clear that 
proponents would like to conduct research with the objective of developing a player 
capable of presenting and, in some cases, manipulating or customizing captions and/or 
                                                                                                                                            
technology.”  Letter from Bruce H. Turnbull, Counsel, DVD CCA to David Carson, General Counsel, U.S. 
Copyright Office (June 13, 2012).  Several weeks later, proponents and opponents sent separate letters to 
the Copyright Office indicating that, although discussio ns between the parties were positive and 
encouraging, they failed to achieve a licensing arrangement.  See Letter from David Jonathan Taylor, 
Counsel to DVD CCA and AACS LA to David Carson, General Counsel, U.S. Copyright Office (Aug. 15, 
2012); Letter from Blake Reid, Counsel to Telecommunications for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing, Inc., 
Christian Volger, Associate Professor and Director, Technology Access Program, Gallaudet University, 
and Andrew Phillips, Policy Attorney, National Association of the Deaf to Maria A. Pallante, Register of 
Copyrights, David Carson, General Counsel, Rob Kasunic, Deputy General Counsel, Chris Reed, Senior 
Advisor for Policy & Special Projects, Ben Golant, Assistant General Counsel, U.S. Copyright Office 
(Aug. 16, 2012).  
832 The trade groups represented by Joint Creators are the Association of American Publishers, the 
American Society of Media Photographers, the Business Software Alliance, the Entertainment Software 
Association, the Motion Picture Association of America, the Pict ure Archive Council of America, and the 
Recording Industry Association of America.  C12 (Joint Creators) at 1 -2.  
833 Id. at 44. 
834 T Reid, June 5, 2012, at 149.  

[PAGE 152]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 149 
descriptive audio.  But with respect to the creation of such captions or descriptive audio, 
the record contains only generalized representations about how they would intend to 
proceed, were the exemption to be granted.835 
 
Proponents assert that each of the broadly defined intended uses is fair, citing to 
Sony Corporation of America v. Universal Studios, Inc.,836 and a sole footnote therein, 
which they acknowledge is merely dicta.837  However, fair use analyses are, by statute, 
necessarily fact specific; moreover, courts have cautioned that “[t]he task is not to be 
simplified with bright-line rules,”
838 but rather, must be analyzed on a case-by-case 
basis.839  Most of the uses relating to the creation of captions and descriptive audio 
proposed by the proponents are so general that it is impossible to evaluate whether such 
uses would be noninfringing.  For example, proponents have discussed creating captions 
for content that is uncaptioned, as well as fixing incorrect or poorly implemented captions 
– each of these distinct endeavors could well have a different outcome under a traditional 
fair use analysis.840  But absent any specific facts pertaining to particularized uses, such 
an analysis is not possible. 
                                                
835 Indeed, at the hearing, when describing how one model might work, counsel acknowledged that he was 
“just hypothesizing.”  Id. at 112. 
836 464 U.S. 417 (1984) . 
837 T Reid, June 5, 2012, at 84 -85.  In fact, the House Report referred to in Sony addressed much more 
limited circumstances:   
 
While the making of multiple copies or phonorecords of a work for g eneral circulation 
requires the permission of the copyright owner, a problem addressed in section 70 of the 
bill, the making of a single copy or phonorecord by an individual as a free service for a 
blind persons would properly be considered a fair use unde r section 107. 
 
H.R. Rep. No. 94-1476, at 73 (1976). 
 
838 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 577. 
839 Id. 
840 Indeed, the determination of whether such conduct is fair may well be a matter of degree.  For example, 
one use that proponents hypothesized is to: 
come up with a da tabase by which people that are watching online 
videos or DVDs could say, hey, at [] one minute [into] the movie War 
Horse there’s a problem with the captions.  They misspelled the name 
of the horse.  Here’s the correct name of the horse.  And we could 
design a player that goes out to the database and says, ah, when you’re 
watching the DVD War Horse , grab the corrected captions and insert 
them at that moment.  
T Reid, June 5, 2012, at 112 -13.  If such a caption database were to contain merely corrections – t hat is, 
identification of specific points within a particular copyrightable work that are incorrect, along with the 
necessary fixes – one would expect the fair use calculus to differ from that of a database that contains 
captioning content for an entire co pyrightable work.  The former would appear to have little independent 
value beyond the work to which it is applied, while the latter could constitute a transcript, which likely 
constitutes a derivative work.  Proponents declined to engage on this point, claiming that such uses are per 
se fair.  T Reid, June 5, 2012, at 85.  The Register takes no position on whether the latter activity would 
constitute fair use. 

[PAGE 153]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 150 
 
The record does, however, reflect one potential example:  one of the proponents, 
PCF, operates universalsubtitles.org, a web-based crowdsourcing platform that enables 
volunteers to submit URLs to unprotected online videos and provide transcripts of such 
videos.  Those videos can then be viewed, along with the crowdsourced captions, at the 
universalsubtitles.org website.
841  Although the development of a crowdsourcing 
framework to enhance accessibility of works is a promising technological development, it 
is not at all clear how this example relates to proponents’ intentions. 
 
With respect to research and development, however, the record is more 
developed.  Dr. Christian Vogler of Gallaudet University demonstrated a software 
development effort aimed at creating a player to combine captions or descriptive audio 
with commercially available motion picture and audiovisual content.
842  That 
demonstration, coupled with the extensive discussion of the intended uses, provides a 
sufficient basis upon which to proceed with the analysis.  In this regard, the Register need 
not perform a comprehensive fair use analysis.  Having limited the scope of the 
evaluation to research and development of a player capable of rendering captions or 
descriptive audio alongside lawfully acquired content, the Register finds that the 
underlying purported use does not implicate the work itself, but rather, only certain nonprotectable information about the work – i.e., the timecode information accessible only 
through the protected “playhead.”
843  
 
There do not appear to be any reasonable alternatives to circumvention with 
respect to the proponents’ intended research and player development.  During the 
hearing, Copyright Office staff questioned the need to access the “playhead,” suggesting 
that most content players – DVD, Blu-ray, and online content portals – provide at least 
rudimentary timing information to keep viewers apprised of their progress within a 
particular piece of content.  Proponents’ response was persuasive, explaining that, 
                                                
841 See www.universalsubtitles.org.  Proponents explained that PCF is able to caption YouTube video s 
because “they expose, via an application programming interface, an API, the play head of the player to the 
accessibility software,” which facilitates synchronization of the user -generated caption content to the 
underlying video.  T Reid, June 5, 2012, at  111.  Such models “work[] when there’s an API that exposes 
the play head to the developer” but “that only exists in open players that don’t have DRM.”  Id. 
842 T Vogler, June 5, 2012, at 57 -62. 
843 Opponents note that there is an “extremely fine line” between  the development of players capable of 
rendering certain accessible content, and trafficking in circumvention devices, which is prohibited under 17 
U.S.C. § 1201(a)(2).  T Metalitz, June 5, 2012, at 148.  The Register acknowledges the potential conflict 
with the anti-trafficking provisions of the statute, but does not view those provisions as an impediment to 
the development of players that do not require circumvention in order to render captions or audio 
descriptions (for example, such a player might work alongside a player containing a decryption key 
licensed by AACS LA or DVD CCA).  That is, to the extent that the need to circumvent is essential only to 
the research and development of such players by individual researchers or institutions, then the anti -
trafficking provisions do not appear to be implicated.  The Register believes that appropriately limiting the 
language in an exemption can ensure that such an exemption would not be interpreted  to permit or 
encourage trafficking, which is not only a violation of 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(2), but also beyond the scope of 
this rulemaking. 

[PAGE 154]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 151 
“accessibility software can’t get at what the eye can get at,”844 meaning that although 
certain timing information can be observed by a casual viewer, accessibility software 
cannot “see” it in the same way that a human can without access to the underlying 
timecode.  Further, although screen reading character recognition may be one technically 
feasible alternative, it would be unduly burdensome because the landscape is complicated 
by “a variety of different user interfaces that … render the time code in a variety of 
different fonts.”845  Proponents have therefore established that access to the playhead is a 
necessary element for the functioning of an accessible player, and thus, a necessary 
element of performing research and development relating to such players for which there 
is no reasonable alternative. 
 
 As noted previously, both AACS LA and DVD CCA have indicated a willingness 
to offer a free license to those interested in developing accessibility tools for playback 
devices.  Thus, to the extent that such licenses are offered, there exists a reasonable 
alternative to circumvention.  But the record indicates that no such license is currently in 
place, and it is unclear whether such a license will ever come to fruition, much less 
whether such a license is likely within the three-year period that is the subject of this 
rulemaking.  Although the talks between parties at the hearing are a promising 
development, and one that may very well result in an appropriate licensing arrangement, 
on the present record, it cannot be said that licensing is an effective alternative to 
proponents’ need to circumvent. 
 
b. Adverse impact 
 
Proponents have established that the prohibition is adversely affecting, and is 
likely to continue to have, an adverse effect on certain noninfringing uses of motion 
pictures and audiovisual works.  The record is clear that far less than the full complement 
of video programming distributed commercially through the internet or on DVDs and 
Blu-ray discs contains captions and descriptive audio.  The record is also clear that an 
increasing amount of content is being distributed exclusively via the internet, and it is 
reasonable to infer that as technology continues to evolve, the amount of programming 
distributed only online will likely increase.  Because such content is exempt from 
accessibility requirements, it is reasonable to believe that there is a significant risk that 
less of it will be released in an accessible format. 
 
Although the 2010 passage of the CVAA was an important step forward, the 
broad exemptions to that law still leave a substantial quantity of motion picture and 
audiovisual content that producers and distributors will not be required to render 
accessible.
846  Even some content that is accessible in its original form, such as certain 
                                                
844 T Reid, June 5, 2012, at 119.  
845 Id. at 120. 
846 See, e.g., 47 U.S.C. § 613(c)(2)(C) (empowering the Federal Communications Commission to “delay or 
waive the effective date” of capt ioning requirements for internet-delivered video content upon a finding 
that the application of such requirements “would be economically burdensome to the providers of video 
programming or program owners.”); 47 U.S.C. § 613(f)(2)(D) (empowering the Federal  Communications 
Commission to exempt from the descriptive audio requirements “a service, class of services, program, class 

[PAGE 155]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 152 
television broadcasts, is not accessible when placed in clip form online.847  And it is clear 
that although the marketplace is undergoing rapid change, it is unlikely to evolve in such 
a way that full accessibility of motion picture and audiovisual content will be achieved 
within the next three years. 
 
c. Statutory factors 
 
Regarding the first statutory factor, “the availability for use of copyrighted 
works,”848 “the Register has interpreted the relevant inquiry to include, (1) whether the 
availability of the work in protected format enhances and/or inhibits public use of 
particular works, (2) whether the work protected is also available in other formats (and 
whether those formats are protected by access controls), and (3) if alternative formats are 
available, whether such formats are sufficient to accommodate noninfringing uses.”849 
 
 Proponents have demonstrated that there is a wide range of content that is 
inaccessible to individuals with certain disabilities and as to which there is no alternative, 
accessible version.  Further, the record also supports a finding that an increasing amount 
of content is made available only online, which is not subject to mandatory accessibility 
requirements.  As a result, it is likely that a significant amount of online-only content 
may not be supplied with captions or descriptive audio, and will therefore be 
inaccessible.  The record also supports a finding that even that content which is 
distributed with certain accessibility features may not be adequate for certain 
individuals.
850  
 
 Although proponents have established that there is a great deal of content 
available only online, or only on DVD, that is not available through platforms more 
susceptible to accessibility features, the record with respect to this particular class of 
works does not support the proposition that there is content available only on Blu-ray for 
which there is no alternative version available.  Accordingly, it would appear that with 
respect to Blu-ray content, there exists a reasonable market alternative as the same 
content is generally available also on DVD or via internet streaming.  Although 
proponents’ proposed exemption applies to all “fixed-disc” media, the record simply does 
not support applying such an exemption to Blu-ray discs.
851 
                                                                                                                                            
of programs, equipment, or class of equipment for which the Commission has determined that the 
application of such regulations would be economically burdensome.”).   
847 Asked at the hearing why captions were unavailable for clips of content that was captioned during its 
initial broadcast, the MPAA explained that the caption file associated with a particular piece of full -length 
content cannot be segmented in the same way that the video can.  T Kinney, June 5, 2012, at 156.  
Proponents dispute the assertion.  T Reid, June 5, 2012, at 157.  
848 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(i).  
849 2010 Recommendation at 56 (citing 2006 Recommendation at 19 -22). 
850 See, e.g., T Reid, June 5, 2012 at 139 -40 (describing how customizing captions is “really, really 
important for works to actually be a ccessible”). 
851 In contrast, the record with respect to Proposed Class 7 supports the conclusion that there is some, 
although not a significant amount, of content available only on Blu -ray.  However, because the Register has 

[PAGE 156]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 153 
 
 The second statutory factor, “the availability for use of works for nonprofit 
archival, preservation, and educational purposes,”852 is not particularly well developed in 
the record.  It is worth noting, however, that the research and development efforts in 
which proponents seek to engage could, presumably, result in an accessible player and 
related technologies that would enhance educational opportunities for individuals who are 
blind, visually impaired, deaf, or hard of hearing.   
 
The third statutory factor, “the impact of the prohibition on the circumvention of 
technological measures applied to copyrighted works has on criticism, comment, news 
reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research,”
853 favors the proponents’ exemption.  The 
substantial quantity of inaccessible content, and the likely increase in the amount of 
content distributed free from any requirement that it be rendered accessible, essentially 
limits the universe of materials with respect to which individuals with certain disabilities 
may engage in commentary, criticism, scholarship, and the like.  In addition, the 
requested exemption would allow individuals with certain disabilities to access works 
that are, themselves, criticisms, commentary, scholarship, and related uses.  Moreover, 
the proposed exemption would directly facilitate research for the purpose of furthering 
the aforementioned activities. 
 
The fourth factor, “the effect of circumvention of the technological measures on 
the market for or value of copyrighted works,”
854 also favors granting the exemption.  
Proponents have clearly articulated that the intended result of their research and 
development is a player capable of rendering lawfully obtained content alongside 
captions or descriptive audio that enable individuals with certain disabilities to perceive 
such content.  As proponents described at the hearing: 
 
I think it’s important to emphasize that we drafted the 
exemption specifically … for users that already have lawful 
access to the work.  We’re not envisioning the situation … 
[where] somebody creat[es] an accessible version and 
distribute[s] it to lots of people.  We don’t have anything 
like that in mind. 
 
We have in mind users that have lawfully purchased the 
DVD, have lawfully purchased access to Netflix, lawfully 
can view Hulu for free, or paid Hulu Plus or whatever, and 
                                                                                                                                            
concluded, with respect to Proposed Class 7, that the amount is not sufficiently significant to justify 
extending the class to include content available on  Blu-ray, the disparity in proof on that issue between the 
two classes is of no consequence.  
852 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(i i). 
853 Id. at § 1201(a)(1)(C)(iii). 
854 Id. at § 1201(a)(1)(C)(iv). 

[PAGE 157]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 154 
being able to take some piece of software or some piece of 
code and overlay that over the top.855 
 
Thus, the proposed exemption may well increase interest in – and the purchase of 
copies of or access to – protected works because individuals who cannot currently 
perceive them will, assuming proponents’ research and development result in a viable 
player, be able to access such works, thereby enhancing the potential market for such 
works.  At worst, the fourth factor is neutral, because proponents have stated that they 
have no intention of distributing accessible copies of preexisting works; moreover, the 
class recommended below would not extend the creation or distribution of unauthorized 
copies of such works.  There thus appears to be no risk of proponents’ circumvention 
resulting in content that would have a negative impact on the market for the underlying 
copyrightable motion pictures or audiovisual works.
856 
 
Finally, the fifth statutory factor permits the Librarian to consider “such other 
factors” as appropriate.
857  The Register notes, as proponents have explained, that their 
proposed classes are not intended merely to improve convenience, but rather, to enable 
individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing, blind, or visually impaired, to have meaningful 
access to content that they would otherwise be unable to perceive.  Put differently, the 
proposed exemption is aimed at allowing the wide range of motion pictures and other 
audiovisual works that are available to the general population to be accessed and enjoyed 
by those with disabilities.  For these individuals, the exemption represents the difference 
between having and not having access to the works available to everyone else.858 
 
d. NTIA comments 
 
NTIA supports proponents’ proposals, but encourages the Register to recraft the 
exemptions into three categories which it believes are supported by the record.859  
Specifically, NTIA would fashion a class specifically aimed at those developing the tools 
to facilitate the creation, improvement or rendering of captions and descriptive audio; 
another class specifically for those engaged in the creation of captions and descriptive 
audio; and a third class for those using the captions and descriptive audio.
860  NTIA 
specifically notes that it does not support the inclusion of Blu-ray because DVD remains 
the dominant format, online video distribution is outpacing Blu-ray adoption,
861  and the 
effect of the proposals on the Blu-ray market is uncertain. 
 
                                                
855 T Reid, June 5, 2012, at 126 -27. 
856 Id. at 124 (“I don’t think we wo uld want to be doing anything like di stributing copies of the works. ”). 
857 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(v).  
858 T Reid, June 5, 2012, at 89 -90. 
859 NTIA Letter at 30. 
860 Id. at 30-31. 
861 Id. at 29. 

[PAGE 158]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 155 
The Register and NTIA are in agreement on the need to “open the doors for 
innovation and empower the millions of Americans with visual and hearing disabilities to 
participate to the fullest possible extent in our society’s multimedia culture.”862  
However, for reasons described above, the Register finds that, based on the current 
record, a more narrowly tailored class to permit research and development of assistive 
technologies is appropriate.  The Register encourages the continued development of 
accessibility technologies and encourages future proposals for exemptions to advance 
such efforts. 
 
4. Recommendation 
 
Both the Register and the Librarian have consistently supported universal 
accessibility, and are sympathetic to the needs of blind, visually impaired, deaf and hard 
of hearing communities.  As a matter of policy, access to copyrighted works for 
individuals with such disabilities is to be encouraged.  The Register has not hesitated to 
recommend classes aimed at improving accessibility previously when the record has 
supported such a recommendation.  However, unless the burden of showing a prima facie 
case is met, the statutory standard established for this rulemaking does not permit the 
designation of a class of works.  Presenting strong arguments in favor of exempting a 
class of works from the prohibition on circumvention is only one part of the process; a 
proponent must also provide sufficient facts to justify a finding that the prohibition is 
actually having or is likely to have an adverse effect on noninfringing uses.
863   
 
Here, the broad contours of proponents’ request and the absence of specific facts 
associated with the creation of captions and descriptive audio leads the Register to 
conclude that the statutory burden has not been met with respect to the particular classes 
proposed by proponents.  Accordingly, the Register declines to recommend classes 9A, 
9B, 9C, and 9D as proposed.
  
 
The record does, however, support proponents’ need for an exemption for the 
purpose of engaging in research and development aimed at developing players capable of 
rendering captions and descriptive audio during the playback of lawfully acquired copies 
of motion pictures and audiovisual works.  The Register observes that advancing 
accessibility is an important public policy objective, and one that is becoming even more 
critical as technology advances, content becomes more diverse, and the ways it is 
distributed more varied.  Put differently, the development of improved accessibility 
technology requires research, and public policy commands that such research be 
supported.  If the fruits of such research reveal specific, particularized accessibility 
related uses that require circumvention of technological measures, and such uses are 
properly supported by an appropriate factual record, the Register will welcome requests 
for appropriate exemptions in future rulemakings. 
                                                
862 Id. at 27. 
863 As the Register has stated previously, “[i]n determin ing the proper contours of a class in any particular 
case, the Register will look to the factual record to assess the proper scope of a class for the ensuing three -
year period.”  2010 Recommendation at 17.  

[PAGE 159]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 156 
 
Accordingly, for the reasons set forth above, the Register recommends that the 
Librarian designate the following class – a lesser included class of those that were 
proposed – as supported by the record:
864 
 
Motion pictures and other audiovisual works on DVDs 
that are protected by the Content Scrambling System, 
or that are distributed by an online service and 
protected by technological measures that control access 
to such works, when circumvention is accomplished 
solely to access the playhead and/or related time code 
information embedded in copies of such works and 
solely for the purpose of conducting research and 
development for the purpose of creating players capable 
of rendering visual representations of the audible 
portions of such works and/or audible representations 
or descriptions of the visual portions of such works to 
enable an individual who is blind, visually impaired, 
deaf, or hard of hearing, and who has lawfully obtained 
a copy of such a work, to perceive the work; provided 
however, that the resulting player does not require 
circumvention of technological measures to operate. 
                                                
864 The Register notes that this exemption does not  extend to the creation of derivative works, which, as 
discussed above, may or may not infringe the copyright on the underlying works depending on the 
circumstances surrounding their creation.  The Register notes that , to the extent proponents seek to create 
captions, audio descriptions, or related derivatives  as part of their research efforts, they may use  works that 
are not subject to copyright protection ( e.g., those that are in the public domain, government works, and the 
like), or works for which proponents have secured appropriate permission from the copyright owner.  

[PAGE 160]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 157 
 
I. Proposed Class 10:  Motion pictures and other works on DVDs and 
other media – space shifting 
 
 Proponent Public Knowledge proposes that the Register recommend the following 
class: 
 
10A:  Motion pictures on lawfully made and lawfully 
acquired DVDs that are protected by the Content 
Scrambling System when circumvention is accomplished 
solely in order to accomplish the noncommercial space 
shifting of the contained motion picture. 
 
 Proponents Cassiopaea Tambolini, Susan Fuhs, Kellie Heistand, Andy Kossowsky, 
and Curt Wiederhoeft propose that the Register recommend the following class: 
 
10B:  Legally acquired digital media (motion pictures, 
sound recordings, and e-books) for personal use and for the 
purposes of making back-up copies, format shifting, access, 
and transfer. 
 
1. Proponents’ case 
 
 Public Knowledge and other proponents seek an exemption to permit the 
circumvention of works on digital media protected by access controls for purposes of 
noncommercial “space shifting,” i.e., the copying of complete works to permit personal 
use on alternative devices.
865   
 
a. Background 
 
 The first proposal (10A) requests designation of a class to allow circumvention of 
lawfully acquired motion pictures on DVDs protected by the Content Scrambling System 
(CSS) for the sole purpose of noncommercial space shifting.
866  Proponent Public 
Knowledge indicates a desire to move lawfully acquired motion pictures on DVDs to 
consumer electronic devices, such as tablet computers and laptop computers, that lack 
DVD drives.  It asserts that consumers’ inability to play lawfully acquired DVDs on the 
newest devices adversely affects noninfringing uses of the works contained on DVDs, 
and that a reasonable solution is for these consumers to copy the motion pictures into a 
format that can be viewed on the new devices.
867  
 
 Public Knowledge urges that its proposed exemption “would merely allow a user to 
                                                
865 P10A (Public Knowledge); P10B (Cassiopaea Tambolini, Susan Fuhs, Kellie Heistand, Andy 
Kossowsky). 
866 P10A (Public Knowledge) at 1.  
867 Id. at 2-3. 

[PAGE 161]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 158 
make use of a motion picture she has already acquired.”868  Public Knowledge states that 
“[w]hile copyright owners are taking tentative steps to link motion pictures purchased on 
DVD to digital versions playable on new devices, there is no indication that this program 
– if successful and sustainable – would apply retroactively to the millions of DVDs 
already lawfully owned by consumers and purchased when DVD was the only format 
available to them.”869 
 
 The second proposed class (10B) encompasses five individual proposals.  Four 
proposals request the designation of classes to allow the circumvention of a broad array 
of works on digital media protected by access controls for the purposes of making backup 
copies, format conversion, and transfer.
870  One proposal seeks a specific exemption to 
allow the circumvention of works protected by access controls purchased in the 
“Mobipocket” format for the purpose of format conversion.
871  Most of the proposals in 
this class are one page or less and offer few factual details and little or no legal analysis.   
 
The proposals seek exemptions not unlike one that was sought in the 2006 
rulemaking.
872  In that rulemaking, the Register declined to recommend a space shifting 
exemption, in part because most of the proponents of the requested exemptions failed to 
identify particular technological measures.  In many cases it was unclear whether the 
proponents were referring to access controls or copy controls, or simply to 
incompatibility of formats.  In the 2006 rulemaking, the only access control clearly 
identified in any of the comments was the CSS used to protect motion pictures on 
DVDs.
873  
  
 The Register also declined to recommend a space shifting exemption in 2006 
because the proponents did not offer persuasive legal arguments that space shifting was a 
noninfringing use and that the technological restrictions were impeding their ability to 
engage in noninfringing uses.  In the absence of persuasive legal authority for the 
proposition that making copies of a work and transferring them onto a device of the 
user’s choosing is a noninfringing use, the Register determined that there was no basis for 
recommending an exemption to the prohibition on circumvention.  The Register noted 
that an exemption may not be based simply on perceived beneficial or desirable uses, but 
instead it must be based on a showing that there are noninfringing uses that are or are 
likely to be adversely affected by the prohibition on circumvention.874  
 
 The Register also addressed space shifting in the 2003 rulemaking in her 
consideration of a requested exemption regarding “tethering.”  In her 2003 
                                                
868 Id. at 5. 
869 Id. 
870 P10B (Cassiopaea Tam bolini, Susan Fuhs, Kellie Heistand, Andy Kossowsky)  
871 P10B (Curt Wiederhoeft).  
872 2006 Recommendation at 69.  
873 P10A (Public Knowledge) at 2 (citing 2006 Recommendation  at 12). 
874 2006 Recommendation at 70.  

[PAGE 162]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 159 
recommendation, the Register observed that “no court has held that ‘space-shifting’ is a 
fair use.”875  The Register indicated that where the online distribution of works is a 
concern, space shifting is problematic.876  She observed that the potential for 
unauthorized dissemination of digital works was precisely the type of concern that led to 
the enactment of Section 1201.  Thus, to deny copyright owners the ability to limit the 
device on which a particular digital work will be rendered necessarily forecloses the most 
useful protections afforded to them by the DMCA.877 
 
b. Legal arguments 
 
 Public Knowledge cites RIAA v. Diamond Multimedia Systems Inc.
878 and Sony 
Corporation of America v. Universal City Studios, Inc.879 in support of its contention that 
space shifting is a noncommercial personal use, and therefore a fair use.880  It applies the 
four-factor fair use test of Section 107 in support of its assertion that the sort of space 
shifting for which it seeks an exemption is a noninfringing use, characterizing such space 
shifting as a “paradigmatic noncommercial personal use.”
881  Public Knowledge argues 
that the series of factors set forth in Section 1201(a)(1)(C) weigh in favor of granting an 
exemption, asserting that space shifting will not negatively impact the availability of, or 
harm the market for, copyrighted works, or contribute to piracy.
882  Finally, Public 
Knowledge claims that there are no reasonable alternatives to space shifting.883 
 
 Public Knowledge asks the Register to consider the requested exemption in light of 
current conditions, without regard to past determinations.884  It urges the Register to 
evaluate the legitimacy of personal space shifting through “independent examination.”885  
According to Public Knowledge, “[t]he [Section 1201(a) rulemaking] process of 
recommending, consulting, determining, and speculating necessarily requires the Register 
to draw conclusions beyond parroting the statute and existing case law.”886   
 
                                                
875 2003 Recommendation at 130 (citing Recording Indus. Ass’n of Am. v. Diamond Multimedia Sys. Inc. , 
180 F.3d 1072, 1079 (1999)).  
 
876 Id. (citing A & M Records, Inc. v. Napster, Inc.,  239 F.3d 1004, 1019 (2001)).  
877 Id. 
878 180 F.3d 1072. 
879 464 U.S. 417 (1984).  
880 P10A (Public Knowledge) at 3 (citing Sony Corp., 464 U.S. 417, and Diamond Multimedia , 180 F.3d 
1072). 
881 Id. at 3-7. 
882 Id. at 8-20. 
883 Id. at 12-18. 
884 R3 (Public Knowledge) at 2.  
885 Id. at 10. 
886 Id. 

[PAGE 163]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 160 
 Proponents of the second proposed class (10B) seek to exempt other digital works, 
including sound recordings and ebooks, in addition to motion pictures, for purposes of 
space shifting.  They offer insufficient factual or legal analysis in support of their 
proposed exemptions, however. 
 
2. Opposition 
  
DVD CCA opposes the requested exemption by first observing that, although 
many new electronic devices are made without DVD drives, consumers can still play 
DVDs on such devices through the use of peripheral tools, i.e., external drives that 
connect to the devices and are capable of playing DVDs.887  DVD CCA argues that just 
because a consumer prefers a portable device for certain purposes, it does not mean that 
the consumer is foreclosed from using a different device to play DVDs, or that an 
exemption for space shifting is warranted.
888   
 
DVD CCA further notes that, contrary to the statements made by Public 
Knowledge, consumers have not purchased the motion picture itself, but a DVD copy of 
the motion picture, which affords only the right to access the work according to the DVD 
format specifications, i.e., through the use of a DVD player.  DVD CCA explains that 
consumers are able to purchase the copy at its retail price – typically less than twenty 
dollars – because it is distributed on a specific medium that will only play back on a 
licensed player.
889  It asserts that the Register has recognized that there is no unqualified 
right to access a work on a particular device.890  DVD CCA contends that the proposed 
class would overwhelm the purpose of Section 1201 by undermining the CSS system, 
which remains viable and continues to be protected by courts.891   
 
 DVD CCA additionally argues that proponents have failed to establish that the 
proposed uses are noninfringing.  In so doing, it criticizes Public Knowledge’s reliance 
on RIAA v. Diamond Multimedia Systems, which in turn cited Sony Corporation of 
America v. Universal City Studios, Inc., noting that in an earlier rulemaking, the Register 
rejected reliance on Sony in a similar context because the Supreme Court declined to 
address the “librarying” of copyrighted works.892   
 
                                                
887 C8 (DVD CCA) at 24 nn.55 & 56 (referencing two specific devices, the Apple Macbook Air Superdrive 
- MC684ZM/A, with a retail price of approximately $90.00, and the HP Mobile USB DVD Reader, with a 
retail price of approximately $50.00).  
888 Id. at 24. 
889 Id. at 24. 
890 Id. (citing 2000 Final Rule, 65 Fed. Reg. at 64,569).  
891 Id. at 26-28 (citing DVD CCA, Inc. v. Ka leidescape, Inc., No. 1-04-CV-031829, at 3 (Sup. Ct. Santa 
Clara County, Jan. 9, 2012)).  
892 Id. at 29-30. 

[PAGE 164]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 161 
DVD CCA argues that the proposal to exempt space shifting is intolerably broad 
and lacks the “refinements” found necessary in other cases.893  DVD CCA alleges that the 
proposed exemption would harm the market for works distributed in the DVD medium as 
well as that for works offered in other digital media, explaining that the proposed 
exemption would displace sales from existing and forthcoming digital offerings that the 
DMCA was meant to encourage and create “public confusion” as to what is permitted 
activity.894  It asserts that the requested exemption fails to satisfy the statutory factors set 
forth in Section 1201(a)(1)(C) and “would … swallow[] the rule against 
circumvention.”
895   
 
Joint Creators
896 similarly dispute Public Knowledge’s assertion that consumers 
are adversely affected by an inability to play DVDs on electronic devices that are not 
designed to play DVDs.
897  They argue that Public Knowledge is incorrect in asserting 
that the only option for consumers who purchase movies in DVD format and wish to 
access them on an iPad, for example, is to “re-purchase a motion picture they already 
own simply to watch it on a device they own.”
898  Joint Creators point to services that 
provide access to numerous titles for low subscription prices where there is no need to 
“purchase” a copy of a movie at all.
899  They also note that “it is not the purpose of this 
rulemaking to provide consumers with the most cost-effective manner to obtain 
commercial video content.  If the consumer wants to obtain content, there are many 
reasonably-priced alternatives that may fulfill the consumers’ wants and needs.”
900 
 
Joint Creators further note that many of the space shifting proposals are actually 
use-based exemptions that fail to identify particular classes of works, and therefore fail to 
justify an exemption.
901  They add that space shifting exemptions have previously been 
considered and rejected because there is no legal precedent or statutory provision 
establishing that space shifting is a fair use.
902  They note that the marketplace already 
offers numerous authorized ways for consumers to acquire works for use on the devices 
                                                
893 Id. at 31-34. 
894 Id. at 35-36. 
895 Id. at 31-34. 
896 The trade groups represented by Joint Creators are the Association of American Publishers, the 
American Society of Media Photographers, the Business Software Alliance, the Entertainment Software 
Association, the Motion Picture Association of America, the Picture Archive Council of America, and the 
Recording Industry Association of America.  C12 (Joint Creators) at 1 -2. 
897 Id. at 48-50. 
898 P10A (Public Knowledge) at 10.  
899 C12 (Joint Creators) at 49.  
900 Id. at 50 (citing 2010 Recommendation at 224). 
901 Id. at 48. 
902 Id. at 48-49 (citing Campbell, 510 U.S. 569; Perfect 10, 487 F.3d at 720; Diamond Multimedia, 180 
F.3d at 1079; UMG Recordings, Inc. v. MP3.com, Inc. , 92 F. Supp. 2d 349 (2000)).  

[PAGE 165]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 162 
of their choosing.903  They assert that the harms alleged by proponents amount to mere 
inconvenience and fail to support an exemption.904  
 
 AACS LA opposes an exemption for space shifting that would apply to AACS 
technology protecting Blu-ray discs.  It notes that proponents have failed to satisfy their 
burden to demonstrate that an exemption is warranted.  It adds that proponents have 
failed to establish that space shifting is, in fact, a noninfringing act.905 
 
3. Discussion 
a. Noninfringing uses 
 
The Register recognizes the significant consumer interest in the proposed 
exemption.  As has been established in prior rulemakings, however, proponents bear the 
burden of demonstrating that a requested use is noninfringing.  In urging that space 
shifting is a fair use, proponents rely principally on two cases, RIAA v. Diamond 
Multimedia Systems Inc.906 and Sony Corporation of America v. Universal City Studios, 
Inc..907  But neither of these decisions addresses or informs the space shifting activities at 
issue here. 
   
As the Register has previously explained, Diamond Multimedia – a case in which 
the court was called upon to interpret the Audio Home Recording Act (“AHRA”) – “did 
not hold that ‘space-shifting’ is fair use.  It did state, in dicta, that ‘space-shifting’ of 
digital and analog musical recordings is a noncommercial personal use consistent with 
the Audio Home Recording Act.”
908  Notably, neither Diamond Multimedia, nor the 
statute it interpreted, addresses motion pictures, the focus of Public Knowledge’s 
proposal.
909     
 
Turning to Sony, which the Register has also previously considered in the context 
of personal copying, that case involved “time-shifting,” defined by the Supreme Court as 
“the practice of recording a program to view it once at a later time, and thereafter erasing 
it.”  It did not address the legality of “librarying,” i.e., the maintenance of copies of 
                                                
903 Id. at 49-50 (“As PK admits, copyright owners include with many DVD and Blu -ray disc purchases 
digital copies of motion pictures that may be reproduced to mobile devices and  computers pursuant to 
licenses.”). 
904 Id. at 50. 
905 C4 (AACS) at 44. 
906 Diamond Multimedia , 180 F.3d 1072. 
907 Sony Corp., 464 U.S. 417. 
908 2003 Recommendation at 130 n.234.  
909 See 17 U.S.C. § 1001, et seq. It is also worth noting that Diamond Multimedia  held that the AHRA does 
not apply to computer hard drives.   See Diamond Multimedia, 180 F.3d at 1076 . 

[PAGE 166]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 163 
copyrighted works.910  Here, by contrast, librarying is apparently among the activities 
contemplated by the proposed exemptions.911   
 
The Register notes that the law does not guarantee access to copyrighted material 
in a user’s preferred format or technique.912  Indeed, copyright owners typically have the 
legal authority to decide whether and how to exploit new formats.913  Although it is 
possible that the law will evolve in such a way that some of the proponents’ proposed 
uses may someday be accommodated, the Register reiterates her view that the Section 
1201 rulemaking process “is not the forum in which to break new ground on the scope of 
fair use.”
914   
 
Neither Diamond Multimedia nor Sony provides the legal basis for a broad 
declaration that space shifting of audiovisual works is a noninfringing use.  Moreover, 
more recent cases touching upon space shifting confirm that the fair use implications of 
various forms of space shifting are far from settled.
915  The Register thus proceeds to 
consider the argument that the requested uses satisfy the four-factor test for fair use, as 
set forth in 17 U.S.C. § 107. 
 
The first fair use factor directs consideration of “the purpose and character of the 
use, including whether such use is of a commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational 
purposes.”
916  Public Knowledge characterizes the copying of motion pictures for use on 
personal devices as a “‘paradigmatic noncommercial personal use,’” adding that any 
attempt to reproduce works for commercial purposes would place the use outside of the 
                                                
910 2003 Recommendation at 106 (“In the time -shifting case, the Court explicitly did not address the issue 
of librarying such a work.” ( citing Sony Corp., 464 U.S. at 423-24, 442) (limiting analysis to time -shifting, 
and declining to address librarying uses)).  
911 See P10A (Public Knowledge) at 3 -4 (indicating that the exemption would allow “consumers to access 
all of their media in a single interface and launch the v ideo of their choice at the touch of a button”).  
912 Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Corley , 273 F.3d 429, 459 (2d. Cir. 2001); see also 2003 
Recommendation at 117 -18. 
913 UMG Recordings, Inc. v. MP3.com , 92 F. Supp. 349, 352 (S.D.N.Y. 2000) (defendants not “ free[] … to 
usurp a further market that directly derives from reproduction of the plaintiffs’ copyrighted works”) (citing 
Infinity Broadcast Corp. v. Kirkwood , 150 F.3d 104, 111 (2d Cir. 1998)).  
914 2003 Recommendation at 106.  
915 See, e.g., Arista Records LLC  v. Myxer Inc., No. CV 08-03935 GAF (JCx), 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 
109668, at *119-20 (C.D. Cal. Apr. 1, 2011) (service permitting users to upload recordings to generate and 
download ringtones for their phones not engaged in fair use space shifting); Sony BMG Music Entm’t v. 
Tenenbaum, 672 F. Supp.2d 217, 237 (D. Mass. 2009) (“This Court, unlike others that have spoken on the 
subject, can envision a scenario in which a defendant sued for file sharing could assert a plausible fair use 
defense – for example, the defendant who ‘deleted the mp3 files after sampling them, or created mp3 files 
exclusively for space -shifting purposes from audio CDs they had previously purchased.’ ”) (quoting party’s 
submission); A&M Records, Inc. v. Napster, Inc. , 239 F.3d 1004, 1019 (rejecting claim that peer -to-peer 
file sharing is a form of space shifting that constitutes fair use); UMG Recordings, Inc. , 92 F. Supp.2d 349 
(rejecting fair use argument by online music locker service making copies of works allegedly owned by its 
subscribers). 
916 17 USC § 107(1). 

[PAGE 167]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 164 
scope of its proposed exemption.917  Public Knowledge further argues that the proposed 
exemption can facilitate a transformative use.918  It maintains that integrating 
reproductions of motion pictures from DVDs into a consumer’s media management 
software is analogous to the integration of thumbnail images into internet search engines 
found to be transformative in Perfect 10 Inc. v. Amazon, Inc.919  In Public Knowledge’s 
view, such integration is similar to the creation of an internet search engine, which the 
Perfect 10 court considered transformative because it provides “an entirely new use for 
the original work.”
 920   
 
The Register does not agree with this analysis.  The incorporation of 
reproductions of motion pictures from DVDs into a consumer’s media management 
software is not equivalent to the provision of public search engine functionality.  Rather, 
it is simply a means for an individual consumer to access content for the same 
entertainment purpose as the original work.  Public Knowledge itself recognizes this 
when it states that one of the benefits of such integration is to launch the video of one’s 
choosing “at the touch of a button.”
921  Therefore, even though the uses contemplated by 
the proposed exemption may be personal and noncommercial in nature, they do not 
“add[] something new, with a further purpose or different character, altering the first with 
new expression, meaning,”
 922 or advance criticism, comment, or any other interest 
enumerated in the preamble of Section 107.  The first fair use factor thus does not favor a 
finding of fair use. 
 
The second fair use factor directs consideration of “the nature of the copyrighted 
work.”
923  Public Knowledge agrees that the motion pictures at issue are generally 
creative in nature.924  However, it then suggests that the second factor should not 
significantly weigh against a finding a fair use because “the works have been published 
and sold to … individuals hoping to make personal space shifting copies of the work.”925  
Nonetheless, as Public Knowledge acknowledges, creative works are “within the core of 
copyright’s protective purposes.”
926  As such, the second factor does not favor a finding 
of fair use. 
 
                                                
917 P10A (Public Knowledge) at 3 -4 (quoting Diamond Multimedia , 180 F.3d at 1079).  
918 Id. 
919 Id. (citing Perfect 10 Inc. v. Amazon.com, Inc. , 487 F.3d 701, 720 -23 (9th Cir. 2007)).  
920 Id. (citing Perfect 10, 487 F.3d at 721 -22). 
921 Id. at 4. 
922 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 579. 
923 17 U.S.C. § 107(2).  
924 P10A (Public Knowledge) at 4.  
925 Id. at 4-5. 
926 Id. at 4 (quoting 2010 Recommendation at 50). 

[PAGE 168]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 165 
The third fair use factor directs consideration of “the amount and substantiality of 
the portion used in relation to the copyrighted work as a whole.”927  Public Knowledge 
agrees that the third fair use factor points to the limited use of works.  However, it argues 
that in Sony, the Supreme Court found complete reproductions of works to be fair and 
maintains that the situation in Sony is analogous to the requested exemption.928  But in 
Sony, the Court considered the home recording of broadcast television programming – or 
“time-shifting” – a practice which “merely enable[d] a viewer to see … a work which he 
had been invited to witness in its entirety free of charge.”
929  In contrast, the uses at issue 
here appear to include “librarying” copies of motion pictures contained on DVDs that are 
not distributed for free.930  As noted above, such librarying uses diverge significantly 
from the uses considered fair by the Sony Court.931  Thus, there is no similar basis here to 
depart from the usual presumption that the copying of an entire work strongly detracts 
from a finding of fair use. 
 
The fourth fair use factor directs consideration of “the effect of the use upon the 
potential market for or value of the copyrighted work.”932  While Public Knowledge 
suggests that consumer space shifting of DVDs to other media will not harm the 
developing market for the online distribution of motion pictures, there is no factual record 
to confirm this, and the Register is unable to conclude that the broad sanctioning of this 
type of copying will not negatively impact this market.   
 
 In sum, the Register is not persuaded that there is a basis under current law to 
conclude that proponents’ uses are noninfringing.   
 
b. Adverse impact 
 
Public Knowledge argues that without the proposed exemption, consumers will be 
adversely affected by their inability to play lawfully acquired DVDs on electronic devices 
such as tablet computers and laptop computers made without DVD drives.
933   
 
 The Register concludes that proponents have failed to demonstrate that the use of a 
reasonably priced peripheral, a different device, or an online subscription service to 
access and play desired content do not offer a reasonable alternative to circumvention.  In 
other words, consumers’ inability to “access all of their media in a single interface and 
launch the video of their choice at the touch of a button”
934 goes to convenience rather 
                                                
927 17 U.S.C. § 107(3).  
928 P10A (Public Knowledge) at 5.  
929 Sony Corp., 464 U.S. at 449. 
930 P10A (Public Knowledge) at 4 (discussing consumers accessing all of their media in a single interface).  
931 As the Sony Court explained, its reasoning did not extend to the practice of “librarying,” i.e., the storing 
of recorded programs indefinitely to view them repeatedly .  464 U.S. at 453 n.39. 
932 17 U.S.C. § 107(4).  
933 P10A (Public Knowledge) at 1 -3; R3 (Public Knowledge) at 12 -18. 
934 P10A (Public Knowledge) at 4.  

[PAGE 169]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding   October 2012 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
 
 166 
than necessity.  Accordingly, on the present record, the Register is not persuaded that the 
inability to engage in the space shifting activities described by proponents is having a 
substantial adverse impact on consumers’ ability to make noninfringing uses of 
copyrighted works.935 
 
c. NTIA comments 
 
NTIA supports what it describes as a “more narrowly-constructed” version of 
Public Knowledge’s proposed exemption.936  Specifically, it supports an exemption that 
allows circumvention of lawfully acquired DVDs “when the DVD neither contains nor is 
accompanied by an additional copy of the work in an alternative digital format, and when 
circumvention is undertaken solely in order to accomplish the noncommercial space 
shifting of the contained motion picture.”
937  NTIA voiced support for the motion picture 
industry’s efforts to make content available on the wide range of new devices, and 
encourages the industry to continue developing new offerings.
938  It contends that by 
limiting the exemption to circumstances in which the market has not supplied alternatives 
to DVDs, “the potential adverse effect on the market is minimal.”
939 
 
The Register likewise supports the motion picture industry’s innovation and the 
development of market approaches to satisfy the demand for electronically distributed 
content.  While the Register is sympathetic to the desire to consume content on a variety 
of different devices, there is no basis under current law to assume that the space shifting 
activities that would be permitted under NTIA’s proposal are noninfringing.  Moreover, 
on the record before her, the Register cannot find that such activities would not adversely 
affect the legitimate future markets of copyright owners. 
 
4. Recommendation 
 
The Register concludes that proponents have failed to establish that the 
prohibition on circumvention is imposing an adverse impact on noninfringing uses.  The 
Register therefore declines to recommend an exemption for Proposed Classes 10A and 
10B. 
                                                
935 Because the proponents have failed to make their case on the fundamental prerequisites to recommend 
an exemption, the Register sees no need to consider the statutory factors enumerated in Section 
1201(a)(1)(C). 
936 NTIA Letter at 32. 
937 Id. 
938 Id. at 33. 
939 Id. at 32. 