[PAGE 1]
united states copyright office
 
 
  
section 1201 rulemaking: 
Sixth Triennial Proceeding to Determine 
Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention 
recommendation of the register of copyrights october 2015 

[PAGE 2]
The Register of Copyrights of the United States of America 
United States Copyright Office · 101 Independence Avenue SE ·Washington, DC 20559-6000 · (202) 707-8350 
October 8, 2015 
David Mao 
Acting Librarian of Congress 
Library of Congress 
101 Independence Ave, SE 
Washington, DC 20540 
Dear Acting Librarian Mao: 
Pursuant to my statutory obligation under 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(l)(C) please find the 
attached recommendation relating to the rulemaking on exemptions from the prohibition on 
circumvention of technological measures that control access to copyrighted works. 
Respectfully, 
Maria A. Pallante 
Register of Copyrights and Director 
U.S. Copyright Office 
cc: Elizabeth A. Pugh, General Counsel, Library of Congress 

[PAGE 3]
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
    
    
      
     
    
     
   
       
   
         
     
     
   
   
  
   
    
   
     
     
       
       
   
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
	 
 
	 
 
	 
 
	 
 
	 
 
	 
 

 
	 
 

 
	 
 

 
	 
 

 
	 

 
	 

 
	 
 
	 
 
	 
 
	 
 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking:
 
Sixth Triennial Proceeding to Determine
 
Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention
 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
 
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................................. 1
 
I.	 LEGAL BACKGROUND........................................................................................... 8
 
A.	 Section 1201(a)(1) .................................................................................................. 8
 
B.	 Relationship to Other Provisions of Section 1201 and Other Laws ..................... 10
 
C.	 The Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act........................ 12
 
D.	 Rulemaking Standards .......................................................................................... 13
 
II.	 HISTORY OF SIXTH TRIENNIAL PROCEEDING............................................... 19
 
III. DISCUSSION............................................................................................................ 24
 
A.	 Proposed Classes 1 to 7:  Audiovisual Works – Educational and
 
Derivative Uses..................................................................................................... 24
 
B.	 Proposed Classes 8 and 10: Audiovisual Works and Literary Works
 
Distributed Electronically – Space-Shifting and Format-Shifting...................... 107
 
C.	 Proposed Class 9:  Literary Works Distributed Electronically –
 
Assistive Technologies........................................................................................ 127
 
D.	 Proposed Classes 11 to 15:  Computer Programs That Enable Devices 
To Connect to a Wireless Network That Offers Telecommunications 
and/or Information Services (‘‘Unlocking’’) ...................................................... 138
 
E.	 Proposed Classes 16 and 17:  Jailbreaking – Smartphones and 
All-Purpose Mobile Computing Devices............................................................ 172
 
F.	 Proposed Class 18:  Jailbreaking – Dedicated E-Book Readers......................... 193
 
G.	 Proposed Class 19:  Jailbreaking – Video Game Consoles................................. 195
 
H.	 Proposed Class 20: Jailbreaking – Smart TVs ................................................... 202
 
I.	 Proposed Class 21: Vehicle Software – Diagnosis, Repair
 
or Modification ................................................................................................... 218
 

[PAGE 4]
   
    
    
     
      
   
       
      
     
 
 
 
	 
 

 

 
	 

 
	 
 
	 
 
	 
 
J.	 Proposed Classes To Permit Research of Software Flaws, Proposed
 
Class 25: Software – Security Research; Proposed Class 22:  Vehicle 
Software – Security and Safety Research; Proposed Class 27A:
 
Medical Device Software – Security and Safety Research................................. 250
 
K.	 Proposed Class 23: Abandoned Software – Video Games Requiring 
Server Communication ....................................................................................... 321
 
L.	 Proposed Class 24:  Abandoned Software – Music Recording Software........... 354
 
M.	 Proposed Class 26:  Software – 3D Printers ....................................................... 356
 
N.	 Proposed Class 27B:  Networked Medical Devices – Patient Data.................... 378
 

[PAGE 5]
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
  
  
  
   
 
  
 
  
      
  
 
    
  
  
  
    
  
 
  
  
 
   
         
            
            
             
           
         
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking:
 
Sixth Triennial Proceeding to Determine 
Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention
 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights
 
INTRODUCTION
 
The Digital Millennium Copyright Act (“DMCA”) has played a critical role in the 
development of the digital marketplace that is a defining feature of modern life.  Enacted 
by Congress in 1998,1 the DMCA has fostered widespread dissemination and enjoyment 
of creative works by establishing legal protections for copyrighted content—as well as 
for the consumers and businesses who wish to access and use it—whether over the 
internet or through a computer or device.
2 
The section 1201 rulemaking is a key part of the DMCA, striking a balance 
between copyright and digital technologies.  While the DMCA generally prohibits the 
circumvention of technological measures employed by or on behalf of copyright owners 
to protect their works (also known as “access controls”), the rulemaking process permits 
the Librarian of Congress, following a public proceeding conducted by the Copyright 
Office, to grant limited exceptions every three years to ensure that the public can still 
engage in fair and other noninfringing uses of works.
3 In accordance with the statute, the 
Librarian’s determination to grant an exemption is based upon the recommendation of the 
Register of Copyrights, who also consults with the National Telecommunications and 
Information Administration (“NTIA”) of the Department of Commerce.4 
Revised Rulemaking Procedures 
The Register revised the administrative process for this sixth rulemaking 
proceeding.  In prior proceedings, the Copyright Office required proponents to provide 
complete legal and evidentiary support for their proposals at the outset of the rulemaking 
process.  For this rulemaking, members of the public were instead able to propose 
exemptions by filing brief petitions containing only basic information.  The Office then 
reviewed and grouped the 44 petition requests into 27 classes and published the 
proposals, after which proponents and opponents of the proposals had the opportunity to 
submit written comments offering specific legal and factual support for their respective 
positions.
5 The Office provided detailed guidance to assist the public during this process, 
1 See generally DMCA, Pub. L. No. 105-304, 112 Stat. 2860 (1998). 
2 See H.R. REP. NO. 105-551, pt. 2, at 22 (1998) (“Commerce Comm. Report”). 
3 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1); see also Commerce Comm. Report at 25-26, 35-36. 
4 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C); see also Commerce Comm. Report at 37. 
5 See Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, 79 Fed. Reg. 73,856, 73,857-59 (Dec. 12, 2014) (“NPRM”). 

[PAGE 6]
     
    
  
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
    
     
 
  
 
 
 
     
  
  
  
    
   
 
 
   
  
   
  
   
        
               
     
          
      
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
including template forms.6 During the course of the rulemaking, the Office received 
nearly 40,000 comments.  The written submissions were followed by seven days of 
public hearings in Los Angeles and Washington, D.C.,7 at which the Office received 
testimony from sixty-three witnesses. 
Policy Considerations 
This sixth triennial rulemaking has been the most extensive and wide-ranging to 
date and is carefully documented and addressed in the ensuing 403-page 
Recommendation.  As explained, some of the proposed exemptions concern the ability to 
access and make noninfringing uses of expressive copyrighted works such as motion 
pictures, video games and e-books, as Congress undoubtedly had in mind when it created 
the triennial review process.  But many other proposals seek to access the copyrighted 
computer code that now pervades consumer devices.  Proponents of these latter classes 
are not seeking to access software for its creative content, but rather to enable greater 
functionality of devices ranging from cellphones, tablets and smart TVs to automobiles, 
tractors and pacemakers. For example, good-faith security researchers seek the ability to 
circumvent access controls in order to identify and address flaws and malfunctions in the 
computer programs embedded in consumer products, vehicles and medical devices.  
Automobile and tractor owners want to access vehicle software to make repairs and 
modifications.  Patients seek access to compilations of data generated by the life-saving 
medical devices on which they rely. In each of these cases, the prospective users are 
concerned about violating section 1201. 
The discussion of the various proposals that follows richly illustrates both the 
importance and limitations of the DMCA’s anticircumvention rule and triennial 
rulemaking process. While it is clear that section 1201 has played a critical role in the 
development of secure platforms for the digital distribution of copyrighted works, it is 
also the case that the prohibition on circumvention impacts a wide range of consumer 
activities that have little to do with the consumption of creative content or the core 
concerns of copyright.  Many of the issues that were raised in this proceeding would be 
more properly debated by Congress or the agencies with primary jurisdiction in the 
relevant areas.  Indeed, the present record indicates that different parts of the 
Administration have varying views on the wisdom of permitting circumvention for 
security research or to enable modification of motor vehicles. NTIA has endorsed broad 
exemptions to facilitate these activities, while the Environmental Protection Agency is 
opposed, and the Department of Transportation expresses substantial reservations.  There 
are also concerns about circumvention of medical device software.  While the Food and 
6 See id. at 73,857-58. 
7 See Notice of Public Hearings: Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection 
Systems for Access Control Technologies, 80 Fed. Reg. 19,255, 19,255 (Apr. 10, 2015). The hearing 
agenda is posted at http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/Final_1201_hearing_agenda_20150507.pdf. 
Transcripts for the hearings are posted at http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/hearing-transcripts. Hearing 
exhibits are posted at http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/hearing-exhibits. 
2
 

[PAGE 7]
     
    
   
   
       
   
  
   
      
  
   
 
 
   
   
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
     
  
       
              
             
        
            
           
              
                
                 
               
         
               
             
             
           
          
            
            
            
           
  
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Drug Administration has raised regulatory concerns concerning the impact of 
circumvention activities on the devices it regulates, NTIA supports proposed exemptions 
to allow security testing on medical devices as well as access to the data they generate. 
In light of the substantial public safety and environmental concerns raised by 
government actors and others, the Register is of the view that the Librarian should 
exercise a degree of caution in adopting exemptions to facilitate security research on 
consumer goods, motor vehicles and medical devices, as well as for purposes of vehicle 
repair. The Register appreciates and agrees with NTIA’s view that such concerns have “at 
best a very tenuous nexus to copyright protection.”
8 But they are serious issues 
nevertheless. Accordingly, while the Register generally concurs with NTIA that 
exemptions should be granted in these areas, the Register nonetheless believes it is 
appropriate to take the competing concerns of other agencies into consideration.  As 
explained more fully below, the Register is recommending a window of twelve months 
before exemptions that may implicate public safety and environmental concerns become 
effective, which will provide an opportunity for the various parts of the federal 
government, as well as state agencies, to prepare for any impact. 
This proceeding points to other policy concerns as well.  As in the past, the 
rulemaking process has highlighted aspects of the Copyright Act that have not kept up 
with changing technologies.  For example, while Congress clearly foresaw the need to 
facilitate good-faith security research when it enacted a standing exemption for security 
testing in section 1201(j), the exemption does not seem sufficiently robust in light of the 
perils of today’s connected world.
9 And, as is apparent in the proposal to allow 
preservation of video games, the exceptions for preservation activities set forth in section 
108 appear inadequate to address institutional needs in relation to digital works.10 The 
8 Letter from Lawrence E. Strickling, Assistant Sec’y for Commc’ns & Info., Nat’l Telecomms. & Info. 
Admin., U.S. Dep’t of Commerce, to Maria A. Pallante, Register of Copyrights and Dir., U.S. Copyright 
Office (“USCO”), at 4 (Sept. 18, 2015) (“NTIA Letter”). 
9 The Register’ s Perspective on Copyright Review: Hearing Before the H. Comm. on the Judiciary, 114th 
Cong. 29, 57 (2015) (“The Register’ s Perspective on Copyright Review Hearing”) (statement of Maria A. 
Pallante, Register of Copyrights and Dir., USCO); id. at 57 (statement of Rep. Zoe Lofgren, Member, H. 
Comm. on the Judiciary) (“I recently met with some researchers, academically based, . . . . [a]nd they are 
good guys. They are exploring cybersecurity issues. And to do so, they have to actually do some breaking. 
And we want them to because we want to find out what the holes are. But they’re very concerned. They’re 
a law-abiding group. They don’t want to be behind a law violation.”). 
10 Id. at 20-21 (statement of Maria A. Pallante, Register of Copyrights and Dir., USCO); see also 
Preservation and Reuse of Copyrighted Works: Hearing Before the Subcomm. on Courts, Intellectual Prop., 
and the Internet of the H. Comm. on the Judiciary, 113th Cong. 2 (2014) (statement of Rep. Jerrold Nadler, 
Ranking Member, Subcomm. on Courts, Intellectual Prop., and the Internet) (“Recognizing the unique 
public service mission served by libraries and archives, Congress first enacted section 108 in 1976, 
allowing these entities a limited exception for preservation, replacement, and research purposes long before 
technological innovations made it possible to make digital copies of analog works on a mass scale, a 
process otherwise known as mass digitization.”); T
HE SECTION 108 STUDY GROUP, THE SECTION 108 
STUDY GROUP REPORT, at i (2008), available at http://www.section108.gov/docs/Sec108StudyGroup 
Report.pdf. 
3
 

[PAGE 8]
     
    
  
      
 
 
  
 
 
     
   
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
     
  
  
            
       
         
            
              
                 
              
           
            
                
                  
                
            
      
               
     
             
              
            
       
       
       
          
               
      
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
sixth triennial rulemaking thus soundly affirms Congress’s substantial efforts over the 
past two years to review the Copyright Act and assess where it is in need of updates.11 
Additionally, as has also been true in the past, a number of proposals essentially 
seek renewal of existing exemptions—for example, unlocking of cellphones and 
jailbreaking of smartphones.  As the Register suggested in recent testimony before the 
Judiciary Committee of the House of Representatives, Congress could amend the 
rulemaking process to create a presumption in favor of renewal when there is no 
meaningful opposition to the continuation of an exemption.
12 Not only will this lessen 
the burden on proponents, but it will also allow for a more streamlined rulemaking 
process. Under current law, the Copyright Office must assess proponents’ evidence every 
three years anew as though the exemption were presented for the first time, even when 
proponents have in a previous rulemaking made a strong case.  When there is an existing 
exemption, however, the evidence may be weak, incomplete or otherwise inadequate to 
support the request for renewal, as was the case with the cellphone unlocking proposals 
in the 2012 proceeding. 
Finally, Congress may wish to consider clarifications to section 1201 to ensure 
that the beneficiaries of exemptions are able to take full advantage of them even if they 
need assistance from third parties.
13 The anti-trafficking rules set forth in sections 
1201(a)(2) and 1201(b) generally prohibit the manufacture and provision of technologies, 
products or services—or “part[s] thereof”—that are “primarily” designed for purposes of 
11 See Press Release, H. Comm. on the Judiciary, Chairman Goodlatte Announces Comprehensive Review 
of Copyright Law (Apr. 24, 2013), available at http://judiciary.house.gov/index.cfm/2013/4/chairman 
goodlatteannouncescomprehensivereviewofcopyrightlaw (“There is little doubt that our copyright system 
faces new challenges today.”); The Register’ s Perspective on Copyright Review Hearing at 7-8 (statement 
of Maria A. Pallante, Register of Copyrights and Dir., USCO); The Register’ s Perspective on Copyright 
Review Hearing at 56 (statement of Rep. Zoe Lofgren, Member, H. Comm. on the Judiciary) (noting that 
“as the [1201] exemptions have proliferated, I think it tells us something about the underlying defect in the 
statute”); Chapter 12 of Title 17: Hearing Before the Subcomm. on Courts, Intellectual Prop., and the 
Internet of the H. Comm. on the Judiciary, 113th Cong. 64 (2014) (statement of Rep. Bob Goodlatte, 
Chairman, H. Comm. on the Judiciary) (“As someone who was very active in negotiating all of the DMCA, 
I am not sure that anyone involved in the drafting would have anticipated some of the TPM uses that have 
been litigated in court. Such as replacement printer toner cartridges and garage door openers. S o I am also 
interested in ways to better focus Chapter 12 on protecting copyright works from piracy rather than 
protecting non-copyright industries from competition.”). 
12 The Register’ s Perspective on Copyright Review Hearing at 27 (statement of Maria A. Pallante, Register 
of Copyrights and Dir., USCO). 
13 Section 1201(a)(2) is addressed to technological measures limiting access to works, while section 
1201(b) is addressed to technological measures limiting copying of works. See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(2), (b). 
Some technological measures control both access to and copying of works. Recommendation of the 
Register of Copyrights in RM 2008-8, Rulemaking on Exemptions from Prohibition on Circumvention of 
Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, at 44-47 (June 11, 2010) (“2010 
Recommendation”) (quoting Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems 
for Access Control Technologies, 65 Fed. Reg. 64,556, 64,568 (Oct. 27, 2000) (“2000 Final Rule”)) 
(explaining that the Content Scramble System, a TPM that protects DVDs, “is an access control that also 
(and, arguably, primarily) serves to prevent copying”). 
4
 

[PAGE 9]
     
    
   
    
 
     
  
 
  
 
    
  
  
   
  
   
 
 
  
     
              
                
             
                 
               
               
             
                    
              
          
                
          
            
             
                    
           
               
                
              
              
        
           
         
          
         
 
 
                                                 
 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
circumvention.14 Any exemption granted by the Librarian on the Register’s 
recommendation may not override these provisions.15 While the anti-trafficking 
provisions can curtail bad actors seeking to profit from circumvention by others, they also 
constrain the ability to allow third parties to offer assistance to exempted users. 
Congress adopted a limited clarification on this point in relation to the unlocking 
of wireless devices in 2014 when it passed the Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless 
Competition Act (“Unlocking Act”), which, among other things, amended section 1201 to 
permit specified third parties to circumvent technological measures “at the direction of” a 
cellphone or device owner to enable its use on a different wireless network.16 The issue 
of third-party assistance has surfaced again in the current proceeding, as reflected in 
proposals to allow circumvention “on behalf of” vehicle owners to facilitate repairs or 
permit access to medical data “at the direction of” the patient. Assistance with these 
types of activities is not authorized under the 2014 Unlocking Act.  Congress may wish to 
consider another amendment to section 1201 to address these sorts of situations, for 
example, by expressly allowing the Librarian to adopt exemptions that permit third-party 
assistance when justified by the record. 
Summary of Recommendations 
The Librarian has previously adopted five sets of exemptions under section 
1201
17 based upon prior Recommendations of the Register.18 In this sixth triennial 
14 Section 1201(a)(2) provides that “[n]o person shall manufacture, import, offer to the public, provide, or 
otherwise traffic in any technology, product, service, device, component, or part thereof, that . . . is 
primarily designed or produced for the purpose of circumventing a technological measure that effectively 
controls access to a work protected under this title . . . .” 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(2)(A). Section 1201(b) 
provides that “[n]o person shall manufacture, import, offer to the public, provide, or otherwise traffic in any 
technology, product, service, device, component, or part thereof, that . . . is primarily designed or produced 
for the purpose of circumventing protection afforded by a technological measure that effectively protects a 
right of a copyright owner under this title in a work or a portion thereof . . . .” Id. § 1201(b)(1)(A). 
15 See id. § 1201(a)(1)(E) (“Neither the exception under subparagraph (B) from the applicability of the 
prohibition contained in subparagraph (A), nor any determination made in a rulemaking conducted under 
subparagraph (C), may be used as a defense in any action to enforce any provision of this title other than 
this paragraph.”); see also Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for 
Access Control Technologies, 79 Fed. Reg. 55,687, 55,688 n.2 (Sept. 17, 2014) (“NOI”). 
16 See Unlocking Act, Pub. L. No. 113-144, § 2(c), 128 Stat. 1751, 1751-52 (2014) (providing that 
circumvention “may be initiated . . . by another person at the direction of the owner, or by a provider of a 
commercial mobile radio service or a commercial mobile data service at the direction of such owner or 
other person, solely in order to enable such owner or a family member of such owner to connect to a 
wireless telecommunications network . . . .”). The Unlocking Act, however, provides a narrow fix to the 
issue of third-party circumvention since the Act applies only in the context of exemptions that permit 
unlocking of cellphones and other wireless devices. See S. R
EP. NO. 113-212, at 6-7 (2014). 
17 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, 77 Fed. Reg. 65,260 (Oct. 26, 2012) (“2012 Final Rule”), amended by Exemption to 
Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Wireless Telephone Handsets, 79 Fed. 
Reg. 50,552 (Aug. 25, 2014) (codified at 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(3), (c)); Exemption to Prohibition on 
Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 75 Fed. Reg. 43,825 
5
 

[PAGE 10]
     
    
   
    
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
         
            
        
          
   
             
            
           
       
        
       
          
                
        
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 
	 
	 
	 
	 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
proceeding, as discussed more fully below, the Register recommends that the Librarian 
adopt another set of exemptions covering twenty-two types of uses, as follows: 
•	 Motion pictures (including television programs and videos): 
 For educational uses by college and university instructors and students 
 For educational uses by K-12 instructors and students 
 For educational uses in massive open online courses (“MOOCs”) 
 For educational uses in digital and literacy programs offered by 
libraries, museums and other nonprofits 
 For multimedia e-books offering film analysis 
 For uses in documentary films 
 For uses in noncommercial videos 
•	 Literary works distributed electronically (i.e., e-books), for use with assistive 
technologies for persons who are blind, visually impaired or have print 
disabilities 
•	 Computer programs that operate the following types of devices, to allow 
connection of a used device to an alternative wireless network (“unlocking”): 
 Cellphones 
 Tablets 
 Mobile hotspots 
 Wearable devices (e.g., smartwatches) 
•	 Computer programs that operate the following types of devices, to allow the 
device to interoperate with or to remove software applications 
(“jailbreaking”): 
(July 27, 2010) (“2010 Final Rule”); Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection 
Systems for Access Control Technologies, 71 Fed. Reg. 68,472 (Nov. 27, 2006) (“2006 Final Rule”); 
Copyright Office, Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access 
Control Technologies, 68 Fed. Reg. 62,011 (Oct. 31, 2003) (“2003 Final Rule”); 2000 Final Rule, 65 Fed. 
Reg. 64,556 . 
18 Register of Copyrights, Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions 
to the Prohibition on Circumvention, Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights (Oct. 12, 2012) 
(“2012 Recommendation”); 2010 Recommendation; Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights in RM 
2005-11, Rulemaking on Exemptions from Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems 
for Access Control Technologies (Nov. 17, 2006) (“2006 Recommendation”); Recommendation of the 
Register of Copyrights in RM 2002-4, Rulemaking on Exemptions from Prohibition on Circumvention of 
Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies (Oct. 27, 2003) (“2003 Recommendation”); 
2000 Final Rule, 65 Fed. Reg. 64,556 (Librarian’s Final Rule, including the full text of the Register’s 
Recommendation). The Final Rules and the Register’s Recommendations can be found at 
http://www.copyright.gov/1201. 
6
 

[PAGE 11]
     
    
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
	 
	 
	 
	 
	 
	 
	 
	 
	 
	 
	 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
 Smartphones 
 Tablets and other all-purpose mobile computing devices 
 Smart TVs 
•	 Computer programs that control motorized land vehicles, including farm 
equipment, for purposes of diagnosis, repair and modification of the vehicle 
(effective in 12 months) 
•	 Computer programs that operate the following devices and machines, for 
purposes of good-faith security research (effective in 12 months or, for voting 
machines, immediately): 
 Devices and machines primarily designed for use by individual 
consumers, including voting machines 
 Motorized land vehicles 
 Medical devices designed for implantation in patients and 
corresponding personal monitoring systems 
•	 Video games for which outside server support has been discontinued, to allow 
individual play by gamers and preservation of games by libraries, archives and 
museums (as well as necessary jailbreaking of console computer code for 
preservation uses only) 
•	 Computer programs that operate 3D printers, to allow use of alternative 
feedstock 
•	 Literary works consisting of compilations of data generated by implanted 
medical devices and corresponding personal monitoring systems 
The Register declines to recommend the following requested exemptions: 
•	 Audiovisual works, for broad-based space-shifting and format-shifting 
(declined due to lack of legal and factual support for exemption) 
•	 Computer programs in video game consoles, for jailbreaking purposes 
(declined due to lack of legal and factual support for exemption) 
•	 Literary works distributed electronically (e-books), for space-shifting and 
format shifting (declined because incomplete record presented) 
•	 Computer programs that operate “consumer machines,” for unlocking 
(declined because incomplete record presented) 
•	 Computer programs that operate dedicated e-book readers, for jailbreaking 
(declined because incomplete record presented) 
•	 Computer programs consisting of specific music recording software that is no 
longer supported, to allow continued use of the software (declined because 
incomplete record presented) 
7
 

[PAGE 12]
     
    
  
  
    
    
  
 
    
     
  
  
 
 
  
  
   
    
    
 
 
   
  
  
 
  
 
   
  
           
         
  
     
      
             
             
       
     
  
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
I. LEGAL BACKGROUND 
A. Section 1201(a)(1) 
Congress enacted the DMCA in 1998 to implement certain provisions of the 
WIPO Copyright and WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaties. Among other 
things, title I of the DMCA, which added a new chapter 12 to title 17 of the U.S. Code, 
prohibits circumvention of technological measures employed by or on behalf of copyright 
owners to protect access to their works. In enacting this aspect of the law, Congress 
observed that technological protection measures (“TPMs”) can “support new ways of 
disseminating copyrighted materials to users, and . . . safeguard the availability of 
legitimate uses of those materials by individuals.”
19 
Section 1201(a)(1) provides in pertinent part that “[n]o person shall circumvent a 
technological measure that effectively controls access to a work protected under [title 
17].”  Under the statute, to “circumvent a technological measure” means “to descramble a 
scrambled work, to decrypt an encrypted work, or otherwise to avoid, bypass, remove, 
deactivate, or impair a technological measure, without the authority of the copyright 
owner.”
20 A technological measure that “effectively controls access to a work” is one 
that “in the ordinary course of its operation, requires the application of information, or a 
process or a treatment, with the authority of the copyright owner, to gain access to the 
work.”
21 
As originally drafted, the prohibition in section 1201(a)(1)(A) did not provide for 
an exemption process.22 The House of Representatives Committee on Commerce (“the 
Commerce Committee” or “the Committee”) was concerned, however, that the lack of an 
ability to waive the prohibition might undermine the fair use of copyrighted works.23 
The Committee acknowledged that the growth and development of the internet had had a 
significant positive impact on the access of students, researchers, consumers, and the 
public at large to information, and that a “plethora of information, most of it embodied in 
materials subject to copyright protection, is available to individuals, often for free, that 
just a few years ago could have been located and acquired only through the expenditure 
of considerable time, resources, and money.”
24 At the same time, the Committee was 
concerned that “marketplace realities may someday dictate a different outcome, resulting 
19 STAFF OF H. COMM. ON THE JUDICIARY, 105TH CONG., SECTION-BY-SECTION ANALYSIS OF H.R. 2281 AS 
PASSED BY THE UNITED STA TES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ON AUGUST 4, 1998, at 6 (Comm. Print 1998) 
(“House Manager’s Report”). 
20 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(3)(A). 
21 Id. § 1201(a)(3)(B). 
22 The original version of the bill did provide for certain permanent exemptions, including for library 
browsing, reverse engineering, and other activities, which were included in section 1201 as finally enacted. 
See S. REP. NO. 105-190, at 13-16 (1998). 
23 Commerce Comm. Report at 35-36. 
24 Id. 
8
 

[PAGE 13]
     
    
    
   
   
  
  
  
   
 
   
 
  
  
   
     
   
 
 
    
 
   
   
   
   
  
  
   
 
    
  
 
   
  
  
    
    
    
          
              
         
        
         
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
in less access, rather than more, to copyrighted materials that are important to education, 
scholarship, and other socially vital endeavors.”25 The Committee thus concluded that it 
would be appropriate to “modify the flat prohibition against the circumvention of 
effective technological measures that control access to copyrighted materials, in order to 
ensure that access for lawful purposes is not unjustifiably diminished.”26 
Accordingly, the Commerce Committee offered a modification of proposed 
section 1201 that it characterized as a “‘fail-safe’ mechanism.”27 The Committee’s report 
noted that “[t]his mechanism would monitor developments in the marketplace for 
copyrighted materials, and allow the enforceability of the prohibition against the act of 
circumvention to be selectively waived, for limited time periods, if necessary to prevent a 
diminution in the availability to individual users of a particular category of copyrighted 
materials.”
28 
As ultimately enacted, the “fail-safe” mechanism in section 1201(a)(1) requires 
the Librarian of Congress, following a rulemaking proceeding, to publish any class of 
copyrighted works as to which the Librarian has determined that noninfringing uses by 
persons who are users of a copyrighted work are, or are likely to be, adversely affected by 
the prohibition against circumvention in the succeeding three-year period, thereby 
exempting that class from the prohibition for that period.
29 The Librarian’s determination 
to grant an exemption is based upon the recommendation of the Register of Copyrights, 
who conducts the rulemaking proceeding.30 Congress directed the Register, in turn, to 
consult with the Assistant Secretary for Communications and Information of the 
Department of Commerce, who oversees NTIA, in the course of formulating her 
recommendation.31 As explained by the Commerce Committee, “[t]he goal of the 
proceeding is to assess whether the implementation of technological protection measures 
that effectively control access to copyrighted works is adversely affecting the ability of 
individual users to make lawful uses of copyrighted works.”
32 
In keeping with that goal, the primary responsibility of the Register and the 
Librarian in the rulemaking proceeding is to assess whether the implementation of access 
controls impairs the ability of individuals to make noninfringing uses of copyrighted 
works within the meaning of section 1201(a)(1). To do this, the Register develops a 
25 Id. at 36. 
26 Id. 
27 Id. 
28 Id. 
29 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1).
 
30 Id. § 1201(a)(1)(C); H.R. REP. NO. 105-796, at 64 (1998) (“Conference Report”).
 
31 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). Exemptions adopted by rule under section 1201(a)(1)(C) apply only to the
 
prohibition on circumventing technological measures that control “access” to copyrighted works, e.g.,
 
decryption or hacking of access controls such as passwords.
 
32 See Commerce Comm. Report at 37.
 
9
 

[PAGE 14]
     
    
 
    
 
 
  
 
  
    
    
 
  
    
 
    
     
 
    
      
     
     
   
     
       
   
      
                 
              
             
            
             
     
   
    
            
          
                  
              
              
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
comprehensive administrative record using information submitted by interested parties, 
and makes recommendations to the Librarian concerning whether exemptions are 
warranted based on that record.33 
Under the statutory framework, the Librarian, and thus the Register, must 
consider “(i) the availability for use of copyrighted works; (ii) the availability for use of 
works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational purposes; (iii) the impact that 
the prohibition on the circumvention of technological measures applied to copyrighted 
works has on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research; (iv) 
the effect of circumvention of technological measures on the market for or value of 
copyrighted works; and (v) such other factors as the Librarian considers appropriate.”
34 
As noted above, the Register must also consult with the Assistant Secretary, who oversees 
NTIA, and report and comment on his views, in providing her Recommendation. Upon 
receipt of the Recommendation, the Librarian is responsible for promulgating the final 
rule setting forth any exempted classes of works. 
B. Relationship to Other Provisions of Section 1201 and Other Laws 
Significantly, exemptions adopted by rule under section 1201(a)(1) apply only to 
the conduct of circumventing a technological measure that controls “access” to a 
copyrighted work.  Other parts of section 1201, by contrast, address the manufacture and 
provision of—or “trafficking” in—products and services primarily designed for purposes 
of circumvention. Section 1201(a)(2) bars trafficking in products and services that are 
used to circumvent technological measures that control access to copyrighted works (for 
example, a password needed to open a media file),35 while section 1201(b) bars 
trafficking in products and services used to circumvent technological measures that 
protect the exclusive rights of the copyright owners in their works (for example, 
technology that prevents the work from being reproduced).36 The Librarian of Congress 
has no authority to adopt exemptions for the anti-trafficking prohibitions contained in 
subsections (a)(2) or (b) of section 1201.37 
33 See Conference Report at 64 (“[A]s is typical with other rulemaking under title 17, and in recognition of 
the expertise of the Copyright Office, the Register of Copyrights will conduct the rulemaking, including 
providing notice of the rulemaking, seeking comments from the public, consulting with the Assistant 
Secretary for Communications and Information of the Department of Commerce and any other agencies 
that are deemed appropriate, and recommending final regulations in the report to the Librarian.”). 
34 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 
35 Id. § 1201(a)(2). 
36 Id. § 1201(b). 
37 See id. § 1201(a)(1)(E) (“Neither the exception under subparagraph (B) from the applicability of the 
prohibition contained in subparagraph (A), nor any determination made in a rulemaking conducted under 
subparagraph (C), may be used as a defense in any action to enforce any provision of this title other than 
this paragraph.”). However, the statute contains exemptions from the trafficking prohibitions for certain 
limited uses, such as reverse engineering or encryption research. See id. § 1201(f)(2), (g)(4). 
10
 

[PAGE 15]
     
    
   
     
      
  
  
   
    
 
   
   
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
   
  
     
   
    
   
 
    
 
 
 
	 
	 
	 
	 
	 
	 
	 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
More broadly, activities conducted under the regulatory exemptions must still 
comply with other applicable laws, including non-copyright provisions. Thus, while an 
exemption may specifically reference other laws of particular concern, any activities 
conducted under an exemption must be otherwise lawful. 
Also significant is the fact that the statute contains certain permanent exemptions 
to permit specified uses. These are: 
•	 Section 1201(d), which exempts certain activities of nonprofit libraries, 
archives, and educational institutions from the circumvention ban in section 
1201(a)(1) (but not the anti-trafficking provisions of section 1201(a)(2) and 
(b)), so that they can “make a good faith determination of whether to acquire a 
copy of that work for the sole purpose of engaging in conduct permitted under 
this title.” 
•	 Section 1201(e), which exempts “any lawfully authorized investigative, 
protective, information security, or intelligence activity” of the state or federal 
government from the anticircumvention and anti-trafficking provisions in 
section 1201(a)(1), (a)(2), and (b).  
•	 Section 1201(f), which exempts certain “reverse engineering” activities from 
section 1201(a)(1), (a)(2), and (b), “for the sole purpose of identifying and 
analyzing those elements of the program that are necessary to achieve 
interoperability of an independently created computer program with other 
programs.” 
•	 Section 1201(g), which exempts certain “encryption research” from section 
1201(a)(1) and (2) (but not 1201(b)). 
•	 Section 1201(h), which permits courts, in applying section 1201(a)(1) and (2) 
to a “component or part,” to consider whether the component or part is needed 
to “prevent the access of minors to material on the Internet.” 
•	 Section 1201(i), which exempts certain acts of circumvention “solely for the 
purpose of preventing the collection or dissemination of personally identifying 
information about a natural person who seeks to gain access to the work 
protected” from section 1201(a)(1). 
•	 Section 1201(j), which exempts certain acts of “security testing” from section 
1201(a)(1) and (2). 
11
 

[PAGE 16]
     
    
    
   
  
   
   
      
       
    
  
    
  
    
   
  
    
     
            
           
        
             
           
              
 
             
             
            
           
                  
           
                
   
     
           
               
            
  
    
           
            
              
            
                
           
 
 
                                                 
 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
C. The Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act 
In 2014, Congress enacted the Unlocking Act, effective as of August 1, 2014.38 
The Unlocking Act did three things. First, it changed the exemption adopted in the last 
triennial proceeding allowing circumvention of technological measures to enable certain 
wireless telephone handsets to connect to wireless communication networks—a process 
commonly known as “cellphone unlocking”—by substituting a broader version of the 
exemption adopted by the Librarian in 2010
39 for the 2012 version.40 At the same time, 
the language of the Unlocking Act makes clear that the Register is to consider any future 
proposal for a cellphone unlocking exemption according to the usual triennial rulemaking 
41process. 
Second, the legislation provides that the circumvention permitted under the 
reinstated 2010 exemption, as well as any future exemptions to permit wireless telephone 
handsets or other wireless devices to connect to wireless telecommunications networks, 
may be initiated by the owner of the handset or device, by another person at the direction 
of the owner, or by a provider of commercial mobile radio or data services to enable such 
owner or a family member to connect to a wireless network when authorized by the 
network operator.
42 This directive is permanent, and is now reflected in the relevant 
regulations.43 Accordingly, circumvention under any future “unlocking” exemption for 
38 See Unlocking Act, Pub. L. No. 113-144. Subsequently, the Librarian adopted regulatory amendments to 
reflect the new legislation. See Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection 
Systems for Wireless Telephone Handsets, 79 Fed. Reg. 50,552. 
39 See Unlocking Act § 2(a). Although it commenced in 2008, the fourth triennial rulemaking did not 
conclude until 2010. See Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for 
Access Control Technologies, 73 Fed. Reg. 79,425 (Dec. 29, 2008); 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 
43,827. 
40 The 2010 rule allowed unlocking of cellphones initiated by the owner of the copy of the handset 
computer program in order to connect to a wireless network in an authorized manner. 2010 Final Rule, 75 
Fed. Reg. at 43,839. Based on the insufficient record put forth by proponents in the 2012 rulemaking 
proceeding, the Librarian did not extend the exemption with respect to new phones acquired after January 
26, 2013 (90 days after the rule went into effect), but permitted the unlocking of older, or “legacy,” phones. 
2012 Final Rule, 77 Fed. Reg. at 65,264-66. Congress overturned the outcome and enacted the Unlocking 
Act after public calls for a broader exemption than provided in the 2012 rule. See Making Unlocking Cell 
Phones Legal, W
E THE PEOPLE, https://petitions.whitehouse.gov/petition/make-unlocking-cell-phones­
legal/1g9KhZG7 (last updated July 25, 2014). 
41 See Unlocking Act § 2(c)(2) (referencing the possibility of a new cellphone unlocking exemption adopted 
“after the date of enactment” of the Unlocking Act); id. § 2(d)(2)(“Nothing in this Act alters, or shall be 
construed to alter, the authority of the Librarian of Congress under section 1201(a)(1) of title 17, United 
States Code.”). 
42 Id. § 2(a), (c). 
43 See Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Wireless Telephone 
Handsets, 79 Fed. Reg. at 50,554; see also 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(c) (“To the extent authorized under 
paragraph (b) of this section, the circumvention of a technological measure that restricts wireless telephone 
handsets or other wireless devices from connecting to a wireless telecommunications network may be 
initiated by the owner of any such handset or other device, by another person at the direction of the owner, 
or by a provider of a commercial mobile radio service or a commercial mobile data service at the direction 
12
 

[PAGE 17]
     
    
 
  
   
    
  
   
     
  
   
     
     
  
 
 
  
 
 
    
   
 
   
  
 
 
   
    
     
                  
          
 
   
     
    
            
               
               
                 
            
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
wireless telephone handsets and other wireless devices adopted by the Librarian may be 
initiated by the persons Congress identified in the Unlocking Act. 
Third, the legislation directs the Librarian of Congress to consider as part of the 
current triennial proceeding whether to “extend” the cellphone unlocking exemption “to 
include any other category of wireless devices in addition to wireless telephone handsets” 
based upon the Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights, who in turn is to consult 
with the Assistant Secretary.
44 This provision does not alter or expand the Librarian’s 
authority to grant exemptions under section 1201(a)(1), but merely directs the Librarian 
to exercise his existing regulatory authority to consider the adoption of an exemption for 
other wireless devices.  Accordingly, as part of this rulemaking proceeding, the Copyright 
Office solicited and has evaluated several proposed unlocking exemptions for devices 
other than cellphones, as addressed in Proposed Classes 12 through 15 below. 
D. Rulemaking Standards 
In adopting the DMCA, Congress imposed legal and evidentiary requirements for 
the section 1201 rulemaking proceeding, as discussed below.  
1. Burden of Proof 
Those who seek an exemption from the prohibition on circumvention bear the 
burden of establishing that the requirements for granting an exemption have been 
satisfied. In enacting the DMCA, Congress explained that the “prohibition [of section 
1201(a)(1)] is presumed to apply to any and all kinds of works” until the Librarian 
determines that the requirements for the adoption of an exemption have been met with 
respect to a particular class of works.
45 In other words, the prohibition against 
circumvention applies unless and until the Librarian determines that “persons who are 
users of a copyrighted work are, or are likely to be in the succeeding 3-year period, 
adversely affected by the prohibition . . . in their ability to make noninfringing uses under 
this title of a particular class of copyrighted works.”
46 
Congress’ approach to the section 1201 process reflects general principles of 
agency rulemaking under the Administrative Procedure Act (“APA”).47 In keeping with 
of such owner or other person, solely in order to enable such owner or a family member of such owner to 
connect to a wireless telecommunications network, when such connection is authorized by the operator of 
such network.”). 
44 Unlocking Act § 2(b). 
45 Commerce Comm. Report at 37. 
46 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 
47 Congress indicated that the rulemaking under section 1201(a)(1) should be conducted “as is typical with 
other rulemaking under title 17,” to which the APA applies. See Conference Report at 64; 17 U.S.C. 
§ 701(e) (“Except as provided by section 706(b) and the regulations issued thereunder, all actions taken by 
the Register of Copyrights under this title are subject to the provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act 
of June 11, 1946, as amended . . . .”). 
13
 

[PAGE 18]
     
    
   
 
    
    
     
  
  
       
  
   
    
  
  
    
 
   
    
   
 
 
 
  
  
   
   
  
   
   
   
 
              
             
      
             
              
      
              
          
     
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
this approach, as the Copyright Office has previously explained, the proponent of an 
exemption must show by a preponderance of the evidence that the harmful impact on 
noninfringing uses of copyrighted works “is more likely than not.”48 This requirement 
stems from the statute, which requires a demonstration that users “are, or are likely to 
be,” adversely affected by the prohibition on circumvention.49 The APA provides that a 
rule may not be issued pursuant to formal agency rulemaking “except on consideration of 
the whole record or those parts thereof cited by a party and supported by and in 
accordance with the reliable, probative, and substantial evidence.”
50 
2. De Novo Consideration of Exemptions 
Congress made clear in enacting the DMCA that the basis for an exemption must 
be established de novo in each triennial proceeding.51 As Congress stressed, “[t]he 
regulatory prohibition [of section 1201(a)(1)] is presumed to apply to any and all kinds of 
works, including those as to which a waiver of applicability was previously in effect, 
unless, and until, the [Librarian] makes a new determination that the adverse impact 
criteria have been met with respect to a particular class and therefore issues a new 
waiver.”52 Accordingly, the fact that an exemption has been previously adopted creates 
no presumption that readoption is appropriate. This means that a proponent may not 
simply rely on the fact that the Register has recommended an exemption in the past, but 
must instead produce relevant evidence in each rulemaking to justify the continuation of 
the exemption.  
That said, however, where a proponent is seeking the readoption of an existing 
exemption, it may attempt to satisfy its burden by demonstrating that the conditions that 
led to the adoption of the prior exemption continue to exist today (or that new conditions 
exist to justify the exemption).  This could include, for instance, a showing that the 
cessation of an exemption will adversely impact users’ ability to make noninfringing uses 
of the class of works covered by the existing exemption.  Assuming the proponent 
succeeds in making such a demonstration, it is incumbent upon any opponent of that 
exemption to rebut such evidence by showing that the exemption is no longer justified. 
3. Adverse Effects on Noninfringing Uses 
Proponents who seek to have the Librarian exempt a particular class of works 
48 2010 Recommendation at 10. Under the APA, “[e]xcept as otherwise provided by statute, the proponent
 
of a rule or order has the burden of proof.” 5 U.S.C. § 556(d).
 
49 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(B) (emphases added).
 
50 See 5 U.S.C. § 556(d) (emphasis added); see also Steadman v. Securities and Exchange Comm’n, 450
 
U.S. 91, 102 (1981) (holding that the APA “was intended to establish a standard of proof and that the 
standard adopted is the traditional preponderance-of-the-evidence standard”). 
51 See Commerce Comm. Report at 37 (explaining that for every rulemaking, “the assessment of adverse 
impacts on particular categories of works is to be determined de novo”). 
52 Id. (emphases added). 
14
 

[PAGE 19]
     
    
   
     
  
  
 
   
  
 
    
 
   
  
     
    
    
 
      
      
 
 
  
 
    
   
 
 
  
  
   
    
         
           
    
     
     
       
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
from section 1201(a)(1)’s prohibition on circumvention must show: (1) that uses affected 
by the prohibition on circumvention are or are likely to be noninfringing; and (2) that as a 
result of a technological measure controlling access to a copyrighted work, the 
prohibition is causing, or in the next three years is likely to cause, an adverse impact on 
those uses.
53 These requirements are further explained below.  The Register also 
considers potential exemptions under the statutory factors set forth in section 
1201(a)(1)(C), also discussed below. 
a. Noninfringing Uses 
As noted above, Congress believed that it is important to protect noninfringing 
uses. There are several types of noninfringing uses that could be affected by the 
prohibition of section 1201(a)(1), including fair use (delineated in section 107), certain 
educational uses (section 110), and certain uses of computer programs (section 117). 
The Register will look to the Copyright Act and relevant judicial precedents when 
analyzing whether a proposed use is likely to be noninfringing. The statutory language 
requires that the use is or is likely to be noninfringing, not merely that the use might 
plausibly be considered noninfringing.
54 As the Register has indicated previously, there 
is no “rule of doubt” favoring an exemption when it is unclear that a particular use is a 
fair or otherwise noninfringing use.55 Thus, a proponent must show more than that a 
particular use could be noninfringing. Rather, the proponent must establish that the 
proposed use is likely to qualify as noninfringing under relevant law. And, as noted 
above, the burden of proving that a particular use is or is likely to be noninfringing 
belongs to the proponent.   
b. Adverse Effects 
The second requirement is a showing that users of the class of copyrighted works 
currently are, or are likely in the ensuing three-year period to be, adversely affected by 
the prohibition against circumvention.
56 In weighing adverse effects, the Register must 
assess, in particular, “whether the prevalence of . . . technological protections, with 
respect to particular categories of copyrighted materials, is diminishing the ability of 
individuals to use these works in ways that are otherwise lawful.”
57 
Congress stressed that the “main focus of the rulemaking proceeding” should be 
on whether a “substantial diminution” of the availability of works for noninfringing uses 
is “actually occurring” in the marketplace.
58 To prove the existence of adverse effects, it 
53 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(B); see also 2012 Recommendation at 6.
 
54 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C); see also 2012 Recommendation at 6.
 
55 See 2012 Recommendation at 7.
 
56 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C).
 
57 Commerce Comm. Report at 37.
 
58 House Manager’s Report at 6 (emphasis in original).
 
15
 

[PAGE 20]
     
    
   
   
   
  
   
  
 
  
  
   
 
   
     
 
     
  
       
 
  
   
 
    
 
  
   
  
     
       
         
      
       
      
       
      
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
is necessary to demonstrate “distinct, verifiable and measurable impacts” occurring in the 
marketplace, as exemptions “should not be based upon de minimis impacts.”59 Thus, 
“mere inconveniences” or “individual cases” do not satisfy the rulemaking standard.60 
To the extent that a proponent is relying on claimed future impacts rather than 
existing impacts, the statute requires the proponent to establish that such future adverse 
impacts are “likely.”61 An exemption may be based upon anticipated, rather than actual, 
adverse impacts “only in extraordinary circumstances in which the evidence of likelihood 
of future adverse impact during that time period is highly specific, strong and 
persuasive.”62 
The proponent must also demonstrate that the TPM is the cause of the claimed 
adverse impact.  “Adverse impacts that flow from other sources, or that are not clearly 
attributable to implementation of a technological protection measure, are outside the 
scope of the rulemaking.”63 For instance, adverse effects stemming from “marketplace 
trends, other technological developments, or changes in the roles of libraries, distributors 
or other intermediaries” are not cognizable harms under the statute.64 
4. Statutory Factors 
In conducting the rulemaking, the Librarian must also examine the statutory 
factors listed in section 1201(a)(1)(C). Those factors are: “(i) the availability for use of 
copyrighted works; (ii) the availability for use of works for nonprofit archival, 
preservation, and educational purposes; (iii) the impact that the prohibition on the 
circumvention of technological measures applied to copyrighted works has on criticism, 
comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research; (iv) the effect of 
circumvention of technological measures on the market for or value of copyrighted 
works; and (v) such other factors as the Librarian considers appropriate.”
65 In some 
cases, weighing these factors requires the consideration of the benefits that the 
technological measure brings with respect to the overall creation and dissemination of 
works in the marketplace, in addition to any negative impact.  As Congress explained, 
“the rulemaking proceedings should consider the positive as well as the adverse effects of 
these technologies on the availability of copyrighted materials.”
66 
59 Commerce Comm. Report at 37.
 
60 House Manager’s Report at 6.
 
61 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(B), (C) (emphasis added).
 
62 House Manager’s Report at 6.
 
63 Commerce Comm. Report at 37.
 
64 House Manager’s Report at 6.
 
65 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C).
 
66 House Manager’s Report at 6.
 
16
 

[PAGE 21]
     
    
   
   
     
  
   
  
  
     
  
 
   
     
   
 
   
  
    
 
 
  
    
 
 
 
    
     
   
   
         
        
         
        
    
    
  
         
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
5. Defining a Class 
Section 1201(a)(1) specifies that the exemption adopted as part of this rulemaking 
must be defined based on “a particular class of works.”67 Thus, a major focus of the 
rulemaking proceeding is how to define the “class” of works for purposes of the 
exemption.  The starting point for any definition of a “particular class” under section 
1201(a)(1) is the list of categories appearing in section 102 of title 17, such as literary 
works, musical works, and sound recordings.
68 But, as Congress made clear, “the 
‘particular class of copyrighted works’ [is intended to] be a narrow and focused subset of 
the broad categories of works . . . identified in section 102 of the Copyright Act.”69 For 
example, while the category of “literary works” under section 102(a)(1) “embraces both 
prose creations such as journals, periodicals or books, and computer programs of all 
kinds,” Congress explained that “[i]t is exceedingly unlikely that the impact of the 
prohibition on circumvention of access control technologies will be the same for 
scientific journals as it is for computer operating systems.”
70 Thus, “these two categories 
of works, while both ‘literary works,’ do not constitute a single ‘particular class’ for 
purposes of” section 1201(a)(1).
71 
At the same time, Congress emphasized that the Librarian “should not draw the 
boundaries of ‘particular classes’ too narrowly.”72 Thus, while the category of “motion 
pictures and other audiovisual works” in section 102 “may appropriately be subdivided, 
for purposes of the rulemaking, into classes such as ‘motion pictures,’ ‘television 
programs,’ and other rubrics of similar breadth,” Congress made clear that it would be 
inappropriate “to subdivide overly narrowly into particular genres of motion pictures, 
such as Westerns, comedies, or live action dramas.”
73 
The determination of the appropriate scope of a “class of works” recommended 
for exemption may also take into account the adverse effects an exemption may have on 
the market for or value of copyrighted works.  For example, the class might be defined in 
part by reference to the medium on which the works are distributed, or even to the access 
control measures applied to them. Defining an exemption solely by reference to the 
medium on which a work may appear, or the access control measures applied to a work, 
however, would be inconsistent with Congress’s intent in directing the Register and 
Librarian to define a “particular class” of “works.”
74 
67 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(B) (emphasis added).
 
68 House Manager’s Report at 7.
 
69 Commerce Comm. Report at 38 (emphasis added).
 
70 House Manager’s Report at 7.
 
71 Id. 
72 Id. 
73 Id. 
74 See 2006 Recommendation at 9-10, 15-20. 
17
 

[PAGE 22]
     
    
 
  
   
 
 
    
      
   
    
  
  
 
 
 
    
   
 
  
       
   
   
        
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
In the earliest rulemakings, consistent with the records in those proceedings, the 
Register rejected proposals to classify works by reference to the type of user or use (for 
example, libraries, or scholarly research).75 In the 2006 proceeding, however, the 
Register concluded, based on the record before her, that in appropriate circumstances a 
“class of works” that is defined initially by reference to a section 102 category of works 
or subcategory thereof may be additionally refined not only by reference to the medium 
on which the works are distributed, or the particular access controls at issue, but also by 
reference to the particular type of use and/or user to which the exemption will apply.
76 
The Register determined that “it can be appropriate to refine a class by reference to the 
use or user in order to remedy the adverse effect of the prohibition and to limit the 
adverse consequences of an exemption.”
77 
In sum, “[d]eciding the scope or boundaries of a ‘particular class’ of copyrighted 
works as to which the prohibition contained in section 1201(a)(1) has been shown to have 
had an adverse impact is an important issue” to be determined based upon the law and 
facts developed in the proceeding.
78 Accordingly, the Register will look to the specific 
record before her to assess the proper scope of the class for a recommended exemption. 
75 See, e.g., 2000 Final Rule, 65 Fed. Reg. at 64,560-61.
 
76 2006 Recommendation at 10.
 
77 Id. at 19.
 
78 House Manager’s Report at 7.
 
18
 

[PAGE 23]
     
    
  
  
    
     
 
   
   
   
  
  
   
  
    
  
  
     
  
  
   
 
 
      
     
   
        
         
   
             
              
       
        
            
                  
      
       
          
              
    
    
   
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
II. HISTORY OF SIXTH TRIENNIAL PROCEEDING 
In this triennial rulemaking, after consulting with interested members of the public 
and NTIA, the Register adjusted the administrative process that has been used in prior 
rulemakings, including the last triennial proceeding.79 In earlier proceedings, the 
Copyright Office initiated the rulemaking process by calling for the public to submit 
proposals for exemptions.80 Notably, the Office required proponents to provide complete 
legal and evidentiary support for their proposals at the outset of the rulemaking process, 
in the proponents’ initial submissions.
81 After receiving those submissions, the Office 
then published a notice of proposed rulemaking describing the proposals and inviting 
interested parties to submit initial comments (and, later, reply comments) both in support 
of and in opposition to those proposals.82 Although the Office offered general 
information concerning legal and evidentiary requirements, it did not provide more 
specific guidance concerning the individual proposals before the submission of written 
comments.  The Office then held public hearings to explore the proposed exemptions,83 
and sometimes issued follow-up questions to participants after the hearings.84 
In the present rulemaking, the Copyright Office implemented several procedural 
changes to make the process more accessible and understandable to the public, allow 
greater opportunity for participants to coordinate their efforts, encourage participants to 
submit effective factual and legal support for their positions, and reduce administrative 
burdens on both the participants and the Office.  
On September 17, 2014, the Copyright Office published a Notice of Inquiry 
(“NOI”) in the Federal Register to initiate the sixth triennial rulemaking proceeding.85 
The NOI invited interested parties to submit “petitions for proposed exemptions” that set 
forth the essential elements of the exemption.86 In a departure from prior rulemakings, 
the Office did not require the proponent of an exemption to deliver the complete legal and 
79 See generally Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access 
Control Technologies, 76 Fed. Reg. 60,398 (Sept. 29, 2011). 
80 See id. at 60,403-04. 
81 See id. at 60,403 (stressing that “[p]roponents should present their entire case in their initial comments” 
and explaining that “the best evidence in support of an exemption would consist of concrete examples or 
specific instances” of adverse effects on noninfringing uses). 
82 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, 76 Fed. Reg. 78,866, 78,868 (Dec. 20, 2011) (asking for “additional factual information that 
would assist the Office in assessing whether a Proposed Class is warranted for exemption and, if it is, how 
such a class already proposed should be properly tailored”). 
83 See Notice of Public Hearings: Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection 
Systems for Access Control Technologies, 77 Fed. Reg. 15,327 (Mar. 15, 2012). 
84 The post-hearing questions and responses for the prior rulemaking can be found on the Copyright 
Office’s website at http://copyright.gov/1201/2012/responses. 
85 NOI, 79 Fed. Reg. 55,687. 
86 Id. at 55,692-93. 
19
 

[PAGE 24]
     
    
       
    
  
   
    
  
   
    
   
 
    
    
   
      
     
 
     
     
   
 
    
   
 
   
   
     
  
   
   
  
           
          
               
    
      
    
  
            
  
     
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
evidentiary basis for its proposal with its initial submission. Instead, the purpose of the 
petition was to provide the Office and others with basic information regarding the 
essential elements of the proposed exemption, both to confirm that the threshold 
requirements of section 1201(a) could be met, and to aid the Office in describing the 
proposal for the next, more substantive, phase of the rulemaking proceeding.87 The 
Office provided detailed suggestions concerning the content of the petitions, and a 
recommended form for submitters to use.88 The Office received forty-four petitions for 
proposed exemptions in response to the NOI, which were posted on the Copyright Office 
website.89 
Next, on December 12, 2014, the Office issued a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking 
(“NPRM”) that reviewed and grouped the proposed exemptions set forth in the 
petitions.90 In the NPRM, the Copyright Office concluded that three of the petitions 
sought exemptions that could not be granted as a matter of law, and declined to put those 
proposals forward for public comment.91 Each of these petitions sought to permit 
circumvention of any and all TPMs that constituted digital rights management (“DRM”) 
with respect to unspecified types of copyrighted works for the purpose of engaging in 
unidentified personal and/or consumer uses.92 As the Office noted—and as explained 
above—section 1201(a)(1) requires that “any exemptions adopted as part of this 
rulemaking must be defined based on ‘a particular class of works,’” which legislative 
history characterizes as “‘a narrow and focused subset of the broad categories of works . . 
. identified in Section 102 of the Copyright Act.’”93 The Office thus concluded that “the 
sweeping type of exemption proposed by these three petitions” could not be granted 
consistent with the standards of section 1201(a)(1).94 
In the NPRM, the Office grouped the remaining proposed exemptions into 
twenty-seven proposed classes of works.95 In some cases, overlapping proposals were 
merged into a single combined proposed class. In other cases, individual proposals that 
encompassed multiple proposed uses were subdivided into multiple classes to aid in the 
process of review. The Office then provided detailed guidance on the submission of 
87 Id. at 55,692. 
88 Id. 
89 Petitions received in response to the NOI are posted at http://copyright.gov/1201/2014/petitions. 
References to these petitions in this Recommendation are by party name (abbreviated where appropriate), 
followed by subject matter where the party has submitted multiple petitions, followed by “Pet.” (e.g., 
EFF/OTW Disc Remix Pet.). 
90 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,859. 
91 Id. 
92 Id. 
93 Id. (emphases added) (quoting 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(B); Commerce Comm. Report at 38). 
94 Id. 
95 See generally id. at 73,859-71. 
20
 

[PAGE 25]
     
    
     
      
   
  
    
       
  
    
     
   
      
   
  
   
   
  
  
     
   
    
   
   
      
    
        
    
   
           
      
            
               
           
           
           
      
      
            
            
            
    
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
comments, including short- and long-form comment templates.96 In another departure 
from prior rulemakings, the NPRM also identified a number of specific legal and factual 
areas of interest with respect to each proposed class, and encouraged commenters to 
address those issues in the course of their written comments.97 
The Office also made two refinements to the structure for the written comment 
phase to encourage a more organized and complete administrative record. First, 
commenters were required to provide a separate submission for each proposed class 
during each stage of the public comment period.
98 The Office imposed this requirement 
to ensure a manageable record in light of the anticipated number of submissions.99 As the 
Office explained in the NOI, in past rulemakings “submitters sometimes combined their 
views on multiple proposals in a single filing, making it difficult and time-consuming for 
other participants and the Office to sort out which arguments and evidence pertained to 
which.”100 The Office believed that “requiring separate submissions for each proposed 
exemption [would] help both participants and the Office keep better track of the record 
for each proposed exemption.”
101 As the proceeding has progressed, the Office has in 
fact found this to be the case. 
Second, in the past, each round of the written comment phase following the initial 
petitions was open to all potential commenters, whether in support or opposition, which 
made it challenging for opponents to respond to points being made by proponents, and 
vice versa. For this rulemaking, the Office divided the written comment phase into three 
rounds.  The first round following the submission of petitions was limited to proponents 
and members of the public who supported the adoption of a proposed exemption, as well 
as those who neither supported nor opposed an exemption but sought only to share 
pertinent information about a specific proposal.102 The second round of public comment 
was limited to those who opposed an exemption.103 The third round was again limited to 
96 See id. at 73,858.
 
97 See id. at 73,859.
 
98 See id. at 73,857; see also NOI, 79 Fed. Reg. at 55,693.
 
99 NOI, 79 Fed. Reg. at 55,693.
 
100 Id. at 55,692. A few commenters submitted general comments addressing overarching issues applicable
 
to multiple classes, including whether the DMCA should restrict consumer uses of lawfully acquired goods,
 
suggesting interpretations of various statutory provisions of section 1201, or proposing procedures for
 
confidential evidentiary submissions. See Owners’ Rights Initiative General Comments; New America’s
 
Open Technology Institute General Comments; Public Knowledge General Comments. The Register has
 
incorporated these comments as appropriate into her analysis.
 
101 NOI, 79 Fed. Reg. at 55,692.
 
102 Comments received in the first round are posted at http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/comments-020615.
 
References to these comments in this Recommendation are by party name (abbreviated where appropriate),
 
followed by class number where the party has submitted comments for multiple classes, followed by
 
“Supp.” (e.g., MLA Class 1 Supp.).
 
21
 

[PAGE 26]
     
    
   
   
    
 
   
  
    
 
     
    
    
    
  
    
 
 
 
 
  
      
              
             
      
        
           
           
     
         
              
    
           
          
          
               
        
           
            
             
         
          
              
            
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
proponents, supporters and neutral parties, in each case who sought to reply to points 
made in the earlier rounds of comments.104 
The Office received nearly 40,000 comments in response to the NPRM, the vast 
majority of which consisted of relatively short statements of support or opposition 
without substantial legal argument or supporting evidence.  As permitted under the 
Office’s instructions, a number of the longer submissions included multimedia evidence 
to illustrate points made in the written comments. 
After receiving and studying the written comments, the Office held seven days of 
public hearings: in Los Angeles , at the UCLA School of Law, from May 19th to 21st, 
2015; and in Washington, D.C., at the Library of Congress, from May 26th to 29th, 
2015.105 The Office heard testimony from sixty-three witnesses at the hearings, and 
received additional multimedia evidence.106 After the hearings, the Office issued a 
number of follow-up questions to participants, and received responses that have been 
made part of the administrative record.107 
As observed by various commenting parties, certain of the proposed 
exemptions—Proposed Classes 21 and 22, for software installed on automobiles and farm 
equipment for purposes of diagnosis, repair, and modification and security research, and 
Proposed Class 27, for software installed on medical devices for purposes of access to 
patient data and for security research—present issues potentially of concern to DOT, 
103 Comments received in the second round are posted at http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/comments­
032715. References to these comments in this Recommendation are by party name (abbreviated where 
appropriate), followed by class number where the party has submitted comments for multiple classes, 
followed by “Opp’n” (e.g., Joint Creators Class 7 Opp’n). 
104 Reply comments are posted at http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/reply-comments-050115. References to 
these comments in this Recommendation are by party name (abbreviated where appropriate), followed by 
class number where the party has submitted comments for multiple classes, followed by “Reply” (e.g., 
Public Knowledge Class 27 Reply). 
105 See Notice of Public Hearings: Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection 
Systems for Access Control Technologies, 80 Fed. Reg. 19,255 (Apr. 10, 2015). The hearing agendas are 
posted at http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/Final_1201_hearing_agenda_20150507.pdf. 
106 Transcripts for the hearings are posted at http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/hearing-transcripts. Hearing 
exhibits are posted at http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/hearing-exhibits. At the hearing for Proposed Class 
21 (covering vehicle software – diagnosis, repair or modification), opponents submitted additional written 
materials, and the Office provided the opportunity for others to respond after the hearing. That additional 
written material and responses are posted at http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/class21. 
107 The post-hearing questions are posted at http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/post-hearing. References to 
these questions in this Recommendation are by “Post-Hearing Questions to,” followed by class number, 
followed by “Witnesses,” followed by the date (e.g., Post-Hearing Questions to Class 6 Witnesses (June 3, 
2015)). The responses to the post-hearing questions are posted at http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/post­
hearing/answers. References to these responses in this Recommendation are by party name (abbreviated 
where appropriate), followed by class number where the party has submitted responses for multiple classes, 
followed by “Post-Hearing Resp.” (e.g., Joint Creators Class 3 Post-Hearing Resp.). 
22
 

[PAGE 27]
     
    
    
  
 
   
  
    
  
    
    
    
   
 
  
  
           
     
            
 
     
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
EPA, and FDA (and perhaps other regulatory agencies as well).108 The Copyright Office 
therefore sent letters to DOT, EPA, and FDA informing them of the pendency of the 
rulemaking proceeding in case they wished to comment on the proposals.  In response to 
these letters, the Office received responses from those agencies, and also from the 
California Air Resources Board, which are also included in the record.
109 
Throughout this triennial proceeding, as required under section 1201(a)(1), the 
Register has consulted with NTIA. In addition to providing procedural and substantive 
input throughout the rulemaking process, NTIA was represented along with Copyright 
Office staff at the public hearings held in Los Angeles and Washington, D.C.  NTIA 
formally communicated its views on each of the proposed exemptions in a letter 
delivered to the Register on September 18, 2015.
110 A discussion of NTIA’s substantive 
analysis of particular proposals is presented in the relevant sections of this 
Recommendation. 
108 See, e.g., Association of Equipment Manufacturers Class 21 Opp’n at 1; Intellectual Property Owners 
Association Class 27 Opp’n at 2-3. 
109 The Office’s letters to those agencies, and the agencies’ responses, are posted at http://copyright.gov/ 
1201/2015/USCO-letters. 
110 NTIA Letter at 1. 
23
 

[PAGE 28]
     
    
  
      
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
     
  
   
  
   
 
   
 
   
   
                
              
     
             
         
           
           
            
         
               
       
    
    
        
            
          
    
            
        
 
 
                                                 
	 
	 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
III.	 DISCUSSION 
A. Proposed Classes 1 to 7:  Audiovisual Works – Educational and Derivative 
Uses 
1.	 Proposals 
Proposed Classes 1 through 7 would allow circumvention of lawfully made and 
acquired motion pictures and, in some cases, other audiovisual works, protected by 
various access controls, where the person engaging in circumvention seeks to engage in a 
noninfringing use.  Prior rulemakings have granted exemptions relating to uses of motion 
picture excerpts for commentary, criticism, and educational uses by college and 
university faculty and staff and by kindergarten through twelfth-grade educators, as well 
as for derivative uses of excerpts in noncommercial videos, documentary films, and 
nonfiction multimedia e-books offering film analysis.
111 The current petitions seek to 
readopt and to some extent expand those previously granted exemptions to accommodate 
additional technologies, such as Blu-ray discs, or to include new users or types of uses, 
such as for fictional films or uses by museums, libraries, and nonprofits, or students and 
faculty participating in massive open online courses (“MOOCs”). 
The NPRM grouped these proposals into seven classes. The NPRM described 
Proposed Class 1 as follows: 
Proposed Class 1: This proposed class would allow college and university 
faculty and students to circumvent access controls on lawfully made and 
acquired motion pictures and other audiovisual works for purposes of 
criticism and comment. 
111 The current regulatory language for these exemptions is set forth in 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(4)-(7). By way 
of example, a portion of the language allowing for the circumvention of the CSS protection system on 
DVDs provides as follows: 
(4) Motion pictures, as defined in 17 U.S.C. 101, on DVDs that are lawfully made and acquired and 
that are protected by the Content Scrambling System, where the person engaging in circumvention 
believes and has reasonable grounds for believing that circumvention is necessary because reasonably 
available alternatives, such as noncircumventing methods or using screen capture software as provided 
for in alternative exemptions, are not able to produce the level of high-quality content required to 
achieve the desired criticism or comment on such motion pictures, and where circumvention is 
undertaken solely in order to make use of short portions of the motion pictures for the purpose of 
criticism or comment in the following instances: 
(i) In noncommercial videos; 
(ii) In documentary films; 
(iii) In nonfiction multimedia e-books offering film analysis; and 
(iv) For educational purposes in film studies or other courses requiring close analysis of film and 
media excerpts, by college and university faculty, college and university students, and 
kindergarten through twelfth grade educators. 
For purposes of this exemption, “noncommercial videos” includes videos created pursuant to a paid 
commission, provided that the commissioning entity’s use is noncommercial. 
24
 

[PAGE 29]
     
    
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
   
  
 
     
 
 
  
             
           
            
             
            
           
               
           
                   
 
              
           
        
           
           
         
            
              
 
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Class 1 concerns educational uses at colleges and universities; for example, this class 
would allow film studies professors to circumvent DVDs in order to use motion picture 
clips in class lectures.  Petitioners for this class were Professor Peter Decherney, the 
College Art Association, the International Communication Association, and the Society 
for Cinema and Media Studies (collectively, “Joint Educators”).
112 Short-form comments 
supporting this exemption were filed by Professor Jeremy Sheff, Music Library 
Association (“MLA”), the Free Software Foundation (“FSF”), and over 1500 other 
individuals.
113 
The NPRM described Proposed Class 2 as follows: 
Proposed Class 2: This proposed class would allow kindergarten through 
twelfth-grade educators and students to circumvent access controls on 
lawfully made and acquired motion pictures and other audiovisual works 
for educational purposes.  
Class 2 concerns educational uses in kindergarten through twelfth grades; for example, 
this class would allow a high school teacher to circumvent DVDs of various adaptations 
of Shakespeare’s works in order to create a compilation of clips demonstrating the lasting 
influence of these works.  Petitions for Proposed Class 2 were submitted by Professor 
Renee Hobbs
114 and the Library Copyright Alliance (“LCA”).115 During the public 
comment phase, Hobbs’ comments were co-signed by the American Library Association 
( “ALA”), Professor Frances Jacobson Harris, Professor Sherri Hope Culver and 
Michelle Ciulla Lipkin of the National Association for Media Literacy Education 
112 The petition was submitted on their behalf, and petitioners were also represented throughout the 
rulemaking proceeding, by the Glushko-Samuelson Intellectual Property Law Clinic at Washington College 
of Law, American University. Joint Educators’ proposed regulatory language reads as follows: 
“Audiovisual works embodied in physical media (such as DVDs and Blu-Ray Discs) or obtained online 
(such as through online distribution services and streaming media) that are lawfully made and acquired and 
that are protected by various technological protection measures, where the circumvention is accomplished 
by college and university students or faculty (including teaching and research assistants) . . . for the purpose 
of criticism or comment.” Joint Educators Pet. at 1. 
113 Sheff Supp.; MLA Class 1 Supp.; FSF Class 1 Supp.; Digital Right to Repair Class 1 Supp. (1501 
individuals). 
114 Hobbs proposed that the Register recommend “an exemption that enables educators and students in 
grades K-12 . . . to ‘rip’ encrypted or copy-protected lawfully accessed audiovisual works used for 
educational purposes.” Hobbs Pet. at 1. 
115 LCA requested “renewal of the exemption granted in the 2012 rulemaking for motion picture excerpts. 
The exemption should be broadened to apply to all storage media, including Blu-Ray. Further, the 
exemption for educational purposes should be expanded to apply to students in kindergarten through 
twelfth grade. LCA also seeks simplification of the exemption so that it could be readily understood by the 
authors, filmmakers, students, and educators it is intended to benefit.” LCA Motion Picture Excerpts Pet. at 
1. 
25
 

[PAGE 30]
     
    
  
 
 
    
   
  
  
 
   
   
   
 
 
    
  
  
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
                    
  
      
            
          
              
            
                
     
      
                
          
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
(“NAMLE”), and Media Literacy Now, Inc.116 In addition, MLA and FSF filed shortform comments in support of the exemption.117 
The NPRM described Proposed Class 3 as follows: 
Proposed Class 3: This proposed class would allow students and faculty 
participating in massive online open courses (“MOOCs”) to circumvent 
access controls on lawfully made and acquired motion pictures and other 
audiovisual works for purposes of criticism and comment.  
Class 3 concerns educational uses in MOOCs; for example, this class would allow a 
professor preparing an online lecture about the evolution of Chinese society to 
circumvent access controls in order to incorporate video clips documenting Chinese 
history and geography.  Joint Educators proposed Class 3.
118 In addition, MLA and FSF 
filed short-form comments in support of the exemption.119 
The NPRM described Proposed Class 4 as follows: 
Proposed Class 4: This proposed class would allow educators and learners 
in libraries, museums and nonprofit organizations to circumvent access 
controls on lawfully made and acquired motion pictures and other 
audiovisual works for educational purposes.  
Class 4 concerns educational uses in libraries, museums, and nonprofit organizations; for 
example, this class would allow educators in a community center adult education 
program to circumvent access controls in order to create video clips for purposes of 
discussing the portrayal of African-American women in a popular television show.  
Professor Hobbs proposed Class 4.
120 During the public comment phase, Hobbs’ 
comments were co-signed by LCA, NAMLE, Philly CAM: Philadelphia Public Access 
116 Hobbs Class 2 Supp. at 1. Although ALA is a member of LCA, LCA did not separately join Hobbs’ 
written submissions. 
117 MLA Class 2 Supp.; FSF Class 2 Supp. 
118 Joint Educators, in relevant part, proposed the following regulatory language: “Audiovisual works 
embodied in physical media (such as DVDs and Blu-Ray Discs) or obtained online (such as through online 
distribution services and streaming media) that are lawfully made and acquired and that are protected by 
various technological protection measures, where the circumvention is accomplished by . . . students and 
faculty participating in Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) for the purpose of criticism or comment.” 
Joint Educators Pet. at 1. 
119 MLA Class 3 Supp.; FSF Class 3 Supp. 
120 Hobbs proposed that the Register extend the existing exemption to “educators and learners in libraries, 
museum and nonprofit organizations.” Hobbs Pet. at 1. 
26
 

[PAGE 31]
     
    
   
 
 
    
 
  
 
    
  
  
 
  
  
 
    
  
   
 
     
 
  
    
      
      
             
              
              
             
           
         
       
        
                  
             
            
            
 
 
                                                 
 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Center, Media Literacy Now, Inc., and The LAMP NYC.121 In addition, MLA and FSF 
filed short-form comments in support of the exemption.122 
The NPRM described Proposed Class 5 as follows: 
Proposed Class 5: This proposed class would allow circumvention of 
access controls on lawfully made and acquired motion pictures used in 
connection with multimedia e-book authorship. 
Class 5 concerns derivative uses of motion picture excerpts in e-books; for example, this 
class would allow a sound editor and e-book author to circumvent DVDs or Blu-ray discs 
in order to incorporate brief film excerpts in an e-book entitled Listening to Movies. 
Class 5 was jointly proposed by Authors Alliance and Bobette Buster.123 During the 
public comment phase, Authors Alliance and Bobette Buster filed joint comments with 
the American Association of University Professors, the Society for Cinema and Media 
Studies, the University Film and Video Association, and Mark Berger (collectively, 
“Authors Alliance”).
124 In addition, short-form comments supporting the exemption 
were filed by MLA, FSF, and over 1400 individuals.125 
The NPRM described Proposed Class 6 as follows: 
Proposed Class 6: This proposed class would allow circumvention of 
access controls on lawfully made and acquired motion pictures for 
filmmaking purposes. 
Class 6 concerns derivative uses of motion picture excerpts in filmmaking; for example, 
this class would allow filmmakers to circumvent access controls on material streamed 
online in order to incorporate excerpts of news footage into documentaries. A petition 
for Class 6 was jointly filed by International Documentary Association, Film 
Independent, Kartemquin Educational Films, Inc., and National Alliance for Media Arts 
and Culture (collectively, “Joint Filmmakers”).
126 A long-form comment in support of 
121 Hobbs Class 4 Supp. at 1. 
122 MLA Class 4 Supp.; FSF Class 4 Supp. 
123 The petition was submitted on their behalf, and petitioners were also represented throughout the 
rulemaking proceeding, by the UCI Intellectual Property Arts and Technology Clinic at University of 
California, Irvine (“UCI”) and the Samuelson-Glushko Technology Law & Policy Clinic at Colorado Law. 
Petitioners jointly proposed an exemption “that permits authors of multimedia e-books to circumvent 
Content Scramble System (‘CSS’) on DVDs, Advanced Access Content System (‘AACS’) on Blu-ray 
discs, and encryption and authentication protocols on digitally transmitted video in order to make fair use 
of motion picture content in their e-books.” Authors Alliance Pet. at 2. 
124 Authors Alliance Class 5 Supp. at 1. 
125 MLA Class 5 Supp.; FSF Class 5 Supp.; Digital Right to Repair Class 5 Supp. (1408 individuals). 
126 The petition was submitted on their behalf, and petitioners were also represented throughout the 
rulemaking proceeding, by UCI and Donaldson & Callif, LLP. Specifically, Joint Filmmakers proposed an 
exemption to allow circumvention of TPMs for “filmmakers who seek to make fair use in their filmmaking 
27
 

[PAGE 32]
     
    
  
 
 
    
   
  
 
 
   
 
  
   
    
   
 
  
   
 
  
  
 
            
       
     
              
               
              
             
           
             
            
             
                
    
     
      
                 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
the exemption was received from New Media Rights (“NMR”).127 In addition, shortform comments supporting the exemption were filed by FSF and over 1500 
individuals.128 
The NPRM described Proposed Class 7 as follows: 
Proposed Class 7: This proposed class would allow circumvention of 
access controls on lawfully made and acquired audiovisual works for the 
sole purpose of extracting clips for inclusion in noncommercial videos that 
do not infringe copyright.  
Class 7 concerns derivative uses of motion picture excer pts in noncommercial videos, 
including remix videos; for example, this class would allow a fan of James Bond films to 
circumvent access controls on DVDs of these films in order to incorporate brief excerpts 
into a video commenting on the portrayal of female characters in those films.  Petitioners 
of Class 7 were the Electronic Frontier Foundation (“EFF”) and the Organization for 
Transformative Works (“OTW”) (collectively, “EFF/OTW”).
129 Long-form comments 
supporting the exemption were filed by NMR. 130 Short-form comments providing 
specific examples of noncommercial videos were filed by the National Congress of 
American Indians (“NCAI”) and the USC Norman Lear Center.
131 In addition, short -
form comments expressing general support for the exemption were file d by MLA, FSF, 
and over 1500 individuals.132 
Because these proposed audiovisual exemptions involve many overlapping factual 
and legal issues relating to the use of clips from motion pictures or other audiovisual 
works, Proposed Classes 1 through 7 are addressed as a group. 
of copyrighted motion pictures protected by TPMs on DVDs, Blu-ray discs, and digitally transmitted
 
video.” Joint Film makers Pet. at 2.
 
127 NMR Class 6 Supp.
 
128 FSF Class 6 Supp.; Digital Right to Repair Class 6 Supp. (1565 individuals). 
129 EFF/OTW submitted two separate petitions, one relating to DVD and Blu-ray discs and one relating to 
digitally transmitted material, which the Office consolidated into a single class. The respective petitions 
sought exemptions for “[a]udiovisual works on DVDs and Blu-Ray discs that are lawfully made and 
acquired and that are protected by Digital Rights Management schemes, where circumvention is undertaken 
for the sole purpose of extracting clips for inclusion in noncommercial videos that do not infringe 
copyright” and “[a]udiovisual works that are lawfully made and acquired via online distribution services, 
where circumvention is undertaken solely for the purpose of extracting clips for inclusion in 
noncommercial videos that do not infringe copyright.” EFF/OTW Disc Remix Pet. at 1; EFF/OTW Online 
Remix Pet. at 1. 
130 NMR Class 7 Supp. 
131 See NCAI Supp.; USC Norman Lear Center Supp. 
132 MLA Class 7 Supp.; FSF Class 7 Supp.; Digital Right to Repair Class 7 Supp. (1574 individuals). 
28
 

[PAGE 33]
     
    
  
  
 
 
 
   
  
   
 
 
  
 
       
   
    
 
   
   
  
    
 
   
  
               
              
                  
           
                
  
      
   
        
    
           
     
            
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
a. Background 
Proposed Classes 1 through 7 share the desire to circumvent TPMs employed on 
DVDs, Blu-ray discs, and/or by various online streaming services.  The proponents 
generally contend that they need to circumvent controls protecting each technology in 
order to access unique and/or higher-quality material available on the platform in 
question.  
The vast majority of DVDs use the Content Scramble System (“CSS”)  to encrypt 
audiovisual works on DVDs using a fixed set of decryption keys, and the Copyright 
Office and courts have found that CSS is an “access control” within the meaning of 
section 1201(a)(1).133 The CSS key was decoded in 1999, and decryption software is 
now available on the internet, including the programs MactheRipper, DVDDecrypter, and 
Handbrake.
134 
Blu-ray discs are protected primarily by the Advanced Access Content System 
(“AACS”), which allows vendors to revoke compromised keys and distribute new 
keys.
135 In 2012, the Register recognized AACS as a TPM subject to the DMCA.136 
Proponents, including EFF/OTW, attest that Blu-ray circumvention tools are also easily 
available, including DVDFab and MakeMKV .137 Another TPM, called BD+, protects 
some Blu-ray discs.138 
According to Joint Filmmakers, access controls used by online streaming services 
vary widely, and some services, such as Vimeo’s online video sharing service, use no 
encryption or other access control technologies.139 But other services, such as Netflix, 
protect streamed content through encryption and other protocols such as Microsoft 
Silverlight, Adobe Flash, or Apple’s proprietary FairPlay scheme.140 Commenters 
generally agreed that the relevant TPMs for online media are in a “state of flux,” as 
Silverlight and Flash are scheduled to be discontinued and HTML5, a newer web 
standard that is being widely adopted, has encryption capabilities under development.
141 
Accordingly, while Joint Filmmakers provided information on current TPMs for online 
133 See EFF/OTW Supp. at 2; Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 2; see also 2012 Recommendation at 126; DVD 
Copy Control Ass’n, Inc. v. Bunner, 116 Cal. App. 4th 241, 255 (Cal. Ct. App. 2004).
 
134 Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 2; EFF/OTW Supp. at 2 & n.5. The Register notes that distribution of these
 
tools would appear to run afoul of the DMCA’s anti-trafficking provision in section 1201(a)(2), and
 
reiterates that any exemption granted here would not affect a traffickers’ liability under that provision. See 
17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(2).
 
135 Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 3.
 
136 2012 Recommendation at 126.
 
137 See, e.g., EFF/OTW Supp. at 2 & n.5.
 
138 Id. at 2.
 
139 Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 3, App. J (Letter from Alex Podobas).
 
140 Id.; EFF/OTW Supp. at 2
 
141 Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 3, App. J at 2-3 (Letter from Alex Podobas).
 
29
 

[PAGE 34]
     
    
   
  
    
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
       
 
   
  
   
    
  
     
  
     
  
 
  
            
              
   
               
            
     
   
   
   
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
streaming services, they request that an exemption not be limited to a subset of streaming 
technologies to avoid becoming “obsolete long before the exemption expire[s].”142 
In addition to seeking to circumvent the same types of access controls, some of 
the proposals share other commonalities. A number of the proposals seek to access 
content on audiovisual works that are not motion pictures, such as video games.  Notably, 
many of the proposals seek to circumvent access controls to obtain motion picture clips 
for broader purposes than covered by previous exemptions, such as use of more than 
“short portions” of motion picture excerpts, or use for all “fair uses” rather than for 
purposes of criticism or comment.  Other proposals were focused on expanding the 
category of potential users of an exemption, such as to fictional filmmakers or uses by 
museums, libraries and nonprofits, or students and faculty participating in MOOCs.  The 
specific proposals are described below. 
i. Proposed Class 1:  Colleges and Universities 
Joint Educators seek an exemption similar to ones that were adopted in the 2010 
and 2012 rulemakings.
143 The proposal diverges from the exemption adopted in 2012 in 
a few respects, however.  First, the petition requests that any exemption include the 
circumvention of AACS-protected Blu-ray discs, a proposal that the Register declined to 
recommend in 2012.144 Joint Educators maintain that in the past three years, user 
expectations for video delivery technology have advanced and high-definition (“HD”) 
images, such as those provided by Blu-ray discs, have become standard.
145 Second, the 
petition seeks an exemption for uses for “educational purposes,” as opposed to the more 
limited language of the 2012 exemption for uses “in film studies or other courses 
requiring close analysis of film and media excerpts.” This is a variant upon Joint 
Educators’ request in 2012, when, based upon the record, the Register declined to 
recommend that the exemption apply to “students across all disciplines of study.”146 
Third, the petition is not limited to uses of “short portions” of audiovisual material, a 
limitation the Register found critical in 2012.147 Finally, the petition defines the class of 
works as “audiovisual works,” a proposal that the Register declined to recommend in 
2012 based on the record—which was focused on motion picture uses—instead limiting 
her recommendation to “motion pictures.”148 
142 Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 4, App. J at 4 (Letter from Alex Podobas).
 
143 2012 Final Rule, 77 Fed. Reg. at 65,278-79; 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,839.
 
144 2012 Recommendation at 135.
 
145 Joint Educators Class 1 Supp. at 13-15. (In supporting comments, the petitioning Joint Educators were
 
joined by Michael X. Delli Carpini, Professor and Dean, Annenberg School for Communication, American 
Association of University Professors, and LCA.)
 
146 2012 Recommendation at 138-39.
 
147 Id. at 138.
 
148 Id. at 125-26.
 
30
 

[PAGE 35]
     
    
   
    
 
     
 
   
 
    
 
  
   
    
 
   
  
   
   
   
     
  
 
  
        
     
   
         
                
               
              
              
               
             
               
             
 
         
       
    
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
ii. Proposed Class 2:  Primary and Secondary Schools (K-12) 
The proposals for an exemption to facilitate educational uses of motion picture 
excerpts at the kindergarten through twelfth-grade levels diverge from the exemption 
adopted in 2012 in a few respects.149 First, proponents request that the exemption extend 
to student uses for each of the requested technologies, whereas the 2012 exemption was 
limited to student use of screen-capture technologies.150 Second, Hobbs’ proposal seeks 
an exemption for uses for “educational purposes,” as opposed to for uses “in film studies 
or other courses requiring close analysis of film and media excerpts.”151 Third, as in 
Proposed Class 1, proponents request that any exemption include the circumvention of 
AACS-protected Blu-ray discs, which the Register declined to recommend in 2012.
152 
Fourth, the Hobbs proposal as written could encompass more than “motion pictures” 
since the language used is “audiovisual works.”
153 For its part, LCA suggests that the 
wording of the current exemption should be simplified for the benefit of its users.154 
iii. Proposed Class 3:  Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) 
Joint Educators’ petition requests that any exemption for college and university 
faculty and staff include those participating in MOOCs, or online distance education 
courses offered on a broad scale, which have gained popularity since the last triennial 
rulemaking.155 According to the petition, “MOOCs typically consist of pre-recorded 
lectures that may be illustrated, as appropriate, with short clips and still images from 
audiovisual works.”
156 In its NPRM, the Office encouraged commenters to address how 
the Office might define “MOOC” for the purpose of the proposed exemption, “including 
but not limited to (a) courses offered with free and open content versus courses that 
require course materials to be licensed by users, (b) courses requiring registration and/or 
identity verification versus courses without such requirements, (c) courses offered for 
149 See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(4)-(7); 2012 Final Rule, 77 Fed. Reg. at 65,266-70. 
150 2012 Recommendation at 140-42. 
151 See id. at 138-42. 
152 Hobbs Pet. at 2; 2012 Recommendation at 135. 
153 The Copyright Act defines audiovisual works as “works that consist of a series of related images which 
are intrinsically intended to be shown by the use of machines or devices such as projectors, viewers, or 
electronic equipment, together with accompanying sounds, if any, regardless of the nature of the material 
objects, such as films or tapes, in which the works are embodied.” 17 U.S.C. § 101. “Motion pictures ” are 
defined in the Copyright Act as “audiovisual works consisting of a series of related images which, when 
shown in succession, impart an impression of motion, together with accompanying sounds, if any.” Id. 
Under the Copyright Act, then, the category of audiovisual works is broader than motion pictures, but the 
term “motion pictures” includes non-feature film material such as television shows, commercials, and 
videos. 
154 LCA Motion Picture Excerpts Pet. at 1. 
155 Joint Educators Pet. at 1. 
156 Id. at 4. 
31
 

[PAGE 36]
     
    
 
  
  
 
 
   
   
  
 
   
   
     
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
   
  
 
      
     
       
     
      
       
     
 
 
                                                 
	 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
free versus paid courses, and (d) whether the provider is a nonprofit or for-profit 
entity.”157 
In addition to expanding the group of potential users of this exemption to 
participants in MOOCs, the proposal seeks the same expansions from the 2012 
Recommendation as Class 1—namely, to include the ability to circumvent Blu- ray discs, 
to remove the limitation to “short portions” of motion picture excerpts, and to broaden 
the class to cover all “audiovisual works” for all “educational purposes.” 
iv.	 Proposed Class 4:  Educational Programs Operated by 
Museums, Libraries or Nonprofits 
The Hobbs petition for Proposed Class 4 requests an exemption to apply to 
“educators and learners in libraries, museum and nonprofit organizations.”158 This is the 
first time an exemption covering such persons has been requested.  According to Hobbs, 
there are over 123,000 libraries and 3000 public, educational, and government media 
access centers in the United States.
159 The petition states that “[s]ome of the most 
important and innovative work in media literacy education is occurring in libraries, 
museums and afterschool programming, supported by non-profit organizations and 
charitable foundations.”160 
Efforts were made during the rulemaking to ensure this proposal was adequately 
defined.  In its NPRM, the Office encouraged commenters to address, among other 
issues, who should be included in the proposed categories of “educators” and “learners,” 
whether the exemption should treat prepared presentations by museums, libraries and 
nonprofits differently than hands-on learning projects, and whether the exemption should 
be limited to use and display within physical spaces as opposed to online uses.
161 In 
reply comments, Professor Hobbs submitted that if necessary, an exemption could be 
limited to “digital and media literacy instructional practices in informal learning 
contexts.”
162 At the public hearing, Professor Hobbs further indicated that any exemption 
could properly exclude “exhibition” uses by museums and other institutions.163 
In addition to expanding the group of potential users that might benefit from such 
an exemption, the proposal seeks the same expansions from the 2012 Recommendation 
as the Hobbs proposal for Class 2—namely, an exemption for “audiovisual works” as 
opposed to “motion pictures,” and for “educational uses,” as opposed to studies requiring 
157 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,861.
 
158 Hobbs Pet. at 1.
 
159 Hobbs Class 4 Reply at 2.
 
160 Hobbs Pet. at 2.
 
161 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,861.
 
162 Hobbs Class 4 Reply at 8.
 
163 Tr. at 237:09-16 (May 27, 2015) (Hobbs).
 
32
 

[PAGE 37]
     
    
 
 
  
  
     
    
  
  
    
   
  
   
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
    
 
  
    
 
  
   
   
  
      
   
      
   
          
      
      
    
      
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
close analysis of film and media excerpts, as well as the ability to circumvent Blu-ray 
discs. 
v. Proposed Class 5:  Multimedia E-Books 
Authors Alliance generally seeks renewal of a previously granted exemption 
permitting circumvention of TPMs for purposes of facilitating uses of motion picture 
excerpts in nonfiction multimedia e-books offering film analysis.164 The petition requests 
a few modifications to the previously granted exemption.  First, the petition requests that 
any exemption include the circumvention of AACS-protected Blu-ray discs, a proposal 
that the Register declined to recommend in 2012.
165 Second, the petition seeks an 
exemption in order to “make fair use of motion picture content” in any genre of 
multimedia e-book, as opposed to the more limited language of the 2012 exemption for 
uses “in nonfiction multimedia e-books offering film analysis.”
166 Third, the petition is 
not limited to uses of “short portions” of audiovisual material, a limitation the Register 
found critical in 2012.
167 Finally, although the initial proposal was limited to “motion 
pictures” at the public hearing, Authors Alliance suggested that video game excerpts 
should be included within this exemption.
168 
vi. Proposed Class 6:  Filmmaking Uses 
Joint Filmmakers seek adoption of a revised version of the previously granted 
exemption to permit circumvention of TPMs on DVDs, Blu-ray discs, and videos 
acquired via online distribution services, for purposes of facilitating uses of motion 
picture excerpts in documentary films.
169 Prior rulemakings have granted exemptions for 
documentary filmmaking, limited to uses of short clips, and did not extend to Blu-ray 
discs.170 In limiting her Recommendation in 2012 to uses in documentary, as opposed to 
narrative (or fictional) filmmaking, the Register noted that the record in that rulemaking 
proceeding did “not allow the Register to reach a satisfying determination as to the nature 
of the fictional filmmakers’ proposed uses, the amount of the underlying works fictional 
filmmakers generally seek to use, or whether or how such uses might affect the market 
for the original works.”
171 In this proceeding, proponents again seek a broader 
exemption that would cover all types of films, including narrative (or fictional) films.172 
According to Joint Filmmakers, “makers of narrative films with fictional content rely on 
164 Authors Alliance Pet. at 2.
 
165 2012 Recommendation at 135.
 
166 Authors Alliance Pet. at 2.
 
167 2012 Recommendation at 138.
 
168 Tr. at 51:12-53:15 (May 28, 2015) (Lerner, Authors Alliance/Buster).
 
169 Joint Filmmakers Pet. at 1.
 
170 See, e.g., 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(4)-(7); 2012 Recommendation at 138-142.
 
171 2012 Recommendation at 130.
 
172 Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 2.
 
33
 

[PAGE 38]
     
    
  
  
   
 
    
  
 
   
 
  
     
  
  
    
   
 
  
   
   
  
    
   
     
   
  
    
                
           
      
            
        
   
    
             
             
           
          
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
fair use and the DMCA is causing harm to that use; the exemption must be modified to 
account for all filmmakers.”173 
vii. Proposed Class 7:  Noncommercial Videos 
According to EFF/OTW, the past few years have seen an explosion of 
noncommercial videos, including “remix” videos, because of easy-to-use and inexpensive 
or free video editing tools and hosting services.174 EFF/OTW characterize these videos 
as  “original, primarily noncommercial videos that include clips taken from works 
released on DVD and Blu-ray [or from authorized online distribution sources].”175 
EFF/OTW claim that 2.6% of U.S. internet users have created remix videos, and 
“between 2,000 and 6,000 original fair use videos that include clips from DRM-protected 
film or television sources are likely being uploaded to YouTube each day.”176 EFF/OTW 
ask for a renewal of the existing exemption, which covers “noncommercial videos,” and, 
as discussed below, resist opponents’ suggestion to narrow the proposed exemption to 
“remix videos” specifically.177 The record reflects that some purportedly noncommercial 
videos submitted in this category—for example, the Take It Away video commenting 
upon the Washington Redskins’ logo discussed below—might not constitute what are 
commonly understood as remixes. 
The current proposal represents an expansion upon the 2012 rulemaking.  First, 
the petition requests that any exemption include the circumvention of AACS-protected 
Blu-ray discs, a proposal that the Register declined to recommend in 2012.
178 Second, 
EFF/OTW oppose limiting the exemption to uses “for purposes of criticism, comment, or 
education,” instead of simply “noninfringing” or “fair” uses.179 EFF/OTW additionally 
request that the recommendation include interpretative guidance in relation to phrases 
like “short clips,” “motion pictures,” or “primarily noncommercial,” but does not oppose 
maintaining such language, used in 2012, in a new exemption.180 
173 Id. 
174 EFF/OTW Supp. at 3. 
175 EFF/OTW Disc Remix Pet. at 2; EFF/OTW Online Remix Pet. at 3; see also EFF/OTW Online Remix
 
Pet. at 2 (defining “fanworks” as “new, noncommercial creative works based on existing media”).
 
176 EFF/OTW Supp. at 3 (emphasis in original).
 
177 See EFF/OTW Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. (very narrow exemptions may lack clarity and exclude 
protected uses); Band/Butler/Decherney Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp.
 
178 2012 Recommendation at 135.
 
179 EFF/OTW Supp. at 22.
 
180 See id. at 22-24; Tr. at 309:22-311:12 (May 28, 2015) (McSherry, EFF; Tushnet, OTW; Charlesworth,
 
USCO; Smith, USCO). For example, EFF/OTW recommended that any regulation make clear to
 
“laypeople that ‘motion pictures’ includes television and streaming video,” but did not seek to expand the
 
previously granted exemption to all “audiovisual works.” EFF/OTW Supp. at 22.
 
34
 

[PAGE 39]
     
    
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
   
    
 
  
 
    
 
   
  
 
  
 
    
 
  
   
 
    
  
 
  
    
        
  
    
    
    
            
             
         
    
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
b. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
i. Proposed Class 1:  Colleges and Universities 
Joint Educators claim that the proposed uses of motion picture excerpts by college 
and university educators and students are non-infringing as analyzed under the four 
statutory fair use factors.181 According to Joint Educators:  (1) the first factor favors the 
requested exemption because the proposed class is strictly educational and the 
repurposing of audiovisual works for criticism or commentary is transformative; (2) the 
second factor, the nature of the underlying copyrighted work, is of limited use since the 
requested exemption would apply to a range of works ranging from fictional to factual, 
but all uses are likely to be transformative; (3) the third factor favors the requested 
exemption because the amount taken is limited to excerpts incorporated directly into 
lectures or presentations; and (4) the fourth factor favors the requested exemption 
because educational uses are not a market substitute for the underlying work but could 
spur libraries to purchase additional copyrighted works.
182 Because teaching, criticism, 
and comment are enumerated as favored uses under section 107 and because the 
proposed uses are alleged to be transformative, Joint Educators argue that users are 
highly likely to be engaging in fair use.183 
Joint Educators contend that the noninfringing nature of these uses extends across 
disciplines, and the record demonstrates that the existing exemption was used in courses 
spanning art, biology, communication, English, film, foreign language and literature, law 
and music studies.
184 In support of this position, for example, law professor Jeremy Sheff 
documented his use of embedded, high-quality clips obtained from a circumvented DVD 
as a teaching tool in his property law courses.185 
ii. Proposed Class 2:  Primary and Secondary Schools (K-12) 
The proponents assert that the proposed uses of works in pre-college settings, 
including uses requiring access to high-resolution excerpts, are lawful fair uses under 
section 107.  First, the proposed uses are for nonprofit educational purposes.  Hobbs 
submitted multiple examples of educators using film clips as teaching tools in connection 
with media literacy, history, literature, and film theory,186 and of students using excerpts 
in connection with National History Day187 and digital remix projects.188 Hobbs also 
181 Joint Educators Class 1 Supp. at 4-6. 
182 Id. 
183 Id. at 4-5.
 
184 Id. at 7.
 
185 Sheff Supp. at 1.
 
186 Hobbs Class 2 Supp. at 4-5 (discussing comparison of the film Chicago with the book The Great
 
Gatsby, analysis of Shakespearean works, study of usage of tones in video journalism, study of Citizen
 
Kane, and study of film theory in high school English classes).
 
187 Id. at 3-4.
 
35
 

[PAGE 40]
     
    
  
   
  
  
    
  
   
   
 
   
  
  
      
  
  
   
 
 
   
 
 
  
   
       
     
               
         
              
               
             
      
      
     
                
            
              
 
           
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
asserts that students often create “transformative content using motion picture 
excerpts.”189 
Second, Hobbs argues that the nature of the copyrighted work varies depending 
upon material, but may be creative and expressive.  Third, Hobbs contends it is 
inappropriate to limit an exemption to “short” or “brief” excerpts of works, and that use 
of long excerpts can also be a fair use.190 Other proponents, however, accept the 
limitation in the existing exemption to uses of “short clips” and argue that, based on that 
limitation, the third fair use factor weighs in favor of fair use.191 Finally, as to the fourth 
factor, Hobbs asserts that the uses are transformative and that an exemption would have 
no effect on the market for copyrighted works.192 
iii. Proposed Class 3:  Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) 
Essentially, Joint Educators argue that students and faculty participating in online 
distance learning are encumbered by the same restrictions that would hinder traditional 
educational contexts if not for the current exemption.193 Joint Educators explain that the 
prevalence of MOOCs has grown dramatically in the past three years, with up to 18 
million students participating in over 2,400 courses in 2014.
194 According to them, 
“[m]ost MOOCs are taught by the same college and university professors that teach those 
courses at [traditional] institutions across the country.”
195 Joint Educators explain, 
however, that not all MOOCs require registration, courses may be made available without 
charge, and two of the four most popular platforms for MOOCs—Coursera and 
Udacity—ar e for-profit entities.196 
In claiming that the courses available from MOOCs are the “online equivalent of 
core traditional educational uses,” Joint Educators argue that the proposed uses are 
substantially likely to be fair uses under section 107 for the same reasons as uses in a 
traditional classroom.
197 Considering the first factor, they assert that the purpose and 
188 Id. at 3; Hobbs Class 2 Reply at 4.
 
189 Hobbs Class 2 Supp. at 3.
 
190 Hobbs Class 2 Reply at 5 (citing Cambridge Univ. Press v. Patton, 769 F.3d 1232 (11th Cir. 2014)).
 
191 MLA Class 2 Supp. at 1; FSF Class 2 Supp. at 1.
 
192 Hobbs Class 2 Supp. at 3, 9; Hobbs Class 2 Reply at 8-9.
 
193 Joint Educators Class 3 Supp. at 2. (In supporting comments, the petitioning Joint Educators were
 
joined by Michael X. Delli Carpini, Professor and Dean, Annenberg School for Communication, American
 
Association of University Professors, and the LCA.)
 
194 Id. at 2-3.
 
195 Id. at 21.
 
196 Id. at 5-6; Tr. at 105:14-17 (May 27, 2015) (Butler, Joint Educators). Some MOOCs charge for
 
completion certificates. Tr. at 106:19-107:03 (May 27, 2015) (Decherney, Joint Educators). The leading 
non-profit platforms are Coursera, edX, the Khan Academy, and Udacity. Joint Educators Class 3 Supp. at
 
6.
 
197 Joint Educators Class 3 Supp. at 8, 13-15.
 
36
 

[PAGE 41]
     
    
   
 
    
   
    
 
  
  
   
 
  
     
 
    
    
  
 
  
   
   
 
    
   
  
    
  
  
 
      
     
        
     
            
      
                  
   
           
        
      
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
character of the use is a favored educational use.  According to Joint Educators, the “vast 
majority” of MOOCs are taught by college and university professors, and the leading 
providers are “either partnered with or owned by colleges or universities.”198 As 
examples, Joint Educators reference a series of courses on China’s past, present, and 
future titled ChinaX offered by Harvard that could make use of motion picture clips to 
“highlight the beauty of the country and provide enrolled students with a sense of its 
culture,” as well as an upcoming course titled The Hollywood Film Industry planned by 
Professor Decherney of University of Pennsylvania, which is modeled after his face-to­
face lectures in cinema studies.199 
Joint Educators also point out that for-profit uses are not necessarily precluded 
from being fair uses, noting that the Supreme Court has stated “nearly all of the 
illustrative uses listed in the preamble paragraph of § 107, including news reporting, 
comment, criticism, teaching, scholarship, and research . . . are generally conducted for 
profit in this country,” and that the House Report on the 1976 Copyright Act explicitly 
warned against incorporating a not-for-profit limitation into the definition of educational 
uses of copyrighted works.
200 The record, however, does not appear to contain examples 
of proposed uses in connection with MOOCs operated on a for-profit basis.  Instead, the 
examples in the record are all of courses offered by a nonprofit accredited educational 
institution (e.g., University of Pennsylvania or Harvard University) that are accessible 
from a platform (e.g., edX or Coursera) that may or may not be a for-profit company.201 
As with other proposed educational uses, Joint Educators note that the second fair 
use factor, the nature of the copyrighted works, will vary, though based on the examples 
they provide, it can be assumed that the uses will include creative and expressive works. 
As for the third factor, because MOOC video lectures are typically only seven to ten 
minutes long, Joint Educators assert that the amount of the copyrighted works used would 
be limited to brief material essential for the pedagogical purpose.
202 Finally, as to the 
fourth factor, Joint Educators claim that the transformative nature of the uses eliminates 
any risk of market harm.
203 
Joint Educators also addressed the NPRM’s query whether section 110(2) of the 
Copyright Act (often referred to as the “TEACH Act”) might impact this proposed 
class.204 Enacted in 2002, the TEACH Act provides an exception in copyright law for 
198 Joint Educators Class 3 Reply at 9.
 
199 Joint Educators Class 3 Supp. at 12-13.
 
200 Joint Educators Class 3 Reply at 6-7 (quoting Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 584
 
(1994) and H.R. REP. NO. 94-1476, at 66 (1976)). 
201 The record indicates that edX is operated on a nonprofit basis and its competitor Coursera is operated on
 
a for-profit basis.
 
202 Joint Educators Class 3 Supp. at 9, 15.
 
203 Joint Educators Class 3 Reply at 7-8.
 
204 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,861.
 
37
 

[PAGE 42]
     
    
     
     
   
  
      
  
  
   
  
   
     
 
 
     
   
   
       
  
 
  
   
    
             
     
     
  
  
  
  
          
                 
        
                
          
           
            
             
              
   
                
 
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
certain uses of copyrighted works by nonprofit educators in distance education.205 The 
Act outlines a number of requirements in order to make use of this section, many of 
which are potentially relevant to the proposed class.  First, the transmitter of the 
copyrighted works must be “a governmental body or an accredited nonprofit educational 
institution.”206 Second, the use must be made at the direction of an instructor teaching a 
class session as “a regular part of the systematic mediated instructional activities” and in 
an amount “comparable to that which is typically displayed in the course of a live 
classroom session.”207 Third, the reception of the transmission must be limited, to the 
extent feasible, to students officially enrolled in the course.208 Fourth, the transmitting 
educational institution must institute policies and provide notice regarding copyright 
protection to students, faculty, and relevant staff members.209 Finally, the transmitting 
body must apply technological measures that limit the retention and unauthorized further 
dissemination of the work in accessible form.210 
Joint Educators assert that they do not find the TEACH Act to be especially useful 
to their petition or analysis.211 They note that Congress recognized a value in allowing 
“reasonable and limited portions” of audiovisual works for distance learning, and rely on 
this fact to suggest that the proposed uses are “favored” in copyright law.
212 But they 
also suggest that many MOOC offerings would be prohibited from qualifying under 
section 110(2) by the requirements that the uses be made in connection with a “class 
session” for enrolled students, and as part of “systemic mediated instructional activities” 
offered by “an accredited, non-profit institution.”
213 Because the meanings of these terms 
are relatively untested by the courts, Joint Educators suggest that they may discourage 
potential users.214 Further, Joint Educators claim that section 110(2)’s requirement that 
205 17 U.S.C. § 110(2); see also U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, REPORT ON COPYRIGHT AND DIGITAL DISTANCE 
EDUCATION (1999), available at http://www.copyright.gov/reports/de_rprt.pdf. 
206 17 U.S.C. § 110(2). 
207 Id. 
208 Id. 
209 Id. 
210 Id. 
211 Joint Educators Class 3 Supp. at 16. 
212 Joint Educators Class 3 Reply at 5; Tr. at 101:09-12 (May 27, 2015) (Band, LCA) (noting that “it would 
be helpful to use [110(2)] as a starting point”). 
213 Joint Educators Class 3 Supp. at 16; see also Tr. at 112:06-114:06 (May 27, 2015) (Decherney, Joint 
Educators; Charlesworth, USCO) (discussing proponents’ view that MOOCs offered by University of 
Pennsylvania would not qualify under section 110(2) because, although they are password-protected and 
limited to registered users, the videos are not encrypted and the MOOC may be “closer to the next 
generation of textbook” than a lecture); Band/Butler/Decherney Class 3 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2-4 (stating 
that half of Coursera’s video traffic is via download in developing countries, and one-third of its traffic is 
via download in developed countries). 
214 See Band/Butler/Decherney Class 3 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1, 4; Tr. at 101:14-17 (May 27, 2015) (Band, 
LCA). 
38
 

[PAGE 43]
     
    
  
 
   
   
  
    
 
   
   
   
  
   
  
  
   
  
   
 
  
  
   
 
  
    
   
 
   
        
       
     
                
  
       
     
   
           
     
 
 
                                                 
	 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
online courses implement TPMs would be “an unwelcome and unnatural fit” for 
providers of popular MOOC platforms such as Coursera, EdX, FutureLearn, and the 
Canvas Network.215 
iv.	 Proposed Class 4:  Educational Programs Operated by 
Museums, Libraries or Nonprofits 
Proponent Hobbs argues that uses of motion picture excerpts in digital and media 
literacy programs offered by museums, libraries and nonprofits are “highly likely to be 
fair uses” because these “innovative educational practices” allow users to critically 
analyze and create media.
216 Hobbs states that “teachers and learners in informal settings 
need to use film clips for a wide range of teaching and learning purposes characterized 
broadly as educational use.”217 Hobbs provides examples of student-created video poetry 
essays in connection with a GED-conferring program, and an adult education program 
analyzing the portrayal of African-American women in the television series Orange is the 
New Black.218 Hobbs also references various after-school programs, but does not specify 
how these programs seek to use motion picture excerpts obtained by circumventing 
TPMs.  Hobbs urges the Register to treat learning in these “informal” settings as on par 
with exemptions for K-12 teachers, or university students in media studies classes, 
arguing that to distinguish among these settings would perpetuate educational 
inequities.
219 
Although the record is rather sparse regarding the specifics of the proposed uses, 
Hobbs contends generally that these types of uses are likely to be fair under the statutory 
factors.  First, Hobbs asserts that these uses qualify as fair uses because their purpose is to 
facilitate criticism, comment, learning, and teaching.
220 Second, Hobbs claims that the 
nature of the work, including “entertainment, informational, and other forms of 
contemporary and classic film and video content” is relevant to learners today, though she 
does not explain how the second factor favors an exemption.221 Third, Hobbs suggests a 
specific numerical time limit for “short” or “brief” clips is not required by the law.222 
Fourth, Hobbs states that the proposed uses would not impair the market for the 
underlying copyrighted works.223 
215 Band/Butler/Decherney Class 3 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2.
 
216 Hobbs Class 4 Reply at 3-4.
 
217 Hobbs Class 4 Supp. at 3.
 
218 See id.at 4; Hobbs Class 4 Reply at 4, 8; Tr. at 231:09-232:08, 234:11-235:25, 258:14-259:08 (May 27,
 
2015) (Hobbs).
 
219 Hobbs Class 4 Reply at 4.
 
220 Hobbs Class 4 Supp. at 4-5.
 
221 Id.at 4.
 
222 Hobbs Class 4 Reply at 6 (citing Cambridge, 769 F.3d 1232).
 
223 Hobbs Class 4 Supp. at 4-5.
 
39
 

[PAGE 44]
     
    
  
      
   
     
  
    
  
  
   
 
   
    
 
   
 
    
   
  
  
 
  
 
   
               
                     
                  
                 
             
            
              
           
             
            
        
   
                   
            
         
      
                
           
 
 
                                                 
 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
v. Proposed Class 5:  Multimedia E-Books 
Authors Alliance argues that the use of excerpts of motion picture clips in 
multimedia e-books, especially ones intended for educational purposes, presents “a strong 
case for fair use.”224 Proponents do not offer a full analysis of their proposed uses under 
the four fair use factors.  They do, however, describe numerous examples of actual or 
prospective uses of motion picture excerpts in multimedia e-books for purposes of film 
criticism or analysis.
225 For example, proponent Berger is an Academy-Award winning 
sound editor who wishes to make an e-book entitled Listening to Movies that includes 
film clips to analyze how sound relates to a film’s moving images.226 Similarly, 
proponent Buster, a professor in cinema studies, plans to publish an e-book series entitled 
Deconstructing Master Filmmakers that would incorporate and analyze short excerpts 
from feature films.227 Authors Alliance also briefly addresses the third factor, amount 
and substantiality of the use, asserting that the amount necessary to qualify as a fair use 
would likely differ based on the use and platform.
228 The proponents of this class 
nonetheless admit that as a practical matter, file-size limitations for e-books will dictate 
that only brief excerpts be used.229 Finally, proponents also cite the Register’s previous 
determination that uses of short clips from motion pictures in multimedia e-books can 
constitute a noninfringing fair use.230 
vi. Proposed Class 6:  Filmmaking Uses 
Joint Filmmakers argue that the proposed uses in both documentary and narrative 
films are noninfringing fair uses because filmmakers “contribute substantially to society 
by providing criticism and commentary, educating, and reporting on the news and current 
events—activities that Congress has explicitly identified as fair uses.”
231 But Joint 
224 Authors Alliance Supp. at 7. For example, Jack Lerner, representing Authors Alliance and Buster, 
asserted that taking even a “huge portion of a film” would very likely be “a slam-dunk fair use” if it were 
analyzed clip by clip in the context of film studies. Tr. at 31:23-32:07 (May 28, 2015) (Lerner, Authors 
Alliance/Buster). Commenter FSF also submitted a short comment alleging that the use of clips and still 
images in multimedia e-books is a fair use. FSF Class 5 Supp. at 1. 
225 Authors Alliance Supp. at 8, 11-13; id. at Apps. B-C (describing planned e-books by filmmaker Jilian 
Spitzmiller, copyright scholar Pamela Samuelson, as well as a volume entitled Listening to Movies by 
sound editor Mark Berger, and a four-part series called Deconstructing Masters of Cinema by professor 
Bobette Buster); see also Authors Alliance Reply at 12 (noting that “multimedia e-book authors only seek 
to make fair use in the form of criticism, commentary, and education”). 
226 Authors Alliance Supp. at 11, App. C. 
227 Id.at App. B. 
228 Authors Alliance Reply at 11-12 (stating that “what may in practice be considered short in length for a 
documentary film may not qualify as short for a multimedia e-book”). 
229 See, e.g., Tr. at 33:03-07 (May 28, 2015) (Buster). 
230 Authors Alliance Supp. at 7, 9. 
231 Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 5; see also NMR Class 6 Supp. at 12 (noting that documentary filmmakers 
“analyze current events, discuss history, and comment on and criticize popular culture” and use 
40
 

[PAGE 45]
     
    
  
   
      
  
   
   
   
 
   
   
  
  
 
    
  
              
      
                 
             
           
   
        
          
        
               
            
              
    
                  
                
             
            
                  
                
     
      
             
           
           
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Filmmakers do not explicitly analyze the proposed uses under the four fair use factors. 
NMR, however, implicitly suggests that the first and fourth factors favor an exemption 
when it asserts that the filmmaking uses at issue are transformative because they “add to 
the original work with a new message.”232 NMR describes numerous examples of actual 
or prospective uses of motion picture excerpts in documentary films for purposes of film 
criticism or analysis.
233 Filmmaker Gordon Quinn also briefly mentions that uses of 
video games in films could qualify as noninfringing fair uses.234 
Proponents also assert that there is no clear dividing line between documentary 
and narrative filmmaking for purposes of determining whether the uses are likely to be 
fair and that the categories should therefore be treated the same with respect to the 
question of noninfringing use.
235 Joint Filmmakers assert that narrative (i.e., fictional) 
filmmakers may also “conduct criticism and commentary, using techniques such as 
parody, reference, and pastiche,”236 and purport to provide examples of such uses in 
narrative films.237 More specifically, Joint Filmmakers submitted a chart entitled “Fair 
Use in Scripted Films” which lists more than 30 narrative films that they assert 
successfully relied upon fair use in lieu of obtaining permissions for use of copyrighted 
works in connection with rights clearance processes or litigation since the 2012 
rulemaking.
238 These films were further classified by type, with the overwhelming 
majority categorized as “Based on a True Story” or “biopics.”239 A few were 
“copyrighted motion picture material in ways that are excused under fair use”); FSF Class 6 Supp. at 1 
(requesting exemption for “filmmaking purposes that do not infringe copyright”). 
232 NMR Class 6 Supp. at 14. NMR also contends that “documentary films represent uses that Title 17, 
Section 107 of the United States Code mandates are protected under fair use.” Id.
 
233 Id. (describing Valentino’ s Ghost, which used excerpts of Hollywood films to provide commentary on 
“Hollywood filmmakers’ bigotry and Islamophobia”).
 
234 Tr. at 109:14-110:13 (May 20, 2015) (Quinn, Kartemquin Educational Films) (describing aborted
 
documentary project that proposed to use high-resolution footage from video games “to talk about their
 
sexism, their violence, other aspects of video games”).
 
235 See NMR Class 6 Supp. at 13 (asserting that “[m]any filmmakers create fictional and nonfictional films
 
that are highly transformative and thus fall under fair use”); NMR Post-Hearing Resp.; Joint Filmmakers
 
Post-Hearing Resp.; see also Tr. at 27:15-24 (May 20, 2015) (Perez, Joint Filmmakers); Tr. at 53:21-22
 
(May 20, 2015) (Neill, NMR).
 
236 Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 5; Joint Filmmakers Reply at 3-6 (noting that narrative filmmaking “is a rich
 
and diverse art form that encompasses much more than mere entertainment” and “at its best . . . offers the 
same thought-provoking insights into and criticisms of the world as the most critically acclaimed
 
literature”); see also Tr. at 29:12-20 (May 20, 2015) (Perez, Joint Filmmakers).
 
237 See, e.g., Joint Filmmakers Supp. at App. D (Letter from Kenn Rabin), App. F (Letter from Michael
 
Mailer); id. at App. G (Letter from Pablo Cruz) (describing the narrative film Cesar Chavez and use of
 
footage of actual historical events).
 
238 Id.at App. C at Chart 2. 
239 While the commenters ultimately disagree about a precise definition of the term “biopic,” as discussed 
further below, Joint Filmmakers initially described biopics as “fact-based narratives [that] present 
information and commentary meant to educate and analyze real events.” Id.at 5. 
41
 

[PAGE 46]
     
    
  
   
    
   
  
   
 
   
 
  
  
 
  
 
   
  
     
     
  
     
               
           
             
     
    
                
               
 
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
characterized as films “inspired by” real events or what Joint Filmmakers classify as 
“totally fictional” films.240 
Joint Filmmakers also rely upon statements by the Register, the Librarian, and 
NTIA recognizing fair use in filmmaking, at least in certain contexts.241 Finally, NMR 
argues that compensation for films is not determinative in evaluating fair use because 
“[f]ilmmakers who receive compensation for their work still have important messages to 
communicate to the public and should be able to circumvent TPMs to communicate those 
messages.”242 
vii. Proposed Class 7:  Noncommercial Videos 
EFF/OTW assert that the fair use factors generally support a finding that using 
motion picture clips in remix videos is likely to be noninfringing.  Under the first fair use 
factor, EFF/OTW argue that the purposes and character of noncommercial videos are 
highly transformative, regardless of whether the videos are also entertaining, and offered 
scholarly analysis of remix videos characterizing the videos as transformative.
243 In 
particular, EFF/OTW provide evidence relating to the practices of “vidders,” a subcommunity of remixers who create fan videos that remix footage from television shows 
or films into montages set to new soundtracks, at times altering the footage to create 
various effects.244 EFF/OTW argue that vidders create works that criticize and 
recontextualize the underlying narrative works, or make prominent “something latent, 
hidden or potential in a moving image.”245 While some examples evidenced editing of 
the visual or audio files themselves, others “mashed up” video images from one source 
240 Id.at App. C at Charts 2-4. 
241 Id.at 5 (noting that NTIA stated that documentary filmmaking is a “paradigmatic fair use of copyrighted
 
works”); see also 2012 Recommendation at 126-30; 2012 Final Rule, 77 Fed. Reg. at 65,268.
 
242 NMR Class 6 Supp. at 17; see also FSF Class 6 Supp. at 1.
 
243 EFF/OTW Reply at 3-5.
 
244 EFF/OTW Supp. at 3-4.
 
245 Id. at 4-5; Tr. at 214:03-08 (May 28, 2015); see also EFF/OTW Reply at 3, App. A (explaining that
 
SupreMacy “re-tells the James Bond story with M, Bond’s female boss and sometime mentor, as the
 
protagonist”)
 
42
 

[PAGE 47]
     
    
  
    
 
   
    
    
  
   
    
 
  
   
 
  
 
   
               
           
         
    
        
                
      
     
                  
      
               
      
      
                   
               
              
 
    
         
              
               
               
      
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
with audio from another,246 or simply added subtitles over material from a single 
247source. 
While focused primarily on the first factor, EFF/OTW argue that the other factors 
also generally militate in favor of fair use.  They claim that the nature of the work weighs 
“neither for nor against fair use” since both the initial and remix works are likely creative. 
EFF/OTW contend that the use of short clips is “consistent” with the third factor, and 
regardless, that case law supports taking “substantial verbatim sections” or even an 
“entire work” if necessary for the artist’s purpose.
248 Fourth, they claim “the 
transformativeness of remix videos make[s] market harm unlikely.”249 EFF/OTW also 
point to past rulemakings, which found that a “significant number” of remix uses are 
likely to be fair because the uses are transformative, noncommercial, and take only short 
portions of the underlying copyrighted works.250 EFF/OTW argue that “even fully 
commercial works are regularly entitled to fair use protection,” and that remixers should 
not be penalized due to receipt of commissions, exhibition payments, or indirect 
participation in commerce, such as presentation of videos on advertising-supported sites 
such as YouTube.
251 
246 EFF/OTW Supp. at App. A at 1 (citing Randy Szuch, Avatar/Pocahontas Mashup, VIMEO (Feb. 11, 
2010), https://vimeo.com/9389738 (“Avatar/Pocahontas Mashup”)); see id. at App. A at 2 (citing Joe Sabia, 
The Rent is Too Damn UP, POLITICAL REMIX VIDEO (Oct. 19, 2010), http://www.politicalremixvideo.com 
/2010/10/19/the-rent-is-too-damn-high-up-remix, available at https://www.youtube.com/watch? 
v=ugLKGRmhVTM (“The Rent is Too Damn UP”)). Proponents also cite a Ferris Bueller remix which 
falls into a similar category. Id. at App. A at 1 (citing Rohan Ramakrishnan, The 10 Best Youtube Trailer 
Remixes Ever, SCREENCR AV E (Aug. 4, 2010), http://screencrave.com/2010-08-04/the-10-best-youtube­
trailer-remixes-ever (“Ferris Bueller Remix”)). 
247 See id. at App. A at 1, 2-3 (citing The Master, Top 10 Hitler Downfall Parodies of All Time, RANKER, 
http://www.ranker.com/list/top-10-hitler-downfall-parodies-of-all-time/the-master (last visited Oct. 7, 2015) 
(“The Master”) and St01en Collective, Lord of the Rings: Fellowship of the Ring of Free Trade, YOUTUBE 
(Nov. 24, 2006), http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vkmczhkrKY A, available at https://www.youtube.com/ 
watch?v=GNn54ctPwtQ (“St01en Collective’s Lord of the Rings”)). 
248 Id. at 6; EFF/OTW Reply at 5 (citing, e.g., Northland Family Planning Clinic, Inc. v. Ctr. for Bio-Ethical 
Reform, 868 F. Supp. 2d 962, 976 (C.D. Cal. 2012); Sony Corp. of Am. v. Universal City Studios, Inc., 464 
U.S. 417, 449-50 (1984); Bill Graham Archives v. Dorling Kindersley Ltd., 448 F.3d 605, 609 (2d Cir.
 
2006)).
 
249 EFF/OTW Supp. at 6.
 
250 Id. at 5-6 (citing 2010 Recommendation at 49-52 and 2012 Recommendation at 127-29).
 
251 EFF/OTW Reply at 6-7 (discussing works from the artist collective soda_jerk, the NCAI, the Center for 
Bio-Ethical Reform, and the Lear Center and citing Sony, 464 U.S. at 451; Princeton Univ. Press v. Mich.
 
Document Servs., Inc., 99 F.3d 1381, 1385-86 (6th Cir. 1996); Campbell, 510 U.S. at 584; L.A. News Serv.
 
v. Reuters Television Int’l, 149 F.3d 987, 994 (9th Cir. 1998)). 
43
 

[PAGE 48]
     
    
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
     
   
  
   
   
    
 
  
  
   
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
  
     
  
               
                
   
  
         
        
             
   
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
c. Asserted Adverse Effects 
i. Proposed Class 1:  Colleges and Universities 
Joint Educators claim that a prohibition on circumvention adversely affects 
noninfringing educational uses, and that the needs of college and university faculty and 
students have evolved such that access to higher definition material is necessary.  Joint 
Educators assert that access to Blu-ray clips is now required for cinema studies, providing 
as an example a lecture on the work of filmmaker Jacques Tati, whose style involves 
complex compositions contrasting foreground and background action that cannot be 
appreciated in standard definition (“SD”).
252 Proponent Professor Decherney similarly 
asserts that his current course on the history of Hollywood has a “palpable hole” due to 
the prohibition on circumvention of Blu-ray discs, explaining, for example, that highdefinition quality is necessary to see small details in the Wizard of Oz that make the film 
“really enjoyable and almost stage-like.”
253 Proponents refer to other films, such as 
Halloween or Citizen Kane, where high definition enables viewers to see additional 
narrative elements that further the plot, provide commentary, or enhance aesthetics.254 
Beyond Blu-ray, Joint Educators maintain as well that circumvention of DVDs continues 
to be required, as well as of streaming formats, since certain programming is solely 
available on streaming platforms.255 
While most examples in the record concern uses in connection with cinema 
studies or that would otherwise fall under the prior exemption covering “close analysis of 
film and media excerpts,” Joint Educators nonetheless argue that high-quality images are 
generally helpful to convey “feelings of presence” for educational uses more generally.256 
Joint Educators also discuss history students viewing the film Saving Private Ryan, 
asserting that it demonstrates the horror of war through use of “a process called bleach 
bypass, which leaves the silver on the film stock during processing,” resulting in “much 
crisper contrast and color” and through use of “hyper-real details and complex 
soundscapes” that allegedly would not be adequately captured by a more limited DVD 
format.
257 
Joint Educators also assert that professors will suffer from time constraints if they 
are not allowed to circumvent TPMs—because it will take them too lon g to queue up 
clips from alternative sources—and that the heightened viewing expectations of students 
252 Joint Educators Class 1 Supp. at 7; Joint Educators Class 1 Reply at 12. 
253 Joint Educators Class 1 Supp. at 16; Joint Educators Class 1 Reply at 8-12 (also discussing Halloween
 
and Citizen Kane).
 
254 Id.
 
255 Joint Educators Class 1 Supp. at 17.
 
256 Joint Educators Class 1 Reply at 13.
 
257 See id. at 15; see Tr. at 26:23-27:13 (May 27, 2015) (Band, LCA); Tr. at 29:20-30:05 (May 27, 2015)
 
(Decherney, Joint Educators). 
44
 

[PAGE 49]
     
    
    
    
    
 
  
   
 
  
     
 
  
   
  
 
  
 
    
     
 
 
   
 
 
     
   
 
        
        
  
                
            
        
        
        
        
        
     
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
demand high-resolution material to retain attention, convey additional information, and 
avoid sending the message that lower-quality images reflect less valuable content.258 
Joint Educators contend that these adverse effects, if not catastrophic, are also not de 
minimis.259 Responding to opposition comments, Joint Educators suggest that the 
Librarian is authorized to find that grounds of “convenience” or “quality” are sufficient 
adverse effects under section 1201.260 
As with prior 1201 rulemakings, Joint Educators dispute the viability of 
alternatives to circumvention, arguing that screen-capture technology is of poor quality, 
expensive, and offers limited interoperability.261 They also object that licensing 
requirements are unworkable and could inhibit academic freedom due to the inability to 
get permissions, as well as the cost and length of negotiations.262 Finally, Joint Educators 
argue that high-definition digital streaming or films downloaded from licensed sources 
are not adequate alternatives due to restrictions imposed by user agreements, limited 
libraries, internet connectivity issues, and logistical difficulties.
263 
Joint Educators also suggest that the exemption should encompass all audiovisual 
works, instead of being limited to motion pictures, and submit limited evidence 
suggesting that video games have become the subject of study in university settings.
264 
Joint Educators do not, however, provide specific evidence demonstrating that 
circumvention of TPMs is necessary to use video games as a pedagogical tool.  Similarly, 
while Joint Educators assert that there is no legal requirement that fair uses be limited to 
“short portions,” they do not provide examples where this limitation has prevented 
noninfringing use of a work.
265 
ii. Proposed Class 2:  Primary and Secondary Schools (K-12) 
Concerning uses of works in the pre-college setting, proponent Hobbs states that 
“educational uses that depend upon close analysis of film or media images are adversely 
impacted if students are unable to apprehend the subtle detail or emotional impact of the 
images they are analyzing.”266 Hobbs offers the example of a student group creating a 
hypothetical election campaign for the character Scooby Doo.  Unable to legally rip 
258 Joint Educators Class 1 Supp. at 12-16. 
259 Joint Educators Class 1 Reply at 8. 
260 Id. 
261 Joint Educators Class 1 Supp. at 18-19; Joint Educators Class 1 Reply at 16-17 (arguing screen-capture 
technology results in non-standard frames, dropped frames, and a lower quality visual and audio file); see 
also Joint Educators Class 1 Supp. at 20 (re DVD jukeboxes). 
262 Joint Educators Class 1 Supp. at 19. 
263 Joint Educators Class 1 Reply at 18-21. 
264 Joint Educators Class 1 Supp. at 10-11. 
265 Joint Educators Class 1 Reply at 4-5. 
266 Hobbs Class 2 Supp. at 2-3. 
45
 

[PAGE 50]
     
    
 
    
      
   
  
  
    
  
  
 
   
 
  
   
   
     
  
   
   
  
    
  
  
    
   
  
  
    
     
                   
        
             
        
  
        
        
                
        
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
DVDs, the students used low-resolution YouTube clips to create an imaginary TV spot.  
Hobbs argues that the poor image quality created a “diminished sense of pride” for the 
students.267 Hobbs further contends that the distinction between high school and college 
students is arbitrary for purposes of an exemption.268 
According to Professor Hobbs, “access to high quality images is needed in order 
for a lesson to accomplish its pedagogical goals,” and sometimes, “simply in order for the 
content to be usable.”269 The proponents of Class 2 also reject alternatives to 
circumvention as insufficient, arguing that clip libraries are limited, and that screencapture tools are expensive, unreliable, low quality, and do not provide tools such as 
closed captioning.
270 
iii. Proposed Class 3:  Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) 
Although MOOCs appear to be expanding in popularity, Joint Educators contend 
that the prohibition on circumvention of TPMs is inhibiting the introduction of certain 
types of courses.
271 Specifically, Professor Decherney testified that he has delayed 
introducing an online version of his The Hollywood Film Industry course until an 
exemption is in place.272 According to Joint Educators, while tens of thousands of 
MOOC courses have been offered, only four concern film studies, thus providing 
circumstantial evidence that the prohibition on circumvention of TPMs on audiovisual 
works is preventing instructors from making noninfringing uses of clips in online film 
courses.
273 Joint Educators also urge that because instructors are typically filmed in high 
definition and students watching an online course are “only a click away” from 
distraction, high-definition images are especially important for MOOC learning.274 
Professor Decherney stipulates that only “very short” portions of works will be 
used, explaining that MOOCs are generally 7 to 10 minutes long and that “[i]t turns out . . 
. the average time for people to tend to tune out was four minutes and thirty seconds.”
275 
Joint Educators contend that these time constraints make cueing up multiple clips 
impossible, and that it is unrealistic to ask students to navigate outside a lesson to view a 
video on YouTube and then return to the course.
276 Embedding linked content into 
267 Id. at 6.
 
268 Id.; Tr. at 208:16-23 (May 27, 2015) (Hobbs).
 
269 Hobbs Class 2 Reply at 6. Hobbs references, but does not provide, a study that allegedly found
 
improved student discussion when analyzing high-quality video compared to screen-captured content.
 
270 Hobbs Class 2 Supp. at 7; Hobbs Class 2 Reply at 6-7.
 
271 Joint Educators Class 3 Supp. at 17.
 
272 Id. 
273 Joint Educators Class 3 Reply at 10.
 
274 Joint Educators Class 3 Supp. at 11.
 
275 Tr. at 115:17-21 (May 27, 2015) (Decherney, Joint Educators); Joint Educators Class 3 Supp. at 9, 15.
 
276 Joint Educators Class 3 Supp. at 18.
 
46
 

[PAGE 51]
     
    
 
   
     
   
    
    
 
   
   
   
  
 
  
  
  
   
  
 
   
 
 
  
   
    
   
        
   
   
   
      
               
         
   
             
            
       
         
       
 
 
                                                 
	 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
presentations is also apparently unappealing due to imposition of advertisements by 
services like YouTube.277 According to Joint Educators, screen-capture technology 
degrades the video and audio quality of motion pictures, such that it becomes difficult to 
optimize MOOCs for the variety of devices necessary for successful delivery.278 Use of 
commercial streaming services such as Netflix was also rejected by proponents due to use 
limitations imposed by providers regardless of fair use rights.
279 Proponents further 
contend that such streaming services offer limited libraries that are curated for 
entertainment, not education, and that the rotating catalogs offered by these services are 
insufficiently reliable for professors who teach consistent classes across semesters.280 
iv.	 Proposed Class 4:  Educational Programs Operated by 
Museums, Libraries or Nonprofits 
In supporting Proposed Class 4, Professor Hobbs explains that educators and 
learners in digital learning or media literacy programs are unable to legally circumvent 
“copy-protected DVDs for informal learning in out-of-school contexts,” and lists 
organizations that are prohibited from accessing such works because “they primarily 
work in informal learning settings.”
281 For example, Hobbs discussed YESPHILLY , a 
nonprofit GED-conferring organization that could not circumvent TPMs to incorporate 
DVD clips in a poetry video project; Hobbs notes that, in contrast, film students at nearby 
universities who hypothetically engage in a similar project could benefit from the existing 
exemption.
282 
Hobbs argues that screen-captured copies are “inferior” to digitally copied clips, 
and suggests that screen-capture technology does not always work with streaming 
services.283 She also states that streaming media platforms such as Discovery Education, 
with annual fees up to $10,000, are cost prohibitive for many nonprofit educators and are 
of limited use without reliable high-speed internet access.
284 
277 Joint Educators Class 3 Reply at 19.
 
278 Id. at 14-16.
 
279 Id. at 14-17.
 
280 Id. at 18.
 
281 Hobbs Class 4 Supp. at 2, 4.
 
282 Hobbs Class 4 Reply at 5; see also Tr. at 259:08-25 (May 27, 2015) (Hobbs) (discussing a nonprofit 
organization that was barred engaging in a project to excerpt and comment on clips depicting misogynistic 
representations in contemporary culture). 
283 Hobbs Class 4 Reply at 5, 7-8 (asserting that “screencasting does not always work when using encrypted 
DVDs, Blu-Ray discs, Netflix, Amazon Prime, Roku, Hulu Plus, or other streaming services”); Tr. at 
171:04-06 (May 27, 2015) (Hobbs) (stating that “Screencast-O-Matic and Camtasia” screen capture 
programs were unable to capture “Wolf Hall” on PBS streaming). 
284 Hobbs Class 4 Reply at 7. 
47
 

[PAGE 52]
     
    
  
     
  
   
   
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
   
    
   
 
 
     
  
   
             
                    
                 
              
             
        
                  
             
          
              
            
                      
                  
         
 
                 
               
 
      
            
              
       
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
v. Proposed Class 5:  Multimedia E-Books 
In seeking an exemption for multimedia e-books, Authors Alliance argues that 
prohibiting circumvention of CSS encryption on DVDs would “severely hinder[] authors’ 
ability to criticize and comment on important protected material from DVDs,” which 
sometimes are the only source of material.285 Similarly, they contend that “a significant 
and increasing amount of motion picture material is available only through digitally 
transmitted video sources,” such as streaming or broadcast television.286 
Concerning Blu-ray, Authors Alliance argues that there is a “substantial and 
increasing amount of motion picture material . . . available exclusively on AACSprotected Blu-Ray.”287 Proponents claim that standard-definition files are not always 
suitable because they “cannot convey the [desired] detail, clarity, and content,” have 
unacceptable sound quality, are distracting to viewers, and can “degrade over time.”288 
Authors Alliance cites as an example law professor Pamela Samuelson’s study of the 
copyrightability of the James Bond character, asserting that high-quality source material 
is necessary to allow “students to take a fine-grained look at the development of James 
Bond’s character,” including his watch, his age, and his dress.
289 In addition, Authors 
Alliance argues that high definition “has become the prevailing standard for rendering 
video on modern e-reader devices,” and is “now the baseline of acceptable quality for 
multimedia e-books.”290 As evidence of that claim, proponents assert that Apple’s 
“quality control is very strict and . . . there’s a serious and reasonable fear that without 
HD content, Apple will reject quite a number of books” for its iBooks platform.291 
285 Authors Alliance Supp. at 11 (noting that “DVDs are still among the most common sources of motion 
picture material, and at times, the only source”). FSF also asserts that “[t]he application of the right to fair 
use. . . is impeded by access control restrictions which prevent the creators of Multimedia E-Books from 
taking clips and still images from other audiovisual works.” FSF Class 5 Supp. at 1. 
286 Authors Alliance Supp. at 14-15 (citing example of material unavailable on DVD). 
287 Id. at 12; see also id. at App. E. 
288 Authors Alliance Reply at 6; Authors Alliance Supp. at 13, App. C; see also Authors Alliance Supp. at 
App. B at 1 (providing the example of Professor Bobette Buster, who stated that the “consumer expects, 
even demands the highest affordable quality of viewing and listening experience” and that, with lower 
quality DVDs, she is forced to “describe fully what the class should be experiencing from the filmmaker’s 
original vision”); Tr. at 37:07-12 (May 28, 2015) (Buster) (asserting that “films have been mixed with 
either 5.1, 7.1, or, at most, surround sound. HD promises the right levels of mixture of that, and what I see 
with SD is that it’s sort of generically mixed and some levels are too high, some are too low”); Tr. at 17:09­
12, 25:17-19 (May 28, 2015) (Buster); Tr. at 76:04-77:01 (May 28, 2015) (Benmark, Authors 
Alliance/Buster). 
289 Authors Alliance Supp. at 12; see also id. at App. C (noting that “[a] major problem with lower-fidelity 
formats is that they utilize increasing degrees of compression,” which “sacrifices the video and audio 
quality”). 
290 Authors Alliance Reply at 6. 
291 Tr. at 106:17-20 (May 28, 2015) (Lerner, Authors Alliance/Buster); see also id. at 10:21-11:11 (Buster). 
iBooks Author is an app that allows people to create and publish e-books for Apple products. iBooks 
Author, APPLE, https://www.apple.com/ibooks-author (last visited Oct. 7, 2015). 
48
 

[PAGE 53]
     
    
    
   
      
  
   
   
   
 
  
  
 
   
    
    
 
 
    
 
   
 
                 
       
              
 
              
           
      
             
 
                  
              
               
      
              
           
                    
                 
      
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Proponents object to alternatives to circumvention as costly, impracticable, 
inferior, and unduly burdensome.292 Screen-capture software is described as “impossibly 
difficult for authors to operate”293 and of unacceptably low quality.294 Finally, it contends 
that “many authors” use Apple computers, which “will just flat block any screen-capture 
program from working with a TPM-protected or encrypted disk.”295 
Finally, Authors Alliance contends that licensing is “an unrealistic option” 
because nearly all major studio licenses charge “exorbitant fee[s]” and “bar[] licensees 
from casting the studio or the film in a negative light.” 296 In other cases, self-publishing 
authors “are often unable to find the rightsholder, receive permission, or create a legally 
binding agreement.”297 
vi. Proposed Class 6:  Filmmaking Uses 
Joint Filmmakers contend that the proposed exemption for filmmaking is 
necessary lest filmmakers be “forced to self-censor their work because they often cannot 
obtain a usable copy [free of TPMs] of a copyrighted work for fair use.”298 They state 
that “much of the material filmmakers need is still only available on DVD.”299 Joint 
Filmmakers also contend that filmmakers require access to digitally transmitted video, 
including material on cable television, Netflix, Hulu, YouTube, iTunes and other online 
distribution sources, because some of this material “can only be obtained online” or is not 
yet available on discs.300 
While asserting the need for an exemption to cover DVD and online video 
sources, Joint Filmmakers at the same time seek to access Blu-ray source material, 
claiming that “Blu-Ray is quickly supplanting DVD as the predominant source of motion 
292 Authors Alliance Supp. at 15 (cost of visual stabilizers, digital time base correctors and film editing 
software); Authors Alliance Reply at 6, 9. 
293 Authors Alliance Supp. at 16; see also Tr. at 73:20-74:06 (May 28, 2015) (Benmark, Authors 
Alliance/Buster). 
294 See Authors Alliance Reply at 10-11; Tr. at 73:06-18 (May 28, 2015) (Benmark, Authors 
Alliance/Buster). Authors Alliance questioned whether screen-capture software, such as WM Capture or 
Greenshot, could adequately work with many types of TPMs. 
295 Tr. at 73:02-05 (May 28, 2015) (Benmark, Authors Alliance/Buster); see also id. at 75:14-21 (Benmark, 
Authors Alliance/Buster). 
296 Authors Alliance Supp. at 17; see also Authors Alliance Reply at 9. Authors Alliance also asserts that 
“[a]bsent the ability to make fair use, many authors would be prohibited from using copyrighted material 
merely because the rightsholder disapproves of the authors’ message.” Authors Alliance Supp. at 17-18. 
297 Authors Alliance Reply at 9. 
298 Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 7-8, App. C at 2; see also NMR Class 6 Supp. at 12. 
299 Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 8; see also id. at App. I. 
300 Id. at 11, App. B at 4, App. K. Joint Filmmakers also cited filmmaker Danny Yourd as an example 
where using a DVR to collect news clips is needed to easily obtain high-definition clips and clear them for 
“E+O and distribution.” Id. at 12. 
49
 

[PAGE 54]
     
    
    
  
    
  
   
 
  
   
   
 
   
 
  
   
        
      
                 
                 
    
                  
   
              
          
            
              
                      
            
              
                    
                 
              
           
            
        
                   
            
          
               
              
               
            
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
picture material, especially high quality HD material and bonus footage.”301 Without 
such access, NMR suggests that documentarians would “have to forego using that 
content,” interfering with filmmakers’ ability to communicate their intended message.302 
Proponents contend that high-definition content is necessary to more effectively engage 
in comment and criticism.  For example, Gravitas Films allegedly required Blu-ray 
sources for a documentary about the film industry that “compare[d] the fine grained 
details of existing motion pictures, . . . [that] cannot be found on standard definition 
DVDs.”
303 
Separate and apart from the artistic needs of filmmakers, Joint Filmmakers claim 
that industry distribution standards establish that “[h]igh definition footage is mandatory 
in the modern filmmaking and broadcasting world.”304 They explain that broadcasters 
and film distributors require high-definition or better-quality footage, and will “reject 
projects that do not meet these stringent standards, even in the conceptual stage.”305 
According to Jim Morrissette of Kartemquin Educational Films, broadcasters like CNN, 
PBS, BBC and NBC Universal perform technical quality control on programs that 
“analyzes every frame for video defects that do not meet their stringent technical 
requirements.”
306 Joint Filmmakers also contend that films will be rejected by theatrical 
exhibitors, film festivals, and other venues unless they use high-quality footage.307 Even 
301 Id. at 10, App. B at 4-5, App. K. 
302 NMR Class 6 Supp. at 16. 
303 Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 10; see also NMR Class 6 Supp. at 16 (noting that low quality excerpts 
“provide less detail and less information”); Joint Filmmakers Supp. at App. D at 5; Tr. at 25:03-23 (May 20, 
2015) (Quinn, Kartemquin Educational Films). 
304 Joint Filmmakers Reply at 7; see also Joint Filmmakers Supp. at App. B at 1; Tr. at 51:06-18 (May 20, 
2015) (Neill, NMR). 
305 Joint Filmmakers Reply at 7-8. Morrissette asserts that multiple standard -definition archival clips in a 
documentary film submitted to CNN were rejected because they contained “thick black lines around the 
image, dropped frames, interlace artifacts” and other problems, all of which “proved to be unfixable, even 
after extensive and costly processing, and had to be removed from the movie simply because they failed 
quality control.” Id. at App. B at 1; see also id. at App. C, App. E (stating that the PBS show, Independent 
Lens, which showcases independent documentaries, requires delivery of high-definition films on “HDCAM 
1080i, 59.94 drop frame”); Joint Filmmakers Supp. at App. I at 1 (statement of Joel Schroeder) (noting that 
in order to deliver a film to Discovery or CBS, “the standard has to be at least a master of 1080p or 29.9 
FPS”). According to Joint Filmakers, not only does PBS accept only HD programs, but NBC and CNN 
also have “equally high standards for footage” and reject standard-definition clips or clips suffering from 
image framing errors that proponents assert are common to screen-capture software. Joint Filmmakers 
Reply at 8-9, App. D; Tr. at 9:21-23 (May 20, 2015) (Morrissette, Kartemquin Educational Films). 
306 Joint Filmmakers Reply at App. B at 1. 
307 Joint Filmmakers Supp. at App. B at 1 (noting that over “90% of all movie theaters in the US now have 
digital projection, in either 2K resolution (1920x1080 pixels) or 4K resolution (3840x2160 pixels),” 
requiring files “over anything a standard definition DVD (720x480 pixels) can adequately deliver.”); id. at 
10 (noting Finite Films was required to use 1080p (i.e., Blu-ray level) resolution by film festivals, also 
referencing marketplace events, screenings, and seminars); id. at App. H; see also NMR Class 6 Supp. at 16 
(quoting documentarian Rick Bowman claiming “at this past year’s American Film Market event in Los 
Angeles, distributors didn’t want to look at any films unless they had been filmed in 4K”). 
50
 

[PAGE 55]
     
    
 
    
  
     
 
 
     
   
    
   
  
  
    
  
    
 
  
                
              
        
                
          
      
               
               
      
      
             
         
     
                 
                 
              
           
               
           
            
 
 
                                                 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
when not strictly required for distribution, NMR argues that documentary filmmakers 
must access high-definition video content because high definition is generally expected 
by audiences, whereas low-quality content “deters audiences from viewing 
documentaries.”308 Moreover, Joint Filmmakers explain that “everyone is now producing 
in 4K”—referring to 4K resolution, which offers four times the resolution of Blu -ray— 
and that DVD quality will not “stand up” as use of 4K resolution becomes widespread.309 
Joint Filmmakers explain that “upconverting” DVD standard-definition clips to 
meet the pixel ratio of an otherwise HD-quality film “severely degrades the footage’s 
quality,” and creates “fake” frames that “behave differently than the actual frames from 
the DVD” or high-definition images.310 By way of analogy, they evoke the image of a 
drivers’ license picture stretched across the length of a movie poster (in the case of HD) 
or a billboard (in the case of 4K resolution).311 In any event, proponents assert that 
upconversion tools are often “entirely unavailable, too cost prohibitive, or too difficult to 
operate.”
312 
Joint Filmmakers claim alternatives to circumvention are not reasonably 
available.313 According to Joint Filmmakers, solutions like using a smartphone camera to 
record images displayed on a screen result in video quality “degraded so significantly as 
to be unusable,” and that such images cannot convey the filmmaker’s vision or meet the 
technical standards of distributors.314 Joint Filmmakers assert that opponent DVD CCA’s 
exhibits of screen-captured clips “would be rejected by modern distributors and 
broadcasters” and would “not allow the type of detailed criticism and commentary that 
many filmmakers need to undertake.”
315 In addition, they claim that screen-capture 
308 NMR Class 6 Supp. at 15. NMR also argued that a “documentary filmmaker’s ability to communicate 
their message effectively depends on the quality of the video content that the filmmaker uses.” Id. 
309 Tr. at 11:01-23 (May 20, 2015) (Morrissette, Kartemquin Educational Films). 
310 Joint Filmmakers Supp. at App. B at 1-2; see also id. at 12; Tr. at 98:23-99:06 (May 20, 2015) 
(Morrissette, Kartemquin Educational Films). The process of upconverting a standard -definition DVD 
(720 x 480 pixels) to high definition (1920x1080 pixels) involves adding additional “fake” pixels between 
the real pixels using a video hardware box. Additional processing would be required to convert that file 
into a format that would play on digital theater projectors or an ultra-high-definition (“UHD”) TV . See 
Joint Filmmakers Supp. at App. B at 1-2. 
311 Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 10-11. 
312 Id. at 12, App. B at 1-2; see also Tr. at 98:23-99:06 (May 20, 2015) (Morrissette, Kartemquin 
Educational Films); Tr. at 101:14-102:02 (May 20, 2015) (Lerner, Joint Filmmakers).
 
313 Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 12.
 
314 See id. at 12-13, App. B at 3; Joint Filmmakers Reply at 10-11; see also Joint Filmmakers Reply at App.
 
B at 1-2 (stating that filming a television with a camera or cellphone “creates Moire interference, a visual
 
distortion effect created by the interaction of the camera image sensor and the pixels of the TV screen” that
 
“renders the resulting image fuzzy and completely unsuitable for broadcast”).
 
315 Joint Filmmakers Reply at 11-12, App. F (explaining that the Matrix Reloaded clip captured from a
 
DVD is unacceptable because the WMCapture software is unlikely to be able to “handle playing and 
recording simultaneously 29.97 frames per second of 1080p footage”); see also Joint Filmmakers Supp. at
 
51
 

[PAGE 56]
     
    
   
     
 
   
  
 
    
   
  
     
 
   
    
   
 
    
   
 
  
     
            
          
               
            
      
             
                  
               
            
                  
      
      
              
            
               
            
        
     
            
    
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
software “presents a real question of legality to filmmakers . . . because it is not clear 
whether the copyrighted material is captured before or after decryption.”316 They also 
claim that screen-capture software is not “available for Blu-ray on the Mac platform used 
by a majority of filmmakers.”317 
According to Joint Filmmakers, licensing is not a viable option because 
rightsholders often fail to respond or “deny permission based on the content of the 
intended use.”318 In addition, they claim that licensing can be cost prohibitive.319 
vii. Proposed Class 7:  Noncommercial Videos 
According to NMR, previous legal battles demonstrate that many remix videos 
“would not even exist” without the existing exemption, proving adverse impact.320 
EFF/OTW similarly claim that, but for an exemption, creators who could otherwise 
contest improper DMCA takedown notices will be prevented from doing so because of 
the prohibition on circumvention.
321 In contrast, remixers who counter-notify under the 
DMCA or contest a YouTube Content ID match are typically successful, suggesting that 
section 1201 stifles the dissemination of noninfringing uses.322 EFF/OTW further 
contend that section 1201 is unfamiliar to remixers, so the provision creates “a set of 
perverse incentives and traps for the unwary.”
323 
Proponents argue that all potential alternatives to circumvention are inadequate, 
focusing in particular on their claim that any exemption should include circumvention of 
Blu-ray discs protected by AACS.  According to proponents, much material is available 
only from a single source, such as Blu-ray or online.
324 Further, Blu-ray “bonus” 
13 (noting that screen capture software “still has unacceptable stuttering, dropped frames, and image size 
issues”); Tr. at 12:02-24 (May 20, 2015) (Morrissette, Kartemquin Educational Films). 
316 Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 13; see also Joint Filmmakers Reply at 12 (stating that none of the screen 
capture programs listed by opponents represent that they enable “the reproduction of motion picture content 
after such content has been lawfully decrypted”). 
317 Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 13; see also id. at App. B at 3. 
318 Id. at 13-14; see also NMR Class 6 Supp. at 15 (referencing use of clips in film criticizing Hollywood); 
Joint Filmmakers Reply at 10. Joint Filmmakers point to examples where filmmakers attempted to license 
clips but were turned down, either with no explanation or because the rightsholder did not agree with the 
way the clips were used, sometimes for political or financial reasons. See, e.g., Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 
13; Joint Filmmakers Reply at 10. 
319 Joint Filmmakers Reply at 10. 
320 NMR Supp. at 5-6 (discussing Buffy v. Edward clip and legal dispute between remix creator and 
Lionsgate Entertainment, which controlled footage to the television show Buffy the Vampire Slayer). 
321 EFF/OTW Supp. at 7, 10; Tr. at 245:13-21 (May 28, 2015) (Tushnet, OTW) (asserting that section 1201 
creates a chilling effect that prevents remixers from submitting DMCA counter-notifications or litigating). 
322 EFF/OTW Supp. at 10-11; see also NMR Supp. at 3 (same). 
323 EFF/OTW Supp. at 7, 10. 
324 Id. at 11-12; EFF/OTW Reply at 8-10; NMR Supp. at 10; Tr. at 196:13-197:18 (May 28, 2015) 
(Charlesworth, USCO; McSherry, EFF). 
52
 

[PAGE 57]
     
    
 
  
  
   
    
  
    
  
   
  
    
  
  
   
   
 
    
   
  
           
        
         
                    
                  
            
               
              
               
           
     
               
    
             
 
        
           
              
        
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
material, while ancillary to the original copyrighted work, is allegedly often uniquely 
valuable to a vidder’s project of examining and critiquing assumptions in the original 
work.325 EFF/OTW also contend that remix artists should be allowed access to the 
highest quality of source material desired, arguing that the ability to make such aesthetic 
choices goes to the “heart of copyright.”326 EFF/OTW point to a variety of remix videos 
made using Blu-ray source material, claiming the material was necessary and offered 
advantages over other formats due to the ability to portray finer-grained details; accept 
application of editing effects, including cropping, zooming, or superimposition; and 
format films with the desired aspect ratio for editing purposes.327 Conversely, EFF/OTW 
contend that DVD source material results in lost frames, grainy colors, pixellation and 
other artifacts that hinder or even preclude desired editing.328 
EFF/OTW also contest the ability of screen-capture software to capture source 
material with adequate clarity, audio, and formatting.329 As an example, EFF/OTW 
analyze a high-definition video commissioned by NCAI entitled Take It Away, which 
features clips of the Washington Redskins football team, but with the team name and logo 
removed, to demonstrate that the football viewing experience would remain constant 
even with the removal of the allegedly disparaging trademark.
330 They note that 
opponents’ attempt to recreate that video using screen-captured footage actually proves 
this point, asserting that opponents’ version is so blurry that “NCAI’s point that the logo 
is unnecessary to a high-quality experience is completely lost.”
331 Finally, EFF/OTW 
contend that even screen-capture technology may implicate circumvention of TPMs.332 
325 EFF/OTW Reply at 10; Tr. at 210:05-211:04 (May 28, 2015) (Coppa, OTW). 
326 EFF/OTW Supp. at 13-17 (citing Campbell, 510 U.S. at 582-83 (quoting Bleistein v. Donaldson 
Lithographing Co., 188 U.S. 239, 251 (1903)) (“It would be a dangerous undertaking for persons trained 
only to the law to constitute themselves final judges of the worth of [a work], outside of the narrowest and 
most obvious limits. At the one extreme, some works of genius would be sure to miss appreciation. Their 
very novelty would make them repulsive until the public had learned the new language in which their 
author spoke.”)); see NMR Supp. at 7-9; EFF/OTW Reply at 11 (citing Campbell, 510 U.S. at 588; Bill 
Graham, 448 F.3d at 613; Warren Pub. Co. v. Spurlock, 645 F. Supp. 2d 402, 420, 425 (E.D. Pa. 2009)). 
327 EFF/OTW Reply at 10, App. A at 4-6, 11-15 (citing, among others, Jetpack Monkey, White Telephone; 
Rhoboat, Supremacy; astrolat and Speranza, Anything for Love); EFF/OTW Supp. at 17; Tr. at 206:14­
207:02 (May 28, 2015) (Coppa, OTW). 
328EFF/OTW Reply at 8-10, Apps. A-B. EFF/OTW also submitted a list of materials available only through
 
Blu-ray, compared to DVD.
 
329 Id. at 8-9; see also EFF/OTW Post-Hearing Resp. at 2-7 (disputing that opponents’ exhibits represented 
adequate alternatives).
 
330 See NCAI Supp. at 1; EFF/OTW Supp. at 9.
 
331 EFF/OTW Reply at 11-16; see also NMR Supp. at 7-9 (same re Buffy v. Edward).
 
332 EFF/OTW Supp. at 18-19; Tr. at 243:11-17 (May 28, 2015) (Tushnet, OTW) (stating WM Capture is
 
“the only software that claims not to be circumvention”). 
53
 

[PAGE 58]
     
    
  
  
   
  
 
 
 
   
  
  
     
 
   
  
   
    
 
 
   
  
   
   
  
  
   
        
  
   
  
        
      
       
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
d. Argument Under Statutory Factors 
i. Proposed Class 1:  Colleges and Universities 
Joint Educators argue that the statutory factors set forth in section 1201(a)(1) 
favor the granting of an exemption for college and university uses.  With respect to first 
two factors—the availability for use of copyrighted works and the availability for use of 
works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational purposes—Joint Educators 
note that many college and university libraries and programs have lawfully acquired 
extensive motion picture collections. The prohibition on exemption, however, could 
prevent faculty and students from using these works for educational purposes in a 
meaningful way.
333 Under the third factor, the impact on criticism, comment, news 
reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research, Joint Educators assert that the prohibition on 
circumvention inhibits students and professors from engaging in certain types of 
instruction, analysis, commentary and criticism.334 In particular, they observe that lowquality images discourage professors and students from incorporating works obtained 
from alternative sources into their teaching and scholarship.335 Finally, under the fourth 
factor, Joint Educators argue that uses of short clips are unlikely to affect the value of the 
copyrighted work since the clips are “limited in duration and not likely to serve as a 
substitute for the entire work.”336 They also state that because previously granted 
exemptions did not affect the market for copyrighted works, an expanded exemption 
encompassing Blu-ray discs is also unlikely to have a negative impact.337 
ii. Proposed Class 2:  Primary and Secondary Schools (K-12) 
While not explicitly addressing the statutory factors, Hobbs’ various submissions 
strongly stress the educational purpose of this exemption and its relationship to criticism, 
comment, and scholarship.  Hobbs also contends that there would be no effect on the 
market for the copyrighted works.
338 In addition, perhaps falling into the category of 
“other factors” that the Librarian may consider, Hobbs cites a study purportedly 
concluding that use of digital media studies reduces disciplinary problems and minimizes 
technology skill gaps between lower-income and wealthier students.
339 
333 Joint Educators Class 1 Supp. at 21. 
334 Id. 
335 Id. at 22. 
336 Id. 
337 Joint Educators Class 1 Reply at 22-23.
 
338 Hobbs Class 2 Supp. at 3, 9.
 
339 Hobbs Class 2 Reply at 4.
 
54
 

[PAGE 59]
     
    
     
  
  
 
   
 
   
    
   
 
  
 
 
  
    
    
  
     
  
 
    
    
  
   
    
               
                
           
               
              
              
             
           
             
 
 
                                                 
	 
	 
	 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
iii.	 Proposed Class 3: Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) 
Joint Educators maintain that the statutory factors support granting an exemption 
because (1) works stored on TPM-encumbered formats are unavailable for educational 
uses; (2) the works are generally lawfully obtained by colleges or universities, and 
Congress has favored educational uses of audiovisual material, as evidenced by sections 
107 and 110 of the Copyright Act; (3) the prohibition on circumvention inhibits the 
production of and participation in MOOCs and could slow its growth as an educational 
medium; and (4) as the content would be limited to short clips for educational purposes, 
using in large part resources previously acquired by a “home institution” university, the 
market for the underlying copyrighted works is unlikely to be affected.
340 
iv.	 Proposed Class 4:  Educational Programs Operated by 
Museums, Libraries or Nonprofits 
Hobbs did not directly address section 1201(a)(1)’s statutory factors in her 
comments in support of this proposed exemption.
341 
v.	 Proposed Class 5:  Multimedia E-Books 
Authors Alliance argues that the statutory factors support granting an exemption.  
First, they claim an exemption would allow e-book authors “to use material that they 
should be able to access under fair use.”
342 Second, they note that the Register 
previously found that “[m]ultimedia e-books have a similar education value [to 
documentary films] and are intrinsically archival.”
343 Third, according to proponents, 
multimedia e-books make “use of innovative technologies to provide scholarly research 
and arguments” and “serve as compelling examples of . . . critical scholarship.”344 
Finally, proponents claim there will be no adverse effect on the market for copyrighted 
works, given that there are no “allegations that previous exemptions pertaining to DVDs 
have resulted in infringing uses.”
345 As for other factors that the Register and Librarian 
could consider appropriate, they contend that the exemption should be granted because, 
as previously found relevant by the Register, “the TPMs at issue are not used to prevent 
unauthorized access or to conceal copyrighted material” but instead are being used to 
340 Joint Educators Class 3 Supp. at 21-22; Joint Educators Class 3 Reply at 19-21.
 
341 See Hobbs Class 4 Supp. at 4-5 (instead addressing section 107’s statutory factors to determine fair use).
 
342 Authors Alliance Supp. at 18-21; Authors Alliance Reply at 11.
 
343 Authors Alliance Supp. at 21; see also 2012 Recommendation at 136 (noting for “the availability for use
 
for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational uses, the focus on education is, of course, relevant to 
the proposals relating to educational uses, as well as to a lesser degree those relating to documentary films,
 
documentary videos, and multimedia e-books offering film criticism”); Authors Alliance Reply at 11.
 
344 Authors Alliance Supp. at 22; Authors Alliance Reply at 11.
 
345 Authors Alliance Supp. at 22-23; see also Authors Alliance Reply at 8.
 
55
 

[PAGE 60]
     
    
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
    
  
 
    
   
 
 
  
   
   
    
   
 
   
  
 
    
   
 
           
                
           
             
   
   
   
         
    
   
   
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
“manage rights and to prevent the public from engaging in lawful, noninfringing, and fair 
uses.”346 
vi. Proposed Class 6:  Filmmaking Uses 
Joint Filmmakers argue that the statutory factors support granting an exemption 
for the proposed filmmaking uses.  First, they contend that denying an exemption will 
“severely reduce the availability for use of copyrighted works,” by limiting legitimate 
filmmaking uses.347 Second, Joint Filmmakers assert that both documentary films and 
narrative films make uses that “fulfill educational and archival purposes” and are “critical 
to educational efforts.”348 Third, they state that documentary films are “important 
sources of criticism, commentary, and in-depth reporting on issues that may otherwise not 
be widely known,” while narrative films “provide important social commentary and help 
to educate American moviegoers as to important events,” all of which would be adversely 
affected and hindered by prohibiting circumvention.
349 Joint Filmmakers also argue that 
there is no evidence of any likely harm to the market for DVDs, or, by analogy, Blu-ray 
discs, because in the last eight years in which DVDs have been covered by an exemption, 
opponents have “provided neither allegation nor evidence of infringement or harm,” and, 
furthermore, no longer oppose the exemption as it applies to DVDs.
350 
vii. Proposed Class 7:  Noncommercial Videos 
EFF/OTW argue that each of the statutory factors favors an exemption for 
noncommercial videos. First, EFF/OTW note that DVDs continue to be well established 
in the marketplace despite the wide availability of circumvention technology, and from 
this fact extrapolate that the ability to circumvent does not affect the availability of the 
underlying copyrighted works.351 Second, EFF/OTW argue that an exemption would 
facilitate the preservation and use of remix videos in museums, other cultural institutions, 
and educational settings.
352 Third, EFF/OTW claim that because remix video creators 
use their works to engage in criticism and commentary, denying an exemption would 
inhibit criticism and comment.353 Fourth, EFF/OTW argue that an exemption would not 
impact the market or the value of the underlying copyrighted works, noting both the lack 
346 Authors Alliance Supp. at 23; Authors Alliance Reply at 11.
 
347 Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 14-17. In support of this point, Joint Filmmakers also assert that an
 
exemption would not decrease the consumption of the underlying works, and point out that in some cases,
 
such as documentaries about feature films, the new work can increase audience appetite for the underlying 
works. Id.
 
348 Id. at 17-18.
 
349 Id. at 18.
 
350 Joint Filmmakers Reply at 9; Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 18.
 
351 EFF/OTW Supp. at 19-20.
 
352 Id. at 20.
 
353 Id. at 20-21.
 
56
 

[PAGE 61]
     
    
   
  
  
 
    
  
 
  
  
 
 
    
   
    
   
 
  
 
    
  
 
   
  
     
   
          
   
       
              
          
                   
                
         
             
           
             
    
                 
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
of effect seen from prior exemptions as well as the acknowledged acceptance of fan-made 
works by organizations such as the MPAA.354 
EFF/OTW also suggest that the Register should avoid “discrimination based on 
perceived artistic needs” and should not limit an exemption to noncommercial uses.355 
As support, they provide examples of videos distributed in a museum or commissioned 
for pay.356 At the hearing, however, Professor Tushnet of the OTW acknowledged that a 
workable exemption could be limited to “primarily noncommercial” uses if the rule 
included accompanying guidance explaining what types of activity might be permitted.357 
2. Opposition 
For all of these audiovisual classes, the Office received no opposition to the 
“renewal” of the current exemptions; instead, opponents focused their comments on 
containing the existing exemptions without expansion.  The same parties oppose all seven 
classes—Joint Creators, 358 DVD Copy Control Association (“DVD CCA”), and the 
Advanced Access Content System Licensing Administrator (“AACS LA”).  In certain 
classes, DVD CCA and AACS LA filed joint comments.  Opponents voice parallel 
concerns across most of these audiovisual classes. 
Opponents generally contend that there are viable alternatives to circumvention 
that are adequate for any proposed uses that are not permitted under an existing 
exemption.  Joint Creators and DVD CCA claim that the past three years witnessed 
significantly improved alternatives to circumvention, including clip licensing, screencapture technology, streaming platforms such as TV Everywhere, disc-to-digital services, 
and digital rights libraries like UltraViolet, that enable proponents to easily and 
affordably copy short portions of motion pictures without circumvention of any access 
controls.
359 Opponents suggest screen-capture software in particular has “developed 
significantly over the past three years into an effective tool that allows users to 
appropriate high quality, broadly compatible images and video.”360 As evidence, 
354 Id. at 21. 
355 Id. at 22 (“Today’s bad vid may lead to tomorrow's work of searing cultural criticism.”). 
356 Id. at 22-23. 
357 Tr. at 310:09-311:12 (May 28, 2015) (Charlesworth, USCO; Tushnet, OTW). 
358 The trade groups represented by Joint Creators are the Motion Picture Association of America, the 
Entertainment Software Association, and the Recording Industry Association of America. 
359 See, e.g., Joint Creators Class 1 Opp’n at 4-6, 9-11; DVD CCA Class 1 Opp’n at 7-12; Tr. at 198:11-16 
(May 27, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators); Joint Creators Class 2 Opp’n at 6-7 & n.16, 8-11 (listing 
alternatives, including PBS LearningMedia, YouTube, Anyclip.com, Vudu, UltraViolet, Disney Movies 
Anywhere, “TV Everywhere” initiatives like online and mobile app offerings from Comcast’s XFINITY , 
Dish Network’s DISH Online, and V erizon’s FiOS TV Online, and download and streaming platforms such 
as Apple’s iTunes, Amazon Prime, Netflix, Hulu Plus, and AT&T U-verse Live TV); Joint Creators Class 5 
Opp’n at 4-6, Exhibits 1-12. 
360 AACS LA Class 2 Opp’n at 9; DVD CCA Class 2 Opp’n at 8-9. 
57
 

[PAGE 62]
     
    
   
  
   
   
   
   
     
  
  
 
     
    
   
   
 
   
    
                      
        
                  
                   
                
             
                
                  
         
                
            
            
                     
               
                 
              
             
                
          
            
                 
  
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
opponents provided screen-captured clips from the films The Matrix Reloaded and 
Chicago, and compilations of clips from other motion pictures depicting medieval life 
and the works of Shakespeare.361 In response to claims that such alternatives do not 
provide sufficiently high-quality excerpts, Joint Creators, DVD CCA and AACS each cite 
Universal City Studios v. Corley for the proposition that fair use does not entitle a user of 
the copyrighted work to “copying by the optimum method or in the identical format of 
the original.”
362 
In response to proponents’ claims that the exemptions should, for the first time, be 
expanded to encompass Blu-ray, AACS LA and Joint Creators contend that the 
authorized circumvention of DVDs or online material provide a ready alternative to 
circumvention of Blu-ray discs, particularly because “most of the examples provided in 
the proponents’ comments relate to DVD quality.”363 AACS LA also points out that the 
DVD market continues to outstrip the Blu-ray market and states that any harm resulting 
from inferior quality images is speculative.364 In addition, AACS LA and Joint Creators 
contend that the amount of material available on Blu-ray alone is de minimis.365 
Both AACS LA and DVD CCS also argue that expanding the exemptions any 
further will harm the DVD and Blu-ray disc markets.366 AACS LA warns that 
circumvention of Blu-ray discs results in a perfect copy of the entire work “in the 
clear”—that is, free from any restrictions on further copying or redistribution—which it 
contends could undermine the Blu-ray business model at a time when it still competes 
with DVD and other distribution models.367 DVD CCA also voices the concern that 
361 See, e.g., AACS LA Class 2 Opp’n at 9-11; DVD CCA Class 2 Opp’n at 9-11; DVD CCA Class 5 Opp’n 
at 8-11; DVD CCA Class 6 Opp’n at 15-18. 
362 See, e.g., AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 6-7 (citing Corley, 273 F.3d 429, 459 (2d Cir. 2001)); DVD CCA 
Class 1 Opp’n at 6-7 (same); Joint Creators Class 1 Opp’n at 8 (same). Opponents also rely upon U.S. v. 
Elcom Ltd., 203 F. Supp. 2d 1111 (N.D. Ca. 2002) and 321 Studios v. Metro Goldwyn Mayer Studios, Inc., 
307 F. Supp. 2d 1085 (N.D. Ca. 2004) for this point in their submissions. 
363 See, e.g., AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 9-13; see also Tr. at 225:20-226:02 (May 27, 2015) (Williams, 
Joint Creators); Joint Creators Class 2 Opp’n at 5. Joint Creators also question whether the phrase “online 
distribution services” includes online streaming services, such as Netflix, or whether the exemptions were 
meant to be limited to digital download services such as Apple’s iTunes Store, and suggest “digitally 
transmitted material” may more accurately capture both services. Tr. at 306:17- 308:01 (May 28, 2015) 
(Williams, Joint Creators; Smith, USCO). See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(4)-(7). 
364 AACS Class 1 Opp’n at 8; AACS LA Class 5 Opp’n at 7, 9; AACS LA Class 6 Opp’n at 10. 
365 See, e.g., AACS Class 7 Opp’n at 2; Joint Creators Class 7 Opp’n at 5. 
366 See, e.g., DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 3 Opp’n at 14; Tr. at 128:02-16 (May 27, 2015) (Turnbull, DVD 
CCA/AACS LA) (stating that “the concern that we have with the kinds of unbounded exemptions, like the 
MOOC one that’s here, is in fact that it would undermine the licensing system and would thereby 
undermine the copyright owners’ trust in the licensing system and the system of licensed products that are 
deployed”); see also Joint Creators Class 6 Opp’n at 6. 
367 See, e.g., DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 3 Opp’n at 14-16 (asserting that circumvention could undermine 
“the continued growth of the market for Blu-Ray discs”); AACS LA Class 6 Opp’n at 22; AACS LA Class 
7 Opp’n at 16-19. 
58
 

[PAGE 63]
     
    
  
   
   
  
 
  
    
   
   
    
    
  
   
 
   
  
  
  
 
 
             
           
              
   
                      
                
             
               
                
       
                       
          
            
                    
  
        
                
            
          
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
increased circumvention of DVDs could result in the erosion of a still “widely popular” 
DVD market.368 
Opponents contest other attempts to broaden the language of the existing 
exemptions.  Joint Creators object that no proponents have demonstrated a need to 
expand the exemption to audiovisual works beyond “motion pictures” (such as to video 
games), or to engage in circumvention for purposes other than for close analysis of film 
and media excerpts.
369 They also request that the current limitation for uses of “short 
portions” be retained.  Joint Creators, AACS LA and DVD CCA also all object to 
extending exemptions to “fair uses” or “educational uses” in general, asserting that not all 
educational uses qualify as fair uses and that a use’s simply being educational does not 
obviate the need for a full analysis of the four fair use factors.
370 The opponents contend 
that there is a lack of “sufficient description to determine whether any possible activity, 
which could claim educational purpose, is indeed noninfringing,”
371 arguing that 
proponents have failed to prove that the full range of desired activities is 
noninfringing.372 
Finally, Joint Creators state that TPMs, including AACS and CSS, have proven 
value and have “increased the availability of works and have allowed for a vast 
proliferation of platforms” for content distribution.373 Explaining that “more works than 
ever are more readily available than ever, in particular through streaming and 
downloadable online content,” Joint Creators attribute such availability to “the legislative 
promise of secure and robust protection for such content.”374 
368 See, e.g., DVD CCA Class 1 Opp’n at 12-13 (expressing concern for CSS-protected discs); see also Tr. 
at 127:20-128:01 (May 27, 2015) (Turnbull, DVD CCA/AACS LA) (noting that “a judge in California 
found that an effort to make a movie library was indeed irreparable harm to the DVD CCA licensing 
system”). 
369 Joint Creators Class 1 Opp’n at 5; Joint Creators Class 3 Opp’n at 8; Joint Creators Class 5 Opp’n at 6; 
Joint Creators Class 6 Opp’n at 6; Tr. at 93:07-16 (May 28, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators). 
370 See, e.g., Joint Creators Class 1 Opp’n at 4 (also arguing in favor of preserving “short portions” 
limitation); AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 5 (citing 2012 Recommendation at 140); DVD CCA Class 1 Opp’n 
at 3-5; Joint Creators Class 2 Opp’n at 3-4 (noting that “the four statutory factors must be fully evaluated in 
view of the facts of any particular use”). 
371 AACS LA Class 2 Opp’n at 5; see also DVD CCA Class 2 Opp’n at 5; Joint Creators Class 4 Opp’n at 3 
(noting that proponents only provided “brief and vague descriptions of some projects operated by ‘youth 
media educators’ without identifying any actual uses of audiovisual works protected by access controls”). 
372 Joint Creators Class 3 Opp’n at 3; DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 4 Opp’n at 5-7; Joint Creators Class 4 
Opp’n at 3. 
373 Joint Creators Class 1 Opp’n at 3. 
374 Joint Creators Class 4 Opp’n at 5-6 (urging the Register to “consider how the DMCA and access 
controls have supported a vast increase in the public’s access to works when considering the propriety of 
any exemption that applies to everyone even tangentially associated with any non-profit organization”). 
59
 

[PAGE 64]
     
    
 
  
 
  
  
   
 
 
    
     
  
 
   
   
    
 
  
   
  
    
    
  
   
 
    
                      
          
                   
           
          
         
                 
                
                  
                   
              
        
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Beyond these general arguments raised by opponents with respect to all of the 
proposed audiovisual classes, they offer the following specific arguments concerning the 
individual proposed classes. 
a. Proposed Class 1:  Colleges and Universities 
Opponents do not object to renewing the current exemption for colleges and 
universities, which permits faculty and students to circumvent access controls to obtain 
short portions of works on DVDs and material obtained online for purposes of criticism 
and comment in film studies and similar courses requiring close analysis of motion 
picture excerpts.  But they oppose expanding the exemption to encompass all educational 
uses or to AACS-protected Blu-ray discs, relying on the general arguments described 
above.
375 In particular, they argue that proponents have not demonstrated that 
alternatives to accessing Blu-ray are insufficient.  They also maintain that the current 
regulatory language limiting circumvention to uses of short portions of motion pictures 
for purposes of criticism and comment serves a valuable purpose in curbing abuse and 
protecting the integrity of the relevant access controls.
376 
b. Proposed Class 2:  Primary and Secondary Schools (K-12) 
Opponents DVD CCA and Joint Creators do not object to renewing the current 
exemption permitting K-12 teachers to circumvent access controls to obtain short 
portions of works on DVDs and online material for purposes of criticism and comment in 
film studies and similar courses requiring close analysis of motion picture excerpts.  But 
they oppose extending the exemption to cover educational uses in general or uses by K­
12 students (as opposed to their teachers).
377 
DVD CCA and AACS LA contend that the examples provided of K-12 student 
video projects do not demonstrate adverse effects due to the prohibition on circumvention 
but instead “demonstrate that students are successfully making use of copyrighted 
works.”
378 In addition, opponents dispute that diminished student pride should be 
considered an adverse effect “when high quality video and images could have been 
obtained through video capture software from DVD playback.”379 Moreover, Joint 
375 AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 2-5; DVD CCA Class 1 Opp’n at 2-3; Joint Creators Class 1 Opp’n at 2-3. 
376 See, e.g., Joint Creators Class 1 Opp’n at 4-5. 
377 DVD CCA Class 2 Opp’n at 2; Joint Creators Class 2 Opp’n at 2; Tr. at 197:05-13 (May 27, 2015) 
(Williams, Joint Creators); Tr. at 203:23-204:02 (May 27, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators) (“[W]e are 
troubled by the idea of introducing very young children, in some instances, to circumvention technologies 
that can certainly be misused and we’re afraid would be misused.”). 
378 AACS LA Class 2 Opp’n at 8; DVD CCA Class 2 Opp’n at 8. 
379 AACS LA Class 2 Opp’n at 8 (using the terms “video capture” and “screen capture” interchangeably); 
DVD CCA Class 2 Opp’n at 8; see also Joint Creators Class 2 Opp’n at 5-6 (noting that a diminished sense 
of pride and “a feeling that ‘education is not valued in their society . . . . does not establish that preserving 
the contours of the current exemptions would result in any substantial adverse effects on the ability of 
educators or students to make noninfringing uses of audiovisual works”). 
60
 

[PAGE 65]
     
    
 
  
  
    
    
    
   
    
   
    
 
   
  
    
    
 
   
   
    
    
     
 
          
  
                   
   
                    
    
          
                  
            
           
       
                 
              
               
       
                   
          
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Creators found other examples of student-created projects on University of Notre Dame’s 
“Remix T” website cited by proponents, such as a “lip dub” of the trailer for the film 
Inception, troublesome because “re-creating the voiceover and music of a commercial 
film trailer is questionable as a fair use.”380 They also fear that allowing circumvention 
by students “would indicate to students that hacking access controls is acceptable as long 
as they use the material in school.”
381 
AACS LA objects to extending an exemption to AACS-protected Blu-ray discs, 
even if restricted to uses by educators, noting that proponents introduced no evidence of 
specific “AACS-protected works as an example of the use they desire to make.”
382 
AACS LA points out that Hobbs’ sole example, of a teacher wanting to use Blu-ray clips 
from a Shakespeare movie, was undermined by her admission that DVDs could be 
successfully employed to achieve the desired use.
383 
Finally, in response to Hobbs’ concerns over the cost of various methods 
suggested as alternatives to circumvention, Joint Creators assert that cost is not an 
adverse effect “even remotely caused by access controls.”384 They further contend that 
the cost of using licensed materials is overstated by proponents.385 
c. Proposed Class 3:  Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) 
All opponents oppose granting any exemption for MOOCs, at least as the 
exemption was originally proposed.386 They argue that the uses are unlikely to be 
noninfringing fair uses, because “the major providers of MOOCs are for-profit.”387 Joint 
Creators assert that the effect of such uses on the market for copyrighted works would be 
“much greater than in a traditional, limited classroom setting, as the courses would be 
380 Joint Creators Class 2 Opp’n at 4. 
381 Id. 
382 AACS LA Class 2 Opp’n at 2, 7-8; see also Joint Creators Class 2 Opp’n at 5; Tr. at 191:02-09 (May 27, 
2015) (Turnbull, AACS LA). 
383 AACS LA Class 2 Opp’n at 4; see also id. at 8 (student uses of YouTube videos does not demonstrate 
need for high-definition qualify). 
384 Joint Creators Class 2 Opp’n at 6. 
385 Joint Creators emphasize that proponents inflate the costs of at least one of the services available for 
these uses, Discovery Education, asserting that instead of costing more than $10,000 or more per annual 
subscription (as claimed by proponents), this source costs “only $1,600 per year/per building, for K-8 
schools, and $2,150 per year/per building for high schools.” Id. 
386 DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 3 Opp’n at 3; Joint Creators Class 3 Opp’n at 2. DVD CCA/AACS LA and 
Joint Creators note that they may not be opposed to a narrowly tailored exemption that fits within the 
constraints of the TEACH Act. Tr. at 126:17-127:02 (May 27, 2015) (Turnbull, DVD CCA/AACS LA); Tr. 
at 130:12-17 (May 27, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators). 
387 DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 3 Opp’n at 7-8 (citing Princeton Univ. Press v. Mich. Document Servs. , 99 
F.3d 1381 and Cambridge, 769 F.3d 1232); Joint Creators Class 3 Opp’n at 4. 
61
 

[PAGE 66]
     
    
   
     
   
    
  
 
   
 
    
   
  
 
   
    
 
   
        
                
              
           
   
         
              
              
                   
                 
          
                
                
            
   
         
                  
        
            
        
            
             
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
distributed broadly over the internet.”388 Joint Creators suggest the “broad definition of 
MOOC” makes it difficult to assess whether uses are likely noninfringing.389 
DVD CCA/AACS LA also contend that the activities of MOOCs are unlikely to 
qualify as noninfringing under the TEACH Act, codified as section 110(2) of title 17.390 
They note that educational institutions engaging in distance learning under the TEACH 
Act must be nonprofit and accredited, whereas “many, and perhaps most, MOOCs are 
offered by institutions that do not satisfy these requirements.”
391 Opponents point out 
that even where MOOC providers partner with accredited institutions, such as Harvard, 
University of Maryland, or Duke, enrollment is not limited to matriculated students, and 
assert that this undermines the TEACH Act’s enrollment requirement.
392 DVD 
CCA/AACS LA also assert that the legislative history of the TEACH Act demonstrates 
congressional intent that the nonprofit, accredited institution and enrollment requirements 
operate as safeguards against unauthorized dissemination of materials over the 
internet.
393 DVD CCA/AACS LA note that the major MOOC platforms, Coursera, EdX, 
and Udacity, generally do not employ TPMs on their online courses, and so do not satisfy 
section 110(2)’s requirement to employ technological measures to restrict transmissions 
only to those authorized to receive them.
394 They further suggest, however, that these 
platforms have a number of options to apply TPMs to course materials if they so 
choose.
395 Joint Creators also posit that some uses could fall under the existing 
388 Joint Creators Class 3 Opp’n at 4. 
389 Id. at 5; see also Tr. at 120:01-04 (May 27, 2015) (Turnbull, DVD CCA/AACS LA). DVD CCA/AACS 
LA express concern that it is unclear who would be liable should there be infringement, particularly as 
between an affiliated institution and a MOOC provider. Tr. at 142:03-143:02 (May 27, 2015) (Turnbull, 
DVD CCA/AACS LA). 
390 DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 3 Opp’n at 4. 
391 Id. at 5 (noting “two of the largest MOOC providers, Coursera, which accounts for more than one-third 
of all MOOCs offered in 2014, and Khan Academy, are for-profit entities”); see also Joint Creators Class 3 
Opp’n at 5-6 (claiming the TEACH Act “is not relevant . . . because ‘it is limited to systematic instruction 
as part of a curriculum of an accredited, non-profit institution,’ while MOOCs are open to anyone”); Tr. at 
127:12-16 (May 27, 2015) (Turnbull, DVD CCA/AACS LA). 
392 DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 3 Opp’n at 5; Joint Creators Class 3 Opp’n at 5-6 (stating “becoming a 
‘student’ in a MOOC, and potentially eligible for the exemption, is as easy as directing one’s [i]nternet 
browser to any given MOOC”); see also Tr. at 119:23-25 (May 27, 2015) (Turnbull, DVD CCA/AACS 
LA). 
393 DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 3 Opp’n at 6. 
394 AACS LA/DVD CCA Class 3 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2; DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 3 Opp’n at 5-6; see 
also Tr. at 122:01-05 (May 27, 2015) (Turnbull, DVD CCA/AACS LA). 
395 AACS LA/DVD CCA Class 3 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2-5 (citing MediaCAST, Chegg and Vital Source 
Bookshelf e-reader platforms, Apple’s FairPlay technology, DRMtoday, EZDRM.com, Expressplay.com, 
aBuyDRM.com, and Verimatrix.com as examples of TPM services for various online platforms); see also 
Joint Creators Class 3 Post-Hearing Resp. (deferring to AACS LA/DVD CCA on these questions). 
62
 

[PAGE 67]
     
    
 
 
     
    
 
  
   
  
   
   
    
   
   
    
 
  
 
    
  
  
    
 
    
           
 
         
              
             
       
         
               
              
    
    
                
              
    
 
 
                                                 
	 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
exemption for noncommercial videos, thus rendering a separate exemption for MOOCs 
396unnecessary. 
In addition to these concerns, opponents urge that Joint Educators have failed to 
demonstrate adverse effects.397 Joint Creators state that Joint Educators’ assertion that 
“online students are more easily distracted than students in the classroom, and have much 
lower course completion rates,” is not an adverse effect resulting from access controls, 
but rather “is endemic to the nature of MOOCs, which have notoriously low student 
retention rates.”
398 DVD CCA/AACS LA points out that MOOCs have grown over the 
past ten years without an exemption, and suggest that any slowed growth is a result of 
“other concerns about the long-term viability and sustainability of MOOCs as a 
pedagogical model.”399 Joint Creators further observe that proponents did not provide 
sufficient examples that students enrolled in MOOCs were adversely affected by the 
current prohibition.
400 
Looking to the statutory factors, Joint Creators conclude that the “sheer numbers 
and the very nature of MOOCs as ‘massive’ counsel against adoption of this 
exemption,”
401 and that “the open and unregulated nature of the MOOC industry makes it 
difficult to define a properly tailored exemption . . . that does not run the risk of opening 
up motion pictures to widespread hacking by anyone claiming to participate in a 
MOOC.”402 
d.	 Proposed Class 4:  Educational Programs Operated by Museums, 
Libraries or Nonprofits 
Opponents uniformly oppose granting a broad exemption for educational uses by 
museums, libraries or nonprofits.403 They nonetheless indicate that they may be 
amenable to a limited exemption “more in the character of the existing educational 
exemptions.”
404 According to DVD CCA/AACS LA, the proposed exemption for 
396 Joint Creators Class 3 Opp’n at 8 n.23 (referencing Professor Decherney’s planned course on 
Hollywood).
 
397 DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 3 Opp’n at 8.
 
398 Joint Creators Class 3 Opp’n at 6-7; see also Tr. at 131:21-25 (May 27, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators)
 
(positing that the dearth of motion picture clips in online courses may have more to do with practical
 
concerns rather than the inability to circumvent protected works).
 
399 DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 3 Opp’n at 10. 
400 Joint Creators Class 3 Opp’n at 7-8 (noting that the only example provided by proponents was “a video 
essay assignment that Professor Peter Decherney plans to offer on the Hollywood film industry”).
 
401 Id. at 2.
 
402 Id. at 9.
 
403 DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 4 Opp’n at 3; Joint Creators Class 4 Opp’n at 2.
 
404 Tr. at 245:10-246:22 (May 27, 2015) (Smith, USCO; Turnbull, DVD CCA/AACS LA); see also id. at
 
250:18-25 (Williams, Joint Creators). 
63
 

[PAGE 68]
     
    
  
    
       
     
  
 
    
 
   
     
    
    
    
 
   
  
    
 
 
  
   
     
 
   
                   
            
          
                  
  
         
                  
             
                 
          
    
    
           
                   
                
 
 
                                                 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
“programs operated by museums, libraries or nonprofits” defines “an unreasonably large, 
unworkable class.”405 Joint Creators voice concerns that this language would “open[] up 
this proposed exemption to a number of organizations that may have no connection to 
education,” since not all nonprofit organizations have “educational missions.”406 
DVD CCA/AACS LA contends that proponents did not clearly identify the 
particular uses they would like to make of protected works, rendering it “impossible to 
know whether [the] proposed . . . activities ‘for education purposes’ would be 
noninfringing.”
407 They also fault proponents’ use of undefined terms such as “digital 
media and learning,” “educators,” and “learners” in describing the scope of the proposed 
exemption, noting that the term “learners” in particular is so vague that “no determination 
could ever be assured that such uses would be educational at all.”408 
In addition, DVD CCA/AACS LA assert that any remote or online activities 
proposed by proponents as part of this class would “likely fall outside the bounds of the 
TEACH Act,” and so would not be noninfringing.
409 First, the proposed exemption not 
only includes museums and libraries that are not necessarily nonprofit, but also “omits 
any requirement that [institutions] must be accredited.”
410 Second, it is “unclear” 
whether the users of the exemption would satisfy the TEACH Act’s enrollment 
requirement.411 Third, DVD CCA/AACS LA assert that the legislative history of the 
TEACH Act “instructs that transmissions containing copyrighted works only be made to 
those identified persons authorized to receive them, either by password-protected website 
accounts or other technological means,” and proponents have not addressed these 
requirements.412 
DVD CCA/AACS LA maintain that proponents have not demonstrated adverse 
effects, but made only “very generalized statements about the value of ‘learners’ being 
able to ‘learn how to create and express themselves using digital media tools.’”
413 They 
405 DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 4 Opp’n at 3; see also Joint Creators Class 4 Opp’n at 4; Tr. at 244:10-19 
(May 27, 2015) (Turnbull, DVD CCA/AACS LA) (stating “the categories that are suggested here are very
 
vague and very broad”); Tr. at 248:25-249:12 (May 27, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators).
 
406 Joint Creators Class 4 Opp’n at 4; see also Tr. at 244:11-18, 245:05-09 (May 27, 2015) (Turnbull, DVD
 
CCA/AACS LA).
 
407 DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 4 Opp’n at 5.
 
408 Id. at 5-6; see also Joint Creators Class 4 Opp’n at 3-4. “Learners” are defined as those who “come to
 
the library to ‘hang out, mess around and geek out’ and learn how to create and express themselves using 
digital media tools, including music, video and multimedia.” DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 4 Opp’n at 5.
 
409 DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 4 Opp’n at 3, 6-7.
 
410 Id. at 6.
 
411 Id. at 7.
 
412 Id.; Tr. at 247:25-248:11 (May 27, 2015) (Turnbull, DVD CCA/AACS LA).
 
413 DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 4 Opp’n at 8 (citing Hobbs Class 4 Supp. at 2); see also Joint Creators
 
Class 4 Opp’n at 5 (asserting that proponents “have failed to provide any concrete examples of the uses 
64
 

[PAGE 69]
     
    
  
 
    
   
  
  
 
   
 
   
 
   
    
    
 
    
  
  
   
     
  
 
     
              
 
         
                        
       
                     
 
                   
 
         
                     
          
    
                   
              
             
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
also argue that proponents did not provide examples of “specific works that a would-be 
beneficiary of the proposed exemption seeks to use [on DVDs] but has been unable to do 
so,” and did not explain a need for Blu-ray material or high-definition video.414 
e. Proposed Class 5:  Multimedia E-Books 
Opponents do not object to renewing the current exemption for multimedia-e­
books, which permits circumvention of access controls to obtain short portions of works 
on DVDs and material obtained online for purposes of criticism and comment in 
nonfiction multimedia e-books offering film analysis.  All opponents oppose expanding 
the current exemption to allow circumvention of AACS on Blu-ray discs, to remove the 
limitation to uses for purposes of film analysis, criticism and comment, or to remove the 
limitation to uses of short portions of works.
415 In addition to the general arguments 
above, AACS LA and DVD CCA contend that because proponents of Class 5 have not 
identified specific examples of other fair uses in the context of multimedia e-books, an 
exemption cannot be granted for this “much broader scope requested by proponents.”416 
Instead, they claim that proponents’ examples are limited to uses involving film analysis, 
such as exploring the use of sound in film.417 Joint Creators further note that no 
examples have been presented to support “expansion of the exemption to [include uses 
for purposes of] fictional authorship.”
418 
On adverse effects, opponents assert that proponents have not demonstrated that 
Blu-ray content is necessary for their uses, with Joint Creators pointing out that many of 
proponents’ examples “refer to material that is not exclusively available on Blu-ray 
Discs.”419 AACS LA and DVD CCA also assert that screen-capture software is 
especially appropriate for e-books because it offers “highly suitable” resolution and “can 
be used with e-book authors’ preferred software, Adobe InDesign,” which has the ability 
to embed video files, such as mpeg-2 and mpeg-4 files, in e-books.
420 
they seek to enable” and thusly have failed to show adverse effects caused by the prohibition on
 
circumvention).
 
414 DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 4 Opp’n at 8.
 
415 Joint Creators Class 5 Opp’n at 2; AACS LA Class 5 Opp’n at 2; DVD CCA Class 5 Opp’n at 2; Tr. at
 
88:20-89:04 (May 28, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators).
 
416 AACS LA Class 5 Opp’n at 6; DVD CCA Class 5 Opp’n at 6; see also Joint Creators Class 5 Opp’n at
 
3-4.
 
417 AACS LA Class 5 Opp’n at 6; DVD CCA Class 5 Opp’n at 5-6; see also Joint Creators Class 5 Opp’n at
 
3. 
418 Tr. at 89:13-22 (May 28, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators). 
419 Joint Creators Class 5 Opp’n at 4-6; see also AACS LA Class 5 Opp’n at 2-3, 6-9; DVD CCA Class 5 
Opp’n at 6-8; Tr. at 80:02-05 (May 28, 2015) (Turnbull, AACS LA); Tr. at 92:11-19 (May 28, 2015) 
(Williams, Joint Creators). 
420 AACS LA Class 5 Opp’n at 11-13; see also DVD CCA Class 5 Opp’n at 9-11; AACS LA Class 5 Opp’n 
at Exhibit 2; Tr. at 83:04-84:12, Exhibits 23-24 (May 28, 2015) (Taylor, DVD CCA) (demonstrating how to 
add clips in Adobe InDesign and compilation of clips taken from James Bond movies using Camtasia). 
65
 

[PAGE 70]
     
    
  
  
  
 
 
    
   
   
 
  
 
      
     
 
    
 
   
   
  
   
     
  
 
  
   
              
           
             
                      
          
                   
               
              
 
             
            
                
             
               
                  
               
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
f. Proposed Class 6:  Filmmaking Uses 
Opponents do not object to renewing the current exemption for filmmaking uses, 
which permits circumvention of access controls to obtain short portions of works on 
DVDs and material obtained online for purposes of criticism and comment in 
documentary films.  Opponents, however, oppose extending the exemption to allow 
circumvention of AACS on Blu-ray discs, to cover narrative (i.e., fictional) films, to 
permit use of more than short portions of motion pictures, or to permit uses beyond 
criticism and comment.
421 In addition to the general arguments above, opponents argue 
specifically that “even when a second work exhibits some transformative characteristics 
from the underlying work, the new work will infringe if it takes an unnecessary amount, 
slavishly copies from the original, or the purpose of the secondary work is no different 
than that of the original.”422 They contend that “the industry, at least in regard to biopic 
films, is succeeding in the marketplace” despite access controls.423 Joint Creators assert 
that proponents did not define “specific parameters within which fictional filmmakers 
should operate to restrain the scope of the [proposed] exemption.”424 AACS LA and 
DVD CCA also contend that the record does not include a sufficient number of uses in 
fictional films to permit a determination that such uses are likely to be noninfringing.425 
Finally, they argue that “fair use does not compel a copyright holder to hand over a copy 
of the work so that fair use can be made,” arguing that licensing is appropriate rather than 
circumventing TPMs.
426 
AACS LA and Joint Educators also contend that proponents did not establish that 
high-definition or Blu-ray-quality images are necessary for distribution, suggesting that 
film festivals and distributors such as PBS “do not appear to have clear policies to 
exclude a film . . . because it contains a clip that is not of the same quality of the overall 
film.”427 Opponents do not, however, contend that screen-capture software would be 
However, DVD CCA concedes that clips taken from DVDs using screen capture software would not be 
“DVD quality” because the DVDs themselves are not perfect, asserting instead that the “images are of 
sufficient quality” for proponents’ uses. Tr. at 84:16-24 (May 28, 2015) (Taylor, DVD CCA). 
421 AACS LA Class 6 Opp’n at 2; DVD CCA Class 6 Opp’n at 2; Joint Creators Class 6 Opp’n at 2; see 
also Tr. at 60:17-61:03 (May 20, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators).
 
422 AACS LA Class 6 Opp’n at 6-7 (citing Castle Rock Entm’t v. Carol Publ’g, 150 F.3d 132 (2d Cir. 1998)
 
and Warner Bros. Entm’t, Inc. and J. K. Rowling v. RDR Books, 575 F. Supp. 2d 513 (S.D.N.Y . 2008)); 
DVD CCA Class 6 Opp’n at 5-6 (citing same); see also Tr. at 62:04-19 (May 20, 2015) (Williams, Joint 
Creators).
 
423 AACS LA Class 6 Opp’n at 16-17 (discussing Selma and other examples raised by Joint Filmmakers);
 
DVD CCA Class 6 Opp’n at 14-15; see also Tr. at 66:12-67:08 (May 20, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators).
 
424 Joint Creators Class 6 Opp’n at 3-4; see also 61:04-15 (May 20, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators).
 
425 AACS LA Class 6 Opp’n at 7-9; DVD CCA Class 6 Opp’n at 6-8.
 
426 AACS LA Class 6 Opp’n at 12-13; DVD CCA Class 6 Opp’n at 10-11.
 
427 AACS LA Class 6 Opp’n at 17-19; Joint Creators Class 6 Opp’n at 5-6 (stating that PBS’ Editorial
 
Standards and Policies include film quality as only one of many factors considered by the broadcaster).
 
66
 

[PAGE 71]
     
    
  
 
  
  
 
   
 
   
 
  
   
   
    
  
   
 
  
  
 
  
    
  
 
  
  
  
           
        
        
           
 
                 
        
                    
           
            
          
                   
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
acceptable to these distributors.428 Rather, they suggest that upconverting lowerresolution DVD to HD quality would be “acceptable within [PBS’] definition of HD,” a 
solution that Joint Filmmakers reject, as explained above.429 
Opponents further maintain that expansion of the exemption is not warranted 
under the statutory factors.  Under the first factor, Joint Creators assert that access 
controls have increased the availability of copyrighted works.430 Under the fourth factor, 
proponents, including Simon Swart of Twentieth Century Fox, contend that an exemption 
would negatively impact a currently vibrant clip-licensing market.
431 DVD CCA urges 
the Librarian to consider as an additional “other factor” under the statutory test the need 
to “curb the abuse of the exemption,” as allegedly demonstrated in examples provided by 
proponents indicating uses of higher-quality images that were not necessary to engage in 
criticism and comment of the underlying work.
432 
g. Proposed Class 7: Noncommercial Videos 
Opponents do not object to renewing the current exemption permitting 
circumvention of access controls to obtain short portions of works on DVDs, as well as 
material obtained online, for purposes of criticism and comment in noncommercial 
videos.  But Joint Creators oppose any expansion of the current exemption, including to 
anything more than “short” portions, to uses beyond “noncommercial” works, or by 
removing the limitation that uses be for purpose of criticism and comment.
433 In 
addition, opponents express an overarching concern that many such videos are not 
necessarily fair uses, with AACS LA arguing that “the vast majority of remix videos 
cannot be defended under the fair use doctrine.”434 
Contending that screen-capture software is sufficient for purposes of remixing 
high-definition source material, AACS LA and DVD CCA submitted duplicate exhibits 
which attempted to recreate the Take It Away video by covering the Washington 
Redskins’ logo on a football helmet with a bright orange dot, allegedly resulting in the 
“same effect” as NCAI’s original video.
435 EFF/OTW point out in reply comments, 
however, that this screen-captured version was of a lower resolution than the original, 
428 Tr. at 19:17-24 (May 20, 2015) (Smith, USCO; Taylor, DVD CCA).
 
429 Id. at 94:02-12 (Turnbull, AACS LA; Charlesworth, USCO).
 
430 Joint Creators Class 6 Opp’n at 6.
 
431 Tr. at 79:23-80:01 (May 20, 2015) (Swart, Twentieth Century Fox Home Entertainment; Charlesworth,
 
USCO).
 
432 DVD CCA Class 6 Opp’n at 20-22; see also Tr. at 20:07-21:09 (May 20, 2015) (Taylor, DVD CCA).
 
433 Joint Creators Class 7 Opp’n at 4.
 
434 AACS LA Class 7 Opp’n at 3-8; DVD CCA Class 7 Opp’n at 6; Joint Creators Class 7 Opp’n at 3 
(analyzing SupreMacy); Joint Creators Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 3 (analyzing Worthy vid submitted
 
during hearing); but see Tr. at 295:10-11 (May 28, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators) (admitting “we’re not
 
claiming that there aren’t a significant number of fair uses”).
 
435 AACS LA Class 7 Opp’n at 10, Exhibit 1; DVD CCA Class 7 Opp’n at 10, Exhibit 1. 
67
 

[PAGE 72]
     
    
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
    
 
  
 
  
   
   
  
 
    
   
  
   
    
   
  
  
  
 
    
     
                
 
             
           
               
              
            
       
             
          
           
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
thus obviating the need to obscure the logo on other players’ helmets, the turf, and fan 
apparel.436 
Finally, no opponents expressed a position concerning whether the muchdiscussed screen-capture technologies also required circumvention within the meaning of 
section 1201, with Joint Creators noting they had not “independently tested” the 
technologies.437 
3. Discussion 
The current proposals describe an array of uses of proposed motion picture 
excerpts that proponents contend are non-infringing and are likely to be adversely 
affected in the next three years by section 1201(a)(1)’s prohibition on circumvention of 
TPMs. While the proposed uses are more specifically discussed on a class -by-class basis 
below, the record reveals certain commonalities. 
First, the Register concludes that any exemption should be limited to uses of 
“motion pictures,” as opposed to the broader category of “audiovisual works.”  Under 
section 101 of the Copyright Act, “motion pictures” are a broad subset of “audiovisual 
works” that includes television shows, online videos, news, commercials, and other 
works consisting of a “series of related images which, when shown in succession, impart 
an impression of motion, together with accompanying sounds, if any.”
438 While 
EFF/OTW agreed with the “motion pictures” limitation so long as the breadth of this 
phrase could be made clear to non-lawyer users,439 others sought an exemption for 
audiovisual works generally.440 But the record demonstrates insufficient need to 
circumvent TPMs on audiovisual works that are not “motion pictures.” While Joint 
Educators contend that video game excerpts can be used in classroom instruction, it is 
unclear how or why circumvention of TPMs would be necessary to incorporate a video 
game excerpt as a pedagogical tool, as opposed to showing a filmed clip of game play 
(for example, from Twitch or YouTube).  Similarly, while Joint Filmmakers referenced an 
abandoned planned documentary utilizing clips from video games, again there was no 
record provided to support the necessity for or specifics of any circumvention activities to 
obtain the clips.
441 Accordingly, as no further examples of non-motion-picture 
436 EFF/OTW Reply at 11. 
437 Joint Creators Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 3; see also AACS LA/DVD CCA Class 7 Post-Hearing 
Resp. 
438 17 U.S.C. § 101; see also 1-2 MELVILLE B. NIMMER & DA VID NIMMER, NIMMER ON COPYRIGHT § 2.09 
(2015) (“1-2 NIMMER ON COPYRIGHT”). Video games are copyrightable and may be registered by the 
Copyright Office as computer programs, literary works, or as audiovisual works, but are not typically 
registered as motion pictures. See 1-2 NIMMER ON COPYRIGHT § 2.09; Atari Games Corp. v. Oman, 888 
F.2d 878 (9th Cir. 1989); Midway Mfg. Co. v. Artic Int’l, Inc.¸ 704 F.2d 1009 (7th Cir. 1983). 
439 EFF/OTW Supp. at 22 (agreeing with “motion picture” limitation). 
440 See Joint Educators Class 1 Supp. at 10 (seeking expansion to include video games); Hobbs Class 2 
Supp. at 1; Hobbs Class 4 Supp. at 1.
 
441 Tr. at 109:14-110:15 (May 20, 2015) (Quinn, Kartemquin Educational Films; Charlesworth, USCO).
 
68
 

[PAGE 73]
     
    
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
      
 
    
  
  
    
  
  
 
 
  
   
  
 
  
  
  
               
                 
      
             
                    
               
 
                     
  
                
   
           
       
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
audiovisual works were provided to support a broader exemption, the Register declines to 
recommend an exemption for excerpts of “audiovisual works,” as opposed to “motion 
pictures.” 
Second, these requested exemptions implicate the same types of TPMs regardless 
of proposed non-infringing use.  As explained above, proponents each seek an exemption 
that would apply to CSS-protected DVDs, AACS-protected Blu-ray discs, and various 
TPMs applicable to online distribution services. The record in this proceeding again 
confirms that CSS is a technological measure that controls access to motion pictures on 
DVDs, and that AACS is a measure that controls access to motion pictures on Blu-ray 
discs.
442 Proponents also assert that various technologies that protect motion pictures 
available via online streaming and digital download services constitute access controls 
within the meaning of section 1201(a)(1).443 Opponents do not appear to disagree,444 
instead observing that “these access controls have increased the availability of works and 
have allowed for a vast proliferation of platforms” for consumers to enjoy authorized 
content.
445 In light of this record, the Register concludes that a significant number of 
platforms that offer digitally transmitted motion pictures, both for digital downloads and 
for streaming, constitute technological measures controlling access to those works under 
section 1201(a)(1). 
Third, and as further discussed below, based on the record submitted regarding 
non-infringing uses of material distributed over streaming media services, the Register 
agrees with Joint Creators’ suggestion to replace the current phrase “online distribution 
services” with the phrase “digitally transmitted video” to more appropriately describe the 
media that proponents seek to use.  Indeed, the parties understand the current exemption 
to encompass both streamed and downloaded content.446 Additionally, as discussed 
below, the exemptions would retain the qualifications that uses be limited to “short 
portions” of motion pictures and for enumerated purposes related to criticism and 
commentary.
447 
442 See Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 3, App. J; EFF/OTW Supp. at 2; see also 2012 Recommendation at 126. 
443 See, e.g., Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 3, App. J; EFF/OTW Supp. at 2 (collectively referencing RTMPE, 
SWF, Fair Play, HTML5 and planned encryption of standard). 
444 See, e.g., Joint Creators Class 7 Opp’n at 2-3 (referencing EFF/OTW’s description of online access 
controls); Joint Creators Class 6 Opp’n at 2; but see Joint Creators Class 1 Opp’n at 3 n.4 (stating that Joint 
Educators had not established that streaming platforms use access controls to intentionally block access to 
works on projectors). 
445 See, e.g., Joint Creators Class 6 Opp’n at 2; Joint Creators Class 7 Opp’n at 2-3; Joint Creators Class 1 
Opp’n at 3. 
446 Tr. at 306:17-308:01 (May 28, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators; Smith, USCO); see also 37 C.F.R. § 
201.40(b)(4)-(7). 
447 See Tr. at 307:07-308:01 (May 28, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators) (supporting revision but seeking 
clarification that librarying would remain prohibited). 
69
 

[PAGE 74]
     
    
  
  
 
 
    
  
  
 
   
  
   
  
    
   
    
  
  
 
    
  
    
    
   
    
 
     
               
              
               
    
   
  
                  
             
    
             
               
                      
    
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
a. Noninfringing Uses 
Proponents of the various classes all claim that a significant number of the 
proposed uses of motion pictures fall within the favored purposes of criticism and 
commentary referenced in the preamble of section 107 and are therefore likely to be fair 
uses.448 For example, Professor Decherney uses motion picture excerpts as part of a 
course he teaches on the history of Hollywood, and NCAI has used footage of a 
Washington Redskins football game to demonstrate its position that seeing the team’s 
name and logo are not required to enjoy watching the game.  Accordingly, the Register 
proceeds to consider the four-factor test set out in section 107. 
While otherwise analyzing each class of proposed uses separately, the Register 
notes that factors two and three remain relatively constant across the proposed uses. 
Under factor two, it is well established that motion pictures are generally creative and 
thus at the core of copyright’s protective purposes.449 But for transformative uses, the 
second factor may be of relatively limited assistance to evaluate whether a use is fair.450 
As in 2012, the Register concludes that the second fair use factor slightly disfavors the 
proposed exemptions, but is not especially relevant to most of the proposed uses.451 
Under the third factor, the Register again concludes that the limitation to 
circumvention for uses of “short portions” of motion pictures is integral to the various 
proposals.452 Some proponents contested the necessity of this limitation, contending that 
a use should be judged by whether or not it is proportionate to the intended 
transformative goals, and that numerical limits specifying the appropriate amount of a 
work that may be used are inappropriate.453 But while recognizing that the extent of 
permissible copying may vary,454 the Register suggests that the “short portions” 
limitation provides useful guidance as to what is generally likely to be a fair use in these 
contexts without imposing a wholly inflexible rule as to length.455 As a general matter, 
longer uses are less likely to be considered fair because they are more likely to usurp the 
market for a work.  At any rate, the record provides few if any examples where the use of 
448 See 17 U.S.C. § 107.
 
449 In 2012, the Register also noted that while the assessment of the actual nature of a copyrighted work will
 
vary from case to case, the record generally revealed examples of motion pictures that were more creative,
 
rather than factual. See 2012 Recommendation at 128. The same is true for this rulemaking.
 
450 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 586.
 
451 See 2012 Recommendation at 128.
 
452 See id.
 
453 See, e.g., Joint Educators Class 1 Reply at 8 (citing Cambridge, 769 F.3d 1232); Hobbs Class 4 Reply at
 
6 (same); Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 19-20; Tr. at 9:02-05 (May 27, 2015) (Butler, Joint Educators).
 
454 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 586.
 
455 See, e.g., Tr. at 102:20-105:20 (May 20, 2015) (Charlesworth, USCO; Quinn, Kartemquin Educational
 
Films); Tr. at 89:05-11 (May 28, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators) (stating “the short portions limitation, for
 
example, really keeps this closer to what is very likely to be fair use, and so we think it’s important to retain
 
those types of limitations”).
 
70
 

[PAGE 75]
     
    
  
     
   
   
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
   
 
  
   
 
  
  
  
  
 
   
  
             
             
  
                
                   
               
                  
            
             
            
                  
               
             
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
a “longer” clip was necessary,456 and indeed, submissions from proponents of exemptions 
for noncommercial videos, MOOCs, and use in e-books suggest that the formats 
themselves dictate that clips be brief.457 While hypotheticals were raised concerning the 
use of multiple short clips from the same motion picture—and whether such multiple 
uses would qualify for the exemption—the Register notes that the limitation to “short 
portions” does not categorically exclude them.  The critical question is whether, in the 
aggregate, such uses would be noninfringing. 
i. Proposed Class 1:  Colleges and Universities 
Joint Educators demonstrated that a significant number of the proposed uses are 
for purposes of criticism and commentary, which are favored uses under the preamble of 
section 107 and therefore likely to be fair.  Analyzing the first factor, Joint Educators 
introduced multiple examples of uses for commentary, criticism, scholarship and teaching 
in a nonprofit educational context that appeared to represent transformative uses of the 
original work.
458 These included, for example, an instructor’s use of short video clips to 
provide context for ethnomusicology lectures, or a student’s completion of a video essay 
project that required the use of still images and video for a cinema studies course.
459 
As explained above, the second and third factors are neutral or tend to favor 
proponents.  Looking to the fourth factor, when the use of a work is for criticism or 
commentary or otherwise transformative, it is presumed to be less likely to compete with 
the market for the underlying work.  Notably, opponents do not contest that the brief, 
educationally oriented uses in this proposed class are likely to be fair uses; nor have they 
introduced evidence that the intended uses by faculty and students are likely to 
undermine the value of copyright-protected motion pictures.
460 
Accordingly, while the Register makes no judgment as to whether any particular 
uses submitted by Class 1 proponents (or by proponents of the other audiovisual classes) 
are in fact fair, the record demonstrates that many of the uses suggested by proponents 
appear likely to be fair and thus to qualify as a noninfringing purpose under section 107. 
456 Tr. at 13:08-19:24 (May 27, 2015) (Smith, USCO; Butler, Joint Educators); id. at 64:24-65:10 (Williams, 
Joint Creators) (noting that Joint Creators did not challenge whether alleged use of “longer excerpts” fell 
outside exemption). 
457 See EFF/OTW Supp. at 15; Joint Educators Class 3 Supp. at 10; see also EFF/OTW Supp. at 22 (“We do 
not oppose language of this sort, providing that it can be made clear that ‘short’ has no specific definition 
outside a comparison to the particular works at issue and the remixer’s needs.”); Joint Educators Class 1 
Supp. at 23 (requesting limitation that was limited to use of “short portions” of motion pictures); Tr. at 
106:19-20 (May 20, 2015) (Lerner, Joint Filmmakers) (noting “we don’t disagree with what you said about 
[short portions] not being a bright line rule”); Tr. at 105:03-04 (May 20, 2015) (Quinn, Kartemquin 
Educational Films) (agreeing “in most cases, the term ‘short’ is sufficiently vague”). 
458 See Joint Educators Class 1 Reply at 4-6; Joint Educators Class 1 Supp. at 7; Sheff Supp. at 1. 
459 See Joint Educators Class 1 Supp. at 7; Joint Educators Class 1 Reply at 20. 
460 See, e.g., Joint Creators Class 1 Opp’n; DVD CCA Class 1 Opp’n. 
71
 

[PAGE 76]
     
    
   
  
 
  
    
 
   
  
  
    
 
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
  
   
 
  
  
     
  
 
  
       
    
     
                
              
           
     
        
          
   
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
ii. Proposed Class 2:  Primary and Secondary Schools (K-12) 
Similarly, Class 2 proponents demonstrated that a significant number of the 
proposed uses within primary and secondary schools— for example, comparing the 
depiction of the 1920s in the film Chicago with the book The Great Gatsby461— are likely 
to be non-infringing fair uses under section 107, and opponents do not contest this aspect 
of the petition.  Because the purpose and character of the uses are for criticism and 
comment and also within a nonprofit educational setting, the first factor favors fair use.
462 
As explained above, the second and third factors are neutral or tend to favor proponents.  
Finally, the Register agrees that the brief and transformative nature of these educational 
uses makes them unlikely to interfere with the markets for the underlying works.
463 
While the record is relatively light on whether standard definition or higherquality resolution is required to make the proposed uses of the material, as discussed 
further below, it does suggest that a significant number of the proposed uses are likely to 
be fair and would qualify as noninfringing under section 107. 
iii. Proposed Class 3:  Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) 
Analysis of this proposed exemption for faculty and students participating in 
MOOCs must first grapple with varying attempts to define its contours.  Class 3 
proponents initially took the position that it would be inappropriate to limit the types of 
programs qualifying for an exemption, for example, by imposing standards for user 
registration or terms of use, or distinguishing between nonprofit or commercial 
initiatives.
464 
While acknowledging the organic and rapid growth of programs understood to be 
MOOCs since the last rulemaking, the Office shares AACS LA’s concern that an 
“unbounded exemption” where “[a]nybody can declare that they’re teaching a MOOC” 
and “anyone can be a student” is anathema to the exemption process as envisioned by 
Congress.
465 That said, the record contains specific examples of uses proposed by 
proponents, and suggests that proponents’ focus is on a more circumscribed category of 
offerings made available by universities, such as Professor Decherney’s proposed MOOC 
titled The Hollywood Film Industry, or HarvardX’s interdisciplinary series of courses 
461 Hobbs Class 2 Supp. at 4. 
462 Id. at 4-5. 
463 Id. at 3, 9. 
464 Proponents explain that some MOOCs do not require registration, that “[b]y definition, MOOCs are free 
to participate in,” and that Coursera and Udacity, two of the major MOOC platforms, are for-profit entities. 
Joint Educators Class 3 Supp. at 5-6 & n.15 (citing Harvard Open Courses: Open Learning Initiative, 
HARV ARD EXTENSION SCHOOL, http://www.extension.harvard.edu/open-learning-initiative (“You do not 
need to register to view the lecture videos.”)). 
465 Tr. at 119:18-121:16 (May 27, 2015) (Turnbull, DVD CCA/AACS LA); see id. at 129:03-130:24 
(Williams, Joint Creators). 
72
 

[PAGE 77]
     
    
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
  
    
   
   
 
  
 
  
    
  
  
    
  
  
  
         
        
          
          
            
             
                   
               
                     
                
            
           
   
              
               
             
            
   
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
titled ChinaX.466 Professor Decherney explained that platforms like Coursera or Udacity 
do not themselves offer courses, but rather are used by universities or other organizations 
to distribute the online courses that the institutions have created.467 Opponents, for their 
part, expressed significantly greater comfort if this proposed class were to be limited to 
courses offered by accredited institutions such as colleges and universities.468 
Against this backdrop, the Register must consider whether the specific proposed 
uses are likely to be non-infringing under section 110(2), or under section 107 as fair 
uses.  While the record is not as well developed as it might be, it appears that some 
universities perhaps have relied upon section 110(2) in offering live synchronous online 
courses that are limited by registration and size.
469 But the parties seem to agree that 
many MOOCs, as commonly understood, are likely to fall out of bounds of the TEACH 
Act for one or more reasons.
470 
The Register acknowledges proponents’ hesitation to claim that the proposed uses 
meet the TEACH Act’s requirement that all uses are made “under the actual supervision 
of an instructor as an integral part of a class session offered as a regular part of the 
systematic mediated instructional activities of . . . an accredited non-profit educational 
institution.”471 The legislative history indicates that the phrase “systematic mediated 
instructional activities” was intended to encompass uses of works in ways “analogous to 
live-classroom lectures,”
472 and the record disclosed no judicial interpretation to flesh out 
how analogous they must be. The Register recognizes that while to some degree they 
may mimic a traditional classroom setting, MOOCs are typically structured differently 
than live-classroom lectures (e.g., lessons can be completed on-demand, are offered on a 
standalone basis, and are shorter than traditional live-classroom lectures).  In certain 
466 Joint Educators Class 3 Supp. at 8, 12. 
467 Tr. at 134:07-137:16 (May 27, 2015) (Decherney, Joint Educators; Charlesworth, USCO). 
468 See, e.g., id. at 142:03-143:02 (Turnbull, DVD CCA/AACS LA). 
469 See, e.g., id. at 145:19-149:07 (Decherney, Joint Educators; Charlesworth, USCO). 
470 Id. at 98:03-06 (Butler, Joint Educators); id. at 127:04-19 (Turnbull, DVD CCA/AACS LA). 
471 See 17 U.S.C. § 110(2)(A); see also id. § 110(11) (defining “ mediated instructional activities” as 
“activities that use such work as an integral part of the class experience, controlled by or under the actual 
supervision of the instructor and analogous to the type of performance or display that would take place in a 
live classroom setting. The term does not refer to activities that use, in 1 or more class sessions of a single 
course, such works as textbooks, course packs, or other material in any media, copies or phonorecords of 
which are typically purchased or acquired by the students in higher education for their independent use and 
retention or are typically purchased or acquired for elementary and secondary students for their possession 
and independent use”). 
472 The legislative history suggests that the congressional motivation was to exclude uses of works which 
students would typically be required to purchase as part of a coursepack as opposed to viewed in a live 
lecture. See S. REP. NO. 107-31, at 9-10 (2001) (noting the phrase is “intended to require the performance 
or display to be analogous to the type of performance or display that would take place in a live classroom 
setting”). 
73
 

[PAGE 78]
     
    
 
   
   
  
    
 
    
  
     
    
  
    
  
  
 
  
 
  
    
   
   
  
 
  
 
  
  
       
    
        
                
            
            
               
         
            
        
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
cases, MOOCs may qualify for the exception under section 110(2).  But the record also 
suggests that in other cases, they may not.  
It appears that many existing MOOCs may not meet section 110(2)’s standards by 
choice rather than by inherent design.  MOOCs may lack a formalized enrollment 
process,
473 fail to institute policies or provide notices to students regarding copyright,474 
or lack the types of protections against unauthorized redistribution of copyrighted content 
that Congress envisioned in enacting that section.475 In the case of enrollment policies, 
the Register notes that edX, a major MOOC platform, does impose enrollment 
requirements on students.  Section 110(2)(D)(ii) of the TEACH Act requires transmitting 
bodies or institutions to implement technological measures that “reasonably prevent 
retention of a work in accessible form . . . for longer than the class session; and 
unauthorized further dissemination of the work in accessible form.”
476 While AACS LA 
and others contend that it would not be “particularly burdensome” for platforms to 
implement TPMs on streamed or downloaded content—and indeed the extensive record 
submitted in connection with various requests to circumvent TPMs on digitally 
distributed material supports this suggestion
477—Joint Educators claim that implementing 
TPMs of the kind required by section 110(2) “would be an unwelcome and unnatural fit 
for most MOOC providers.”478 
While the TEACH Act may not itself provide a comprehensive basis for a finding 
of noninfringing use in the MOOC context, the Register believes that the Act, which 
became law in 2002, provides useful and important guidance as to Congress’ intentions 
regarding the need for and nature of excepted uses to permit certain performances and 
displays of copyrighted works for distance learning.  As discussed below, the Register 
recommends that any exemption for uses in connection with MOOCs be tied to key 
aspects of section 110(2), including its emphasis on implementation of TPMs in distance 
learning that incorporates copyrighted works. 
Turning to the alternative noninfringing basis of fair use, the record primarily 
contains examples of MOOCs that are provided by accredited nonprofit educational 
473 See 17 U.S.C. § 110(2)(C).
 
474 See id. § 110(2)(D)(i).
 
475 H.R. REP. NO. 107-687, at 11-13 (2002).
 
476 See 17 U.S.C. § 110(2)(D)(ii) (also requiring that transmitting bodies or institutions do not interfere with
 
TPMs used by copyright owners to prevent such retention or unauthorized further distribution).
 
477 Tr. at 122:22-123:16 (May 27, 2015) (Turnbull, DVD CCA/AACS LA); see also, e.g., AACS LA/DVD
 
CCA Class 3 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2-5 (citing MediaCAST, Chegg and Vital Source Bookshelf e-reader
 
platforms, Apple’s FairPlay technology, DRMtoday, EZDRM.com, Expressplay.com, aBuyDRM.com, and
 
Verimatrix.com as examples of TPM services for various online platforms).
 
478 Band/Butler/Decherney Class 3 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2.
 
74
 

[PAGE 79]
     
    
  
      
 
  
 
   
 
   
  
   
      
  
  
    
 
   
  
  
  
     
 
   
  
    
               
          
             
          
            
         
         
      
               
       
        
                  
           
             
  
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
institutions (albeit sometimes through third-party platforms) and it is these types of uses 
that the Register will proceed to analyze under the four-factor test.479 
First, Joint Educators demonstrated that a significant number of the planned uses 
by faculty reproduce portions of motion pictures for purposes of criticism and 
commentary, favored purposes in the preamble of section 107.  For example, Professor 
Decherney plans to offer a MOOC titled The Hollywood Film Industry that is similar to 
classroom and live synchronous online courses he has previously offered to students 
enrolled at the University of Pennsylvania.480 Other examples included an 
interdisciplinary course on Chinese history and culture and the study of German 
cinema.481 Moreover, because the examples provided concerned courses offered by 
universities operating on a nonprofit basis,482 this further favors proponents.  Without 
suggesting that a court would find each and every one of the proposed uses to be 
transformative or otherwise favored under the factor first, the record nonetheless 
indicates that a significant number be viewed positively under this factor. 
As discussed above, while the second fair use factor does not favor an exemption, 
it is not especially relevant here. Turning to the third factor, especially in light of the fact 
that MOOC segments tend to be at most ten minutes in length for all of the content 
presented, the proposed uses of excerpts of motion pictures within these segments are 
likely to be brief as well.  This factor therefore favors proponents. 
Finally, as to the fourth factor, uses of modest amounts of motion pictures in a 
transformative manner for purposes of criticism or comment are less likely to interfere 
with the primary or derivative markets for the motion picture.
483 Opponents have not 
demonstrated that the specific examples provided by proponents would diminish the 
value of copyright-protected works.484 
479 While Butler noted that some MOOC offerers are nonprofits but not “accredited institutions,” including 
Khan Academy, the World Bank, and National Geographic Society, proponents did not introduce specific 
evidence that these nonprofits are seeking to benefit from the proposed exemption. Compare Tr. at 118:05­
118:23 (May 27, 2015) (Butler, Joint Educators), with 17 U.S.C. § 110(2). 
480 See Joint Educators Class 3 Supp. at 8-9; Tr. at 145:19-149:07 (May 27, 2015) (Decherney, Joint 
Educators; Charlesworth, USCO) (describing similarities and differences between non-MOOC online, live 
synchronous courses and Professor Decherney’s planned MOOC); see also Tr. at 145:02-09 (May 27, 2015) 
(Butler, Joint Educators) (describing proposed MOOC about German films). 
481 See, e.g., Joint Educators Class 3 Supp. at 4-5, 12 (referencing courses in computer science, business, 
engineering, art and design, health and medicine and describing a China course offered by HarvardX); Joint 
Educators Class 3 Reply at 10-11 (referencing proposed MOOC on German “Lola” award-winning films). 
482 See Joint Educators Class 3 Reply at 10-11; see also Joint Educators Class 3 Supp. at 4-5, 8, 12. 
483 See 2012 Recommendation at 129; Campbell, 510 U.S. at 591-92. 
484 The market for works protected by access controls is addressed below in the context of the 1201 
statutory factors. 
75
 

[PAGE 80]
     
    
  
    
  
   
 
   
  
 
      
  
  
     
    
 
  
   
 
 
   
  
    
     
 
  
  
              
              
           
           
                  
           
          
          
  
       
                  
    
 
 
                                                 
	 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
On balance, and without passing judgment on any particular use described by 
proponents, the fair use analysis indicates that a substantial number of the proposed uses 
of motion picture excerpts for criticism and comment in MOOCs offered by nonprofit 
educational institutions are likely to qualify as noninfringing under section 107.  Some 
may also qualify as excepted uses under section 110(2).
485 
iv.	 Proposed Class 4:  Educational Programs Operated by 
Museums, Libraries or Nonprofits 
Much of the discussion surrounding the proposed exemption for museums, 
libraries and nonprofits concerned the appropriate contours of such a class.  For example, 
Hobbs was persuasive on the point that an organization accredited to confer GEDs should 
be treated similarly to a K-12 school.
486 But the language proposed in her petition was 
far broader and would seemingly encompass over 1.5 million nonprofit organizations in 
the United States, regardless of purpose or mission statement.487 In reply comments, 
Hobbs suggested the exemption could be limited to “digital and media literacy 
instructional practices in informal learning contexts.”488 Accordingly, the Register limits 
the following analysis to these types of digital and media literacy programs. 
While Hobbs references a large number of library, museums, and other 
organizations, and describes a handful of media literacy programs, including after-school 
programs, the record is short on specific proposed noninfringing uses of copyrighted 
material. The examples provided were limited to GED-conferring and adult education 
programs using short portions of motion pictures for purposes of criticism and 
commentary in the course of face-to-face instruction.  Specifically, an instructor proposes 
to have her students incorporate motion picture excerpts into poetry video essays as part 
of a GED program, and a nonprofit media literacy organization proposes to circumvent 
TPMs on the television series Orange is the New Black so that program participants can 
comment upon the portrayal of African-American women in the series.
489 These sorts of 
uses are favored in the preamble of section 107 and likely to be transformative under the 
first fair use factor.  As explained above, the second and third fair use factors are neutral 
or tend to favor proponents.  In analyzing the fourth fair use factor, as with the other 
485 In reaching this conclusion, the Register notes that section 110 shall not “be construed to imply further 
rights under section 106 of this title, or to have any effect on the defenses or limitations on rights granted 
under any other section of [] title [17].” 17 U.S.C. § 110(11). 
486 Hobbs Class 4 Reply at 5; Tr. at 231:09-232:08 (May 27, 2015) (Hobbs). 
487 See Joint Creators Class 4 Opp’n at 4 n.4 (noting that the National Center for Charitable Statistics lists 
over 1.5 million registered nonprofit organizations in the United States). Nor was the original proposal 
limited to 501(c)(3) organizations; it also encompassed, for example, political organizations structured 
under 501(c)(4), professional football leagues structured under 501(c)(6), and cemetery companies 
organized under 501(c)(13). 
488 Hobbs Class 4 Reply at 5. 
489 See Hobbs Class 4 Supp. at 4; Hobbs Class 4 Reply at 5, 8; Tr. at 231:09-232:08, 234:11-235:25, 
258:14-259:08 (May 27, 2015) (Hobbs). 
76
 

[PAGE 81]
     
    
 
    
  
 
    
  
  
 
  
 
 
   
    
   
 
   
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
              
            
              
             
     
               
        
    
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
educational classes, the Register agrees that the types of transformative uses of brief clips 
that proponents are suggesting are unlikely to interfere with the markets for the 
underlying copyrighted works. 
Accordingly, while the Register makes no judgment as to whether any particular 
uses submitted by Class 4 proponents are in fact fair,490 it appears that many of the 
proposed uses would likely be considered fair and noninfringing under section 107. 
v. Proposed Class 5:  Multimedia E-Books 
Although in the case of multimedia e-books the record with respect to proposed 
uses was leaner than in some other classes, the Register finds that Class 5 proponents 
have sufficiently demonstrated that some meaningful portion of the proffered uses are 
likely to be fair.  For example, proponents seek to incorporate motion picture excerpts in 
e-books analyzing techniques in motion picture sound editing or cinematography. 
First, the record includes examples of prospective e-books in which filmmakers, 
cinema studies professors, and other authors seek to conduct close analysis of and 
provide commentary on short excerpts of motion pictures.
491 At least at the present time, 
the technical limitations of the medium (i.e., maximum file sizes) will seemingly limit the 
uses of the excerpted works to relatively brief segments.  Although many of these ebooks may be commercial endeavors, because the excerpts are used for the purposes of 
criticism and commentary, they may well be productive and transformative uses.
492 That 
said, the Register nonetheless agrees with opponents that the record lacks evidence 
demonstrating a need to expand the current exemption to include uses in fictional e-books 
or for purposes beyond close analysis of the underlying work, as no examples of such 
uses were submitted. 
As with the other classes, the second and third factors are less relevant.  But under 
the fourth factor, the brevity and transformative nature of the proposed uses favors an 
exemption because the proposed users are unlikely to substitute for the original work— 
and indeed opponents did not identify any proposed use that has in the past harmed, or is 
likely in the future to harm, the market for or value of any copyrighted motion 
pictures.
493 
490 As noted above, the record was limited to examples of uses in GED-conferring programs or adult 
education programs, and proponents stipulated that they did not seek an exemption for uses that would fall 
outside “digital and media literacy instructional practices in informal learning contexts.” The Register 
therefore declines to analyze other theoretical uses, such as exhibitions or public presentations before 
general audiences in libraries or museums. 
491 See Authors Alliance Supp. at 11-13; Tr. at 95:12-24 (May 28, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators). 
492 See 2012 Recommendation at 128 (citing Campbell, 510 U.S. at 583-85). 
493 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 591-92. 
77
 

[PAGE 82]
     
    
 
 
  
 
 
 
     
    
    
   
   
 
 
     
 
 
    
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
                 
          
    
   
   
          
        
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Accordingly, again without opining on the fairness of any particular proposed use, 
the Register concludes that the record demonstrates that many of the contemplated uses 
are likely to be noninfringing under section 107. 
vi. Proposed Class 6:  Filmmaking Uses 
Joint Filmmakers introduced numerous examples of uses of short excerpts of 
motion pictures in documentary films to provide criticism, commentary, or educate, 
which the Register agrees may represent “paradigmatic fair uses of copyrighted 
works.”494 These include: a documentary of the life of former U.S. Attorney General 
Ramsey Clark (featuring news clips of Clark),495 the documentary Inequality for All 
(using clips to illustrate America’s widening income gap),496 and These Amazing 
Shadows (telling the story of the history and importance of the National Film 
Registry).497 No commenters dispute the validity of such uses by documentary 
filmmakers.  Obtaining quality motion picture source material can be vital to illustrate 
context for public debate, examine history and popular culture, and otherwise further 
documentary storytelling.
498 As the Register has concluded in prior rulemakings, because 
documentaries use motion picture clips to provide commentary and/or criticism—and 
often, invaluable insight into the subject matter of the film—such uses are likely to be 
transformative and are favored under the preamble of section 107.  This can be true even 
when a film is intended for commercial release.499 
Considering the statutory fair use factors, first, as explained, the use in 
documentaries is likely to be transformative in nature; second, while motion pictures are 
generally creative in nature, this is less true in the case of archival news footage and, at 
any rate, this factor is neutralized by the transformative proposed uses in documentaries; 
third, proponents seek to use quantitatively small portions of excerpts, favoring fair use; 
and fourth, use of a motion picture clip for purposes of documentary commentary or 
criticism is unlikely to interfere with the primary or derivative markets for the underlying 
work.  Accordingly, the Register again concludes that many of the proposed uses in 
documentary filmmaking are likely to be non-infringing fair uses. 
The thornier question for this rulemaking is whether proponents have 
demonstrated that uses beyond documentary filmmaking—alternatively described by 
commenters as “narrative,” “fictional” or “scripted” filmmaking, or in terms of narrower 
subsets such as “biopics” or films “based on a true story”—are likely to be fair.  Joint 
494 See Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 5, Apps. D-G, App. I; see also id. at App. L (listing 23 events held by
 
organizations to inform filmmakers about guidelines for fair use in filmmaking).
 
495 Id. at 9.
 
496 Id. at 13.
 
497 Id. at 17.
 
498 See, e.g., id. at App. D (Letter from Kenn Rabin).
 
499 See 17 U.S.C. § 107; 2012 Recommendation at 127-29; 2010 Recommendation at 49-52.
 
78
 

[PAGE 83]
     
    
 
   
 
  
    
     
   
 
 
   
  
   
  
    
  
  
  
 
 
   
  
       
    
         
       
                    
               
          
            
            
           
       
           
            
                
               
          
              
      
            
     
   
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Filmmakers point to many examples of uses of motion picture excerpts in nondocumentary films, such as a scripted biopic of civil rights leader Cesar Chavez (using 
news clips),500 Oliver Stone’s forthcoming “take on the Edward Snowden saga” (using 
news clips),501 and a fictional film that “explores what it would be like for a 70s black 
family watching Roots” (showing clips from Roots).502 The Register proceeds to evaluate 
whether the current record adequately supports the contention that the proposed uses of 
motion picture excerpts within various types of non-documentary films are likely to be 
non-infringing.
503 
At the outset, the use of motion picture clips in narrative films diverges from 
educational uses and uses in documentaries because there is no presumption that their 
primary purpose is to offer criticism or commentary, as opposed to being included for 
entertainment purposes.
504 Previously granted exemptions have been limited to uses of 
motion picture excerpts for purposes of criticism and comment—that is, purpos es 
explicitly identified by Congress as fair uses in the preamble to section 107.505 To be 
sure, it may be possible for narrative films to use motion picture clips for purposes of 
criticism or comment, or for uses of motion picture clips for purposes other than criticism 
and comment to be fair uses.  The Register acknowledges proponents’ view that some 
fictional filmmaking may offer criticism and commentary through “techniques such as 
parody, reference, and pastiche” or “present information and commentary meant to 
educate and analyze real events.”
506 But with narrative films there is a significant 
countervailing concern: that copyrighted works will be used in a manner that may 
supplant the existing, robust licensing market for motion picture clips.
507 This might be 
true, for example, when a clip is simply used to move a fictional or quasi-fictional 
storyline forward.508 To support their proposal for a broader exemption, Joint 
500 See Joint Filmmakers Supp. at App. G (Letter from Pablo Cruz). 
501 See id. at App. C at Chart 1. 
502 See id. at App. C at Chart 2; see also id. at App. I at 9 (statement of Matt Latham) (referencing a planned 
narrative film “that satirizes the representation of women in cinema”); id. at App. M (Letter of Adam Folk) 
(describing the narrative film Welcome to New York which incorporated news coverage of Dominique 
Strauss-Kahn in an allegedly transformative manner); Lerner et al. Post Hearing Resp. at 2-3 (describing 
the narrative film Experimenter which portrays the life of psychologist Stanley Milgram and uses clips 
from the television show Candid Camera to draw parallels between the show and social psychology; 
further describing transformative nature of Strauss-Kahn footage). 
503 In 2012, the Register concluded that the record presented lacked “concrete examples” that would allow 
her to conduct an adequate fair use analysis with respect to fictional films. 2012 Recommendation at 130. 
504 See id. Of course, the Register recognizes that many documentaries are highly entertaining, and does 
not suggest that entertaining works cannot also make transformative use of preexisting material. Instead, 
the Register means only to differentiate uses which are not intended to offer commentary. 
505 See 17 U.S.C. § 107; 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,827; 2012 Final Rule, 77 Fed. Reg. at 65,266. 
506 Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 5. 
507 See Tr. at 79:08-14 (May 20, 2015) (Swart, Twentieth Century Fox Home Entertainment) (“We actually 
do a pretty vibrant licensing business.”). 
508 See 2012 Recommendation at 130. 
79
 

[PAGE 84]
     
    
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
  
  
   
  
    
   
   
 
    
 
    
 
 
     
   
   
 
 
                
                 
   
        
  
       
             
            
           
                
  
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Filmmakers submit testimony from non-documentary filmmakers509 as well as a list of 
more than 30 narrative films that were awarded errors and omissions (“E&O”) insurance 
coverage since the 2012 rulemaking notwithstanding the use of unlicensed material, or 
where certain uses of unlicensed material was deemed a fair use by a court.510 While this 
list may provide additional context, the Register must perform her own analysis.  In 
particular, the issuance of E&O insurance—which provides coverage in the event of a 
lawsuit for copyright infringement, among other things—is not equivalent to a 
determination of fair use, but only a representation that an underwriter agrees to insure 
the film against any prospective claim.  Similarly, none of the case law examples 
provided by proponents considered the use of motion picture excerpts in narrative films, 
but rather involved reenactments, quotations, filming of fine art, or other types of uses.  
In considering the factual record, the Register considered whether there might be 
an appropriate way to limit the types of narrative films to which the exemption might 
conceivably apply, so as to permit a more limited set of uses while minimizing the 
potential impact upon legitimate licensing of the underlying works.  Of the uses of 
motion picture clips set forth by proponent Michael Donaldson in the list of films 
obtaining E&O insurance, the overwhelming majority were classified as “based on a true 
story” or “biopics.”
511 The Office thus specifically invited participants, after the public 
hearings, to provide information describing any commonly accepted differences between 
documentary, biopics, and other categories of films.
512 But the responses revealed less 
than complete agreement as to the meaning of the term “documentary,” let alone 
categories such as “documentary-like,” “biopic,” “docudrama,” “based on a true story,” 
“films that portray real events,” “inspired by,” “imaginative,” or “totally fiction.”
513 
Accordingly, the Register is unable on this record to draw sound distinctions among 
different types of narrative films.  Moreover, the parties did seem to agree that it would 
be inappropriate to grant an exemption for some types of non-documentary films but not 
others—with, of course, proponents favoring a full exemption and opponents favoring 
none whatsoever.  In analyzing the fair use question for use of clips in non-documentary 
509 Joint Filmmakers Supp. at App. D (Letter from Kenn Rabin), App. F (Letter from Michael Mailer), App. 
G (Letter from Pablo Cruz), App. H (Letter from Finite Films), App. I (Filmmaker Testimony), App. M 
(Letter of Adam Folk). 
510 Id. at App. C (Letter from Michael Donaldson). 
511 Id. 
512 See Post-Hearing Questions to Class 6 Witnesses (June 3, 2015). 
513 See NMR Post Hearing Resp. at 2-3 (noting that “filmmakers across genres of filmmaking borrow many 
techniques and conventions from each other,” and citing professor of film studies Cy Kuckenbaker when 
noting that accepted documentaries like Exit Through the Gift Shop and The Act of Killing “consciously 
subvert traditional assumptions about genre and their relation to fact and fiction”); see generally Class 6 
Post-Hearing Responses. 
80
 

[PAGE 85]
     
    
  
   
   
 
 
      
   
   
    
   
  
 
   
  
   
    
  
   
  
 
  
  
   
  
   
  
              
            
    
                 
               
              
                  
           
          
             
      
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
films, the Register is therefore unable, on this record, to restrict her analysis to any 
predetermined subsets of films.514 
With respect to non-documentary films, the first statutory factor, the purpose and 
character of the use, does not clearly favor proponents.  While the purpose of this 
rulemaking is not to opine on specific uses, the Register observes that, based on the 
record in this proceeding, a number of examples of uses offered by proponents do not 
necessarily appear to be related to criticism or comment or otherwise transformative. For 
example, the description of the film Mandorla offered by Joint Filmmakers suggests that 
multiple excerpts from the film Excalibur are perhaps being used to flesh out the 
motivations of the main character and further the storyline, and it is not immediately 
apparent that these uses are transformative or should not be licensed.
515 Similarly, 
proponents reference Farah Goes Bang, a film about a “woman in her twenties who tries 
to lose her virginity while campaigning across America for presidential candidate John 
Kerry in 2004.”516 Because the campaign clips may be used for entertainment purposes, 
it is not clear that the uses are transformative.  Joint Filmmakers also point to uses of 
motion picture excerpts in scripted films such as Selma or Good Night and Good Luck, 
but it appears that in those cases, the uses were licensed.
517 
As explained above, the second factor, the nature of the work, tends to weigh 
against a finding of fair use because motion pictures are generally creative. As with the 
other proposed classes, the third factor tends to favor proponents because presumably the 
uses would be limited to short portions of the overall work. 
Considering the fourth factor, the effect of the use on the potential market for or 
value of the copyrighted work, the record suggests that extending an exemption to 
narrative films may interfere with primary or derivative markets for the underlying work 
and, in particular, the licensing market for motion picture excerpts.  Joint Filmmakers 
suggest that limiting the exemption to uses of short portions of clips makes it unlikely 
that the proposed uses will interfere with the market for the underlying copyrighted work 
as a whole,
518 but this does not address the effect on the licensing market for the clips 
themselves.  While Joint Filmmakers profess to “have no interest in an exemption that 
514 To the extent relevant in a future rulemaking, the Register would welcome additional filmic examples or 
written analysis of an appropriate way to describe a specific category of narrative films that are more likely 
to make noninfringing use of motion picture excerpts. 
515 Mandorla is described as a movie about “[a] man with an over active imagination. It calls him away 
from the realities of corporate and family life to face a dark and magical place in a medieval French city.” 
It apparently uses “[c]lips from Excalibur which constantly makes him want to recreate the scene in his 
own life.” Joint Filmmakers Supp. at App. C at Chart 2; see also Tr. at 62:11-19 (May 20, 2015) (Williams, 
Joint Creators) (discussing need for licensing of uses of excerpts to “grab the audience’s attention”). 
516 Joint Filmmakers Supp. at App. C at Chart 2. 
517 See id. at 18; id. at App. D (Letter from Kenn Rabin) (discussing obtaining licenses for both uses). 
518 Joint Filmmakers Reply at 6. 
81
 

[PAGE 86]
     
    
  
   
 
   
   
  
 
   
  
   
 
   
   
   
   
  
       
   
   
   
    
   
 
         
       
          
            
    
          
                   
         
                 
        
              
    
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
covers clips just for entertainment value,”519 proponents offer no satisfying way to refine 
this category to exclude “entertainment value” uses from the types of transformative uses 
associated with documentary filmmaking.  Meanwhile, opponents raise persuasive 
concerns that an exemption for non-documentary films would undermine a vibrant 
licensing market.520 The fourth factor therefore weighs relatively substantially against 
fair use. 
On balance, the fair use analysis reveals that while a significant number of the 
proposed documentary uses would qualify as noninfringing under section 107, as framed 
by proponents and based on the record provided, the Register cannot conclude that the 
suggested non-documentary uses are likely to be noninfringing. 
vii. Proposed Class 7:  Noncommercial Videos 
As in previous rulemakings, the Register finds that Class 7 proponents have 
demonstrated that a significant number of the proposed uses to create noncommercial 
videos involve criticism and commentary, which are privileged uses under section 107.521 
More specifically, turning to the first fair use factor, the Register has previously observed 
that noncommercial videos may take clips from motion pictures to make a point about the 
underlying works and/or to convey a political message, and the evidence submitted in this 
proceeding includes many examples of videos that illustrate such uses, such as NCAI’s 
Take It Away video,
522 video lectures providing in-depth film criticism,523 and a remix 
video calling attention to sexism in a famous game show.524 In many instances, then, the 
first fair use factor weighs in favor of proponents. 
That said, the record is not uniform in this regard. The Register credits 
opponents’ concern that several of the videos provided as examples may be insufficiently 
transformative to support a determination of fair use.
525 While understanding that 
familiarity with the original material and the “vidding” genre may sometimes be required 
to fully appreciate the transformative aspects of certain remix videos,526 it is not clear that 
various “trailer-style” videos submitted in connection with this proposed class—often 
519 Tr. at 42:05-43:01 (May 20, 2015) (Lerner, Joint Filmmakers).
 
520 See id. at 79:23-80:01 (Swart, Twentieth Century Fox Home Entertainment).
 
521 See Joint Creators Class 7 Opp’n at 3 (acknowledging that “noncommercial video creators often make
 
fair uses of materials from other motion pictures”); DVD CCA Class 7 Opp’n at 4 (accord).
 
522 See NCAI Supp. at 1.
 
523 See EFF/OTW Supp. at App. A at 4 (referencing Tony Zhou’s Every Frame a Painting video series).
 
524 See id. at App. A at 3 (referencing The Price is Creepy vid); see also generally EFF/OTW Reply at 17,
 
App. A; EFF/OTW Supp. at Apps. A, Q. 
525 See, e.g., DVD CCA Class 7 Opp’n at 5-6 (citing Warner Bros. v. RDR Books, 575 F. Supp. 2d 513); 
AACS LA Class 7 Opp’n at 5-8 (same).
 
526 Compare EFF/OTW Reply at 3-4,  App. A (discussing SupreMacy vid), with Joint Creators Class 7
 
Opp’n at 3-4. 
82
 

[PAGE 87]
     
    
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
   
   
  
  
 
   
   
  
  
 
 
    
   
  
   
  
           
               
                   
 
   
                
            
        
              
           
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
consisting of a montage of scenes from a specific movie or television show accompanied 
by a preexisting soundtrack from another source—sufficiently “change[] the meaning or 
message” of the underlying work to be considered transformative.527 Nor does the case 
law provided by EFF/OTW support the view that montages and like uses that appear to 
offer mainly entertainment rather than commentary are inherently transformative; such 
uses may instead be derivative works that require permission from the copyright owners 
of the original work.  The Register emphasizes that limiting the scope to uses of motion 
pictures for purposes of criticism or commentary is integral to fashioning an appropriate 
exemption for this class. 
Because the second and third factors are neutral or favor proponents, as explained 
above, the analysis next turns to the fourth factor, the effect upon the market for the 
copyrighted work.  As explained in the 2012 rulemaking, when the proposed uses are 
transformative, it is less likely that there will be interference with the primary or 
derivative markets for the underlying work.
528 The Register additionally notes that there 
is no record evidence that an appropriately crafted exemption will harm the market for 
copyrighted works.  Indeed, EFF/OTW offered some evidence that the owners of the 
underlying works may appreciate the attention that fan remix videos bring to the original 
work.
529 
Accordingly, without opining on whether any particular use is in fact fair or not 
fair, the Register concludes that the record demonstrates that a substantial number, though 
not all, of the proffered uses are likely to be noninfringing under section 107. 
b. Adverse Effects 
Proponents have established that certain noninfringing uses contemplated by 
Proposed Classes 1 through 7 can be achieved if circumvention is allowed, but this does 
not end the inquiry.  The Register must also determine whether the prohibition on 
circumvention is causing adverse effects, including whether it is possible that proponents 
may make these noninfringing uses without circumventing access controls.  
At the outset, the Register concludes that generally speaking, copyrighted motion 
pictures are not widely available in formats not subject to technological protections.
530 
While the record shows that the various formats considered in this rulemaking—DVD, 
527 EFF/OTW Supp. at 6. See Joint Creators Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 3 (discussing Worthy vid 
creator’s statement that the music was selected because “it sounded similar to what was used in the show”); 
see also Joint Creators Class 7 Opp’n at 3-4; DVD CCA Class 7 Opp’n at 5-6; AACS LA Class 7 Opp’n at 
5-8. 
528 2012 Recommendation at 129. 
529 See EFF/OTW Reply at 6 n.14. For example, the Worthy video when viewed on YouTube was paired 
with an advertisement from WarnerBros Television to “Watch this show” for a fee. V olta1228, Worthy 
(Supernatural – Dean / Mark of Cain Vid), YOUTUBE, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tcC01yJivmU 
(last visited Oct. 7, 2015) (cited in Joint Creators Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 3). 
530 For example, no commenters suggested that VHS or 35mm were viable alternatives. 
83
 

[PAGE 88]
     
    
  
    
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
    
  
 
   
   
   
  
   
 
 
    
  
   
    
    
 
    
           
 
                    
     
    
   
                     
           
                 
                  
            
                 
        
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Blu-ray, and digitally transmitted video—may sometimes constitute alternatives to one 
another, the record also indicates that each of these formats is typically protected by 
access controls. 
i. General Viability of Alternatives to Circumvention 
Next, the Register evaluates the various alternatives opponents suggest are viable 
alternatives to circumvention, namely, licensing, smartphone and camera video recording, 
screen-capture applications, and services that provide online access to materials 
otherwise available in physical formats, including digital rights libraries and “disc-to­
digital” services. 
The record clearly demonstrates that licensing of motion picture clips is not a 
viable alternative for the uses proposed for criticism and comment.531 The content 
available for clip licensing is far from complete and in any event such licensing is not 
practicable in many cases, whether due to difficulties in locating the rightsholders, overly 
lengthy negotiations that preclude planned uses, or denials where the would-be licensor 
disapproves of the noninfringing use.
532 Furthermore, requiring a creator who is making 
fair use of a work to obtain a license is in tension with the Supreme Court’s holding that 
rightsholders do not have an exclusive right to markets for criticism or comment of their 
copyrighted works.
533 
Unlike in previous rulemakings, opponents do not appear to take the position that 
smartphone recording provides an adequate substitute for circumvention in most or all 
cases.534 But they suggest that smartphone recording is an acceptable alternative for 
Proposed Class 3 specifically, concerning uses in MOOCs, or more generally across the 
proposed classes, to obtain access to Blu-ray exclusive footage.535 Proponents generally 
object that such recordings yield significantly inferior audio and video quality, and no 
exhibits were offered to establish the contrary.
536 For their part, Joint Educators argue 
that the MOOC experience demands equal, or potentially higher, content resolution than 
uses in live classrooms.537 While concerns specific to Blu-ray are discussed further 
531 As explained above, the licensing market may operate more effectively for uses for entertainment
 
purposes.
 
532 See, e.g., Joint Educators Class 1 Supp. at 21; Hobbs Class 2 Supp. at 7; Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 11­
13; EFF/OTW Supp. at 6.
 
533 Campbell, 510 U.S. 569.
 
534 See 2012 Recommendation at 131-32. 
535 See DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 3 Opp’n at 13-14; Joint Creators Class 3 Opp’n at 8; AACS LA Class 1 
Opp’n at 14 (suggesting smartphone or professional camera recordings are viable alternatives for Blu-ray 
content); AACS LA Class 2 Opp’n at 13 (same); DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 4 Opp’n at 13 (same); AACS 
LA Class 5 Opp’n at 12-13; AACS LA Class 6 Opp’n at 21; AACS LA Class 7 Opp’n at 11, 16 (same). 
536 For example, Morrissette of Kartemquin Educational Films states that the resulting quality is degraded 
so significantly as to be unusable for film distribution purposes. See Joint Filmmakers Supp. at App. B. 
537 Joint Educators Class 3 Supp. at 10-11. 
84
 

[PAGE 89]
     
    
   
   
  
    
  
 
 
   
 
   
 
      
   
 
   
   
 
   
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
   
             
         
      
              
                  
                 
             
            
            
           
                
          
   
               
            
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
below, the Register finds that the record does not establish that smartphone recordings 
can serve as sufficient alternatives to circumvention. 
Whether various screen-capture technologies can function as adequate alternatives 
for DVD content or online material was more hotly contested across these classes. 
Notably, AACS LA does not maintain that screen capture of the playback of a Blu-ray 
produces video of comparable image quality to Blu-ray itself, but does contend the 
screen-capture technologies are much improved since the last rulemaking cycle and are 
thus suitable for certain purposes.538 The record contains many examples of screencapture technologies, most of which are available for less than $100, and in some cases, 
for free.
539 The record also demonstrates that these products can be relatively easy to use 
and are generally able effectively to capture content played back from DVDs, Blu-ray 
discs, and online streaming services.540 Finally, the record also suggests that a variety of 
screen-capture technologies are available for use on either Windows or Apple operating 
software, although the makers of some of these programs suggest that use of the software 
may itself require circumvention, particularly on a Mac.541 
Proponents offered extensive commentary and evidence to rebut arguments that 
screen-captured images are sufficient for their needs.542 Based on the video evidence, 
hearing testimony and written submissions offered by both parties, the Register concludes 
that while screen-capture technology has improved markedly since the last rulemaking, 
and may satisfy some purposes, overall, screen-captured images still remain of lower 
quality than those available via circumvention of access controls on motion pictures.  The 
question remains whether screen-capture applications are acceptable for the proposed 
uses. 
Notably, for Proposed Class 6, DVD CCA concedes that screen-capture software 
would not be acceptable for Joint Filmmakers’ distribution needs, and Joint Filmmakers 
have documented examples where distribution quality standards preclude the use of 
screen-captured footage.
543 The Register finds Joint Filmmaker’s evidence persuasive 
538 Tr. at 45:01-05 (May 27, 2015) (Turnbull, AACS LA; Smith, USCO); Tr. at 264:01-09 (May 28, 2015)
 
(Turnbull, AACS LA); see also, e.g., DVD CCA Class 7 Opp’n at 10-14.
 
539 See generally DVD CCA Opp’n for Classes 1-7.
 
540 Tr. at 62:13-63:07 (May 27, 2015) (Taylor, DVD CCA) (describing how WM Capture technology “is
 
very straightforward and fairly intuitive”); see also, e.g., DVD CCA Class 1 Opp’n at 8; DVD CCA Class 2
 
Opp’n at 8-9; DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 4 Opp’n at 10; but see Hobbs Class 4 Reply at 7-8.
 
541 See, e.g., AACS/DVD CCA Class 1 Post-Hearing Resp.; Band/Butler/Decherney Class 1 Post-Hearing
 
Resp. at 2; Benmark et al. Class 3 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2.
 
542 In addition to the video exhibits, the Register found the statements from Professor Tisha Turk and
 
Kartemquin Educational Films’ Jim Morrissette, each providing detailed technical analysis, particularly
 
helpful. See EFF/OTW Supp. at App. N; Joint Filmmakers Supp. at App. B; see also, e.g., EFF/OTW
 
Reply at 11-16; EFF/OTW Post-Hearing Resp. (analyzing insufficiency of exhibits provided by DVD
 
CCA).
 
543 See Tr. at 19:17-24 (May 20, 2015) (Smith, USCO; Taylor, DVD CCA); id. at 9:20-10:13, 98:20-10:09
 
(Morrissette, Kartemquin Educational Films); Joint Filmmakers Supp. at Apps. B, D, I.
 
85
 

[PAGE 90]
     
    
 
 
 
    
   
   
 
 
 
     
   
 
   
    
   
    
  
    
    
  
 
   
 
  
    
   
   
     
        
     
                  
              
        
           
              
    
    
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
and concludes that the inability to obtain higher-quality footage through circumvention 
has adverse effects on filmmakers as a result of current distribution standards. 
The record also supports the conclusion that screen-capture technology is at times 
inadequate for other types of uses as well. While screen -capture technology has 
improved, the record generally demonstrates that consumer devices and expectations 
have at the same time increased as high definition continues to supplant 
standarddefinition and ultra-high-definition formats (i.e., 4K and 8K resolution) begin to 
penetrate the market.  For example, Class 7 proponents EFF/OTW and NCAI provided 
video evidence and commentary indicating that screen-capture technology was 
insufficient to communicate as effective a message about the Redskins logo, as the 
original Take It Away video relied on circumvention of high-definition material.
544 Based 
on this evidence, the Register is able to perceive that Take It Away would suffer due to 
loss of detail in depicting the Redskins logo in its various manifestations if the video 
could only be made with screen-captured images. 
But the record does not demonstrate that all noncommercial videos covered by 
Proposed Class 7 require high-quality images that would be obtained through 
circumvention of access controls on DVDs, Blu-ray discs, or digitally transmitted 
video.
545 For example, EFF/OTW submitted “mash-up” videos that mix images from one 
source with audio from another,546 and other videos that simply add subtitles over 
material from a single source.547 Because these examples do not obviously require high 
quality source material to serve their objectives, it is not apparent that screen-capture 
technology would not be a suitable alternative.  
The Register also finds substantial evidence on this record to support a finding 
that e-book authors under Proposed Class 5 are likely to suffer adverse effects if they are 
unable to incorporate higher than screen-capture quality material in cases where the 
ability to convey a point depends upon perception of details or subtleties in a motion 
picture excerpt.548 This was illustrated in a representative proposed use submitted by 
Academy-Award winning sound editor Mark Berger, who wishes to make an e-book 
entitled Listening to Movies that explores how uses of sound relate to a film’s moving 
images; Berger explained that the compression required to convert material into a lowerresolution format results in unwanted artifacts that distort the audio track.549 
544 See NCAI Supp. at 1; EFF/OTW Supp. at 9.
 
545 See 2012 Recommendation at 134.
 
546 EFF/OTW Supp. at App. A at 1 (citing Avatar/Pocahontas Mashup); see id. at App. A at 2 (citing The 
Rent is Too Damn UP). Proponents also cite a Ferris Buelle r remix which falls into a similar category. Id.
 
at App. A at 1 (citing Ferris Bueller Remix).
 
547 See id. at App. A at 1, 2-3 (citing The Master and St01en Collective’s Lord of the Rings).
 
548 See, e.g., Authors Alliance at 11 (regarding sound editing); id. at 13 (regarding use of color in the film
 
The Godfather).
 
549 Id. at 11. 
86
 

[PAGE 91]
     
    
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
   
   
  
     
 
 
  
  
 
  
    
   
 
 
   
  
   
  
 
   
  
    
               
       
         
                
           
             
      
             
            
     
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Similarly, the record supports a finding that some number of educational uses by 
faculty and students at colleges and universities under Proposed Class 1, by nonprofit 
educational institutions offering MOOCs under Proposed Class 3, as well as by K-12 
educators covered by Proposed Class 2—including those teaching GED courses—may 
depend upon close analysis of images that would be adversely affected if students cannot 
apprehend the subtle detail of the analyzed images.  Proponents offer a variety of 
examples to support this point, such as the inability of screen-capture technology to 
capture a dissolve between a Soviet girl standing in a harvest field and her body lying on 
the ground, to convey natural details in the documentary Planet Earth,
550 or to portray 
subtle details in a classic film such as Citizen Kane.551 In contrast to these examples, 
where precise detail is not required for the use in question, for example, to illustrate a 
general historical point, provide cultural or historical context, or add visual interest to a 
lecture or page of text,
552 screen-captured images may be fully adequate to fulfill the 
noninfringing use. 
With respect to K-12 students covered by Proposed Class 2, on the present record, 
the Register concludes that screen-capture technology is a viable alternative to 
circumvention for those students’ educational needs.   While the record supports the 
potential need for K-12 educators to access higher-quality content—for example, to 
present film analysis or engage in close study of natural phenomena—there was virtually 
no evidence to suggest that students had the same educational need.
553 Rather, it appears 
that K-12 student uses—such as providing a factual report on McDonald’s founder Roy 
Kroc or overlaying students’ own spoken narrative on top of music videos—do not 
typically depend upon close analysis and can be achieved through the use of screencapture tools.
554 Although the Register is sympathetic to Hobbs’ argument that K-12 
students should not be precluded from engaging in the same types of film-related 
educational activities as university students, the current record does not offer evidence 
that K-12 students engage in equivalent uses.  Moreover, while Hobbs claims that screencapture technology can be expensive or difficult to use, as explained above, the Register 
finds that to the contrary, the record demonstrates that easy, low-to-no-cost options are 
available.  If there is continuing desire to extend this exemption to students, the Register 
is hopeful that a more robust record will be submitted in the next rulemaking.
555 
550 Joint Educators Class 1 Supp. at 14, 18 (referencing Planet Earth and The Soviet Story).
 
551 Hobbs Class 2 Supp. at 5.
 
552 Joint Educators Class 1 Supp. at 7, 9.
 
553 See, e.g., Hobbs Class 2 Supp. at 5 (discussing use of excerpts from Citizen Kane and The Patriot).
 
554 See, e.g., Tr. at 160:07-161:21 (May 27, 2015) (Hobbs; Charlesworth, USCO) (describing students
 
adding three sentences of narrative over music videos); id. at 212:02-18 (Hobbs; Smith, USCO) (discussing 
use of footage of Roy Kroc).
 
555 Future proponents may also wish to consider NTIA ’s query whether the proposed class needs to include
 
all grades from K through 12, as opposed to starting at more upper level grades. Id. at 208:02-209:15 
(Cheney, NTIA; Williams, Joint Creators; Hobbs).
 
87
 

[PAGE 92]
     
    
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
    
   
   
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
    
  
   
    
   
    
          
          
        
       
     
              
                    
                 
                
           
          
               
           
       
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
For similar reasons, the record as presented does not establish the need for 
students or educators participating in media literacy or adult education programs outside 
of the school environment (Proposed Class 4) or students enrolled in MOOCs (Proposed 
Class 3) to circumvent access controls on DVDs, Blu-Rays, or digitally transmitted 
material.
556 While Hobbs pointed to the growing prevalence of media literacy studies, 
the few specific programs she cited did not appear to depend upon close analysis of 
motion picture excerpts; rather they seem to involve more general engagement with and 
manipulation of digital media, which can be accomplished through screen capture.
557 As 
for MOOCs, while proponents mentioned that in some cases enrollees may be tasked 
with video assignments, the Register finds that the record addressing proposed student (as 
opposed to instructor) uses is too indeterminate to support a recommendation for an 
exemption.
558 
Finally, while concluding on the current record that an exemption for screencapture technologies should serve to facilitate the proffered uses by K-12 students and 
those teaching and participating in out-of-school educational programs, the Register notes 
that in appropriate contexts, such users may also be able to avail themselves of the 
noncommercial video exemption.
559 
The Register has previously determined that at least some types of screen-capture 
software are “comparable to camcording the screen—a process that has been identified as 
a noncircumventing option to accomplish noninfringing uses” because the images are 
captured after they have been decrypted.560 But it is not clear that all screen-capture 
software operates in this fashion, and the record provides no absolute assurance that 
copyright owners would agree that specific types of software do not employ 
circumvention techniques.
561 More specifically, it appears that at least some screencapture tools operate by circumvention, including when capturing content played on 
certain Apple devices, which incorporate proprietary content protection technologies.
562 
Accordingly, the Register again finds that there is a need for exemptions to address the 
556 Id. at 234:11-25 (Hobbs); see also Hobbs Class 4 Reply at 5. 
557 Hobbs Class 4 Reply at 2-3, 8. 
558 See Joint Educators Class 3 Supp. at 8. 
559 See Tr. at 174:04-175:12 (May 27, 2015) (Hobbs; Charlesworth, USCO). 
560 2010 Recommendation at 60-61; see also 2012 Recommendation at 134.
 
561 Tr. at 70:19-71:13 (May 20, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators; Charlesworth, USCO; Smith, USCO).
 
562 See, e.g., Joint Educators Class 1 Supp. at 16 (“TPMs block screen capture tools . . . .”); Tr. at 243:11-19
 
(May 28, 2015) (Tushnet, OTW) (stating WM Capture is “the only software that claims not to be
 
circumvention”); Joint Educators Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp.; Joint Educators Class 3 Reply at 16; Tr. at
 
74:07-75:21 (May 28, 2015) (Benmark, Authors Alliance/Buster; Charlesworth, USCO) (discussing Apple
 
technology); Tr. at 25:14-17 (May 27, 2015) (Band, LCA); Tr. at 76:03-77:14 (May 27, 2015) (Decherney,
 
Joint Educators; Band, LCA; Taylor, DVD CCA; Charlesworth, USCO; Smith, USCO; Ruwe, USCO); Tr.
 
at 59:01-15 (May 27, 2015) (Taylor, DVD CCA; Charlesworth, USCO); but see Tr. at 49:19-50:01 (May 
27, 2015) (Taylor, DVD CCA; Smith, USCO).
 
88
 

[PAGE 93]
     
    
 
 
   
 
  
  
 
 
    
  
   
 
  
 
    
   
    
  
 
    
  
  
   
    
  
  
 
   
            
              
              
 
              
                    
          
             
           
                  
        
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
possible circumvention of protected motion pictures when using screen-capture 
technology for noninfringing purposes.563 
In addition to screen-capture technology, Joint Creators contend that services that 
provide online access to materials lawfully purchased in physical formats, including 
digital rights libraries and disc-to-digital services, are additional viable alternatives to 
circumvention.  As explained in the record, these types of cloud-based services allow 
consumers to obtain high-definition versions of copyrighted works that they may have 
purchased on DVD or Blu-ray, meaning that the screen quality is presumably comparable 
or improved as compared to the physical copy of the work.  At the hearings, opponents 
indicated that these services offer convenient ways for users to cue up clips for later 
playback.
564 The evidence thus indicates that these services may, in some circumstances, 
serve as alternatives to circumvention of physical discs, although current content 
offerings appear far from comprehensive.565 While the Register appreciates that these 
steadily growing services may be useful in some cases, the record therefore indicates that 
such services cannot yet serve as reliable alternatives to circumvention for many of the 
proposed uses.  
ii. Viability of Alternatives to AACS-Protected Blu-ray Discs 
Having concluded that proponents have demonstrated a lack of adequate 
alternatives to circumvention for many of the proposed uses, the Register must next 
evaluate whether prospective users are likely to suffer adverse effects without the ability 
to circumvent Blu-ray discs, or whether their needs would be satisfied by limiting the 
exemptions to circumvention of DVDs or digitally transmitted material. While prior 
rulemakings have considered Blu-ray technology in passing, this triennial rulemaking 
does so with the benefit of a larger volume of evidence to consider, and with an eye 
toward the emergence of still higher-resolution 4K and Ultra HD formats,
566 which are 
being incorporated into streaming platforms and forthcoming Ultra HD Blu-ray discs.567 
The Register appreciates that the requests to circumvent Blu-ray technology raise 
complex questions relating to proponents’ represented needs for an exemption as well as 
opponents’ concerns regarding the potential effects of such an exemption; while 
563 See 2012 Recommendation at 134-135. 
564 Tr. at 163:09-25 (May 19, 2015) (Smith, USCO; V oris, The Walt Disney Studios; Charlesworth, USCO). 
565 Tr. at 47:04-48:12 (May 27, 2015) (Turnbull, AACS LA; Smith, USCO); Tr. at 124:03-126:04 (May 19, 
2015) (Teitell, DECE and UltraViolet; Damle, USCO) (discussing market share of UltraViolet for new 
releases). 
566 4K resolution generally refers to cinematic display devices (i.e., movie projectors) that have a resolution 
of 4096 x 2160 pixels and approximately a 1.9:1 aspect ratio. UHD television is a separate standard with a 
close but not identical resolution of 3840 x 2160 and a 16:9 aspect ratio. 
567 In contrast to 4K and Ultra HD standards, high definition has a resolution of 1920 x 1080 pixels, and 
DVD has a resolution of 720 x 480 pixels. So, DVDs contain 345,600 pixels per video frame compared to 
2,073,600 for Blu-ray or 8,294,400 for 4K and Ultra HD. Joint Filmmakers Supp. at App. B. Ultra HD 
Blu-ray is expected to be introduced within the next year. 
89
 

[PAGE 94]
     
    
  
  
  
   
   
     
 
  
 
 
  
     
   
   
  
  
   
 
    
  
    
   
    
   
  
 
  
           
             
            
           
             
      
        
               
                
            
          
  
          
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
opponents’ concerns are discussed below in the context of the statutory factors, this 
section focuses on whether proponents have made their case. 
Proponents generally seek to circumvent AACS-protected Blu-ray discs because 
Blu-ray content is of a higher quality than available alternatives (including circumvention 
of DVDs or digitally transmitted material) and/or because certain material may be 
available only on Blu-ray. The Register first evaluates whether proponents for derivative 
uses of motion picture excerpts—in filmmaking (Class 6), noncommercial videos (Class 
7), and e-books (Class 5)—have demonstrated that they are likely to suff er adverse 
effects if denied an exemption to circumvent AACS-protected Blu-ray discs.  Proponents 
of these derivative uses argue that accessing content on Blu-ray is necessary to create 
and/or distribute their own new and creative derivative works. 
Joint filmmakers presented a detailed record to argue that standard-definition 
resolution is insufficient for film distribution purposes. The record contains references to 
HD (i.e., Blu-ray) quality requirements from distributors such as CNN, BBC, NBC, 
Discovery Health, PBS, and various other entities, as well as examples where films or 
clips within programs were rejected because they were only standard-definition (i.e., 
DVD) quality.568 For example, Joint Filmmakers submitted a frame-by-frame analysis 
report from CNN analyzing a documentary film entitled Life Itself that rejected many 
embedded SD clips.569 Joint Filmmakers also provide PBS’ Technical Operating 
Specifications, which require HD or better resolution, and the record contains testimony 
from multiple filmmakers that PBS rejects footage submitted in SD.570 Citing as an 
example a documentary on Roger Ebert, Joint Filmmakers also claim that distributors 
“often” reject material that has been “upconverted” from SD to HD.
571 Joint Filmmakers 
also explain that DVD quality is likely to become increasingly less acceptable as 4K 
resolution becomes widespread.572 Based on this record, the Register finds that Joint 
Filmmakers have demonstrated they are likely to suffer adverse effects if they are unable 
to make use of material on Blu-ray in these cases. 
Similarly, EFF/OTW contend that remix artists cannot achieve their proposed uses 
without access to Blu-ray, both because of image quality and content availability 
568 Tr. at 98:04-100:09 (May 20, 2015) (Morrissette, Kartemquin Educational Films) (providing example of 
BBC quality control process); see also id. at 9:21-23 (Morrissette, Kartemquin Educational Films) (“DVD 
quality images are being rejected on our programs by our distributors ranging from Magnolia Films to 
CNN.”); id. at 51:02-53:10 (Neill, NMR; Charlesworth, USCO) (discussing international distributors and 
PBS); Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 16, App. I (providing statements from various filmmakers); Joint 
Filmmakers Reply at 8, Apps. C-D. 
569 Joint Filmmakers Reply at 8, App. D. 
570 See id. at 7-8 (citing PBS’ specifications and explaining that “[e]xceptions are granted rarely and 
primarily in the context of archival footage that was not created in high definition”); Joint Filmmakers 
Supp. at App. I (testimony 4, 5, 14 from filmmakers re PBS). 
571 Tr. at 98:04-100:09 (May 20, 2015) (Charlesworth, USCO; Morrissette, Kartemquin Educational Films; 
Damle, USCO). 
572 Id. at 11:01-23 (Morrissette, Kartemquin Educational Films; Charlesworth, USCO). 
90
 

[PAGE 95]
     
    
   
  
 
   
    
   
 
   
      
    
     
   
     
   
   
  
    
  
      
 
  
                
              
                 
          
    
                 
 
                
      
           
           
               
            
                   
            
             
     
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
concerns.  Extensive interviews by remix artists were submitted, explaining that DVDquality source material results in lost frames, grainy colors, pixilation and other artifacts 
that hinder or even preclude the application of complex editing effects.573 For example, 
vidder JetPack Monkey explained that Blu-ray video was the only available source to 
obtain a version of the film Halloween H20 that is in a similar format and aspect ratio to 
the other Halloween films, required for a vid that intercut scenes from films shot over a 
40-year period.574 EFF/OTW also explain that vidders often rely upon extra or bonus 
material available only on Blu-ray discs to create their narrative; for example, they 
reference a vidder who combined clips from the feature film and the Blu-ray bonus 
materials to form a message about the film Captain America.575 As a general matter, 
EFF/OTW assert that users are entitled to “what is needed to accomplish their [non­
infringing] purpose.”576 While AACS LA points out that fair use does not entitle users to 
the “optimum method” of copying,577 there is a difference between “optimum” and 
“necessary,” and the Register concludes that proponents have submitted an adequate 
factual record to demonstrate that, in certain cases, Blu-ray is required for remix artists to 
achieve their intended uses. 
Considering proposed uses in e-books, the record demonstrates that e-book 
readers, such as the Kindle Fire, Kindle V oyage, Kobo Glo HD, or Apple iPad, offer 
resolution that is HD quality or higher and that a variety of e-books are currently 
marketed based on their HD content.578 Proponents also demonstrate that Blu-ray 
content may be necessary for certain proposed film analysis uses in e-books, such as to 
analyze nuances in cinematography or sound editing, or to comment upon material 
available only on Blu-ray discs.579 Although the record is less developed than for 
filmmaking or noncommercial videos, Class 5 proponents have demonstrated that, in 
some cases, accessing Blu-ray content may be required for the proposed uses of e-books 
containing film analysis.  
573 EFF/OTW Reply at 8-10, Apps. A-B. To the extent that EFF/OTW argue more broadly that aesthetic 
choice necessitates access to Blu-ray materials, the Register finds that the record presented was limited to 
more specific needs, such as the ability to portray fine-grained details, format films into the desired aspect 
ratio, or apply effects such as cropping, zooming, dissolves, or superimposition. 
574 Id. at 5. 
575 EFF/OTW Supp. at 25. EFF/OTW also submitted a list of materials available only through Blu -ray, 
compared to DVD. 
576 EFF/OTW Reply at 11 (citing Campbell, 510 U.S. at 588; Bill Graham, 448 F.3d at 613; Warren Pub. v. 
Spurlock, 645 F. Supp. 2d at 420, 425). 
577 See DVD CCA Class 7 Opp’n at 8 (citing Corley, 273 F.3d 429). 
578 Authors Alliance Reply at 6-7; Lerner/Reid Class 5 Post-Hearing Resp. 
579 See, e.g., Authors Alliance Supp. at App. B (discussing cinematography in films such as The Godfather), 
App. C (re sound editing), App. E (listing Blu-ray only content, including added material in James Bond 
films, a proposed use of this class). By contrast, after comparing the DVD and Blu -ray examples of The 
Shawshank Redemption and The King’ s Speech offered by proponent Buster at the hearing, the Register 
finds the differences negligible at most and declines to credit these examples. See Tr. at 13:14-14:24, 
16:01-17-21, Exhibit 22 (May 28, 2015) (Buster). 
91
 

[PAGE 96]
     
    
  
 
 
 
  
     
 
 
    
 
   
  
  
    
   
  
  
    
 
  
  
  
     
  
     
 
 
    
        
    
   
            
       
    
              
        
             
            
       
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
A separate question is whether the educational users, who may find screencaptured images unsuitable for some proposed uses, actually require Blu-ray images in 
order to perform their close analysis of the underlying work itself, or if standarddefinition resolution is sufficient.  In Classes 1 (colleges and universities) and 3 
(MOOCs), Joint Educators submitted many instances where high-definition quality—as 
opposed to DVD quality—was necessary to closely analyze films including The Wizard 
of Oz (to highlight prop wires and other “stage-like” elements),580 Citizen Kane (to 
appreciate depth of field, chiaroscuro effects, and subtle narrative elements),581 Jacques 
Tati’s Playtime (to better approximate the intended 70mm viewing experience and 
appreciate the film’s very detailed and complex composition),582 and Saving Private Ryan 
(to experience the enhanced color and contrast effect of bleach bypass film processing, 
hyper-realism, and complex soundscapes).
583 These examples seemingly apply to cinema 
studies in traditional physical classrooms as well as lectures in online learning contexts, 
as Joint Educators explain that students and faculty engage in “fundamentally the same 
kinds of activities, whether they are in a MOOC or in a traditional college or university 
classroom.”584 Based on this record, the Register determines that faculty and students 
participating in college or university classes, or faculty presenting MOOCs585 are likely 
to suffer an adverse effect if unable to incorporate Blu-ray quality images when necessary 
for close analysis of film or media images. 
As for the other proposed educational uses, Classes 2 (K-12) and 4 (museums, 
libraries and nonprofits) proponents submitted no examples where Blu-ray quality or Blu­
ray-unique content was required for uses in K-12 classrooms or media literacy programs.  
For Class 2, the record contains only a single example where a high school teacher 
wished to compile clips of Shakespearean works taken from Blu-ray discs, but whose 
needs were able to be met by using DVDs.586 For Class 4, the only reference to material 
available on Blu-ray concerns the television series Orange is the New Black, which is 
produced by and available on Netflix and thus is able to be alternatively accessed.587 
Accordingly, the Register concludes that the record does not establish there is a likely 
adverse impact for Proposed Classes 2 and 4 if the prohibition on circumventing AACSprotected Blu-ray discs remains. 
580 Joint Educators Reply at 10.
 
581 Id. at 11.
 
582 Id. at 12.
 
583 Tr. at 26:23-27:13 (May 27, 2015) (Band, LCA); id. at 29:20-30:05 (Decherney, Joint Educators); see 
Joint Educators Class 1 Reply at 15.
 
584 Joint Educators Class 3 Reply at 10.
 
585 As explained above, the Register finds that the record does not sufficiently establish the need for
 
participants enrolled in MOOCs to engage in circumvention of motion pictures. 
586 See Hobbs Class 2 Supp. at 4; Tr. at 183:13-20 (May 27, 2015) (Smith, USCO; Hobbs) (confirming that
 
proponents did not offer any additional examples of proposed uses of Blu-ray discs).
 
587 See Hobbs Class 4 Reply at 8.
 
92
 

[PAGE 97]
     
    
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
   
  
  
   
 
  
 
  
   
    
 
  
 
    
   
 
      
   
 
 
    
  
 
  
      
             
            
               
        
            
                 
  
           
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
c. Statutory Factors 
The Register now turns to the statutory factors, which are reviewed collectively in 
relation to the several classes. 
With respect to the first factor, the impact on the availability of copyrighted 
works, the Register previously “determined that it is questionable whether CSS protection 
is a critical factor in the decision to release motion pictures in digital format,” noting that 
“DVDs remain the dominant form of distribution” despite the wide availability of 
circumvention tools.
588 Consistent with this finding, the current record suggests that the 
prior exemptions have not harmed the market for DVDs and, in fact, no party opposes 
renewing the current exemptions for DVDs.  Accordingly, the Register finds that the 
record does not demonstrate that an exemption to circumvent CSS-protected DVDs will 
decrease the availability of copyrighted works. 
Regarding the various systems protecting motion pictures available via online 
distribution services, the record demonstrates that these systems effectively control access 
to copyrighted works; however, the record also shows that decryption tools are widely 
available.  As with DVDs, there is no evidence that the existing exemption authorizing 
circumvention of TPMs used by online distribution services has harmed the market or 
decreased new releases of copyrighted motion pictures. 
With respect to Blu-ray discs, opponents assert that allowing an exemption is 
likely to undermine Blue-ray-related content because it will erode copyright owners’ 
confidence in the AACS protection system and the Blu-ray disc format generally.
589 
AACS LA argues that allowing circumvention of Blu-ray discs to create perfect copies of 
the entire work could harm the Blu-ray business model at a time when Blu-ray is still 
establishing its place in the overall motion picture market.590 The Register agrees that 
access controls such as AACS play a significant role in copyright owners’ ability to invest 
in and disseminate valuable copyrighted works.  As discussed below, however, while this 
may be true as a general matter, the record does not reflect that allowing the uses 
proposed here will have a material impact on the efficacy of AACS technology or the 
ability to bring new Blu-ray content to market.  Although the record indicates that AACS 
circumvention tools are not as accessible as CSS circumvention software and 
circumvention of Blu-ray is not as prevalent as circumvention of DVDs, 
591 
588 2012 Recommendation at 135-36; see also 2010 Recommendation at 57 (stating that “while CSSprotected DVDs may very well have fostered the digital distribution of motion pictures to the public, there 
is no credible support for the proposition that the digital distribution of motion pictures continues to depend 
on the integrity of the general ‘principle’ that the circumvention of CSS is always unlawful”). 
589 See, e.g., AACS LA Class 7 Opp’n at 18. 
590 See, e.g., DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 3 Opp’n at 14-16 (asserting that circumvention could undermine 
“the continued growth of the market for Blu-Ray discs”); AACS LA Class 6 Opp’n at 22; AACS LA Class 
7 Opp’n at 16-19. 
591 See, e.g., Tr. at 77:21-78:25 (May 28, 2015) (Turnbull, AACS LA). 
93
 

[PAGE 98]
     
    
   
 
   
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
     
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
  
   
             
              
            
                
             
                 
              
           
 
 
                                                 
 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
circumvention of the Blu-ray format is nonetheless possible and not uncommon, 
including among video artists.592 The Register therefore cannot conclude on this record 
that allowing a limited exemption to make brief, transformative uses of motion pictures 
for noninfringing purposes would have a material impact on the availability of motion 
pictures on Blu-ray or of motion pictures generally. 
Moreover, some of the proposed uses, including for filmmaking or 
noncommercial videos, will facilitate the creation of new copyrighted works.  The record 
indicates that the overall availability of copyrighted works will not be lessened—and may 
in fact increase—if circumvention is permitted for certain limited purposes.  Accordingly, 
the first statutory factor tends to favor appropriately tailored exemptions to permit the fair 
use of protected motion picture material. 
Turning to the second statutory factor, the availability for use for nonprofit 
archival, preservation, and educational uses, this factor clearly favors the proposals 
relating to educational uses, as well as to a lesser degree those relating to documentary 
films and multimedia e-books offering film criticism, and perhaps some noncommercial 
videos. Overall, this factor also appears favorable vis-à-vis most of the proposed 
exemptions. 
The third factor, the impact the prohibition on circumvention has on criticism, 
comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, and research, is a critical consideration 
in relation to noncommercial videos, filmmaking, multimedia e-books offering film 
criticism, and educational uses.  Each of these categories seeks to enable the listed 
statutory purposes.  This factor therefore weighs strongly in favor of properly crafted 
exemptions to foster such uses. 
The fourth factor, the effect of circumvention on the market for or value of 
copyrighted works, is an important consideration with respect to each of the proposed 
uses.  Motion pictures involve significant effort and expense to create and, as the 
proposals demonstrate, are a vital American art form. The motion picture industry has a 
legitimate interest in preventing works from being copied and used in ways that 
undermine the market for or value of these works, including the market for derivative 
uses.  Significantly, however, in each class, the record reflects the need to use only brief 
portions of the protected works.  Many examples in the record demonstrate uses of less 
than thirty seconds of footage,
593 representing a very modest amount of an entire film or 
592 See, e.g., Tr. at 111:21-112:06 (May 20, 2015) (Swart, Twentieth Century Fox Home Entertainment; 
Ruwe, USCO); EFF/OTW Supp. at 2 (“Numerous tools exist to circumvent such restrictions.”); Tr. at 
195:01-03 (May 27, 2015) (McSherry, EFF) (“[A]rtists are already relying on Blu-ray source.”). 
593 See, e.g., EFF/OTW Supp. at App. A at 5 (citing soda_jerk remix video art); id. at 9 (re Take it Away 
video); Authors Alliance Supp. at App. B (Statement of Bobette Buster) (describing planned usage of 
fleeting clips of motion pictures in e-book series on filmmaking); Joint Educators Class 1 Supp. at 18 
(describing use of a clip showing brief dissolve of one image into another from The Soviet Story); see 
alsoJoint Educators Class 1 Supp. at 12 (quoting Patricia Aufderheide, Professor of Communication Studies 
94
 

[PAGE 99]
     
    
     
  
    
   
 
  
 
  
    
    
 
   
   
   
   
     
   
  
 
    
    
    
   
  
  
 
  
 
  
                 
  
               
                  
                 
                
           
               
            
        
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
television episode. As in the past, the Register concludes that the use of such small 
portions in contexts involving comment or criticism is consistent with principles of fair 
use and unlikely to supplant the market for motion pictures. At the same time, 
exemptions in this area must be carefully focused on noninfringing uses so as not to 
undermine copyright owners’ ability to license portions of motion pictures for 
entertainment purposes and other derivative uses outside of the parameters of fair use, 
including through clip licensing services.  
As noted above, opponents point to the integrity of access controls as an 
important factor in preserving the value of copyrighted works.
594 Speaking to market 
impact, opponents additionally observe that about “75-80 percent of Blu-ray revenue 
stems from the first two to four weeks of a title’s distribution.”595 For their part, 
proponents analogize AACS-protected works to previous exemptions for CSS-protected 
DVDs to argue that an exemption is unlikely to harm the market for Blu-ray discs or 
affect the integrity of access controls.596 It is worth noting that the proposed uses of 
excerpts across the various proposed classes do not appear to be particularly tied to “new 
releases,” and indeed, often relate to classic or already popular films or television 
episodes.  While the Register is sympathetic to opponents’ concerns about the integrity of 
Blu-ray, the record does not establish a clear relationship between the circumvention of 
Blu-ray discs for limited noninfringing purposes such as those being proposed here and 
piracy of, or otherwise diminished markets for, copyrighted motion pictures.  The 
Register therefore finds that the fourth factor does not strongly favor, but also does not 
weigh against, properly conceived exemptions to enable the use of motion picture 
excerpts for criticism and commentary. 
The Register thus concludes that the statutory factors on the whole tend to favor 
appropriately tailored exemptions to foster noninfringing uses of motion picture excerpts. 
4. NTIA Comments 
NTIA recommends renewing the current exemptions for educational and 
derivative uses, and expanding those exemptions in several respects.  As a general matter, 
NTIA proposes that the exemptions should encompass “motion pictures and similar 
audiovisual works” on DVDs, Blu-ray discs, and obtained via online distribution 
services.  NTIA explains that expanding the exemptions to include Blu-ray is appropriate 
in the School of Communication at American University, explaining that use of short clips was necessary to 
use classroom time efficiently). 
594 See DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 3 Opp’n at 14; Tr. at 128:02-16 (May 27, 2015) (Turnbull, DVD 
CCA/AACS LA); DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 4 Opp’n at 13-14; Joint Creators Class 4 Opp’n at 6; AACS 
LA Class 5 Opp’n at 14-15; DVD CCA Class 5 Opp’n at 12-13; Joint Creators Class 5 Opp’n at 6; AACS 
LA Class 6 Opp’n at 22-23; DVD CCA Class 6 Opp’n at 19-20; Joint Creators Class 6 Opp’n at 6. 
595 Tr. at 112:02-06 (May 20, 2015) (Swart, Twentieth Century Fox Home Entertainment) (stating the first 
two to four weeks “is where the vast majority of the Blu-ray business happens and then it drops off 
dramatically”); see also Tr. at 46:06-11 (May 27, 2015) (Turnbull, AACS LA; Smith, USCO). 
596 See, e.g., Authors Alliance Reply at 8. 
95
 

[PAGE 100]
     
    
 
   
  
     
    
 
  
   
 
 
   
  
   
 
   
  
  
    
 
    
    
 
   
   
     
   
    
     
    
   
  
    
     
  
   
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
for the educational uses in Classes 1 to 4 because “the exclusion of high definition 
material is having an adverse effect on the quality of teaching.”597 NTIA claims that an 
expansion to Blu-ray is also appropriate for the derivative uses in Classes 5 to 7 because 
“the quality of clips obtained from DVDs is substantially less than that of Blu-ray,” and 
because “film and television distribution standards . . . require use of high definition 
video.”598 For all classes, NTIA finds the alternatives to Blu-ray circumvention to be 
inadequate.599 
At the same time, NTIA rejects proposals to expand the exemptions to encompass 
all “noninfringing” or “fair uses,” instead favoring maintenance of “a tailored 
exemption.”600 It suggests “provid[ing] further clarity” in the exemption language, and 
proposes that the exemption be limited to circumvention conducted “solely to incorporate 
excerpts of such works into new works for the purpose of criticism, comment, or 
education, where the length of the clip is no more than reasonably necessary for such 
purpose and does not constitute a substantial portion of the original work.”601 In 
addition, by limiting its proposals to “motion pictures and similar audiovisual works,” 
NTIA appears implicitly to reject proposals to expand the exemption to encompass all 
“audiovisual works,” including video games.
602 
With respect to the specific classes, NTIA makes the following proposals, and in 
each case, NTIA recommends that the exemption permit circumvention of TPMs on 
DVDs, Blu-ray discs, and online distribution services.  With respect to Class 1, NTIA 
proposes an exemption for “[e]ducational use by college and university instructors, 
faculty, and students.”603 Although the current exemption for colleges and universities 
distinguishes between uses in film studies and other courses requiring close analysis of 
film and media excerpts, and uses in other courses,604 NTIA’s proposed exemption does 
not.605 NTIA does not explain, however, why elimination of that distinction is warranted. 
For Class 2, NTIA proposes an exemption for “[e]ducational use by K-12 
instructors, and by students in grades 6-12 engaging in video editing projects actively 
overseen by an instructor.”
606 NTIA acknowledges that “[s]creen capture technology, 
despite its limitations, may be sufficient” for students “in certain circumstances.” 607 It 
597 NTIA Letter at 14-15.
 
598 Id. at 24.
 
599 Id. at 14-17, 24-26.
 
600 Id. at 13 & n.42.
 
601 Id. at 13-14.
 
602 Id. at 14.
 
603 Id. 
604 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(4)-(7). 
605 NTIA Letter at 14. 
606 Id. 
607 Id. at 17. 
96
 

[PAGE 101]
     
    
    
   
  
 
  
   
   
  
 
   
     
  
     
  
  
  
    
  
  
      
  
   
   
  
               
                 
              
          
           
            
        
     
   
  
   
  
   
   
  
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
nonetheless asserts that circumvention should be permitted “when the project requires a 
level of quality only available through circumvention.”608 As discussed below, however, 
the Register concludes that the record lacks any specific evidence showing a need for 
such students to access anything more than screen-captured video clips.609 
For Class 3, NTIA proposes an exemption for “[e]ducational use by instructors 
offering [MOOCs] engaged in film and media analysis.”610 NTIA notes that “online 
learning should be encouraged, as it allows a breakdown of the traditional barriers to 
education such as geographic restrictions and limited financial resources.”611 At the same 
time, it “recognizes the importance of crafting an exemption that is based on the record 
and will not be misinterpreted as covering every application and service on the 
Internet.”
612 In particular, NTIA notes that “because any Internet user can enroll in a 
MOOC,” there is “some concern that a poorly-crafted exemption could further 
infringement.”613 NTIA also concludes that “the record is too limited with respect to 
student needs to circumvent TPMs to complete class work while enrolled in MOOCS to 
support their inclusion at this time.”
614 NTIA further “supports limiting the exemption to 
MOOCs that focus on film or media analysis or studies, which would still cover the 
desired uses noted in proponents’ comments.” According to NTIA, “further expansion of 
this exemption to all MOOCS is not supported on the record.”
615 
NTIA also addresses the TEACH Act in relation to Class 3, concluding that 
incorporating that provision’s limitations in a MOOC exemption would be inappropriate.  
First, NTIA observes that the provision “only applies to online course activities that are 
part of a governmental body or ‘accredited nonprofit educational institution.’”
616 
According to NTIA, “not all MOOCs will qualify” under that requirement.617 To support 
that point, however, NTIA points only to extra-record evidence that National Geographic 
Society and the Museum of Modern Art provide courses through the Coursera platform; 
608 Id. 
609 Although NTIA suggests that student projects submitted for the National History Day competition are 
judged for “quality of the video,” the published criteria it cites do not specifically reference video quality. 
See id. at 17 n.60 (citing How an Entry Is Judged, N
ATIONAL HISTORY DAY IN PENNSYLV ANIA, 
http://pa.nhd.org/judging.htm (last visited Oct. 7, 2015)). Moreover, the specific criteria for documentaries 
only evaluates whether the submission is “original, clear, appropriate, organized and articulate” and 
whether “visual impact is appropriate to [the] topic.” See Documentary Evaluation Form, NATIONAL 
HISTORY DAY IN PENNSYLV ANIA, http://pa.nhd.org/images/uploads/Docu.pdf (last visited Oct. 7, 2015). 
610 NTIA Letter at 14. 
611 Id. at 18. 
612 Id. 
613 Id. at 19. 
614 Id. 
615 Id. at 19-20. 
616 Id. at 20. 
617 Id. 
97
 

[PAGE 102]
     
    
  
    
  
  
  
     
  
   
  
 
     
 
    
    
 
   
 
   
 
  
      
 
  
  
 
    
     
 
  
   
   
     
   
     
   
   
   
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
NTIA does not cite any evidence showing that these institutions need to engage in 
circumvention.618 Second, NTIA argues that “the TEACH Act requirement to place 
TPMs on the embedded clips should not be included as a condition of an exemption,” 
suggesting that “the record demonstrates that primary providers of MOOCs do not use 
TPMs for their online courses,” and stating that given the other limitations that would be 
imposed under the exemption, it is “unconvinced that TPMs on MOOC content are 
necessary to prevent harm to the market for the original work excerpted in a lecture 
video.”619 As discussed below, contrary to NTIA, the Register finds based on the record 
that placing TPMs on such courses should not be unduly burdensome.  
For Class 4, NTIA proposes an exemption for “[e]ducational use by instructors 
and students participating in digital media and literacy programs in libraries, museums, 
and non-profit organizations with an educational mission.”620 NTIA points to evidence 
regarding a poetry video project by YES PHILLY , a nonprofit GED program, in which 
students wish to incorporate clips of culturally relevant films.
621 In so doing, NTIA does 
not address why this evidence demonstrates the need for circumvention of TPMs on 
DVDs, Blu-rays, or online distribution platforms, rather than use of screen-capture 
technology.  In any event, NTIA notes that the creation of such a video project “might be 
characterized as a noncommercial, remix video” under Class 7.
622 
For Classes 5 and 7, NTIA proposes renewing the existing exemptions for 
nonfiction or educational multimedia e-books offering film analysis, and for 
noncommercial videos, respectively, and expanding them to include Blu-ray discs.
623 
NTIA does not specifically address the evidence presented in Class 5. W ith respect to the 
noncommercial video proposal in Class 7, NTIA notes that proponents “provided 
compelling material supporting their request,” citing the “informative demonstration of 
the sophisticated video editing required to create their videos.”
624 
Finally, for Class 6, NTIA proposes an exemption both for documentary films and 
for “[n]arrative films portraying real events, where the prior work is used for its 
biographical or historically significant nature.”625 NTIA acknowledges that it “is 
uncertain that the record supports including all narrative [films].”626 Its proposed 
exemption is therefore limited to “biopics and other similar films” or in other fictional 
films where the use “is necessary to comment on the historically-based plot of the film, or 
618 Id. 
619 Id. at 21. 
620 Id. at 14. 
621 Id. at 22 & n.85. 
622 Id. at 22 n.85. 
623 Id. at 24. 
624 Id. at 26. 
625 Id. at 24. 
626 Id. at 27. 
98
 

[PAGE 103]
     
    
   
 
    
    
 
   
   
   
  
    
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
    
  
  
   
 
  
   
 
  
                
              
  
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
when necessary to show its biographical significance.”627 NTIA urges that “such uses are 
likely fair” under current case law, citing a case involving use of a film clip in a 
Broadway musical production.628 NTIA does not, however, discuss the existing market 
for use of clips in films, or assess the effect the exemption would have on that market.  
Nor does it offer a definition of “biopic and other fictional films depicting historical 
events.”
629 As discussed below, these concerns have led the Register to recommend 
against an exemption for non-documentary films. 
Overall, the Register generally agrees with NTIA that the existing exemptions for 
uses of motion picture excerpts should be expanded in certain respects, though not as 
broadly as NTIA proposes, largely due to the limitations of the record. 
5. Conclusion and Recommendation 
As detailed above, proponents have sufficiently established that various 
technological measures interfere with their ability to make desired uses of motion 
pictures and that a significant number of those uses are likely fair and noninfringing.  
Proponents seeking exemptions for noncommercial videos, filmmaking, e-books offering 
film analysis, and certain educational uses have further established that they are, or are 
likely to be, adversely affected by the prohibition against circumvention, including when 
it is necessary to use high-quality motion picture material to convey intended criticism or 
commentary.  In some, but not all cases, the intended use may require HD-quality content 
on AACS-protected Blu-ray discs. 
Further, for those uses that do not require access to higher-quality content—a 
category that includes uses by educators and students who do not require close analysis of 
motion picture material—the Register finds that screen -capture technology has evolved to 
the point where it can fulfill these needs and, accordingly, recommends limited 
exemptions to address the possibility of circumvention when using such technology.  The 
Register recognizes that it may be difficult to ascertain how particular technologies work. 
Indeed, the record does not include any examples of screen-capture technology that holds 
itself out as non-circumventing.   
The specific recommendations are set forth below, and are influenced by the 
following considerations.  Initially, to the extent proponents seek to exempt uses of 
motion pictures that exceed short portions of clips, the Register finds that these requests 
are not supported by the record, which is focused on brief excerpts.  Moreover, the use of 
only short segments is critical to the Register’s determination in this proceeding that a 
significant number of the desired uses are likely noninfringing.  
627 Id. 
628 Id. (citing Sofa Entm’t, Inc. v. Dodger Prods., Inc., 709 F.3d 1273, 1278 (9th Cir. 2013) (holding that use 
of an excerpt from The Ed Sullivan Show in a Broadway musical production of Jersey Boys was fair use)). 
629 Id. 
99
 

[PAGE 104]
     
    
  
 
 
  
      
 
 
 
   
  
    
    
  
  
   
 
   
   
  
   
 
  
   
 
  
 
   
   
       
          
    
            
             
            
  
          
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Nor does the record support recommending an exemption for “audiovisual works” 
as opposed to the narrower category of “motion pictures,” as these classes of works are 
defined in the Copyright Act.  As explained above, proponents did not demonstrate a need 
to circumvent non-motion-picture audiovisual works in any of the classes.  The Register 
finds that the category of motion pictures is sufficiently broad to cover the intended uses, 
in that it encompasses television programs and other forms of video in addition to 
feature-length films.  
Similarly, to the extent proponents seek more expansive exemptions to cover 
generally “noninfringing” or “fair uses,” these requests, too, lack support.
630 The 
evidence in each class focuses on transformative uses that provide criticism and 
commentary—that is, greater insights into —the underlying works. Consistent with the 
record presented in this rulemaking, then, the Register finds that the desire to engage in 
criticism or commentary is a critical factor in her recommendation to adopt the below 
exemptions.  A mere requirement that a use be “noninfringing” or “fair” does not satisfy 
Congress’s mandate to craft “narrow and focused” exemptions.
631 For this reason, the 
Register has previously rejected broad proposed categories such as “fair use works” or 
“educational fair use works” as inappropriate.632 An exemption should provide 
reasonable guidance to the public in terms of what uses are permitted, while at the same 
time mitigating undue consequences for copyright owners.633 
Turning to the multimedia e-books exemption specifically, the record contains no 
evidence of proposed uses in e-books that are not offering “film analysis,” and the 
Register therefore sees no reason to deviate from the language of the previously granted 
exemption in this regard.  
Next, in considering the noncommercial video exemption, although EFF/OTW 
suggest expanding the exemption to replace the term “noncommercial” with the phrase 
“primarily noncommercial,” they fail to offer a rationale for such an expansion.  Although 
they cite examples where commissions or exhibition stipends are paid to artists by 
noncommercial entities for noncommercial uses, it is not clear why these works would 
not be considered “noncommercial.”  Indeed, the current exemption states explicitly that 
“noncommercial videos include work created pursuant to a paid commission where a 
commissioning entity’s use is noncommercial,” and the Register believes this 
clarification should be continued.
634 
630 See, e.g., EFF/OTW Reply at 5-6.
 
631 H.R. REP. NO. 105-551, pt. 2, at 38 (1998).
 
632 2006 Recommendation at 17-19.
 
633 See Tr. at 13:12-15:25 (May 27, 2015) (Butler, Joint Educators; Charlesworth, USCO) (discussing role
 
of regulatory language in providing user guidance); 2006 Recommendation at 19 (noting “if a class is too 
broad” it could “lead to undue harm to copyright owners” and would be “difficult to justify the exemption 
at all”).
 
634 2012 Final Rule, 77 Fed. Reg. at 65,728; see also 2012 Recommendation at 141. 
100
 

[PAGE 105]
     
    
   
 
   
  
 
    
 
    
 
     
  
   
   
  
   
  
  
      
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
  
   
   
  
 
  
 
           
    
          
           
      
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
In addition, Joint Creators have suggested that the phrase “noncommercial 
videos” should be narrowed to help distinguish this category from the educational use 
exemptions.635 Specifically, they propose revising the language of the exemption to limit 
it to uses of short portions of motion pictures “(i) in remix videos or mash-up videos 
involving parody or satire, (ii) in videos with overtly political messages, (iii) or in non­
profit art museum installations or exhibitions.”636 Joint Creators believe that in 2012, the 
Register and the Librarian of Congress intended to limit this exemption to uses for 
“remix” purposes—that is, to videos that involve remixing or modifying a preexisting 
work or works in order to criticize or comment upon some aspect of the underlying 
work(s), or to make a broader societal or political statement.
637 Joint Creators concede, 
however, that they cannot say whether the current language has resulted in abuse of the 
exemption.
638 On this record, the Register concludes that Joint Creators’ proposed 
amendment is unnecessary, and might unintentionally exclude otherwise permissible 
uses.  The crux of the noncommercial exemption is that the use be a brief and 
transformative one for purposes of criticism or commentary; a remix video or a nonremix video may or may not fulfill these criteria. To the extent that a potential use might 
fall within both the noncommercial exemption and an educational exemption, it is unclear 
why that in itself should be of concern.  In assessing whether circumvention is proper, the 
point is that the use fall under at least one exemption. 
For the various educational exemptions, the Register finds it appropriate, based on 
the record presented, to continue to distinguish between purposes requiring close analysis 
of film and media excerpts and more general educational uses.  As with prior 
rulemakings, the Register is limited to the record presented.  The evidence demonstrates 
that screen-capture technology has markedly improved since the last proceeding and can 
serve as an adequate substitute to circumvention in cases where close visual or audio 
analysis of the excerpts is not required.  In fact, screen capture may well be adequate to 
fulfill the majority of the educational uses at issue.  As explained above, the Register 
finds that the evidentiary record for proposed uses in connection with K-12 students and 
media literacy after-school or adult education programs (apart from GED programs) is 
not well developed, and does not demonstrate that screen capture cannot meet these 
needs. Accordingly, the Register recommends a screen -capture exemption for these 
categories to address the possibility of circumvention when using this technology.  In 
describing the users of motion pictures in such media literacy programs based on the 
record before her, the Register adopts proponents’ refinement that the uses be connected 
to nonprofit digital and media literacy programs and adds the requirement that uses take 
place in the course of face-to-face instructional activities.
639 
635 See Joint Creators Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2-3.
 
636 Id. at 3.
 
637 Id. at 2-3 (citing 2010 Recommendation at 37-38 and 2012 Recommendation at 106).
 
638 Tr. at 300:10-301:14 (May 28, 2015) (Smith, USCO; Williams, Joint Creators).
 
639 See Hobbs Class 4 Reply at 8; 17 U.S.C § 110(2).
 
101
 

[PAGE 106]
     
    
   
 
  
     
  
    
  
 
  
  
   
 
 
    
 
     
    
  
  
  
   
   
  
    
 
    
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
     
       
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
For K-12 educators, the record was more robust in that proponents documented 
examples where high school educators relied upon DVD excerpts to facilitate classroom 
analysis of films such as Citizen Kane and Chicago, as well as other discussions of film 
theory, but proponents did not provide any examples where standard-definition resolution 
was insufficient to achieve these uses.
640 The Register therefore recommends an 
exemption to allow access by K-12 instructors to DVDs or digitally distributed material 
for purposes of close analysis.  For college and university educators and students, and for 
education uses by faculty in connection with similarly situated MOOCs, the Register 
finds that the record demonstrates that access to Blu-ray discs may occasionally be 
required to engage in close analysis in cinema studies or similar courses if DVD or other 
standard-definition materials are insufficient to accomplish the desired analysis of visual 
or sonic details.  But the record did not establish that students enrolled in MOOCs had a 
need to engage in circumvention to complete course assignments. 
In evaluating the proposed exemption for MOOCs specifically, while the Register 
finds that the record establishes that MOOCs merit an exemption for the same reasons as 
college or university courses, the record does not support the sweeping approach 
suggested by proponents.  Proponents’ broadly framed proposal would seemingly 
encompass any online video that could be characterized as an educational experience. 
Upon examination of the record, however, the specific examples of proposed 
noninfringing uses submitted by the proponents all involve uses by faculty in courses 
offered by accredited educational bodies; although the Register is aware that some 
MOOCs operate independently of accredited organizations, no examples of purported 
noninfringing uses by these other (sometimes for-profit) MOOCs were provided to justify 
proponents’ broad language.  In addition, the Register is persuaded that while the strict 
contours of section 110(2) may be an imprecise fit for the rapid emergence of the MOOC 
model, section 110(2) nonetheless offers important and meaningful guidance concerning 
Congress’s desire to balance pedagogical needs in distance learning with copyright 
owners’ concerns of harmful impact. The Register therefore recommends that any 
exemption incorporate section 110(2)’s requirements that uses be limited to nonprofit 
educational institutions, that transmissions be limited to enrolled students, and that the 
transmitting body institute policies regarding copyright protection.  Taking a further cue 
from the TEACH Act, the Register also recommends requiring MOOCs making use of 
this exemption to employ TPMs that reasonably prevent the retention and unauthorized 
dissemination of copyrighted content, as provided in section 110(2).  In this regard, the 
Register notes that the record indicates that these measures should be relatively simple 
for course platforms to adopt. 
Next, concerning uses by filmmakers, based on the extensive record presented, 
the Register recommends that the existing exemption for documentary films be 
continued.  In considering non-documentary films, however, the Register concludes that 
the record does not support a finding that the use of motion picture clips in narrative films 
640 See, e.g., Hobbs Class 2 Supp. at 5. 
102
 

[PAGE 107]
     
    
  
   
  
 
     
   
     
  
   
 
 
   
     
   
  
    
   
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
   
   
 
          
      
       
             
            
            
   
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
is, as a general matter, likely to be noninfringing.  In light of documented concerns about 
the effect of such uses on existing markets, the Register cannot at this time recommend 
extending an exemption beyond non-documentary filmmaking.  The Register observes, 
however, that the category of “documentary” should not be construed in an unduly 
narrow fashion,
641 and should be understood as sufficiently flexible to encompass films 
of this genre that incorporate limited scripted elements such as reenactments or imagined 
dialogue based on real events. 
Further, for certain uses of motion picture excerpts obtained online, the Register 
recommends replacing the phrase “online distribution services” in the current exemption 
with the phrase “digitally transmitted video.” This clarification is intended only to make 
clear that the exemption extends to online streaming video services, and is not intended to 
permit the making of full copies of works obtained from such services. 
A number of commenters urged that the language of previous exemptions be 
simplified so that it is more accessible for users of the exemptions. The Register agrees, 
and has adopted the suggestion that exemptions be restructured based on the type of use 
at issue.
642 
Prospective users of the recommended exemptions should take pains to ensure 
that they satisfy each requirement of these narrowly tailored exemptions before seeking 
to invoke them. The Register encourages users to seek out and employ noncircumventing screen-capture technology or other technologies that can be employed in 
lieu of circumvention.643 
Based on the foregoing analysis, the Register recommends that the Librarian 
designate the following classes: 
Motion pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in 
17 U.S.C. 101, where circumvention is undertaken solely in order to 
make use of short portions of the motion pictures for the purpose of 
criticism or comment in the following instances: 
(i) For use in documentary filmmaking, 
(A) Where the circumvention is undertaken using screencapture technology that appears to be offered to the public 
641 See generally Class 6 Post-Hearing Responses (providing definitions of “documentary” films); see also 
ACADEMY OF MOTION PICTURE ARTS AND SCIENCES, 88TH ACADEMY AWARDS OF MERIT FOR 
ACHIEVEMENT DURING 2015, at 10 (2015), available at http://www.oscars.org/sites/default/files/88aa_rules 
.pdf (noting that a documentary film “may employ partial reenactment, stock footage, stills, animation, 
stop-motion or other techniques, as long as the emphasis is on fact and not on fiction”). 
642 See, e.g., Tr. at 297:14-19 (May 28, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators). 
643 See 2012 Recommendation at 140 (same). 
103
 

[PAGE 108]
     
    
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
	 
	 
	 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
as enabling the reproduction of motion pictures after 
content has been lawfully acquired and decrypted, or 
(B) Where the motion picture is lawfully made and acquired on 
a DVD protected by the Content Scramble System, on a Blu­
ray disc protected by the Advanced Access Control System, 
or via a digital transmission protected by a technological 
measure, and where the person engaging in circumvention 
reasonably believes that screen-capture software or other 
non-circumventing alternatives are unable to produce the 
required level of high-quality content; 
(ii)	 For use in noncommercial videos (including videos produced for 
a paid commission if the commissioning entity’s use is 
noncommercial), 
(A) Where the circumvention is undertaken using screencapture technology that appears to be offered to the public 
as enabling the reproduction of motion pictures after 
content has been lawfully acquired and decrypted, or 
(B) Where the motion picture is lawfully made and acquired on 
a DVD protected by the Content Scramble System, on a Blu­
ray disc protected by the Advanced Access Control System, 
or via a digital transmission protected by a technological 
measure, and where the person engaging in circumvention 
reasonably believes that screen-capture software or other 
non-circumventing alternatives are unable to produce the 
required level of high-quality content; 
(iii)	 For use in nonfiction multimedia e-books offering film analysis, 
(A) Where the circumvention is undertaken using screencapture technology that appears to be offered to the public 
as enabling the reproduction of motion pictures after 
content has been lawfully acquired and decrypted, or 
(B) Where the motion picture is lawfully made and acquired on 
a DVD protected by the Content Scramble System, on a Blu­
ray disc protected by the Advanced Access Control System, 
or via a digital transmission protected by a technological 
measure, and where the person engaging in circumvention 
reasonably believes that screen-capture software or other 
non-circumventing alternatives are unable to produce the 
required level of high-quality content; 
(iv)	 By college and university faculty and students, for educational 
purposes, 
104
 

[PAGE 109]
     
    
  
 
  
  
   
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
   
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
	 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
(A) Where the circumvention is undertaken using screencapture technology that appears to be offered to the public 
as enabling the reproduction of motion pictures after 
content has been lawfully acquired and decrypted, or 
(B) In film studies or other courses requiring close analysis of 
film and media excerpts where the motion picture is lawfully 
made and acquired on a DVD protected by the Content 
Scramble System, on a Blu-ray disc protected by the 
Advanced Access Control System, or via a digital 
transmission protected by a technological measure, and 
where the person engaging in circumvention reasonably 
believes that screen-capture software or other noncircumventing alternatives are unable to produce the 
required level of high-quality content; 
(v)	 By faculty of massive open online courses (MOOCs) offered by 
accredited nonprofit educational institutions to officially 
enrolled students through online platforms (which platforms 
themselves may be operated for profit), for educational 
purposes, where the MOOC provider through the online 
platform limits transmissions to the extent technologically 
feasible to such officially enrolled students, institutes copyright 
policies and provides copyright informational materials to 
faculty, students and relevant staff members, and applies 
technological measures that reasonably prevent unauthorized 
further dissemination of a work in accessible form to others or 
retention of the work for longer than the course session by 
recipients of a transmission through the platform, as 
contemplated by 17 U.S.C. 110(2), 
(A) Where the circumvention is undertaken using screencapture technology that appears to be offered to the public 
as enabling the reproduction of motion pictures after 
content has been lawfully acquired and decrypted, or 
(B) In film studies or other courses requiring close analysis of 
film and media excerpts where the motion picture is lawfully 
made and acquired on a DVD protected by the Content 
Scramble System, on a Blu-ray disc protected by the 
Advanced Access Control System, or via a digital 
transmission protected by a technological measure, and 
where the person engaging in circumvention reasonably 
believes that screen-capture software or other noncircumventing alternatives are unable to produce the 
required level of high-quality content; 
105
 

[PAGE 110]
     
    
  
   
 
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
	 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
(vi)	 By kindergarten through twelfth-grade educators, including of 
accredited general educational development (GED) programs, 
for educational purposes, 
(A) Where the circumvention is undertaken using screencapture technology that appears to be offered to the public 
as enabling the reproduction of motion pictures after 
content has been lawfully acquired and decrypted, or 
(B) In film studies or other courses requiring close analysis of 
film and media excerpts where the motion picture is lawfully 
made and acquired on a DVD protected by the Content 
Scramble System, or via a digital transmission protected by 
a technological measure, and where the person engaging in 
circumvention reasonably believes that screen-capture 
software or other non-circumventing alternatives are unable 
to produce the required level of high-quality content; 
(vii) By kindergarten through twelfth-grade students, including those 
in accredited general educational development (GED) programs, 
for educational purposes, where the circumvention is 
undertaken using screen-capture technology that appears to be 
offered to the public as enabling the reproduction of motion 
pictures after content has been lawfully acquired and decrypted; 
and 
(viii) By educators and participants in nonprofit digital and media 
literacy programs offered by libraries, museums and other 
nonprofit entities with an educational mission, in the course of 
face-to-face instructional activities for educational purposes, 
where the circumvention is undertaken using screen-capture 
technology that appears to be offered to the public as enabling 
the reproduction of motion pictures after content has been 
lawfully acquired and decrypted. 
106
 

[PAGE 111]
     
    
      
   
   
  
  
  
   
    
   
   
    
  
 
   
   
  
   
  
 
   
  
          
             
           
            
           
              
                  
         
    
            
        
          
          
    
               
              
                  
             
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
B. Proposed Classes 8 and 10: Audiovisual Works and Literary Works
 
Distributed Electronically – Space-Shifting and Format-Shifting
 
1. Proposals 
Proposed Classes 8 and 10 would allow circumvention of technological measures 
protecting motion pictures, e-books, and other audiovisual or literary works to allow 
users to view the materials on alternate devices for personal use or to create back-up 
copies.
644 Broadly speaking, this activity is referred to as “space-shifting” and, in some 
cases, “format-shifting.” “Space -shifting” occurs when a work is transferred from one 
storage medium to another, such as from a DVD to a computer hard drive.645 “Formatshifting” occurs when a work is converted into a new file or storage format, such as 
converting an e-book purchased through Amazon’s Kindle store into a universally 
readable form.
646 Accordingly, the NPRM formulated these classes as seeking to engage 
in both space- and format-shifting. 
Public Knowledge submitted a petition for an exemption to engage broadly in the 
noncommercial space-shifting of motion pictures.647 Specifically, it seeks to allow 
consumers to transfer copies of motion pictures from DVDs, Blu-ray discs, or 
downloaded files to other digital formats so that the content can be viewed on alternate 
devices such as tablets, smartphones, and computers that lack DVD drives, or for backup 
purposes.
648 Another petition submitted by Alpheus Madsen requests an exemption to 
allow circumvention of access controls on DVDs specifically in order to play the DVDs 
on the Linux operating system.649 Combining these two overlapping petitions, the 
NPRM described the class as follows: 
644 See Public Knowledge Space-Shifting Pet. at 2; Meadows Pet. at 1. 
645 One court has defined “space-shifting” as “mak[ing] copies in order to render [files] portable.” 
Recording Indus. Ass’n of Am. v. Diamond Multimedia Sys., Inc., 180 F.3d 1072, 1079 (9th Cir. 1999); see 
also 2 MELVILLE B. NIMMER & DA VID NIMMER, NIMMER ON COPYRIGHT § 8B.07[C][4] (rev. ed., 2015) (“2 
NIMMER ON COPYRIGHT”). This is in contrast to “time-shifting,” which the Supreme Court defined in the 
context of broadcast television as “record[ing] a program [one] cannot view as it is being televised and to 
watch it once at a later time.” Sony Corp. of Am. v. Universal City Studios, Inc., 464 U.S. 417, 421 (1984). 
646 See, e.g., 2006 Recommendation at 80-83 (declining to recommend exemption for creation of back-up 
copies by both space- and format-shifting). 
647 Public Knowledge’s proposed regulatory language reads as follows: “an exemption for digital rights 
management-encrypted motion pictures and other audiovisual works on lawfully made and lawfully 
acquired DVDs, Blu-ray discs (‘BDs’), and downloaded files, when circumvention is accomplished for the 
purpose of noncommercial space shifting of the contained audiovisual content.” Public Knowledge Space -
Shifting Pet. at 1. 
648 Id. at 2; Madsen Pet. at 1; Public Knowledge Class 8 Supp. at 1-2. 
649 Madsen did not provide proposed regulatory language but stated “[a]s a user of the Linux Operating 
System, I cannot legally play DVDs I legitimately own, rent, or borrow, which is a violation of my free use 
of such DVDs.” Madsen Pet. at 1. Madsen did not submit subsequent comments in this rulemaking. 
107
 

[PAGE 112]
     
    
    
   
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
    
   
  
   
  
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
        
                
                
              
                
          
           
              
           
        
        
        
   
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Proposed Class 8: This proposed class would allow circumvention of 
access controls on lawfully made and acquired audiovisual works for the 
purpose of noncommercial space-shifting or format-shifting. This 
exemption has been requested for audiovisual material made available on 
DVDs protected by CSS, Blu-ray discs protected by AACS, and TPMprotected online distribution services.
650 
Additional comments supporting this exemption were filed by the Music Library 
Association (“MLA”), Free Software Foundation (“FSF”), OmniQ, and over 130 
individuals.
651 
Christopher Meadows submitted a petition for an exemption to engage in 
noncommercial space- or format-shifting of e-books.652 This exemption would allow 
consumers to view e-books that are protected by TPMs on alternate viewing platforms 
and to create back-up copies.  For example, it would allow a user to circumvent the TPM 
that restricts a book to a specific e-book reader in order to store a digital copy of it on a 
laptop or a different e-book reader. The NPRM described the exemption as follows: 
Proposed Class 10: This proposed class would allow circumvention of 
access controls on lawfully made and acquired literary works distributed 
electronically for the purpose of noncommercial space-shifting or formatshifting.  This exemption has been requested for literary works distributed 
electronically [as] e-books.
653 
Comments supporting this exemption were filed by MLA, FSF, and Rachel Englander.654 
Because the proposed space-shifting exemptions for audiovisual works and ebooks involve common issues, Proposed Classes 8 and 10 are addressed together.  
a. Background 
The proposed classes here are similar to those sought in previous section 1201 
rulemakings.655 The Register has declined to recommend an exemption for such uses in 
650 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,862. 
651 MLA Class 8 Supp.; FSF Class 8 Supp.; OmniQ Reply; Arnold Scher Reply; David Butterworth Reply; 
David Graf Reply; Don Lowery Class 8 Reply; Gregory Borodiansky Class 8 Reply; James King Reply; 
Jason Weingartner Reply; John Berglund Reply; John Cleave Reply; Keith Chatfield Reply; Patrick Brett 
Class 8 Reply; Patrick Ferguson Class 8 Reply; Sandra Cobb Reply; Shawn White Reply; Valentin Duran 
Reply; Digital Right to Repair Class 8 Reply (118 individuals). 
652 Meadows specifically proposed that “[c]onsumers should be legally permitted to remove DRM from 
electronic books that they have purchased in order to back them up, read them on other e-book platforms, 
or otherwise make section 107 fair use of the material.” Meadows Pet. at 1. 
653 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,863. 
654 MLA Class 10 Supp.; FSF Class 10 Supp.; Englander Supp. 
655 See 2012 Recommendation at 157; 2010 Recommendation at 214; 2006 Recommendation at 69; 2003 
Recommendation at 126-27. 
108
 

[PAGE 113]
     
    
  
  
   
    
 
  
    
    
    
 
 
   
    
   
 
 
    
     
    
     
       
           
      
          
          
     
      
      
              
          
            
        
  
   
         
     
    
   
  
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
the past four rulemakings because the proponents have failed to establish a legal or 
factual record sufficient to establish that the space-shifting and/or format-shifting of 
audiovisual works, e-books, and other copyrighted works constitutes a noninfringing 
use.656 When considering space- or format-shifting for the transfer of copyrighted works 
to different devices or the creation of back-up copies, the Register has consistently found 
insufficient legal authority to support the claim that these activities are likely to constitute 
fair uses under current law.657 
In particular, the Register has previously noted that “no court has held that ‘spaceshifting’ is a fair use,”658 and that current law “does not guarantee access to copyrighted 
material in a user’s preferred format.”659 In the 2012 rulemaking, the Register found that 
proponents had not adequately demonstrated that space-shifting was a transformative use 
as opposed to “simply a means for an individual consumer to access content for the same 
entertainment purpose as the original work.”660 While the Register has acknowledged 
that judicial interpretation of fair use could someday evolve to include certain spaceshifting activities, as stated in the last proceeding, “the Section 1201 rulemaking process 
is not the forum in which to break new ground on the scope of fair use.”661 
The Register has also found in prior rulemakings that proponents failed to 
demonstrate any significant adverse effects resulting from the prohibition on 
circumvention,
662 failed to identify the specific DRM at issue,663 or failed to show that 
the inability to access a copyrighted work was a result of an access control rather than 
software or hardware incompatibility.664 At the same time, opponents in prior 
rulemakings have introduced evidence that market alternatives to circumvention— 
656 2012 Recommendation at 162-65 (declining to recommend an exemption for space-shifting of 
audiovisual works on DVDs); 2010 Recommendation at 224 (declining to recommend an exemption for 
circumvention of access controls on DVDs and online streamed media to enable viewing on alternate 
platforms); 2006 Recommendation at 72, 80-83 (declining to recommend exemptions for space-shifting of 
audio and video content and for creation of back-up copies by both space- and format-shifting); 2003 
Recommendation at 137, 141 (declining to recommend exemptions for space-shifting of “tethered” ebooks, sound recordings, and audiovisual works). 
657 See 2006 Recommendation at 60, 69-72, 80-83; 2003 Recommendation at 130-31, 137-38. 
658 2003 Recommendation at 130 (citing Diamond Multimedia, 180 F.3d at 1079); see also 2006 
Recommendation at 70 (noting that the “commenters uniformly failed to cite legal precedent that 
establishes that such space-shifting is, in fact, a noninfringing use”). 
659 2012 Recommendation at 163 (citing Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Corley, 273 F.3d 429, 459 (2d Cir. 
2001)); see also 2010 Recommendation at 224; 2006 Recommendation at 74; 2003 Recommendation at 
132.
 
660 2012 Recommendation at 164.
 
661 Id. at 163 (quotations omitted); see also 2003 Recommendation at 106.
 
662 2012 Recommendation at 165-66; 2010 Recommendation at 220, 223-24; 2006 Recommendation at 73­
74; 2003 Recommendation at 134-138, 140-41.
 
663 2010 Recommendation at 220-21; 2006 Recommendation at 69.
 
664 Id. 
109
 

[PAGE 114]
     
    
  
   
   
     
 
  
    
 
    
 
 
    
   
   
   
  
   
 
   
   
           
          
      
         
         
        
        
           
             
              
      
      
     
      
      
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
including peripheral devices, online downloading and streaming video services, set top 
boxes, cable and satellite on-demand services and, in the case of e-books, alternate 
formats, including hard copies of books—could mitigate the claimed adverse impact on 
accessibility.665 
i. Proposed Class 8: Audiovisual Works 
Public Knowledge’s submissions are focused on enabling the viewing of feature 
films and television shows on tablets, smartphones, and laptops.  Public Knowledge 
identifies several TPMs relevant to this class.
666 As with Classes 1 through 7, Class 8 
proponents seek to circumvent CSS on DVDs and AACS on Blu-ray discs, both of which 
have been recognized as TPMs by the Register in previous proceedings.667 Public 
Knowledge also identifies BD+ for Blu-ray discs, Content Protection for Recordable 
Media, and High-Bandwidth Digital Content Protection as additional TPMs that are 
applied to Blu-ray discs and digitally distributed content.668 In addition to these specific 
TPMs, Public Knowledge requests the ability to circumvent “any DRM encryption 
standard” used to restrict copying of motion pictures.669 With respect to downloaded 
files, Public Knowledge notes that a “wider variety of changing controls on digitallydelivered audiovisual works” is implicated and requests that the exemption not be overly 
specific, because foreclosing access to TPMs “that may be developed between now and 
2018 would be unnecessarily limiting.”
670 
Public Knowledge declined to specify the methods by which circumvention 
would be accomplished, arguing instead that the method of circumvention is irrelevant so 
long as the method would not “lead to infringing uses not within the intended scope of 
the proposal.”
671 
665 2012 Recommendation at 165 (suggesting that “a reasonably priced peripheral, a different device, or an 
online subscription service to access and play desired content” may “offer a reasonable alternative to 
circumvention”); 2010 Recommendation at 221-23 & n.725 (discussing alternatives such as “online 
distribution and on-demand access,” “streaming video,” or “a set-top device”); 2006 Recommendation at 
74 (discussing alternatives, including VHS format, “[o]nline access and online downloading,” and “on­
demand services from cable and satellite companies”); 2003 Recommendation at 132-33, 139-41 
(discussing alternatives to e-book circumvention, including “hardcover, paperback, or audio book” and 
“multiple choices of formats, e.g., Adobe Reader, Microsoft Reader, Palm Reader”). 
666 See Public Knowledge Space-Shifting Pet. at 2; Public Knowledge Class 8 Supp. at 2. 
667 Public Knowledge Space-Shifting Pet. at 2; Public Knowledge Class 8 Supp. at 2; 2012 
Recommendation at 126; 2000 Final Rule, 65 Fed. Reg. at 64,567-68. 
668 Public Knowledge Class 8 Supp. at 2. 
669 Public Knowledge Space-Shifting Pet. at 2. 
670 Public Knowledge Class 8 Supp. at 2. 
671 Id. at 3. 
110
 

[PAGE 115]
     
    
   
  
 
   
   
  
 
  
     
  
 
  
  
 
  
    
 
   
 
  
  
   
  
   
      
    
               
            
            
      
                  
            
             
    
           
             
           
     
    
    
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
ii. Proposed Class 10:  Literary Works Distributed Electronically 
Meadows seeks to circumvent TPMs on e-books sold in the Kindle, Nook, and 
Kobo formats, which are allegedly locked by a “Digital Rights Management lock that 
encrypts the electronic books to prevent them from being read in unauthorized reader 
hardware.”672 However, neither he nor any other proponent provided further information 
as to the types of access controls used on e-books or the intended methods of 
circumvention.  
b. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
i. Proposed Class 8: Audiovisual Works 
Proponents claim that space- and format-shifting for personal, noncommercial 
uses, such as transferring audiovisual works from DVDs to alternate formats or creating 
back-up copies for preservation purposes, are established fair uses.
673 In support, Public 
Knowledge asserts that the “history of copyright legislation contains a multitude of 
references to noncommercial, personal uses,” and argues that personal uses have long 
been considered noninfringing.
674 More specifically, Public Knowledge relies on a 
House Report675 and hearing testimony of Register Barbara Ringer676 regarding the 1971 
Sound Recording Amendment to support the proposition that making noncommercial 
home audio recordings is a “recognized fair use.”
677 From these sources, which address 
in relevant part whether the creation of a limited copyright in sound recordings could 
preclude home audio recording for private use, Public Knowledge infers support for a 
general space-shifting exemption in copyright law; in the view of Public Knowledge, the 
legislative history suggests that “it was clear that home users were . . .  making personal 
copies from commercially-produced tapes and records,” and “it would be nonsensical” to 
consider this copying onto alternate formats to be time-shifting as opposed to space- or 
format-shifting.
678 Public Knowledge also cites a 1961 Copyright Office Report, which 
672 Meadows Pet. at 2-3. 
673 See Public Knowledge Space-Shifting Pet. at 2; see also, e.g., Cleave Reply at 1 (“I, personally, have 
had at least a dozen movies that I legally purchased become unusable due to defect or machine 
incompatibility: I ought to be allowed to make a backup to cover such an event.”); Madsen Pet. at 4. 
674 Public Knowledge Class 8 Supp. at 3. 
675 Id. (quoting H.R. REP. NO. 92-487, at 7 (1971) (“1971 House Report”) (“[I]t is not the intention of the 
Committee to restrain the home recording, from broadcasts or form tapes or records, of recorded 
performances, where the home recording is for private use and with no purpose of reproducing or otherwise 
capitalizing commercially on it.”)). 
676 Id. at 4-5 (quoting Prohibiting Piracy of Sound Recordings: Hearings on S. 646 and H.R. 6927 before 
the Subcomm. No.3 of the H. Comm. on the Judiciary, 92d Cong. 22 (1971) (statement of Barbara Ringer, 
Assistant Register of Copyrights) (“1971 Testimony of Barbara Ringer”) (“[Home video recording] is 
something you cannot control.”)). 
677 Id. at 5. 
678 Id. at 4. 
111
 

[PAGE 116]
     
    
   
   
 
 
   
     
   
   
   
     
    
    
  
   
 
     
  
   
  
   
    
  
          
          
              
               
  
    
              
    
     
      
                
  
              
        
     
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
referenced the then-emerging ability to view private performances of televised motion 
pictures captured by home recordings, as further evidence of a space-shifting privilege.679 
Public Knowledge opines that “the most viable statutory rationale” for these various 
statements “has always been fair use.”680 
Public Knowledge further contends that case law establishes that space- and 
format-shifting are fair uses.681 As in previous petitions, Public Knowledge relies upon 
Recording Industry Association of America v. Diamond Multimedia Systems Inc.682 and 
Sony v. Universal,683 although Public Knowledge concedes that the Register and the 
Librarian found that those cases “did not indicate that format-shifting and space-shifting 
were lawful, fair uses” in the 2012 rulemaking.684 
Public Knowledge also points to a more recent district court decision in a case 
involving the satellite television provider Dish, Fox Broadcasting Co. v. Dish Network 
LLC,685 as further support for its claim that the “noncommercial, nonprofit, private 
reproduction of the works onto a personal computing device” is a fair use.686 The spaceshifting service at issue in the Dish litigation was called “Hopper Transfers,” and allowed 
Dish’s subscribers to download content, including copyrighted television programming, 
from their Dish-provided set-top box onto personal devices such as a laptop, tablet, or 
smartphone.687 Fox brought suit against Dish for copyright infringement and breach of 
contract; while the district court granted Dish’s motion for partial summary judgment as 
to the copyright claim—indicating that the noncommercial “time- and place-shifting of 
recordings” at issue were fair use—it nonetheless found against Dish on the related 
contract claim.
688 
Notably, Public Knowledge’s legal theory is not limited to the context of 
audiovisual works sold in digital formats.  Instead, as made clear at the hearing, Public 
Knowledge believes that fair use would also entitle purchasers of physical books to make 
679 Id. (quoting U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, 88TH CONG., REP. OF THE REGISTER OF COPYRIGHTS ON THE
 
GENERAL REVISION OF THE U.S. COPYRIGHT LAW 30 (Comm. Print 1961) (“1961 Copyright Office
 
Report”) (“New technical devices will probably make it practical in the future to reproduce televised
 
motion pictures in the home. We do not believe the private use of such a reproduction can or should be
 
precluded by copyright.”)).
 
680 Id. at 5.
 
681 Id. at 5-6; Public Knowledge Class 8 Reply at 2; OmniQ Reply at 5-9.
 
682 Diamond Multimedia, 180 F.3d 1072.
 
683 Sony, 464 U.S. 417.
 
684 Public Knowledge Class 8 Supp. at 3.
 
685 Fox Broad. Co. v. Dish Network LLC, No. CV 12-4529 DMG SHX, 2015 WL 1137593 (C.D. Cal. Jan.
 
20, 2015).
 
686 Public Knowledge Class 8 Supp. at 6; see also Public Knowledge Class 8 Reply at 3-5.
 
687 See Dish, 2015 WL 1137593, at *6.
 
688 Id. at *30-31 (citing Diamond Multimedia, 180 F.3d at 1079).
 
112
 

[PAGE 117]
     
    
    
  
  
   
     
   
   
 
  
  
   
    
     
   
  
   
  
    
  
 
     
 
   
   
   
 
         
      
  
  
    
             
        
                
 
                    
                 
   
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
full photocopies of them for purposes of convenience, although it could not provide 
specific case law authorizing such conduct.689 
That said, Public Knowledge argues generally that the four-factor fair use test of 
section 107 validates its proposal.690 Under the first factor, the purpose and character of 
the use, Public Knowledge urges that Dish and Sony indicate that space-shifting is a fair 
use because “the noncommercial, nonprofit, private nature” of a reproduction made for 
personal use “creates a presumption of fairness.”691 Public Knowledge did not address 
the second factor, the nature of the copyrighted work, or the third factor, the amount and 
substantiality of the use—although it is clear that Public Knowledge is seeking to create 
entire copies of expressive copyrighted works.  As for the fourth factor, the effect on the 
market for or value of the work, Public Knowledge contends that “the harms for the 
market for copyrighted works remain speculative.”
692 In support, Public Knowledge 
points to the Dish court’s determination that Fox did not show more than a “speculative” 
market harm and also asserts that an exemption would “create a minuscule amount of 
market effect, due to the current prevalence of space-shifting” undertaken by consumers 
even without an exemption.693 
Proponents of this exemption briefly present other arguments besides fair use to 
establish that their desired uses are noninfringing.694 Commenter OmniQ submitted a 
patent application that purports to set forth a system of “non-reproductive” space-shifting, 
such that the original instance of a work is destroyed or made unusable when a copy of 
the work is moved to a new medium.  OmniQ asserts that use of such a system would not 
implicate any of the exclusive rights under section 106 because “[t]here is no 
‘reproduction or duplication.’”
695 Although described in written comments, this system 
was not demonstrated at the hearings, and it is not clear from the record that a product 
embodying the patent specification has been made available for potential users or even 
prototyped. 
689 Tr. at 150:18-22 (May 19, 2015) (Siy, Public Knowledge). 
690 Public Knowledge Class 8 Supp. at 6. 
691 Id. 
692 Id. 
693 Id. at 6-7. 
694 See id. at 8-12 (arguing that agreement terms restricting consumers’ personal use of purchased works are 
invalid and expressing concern that crediting these agreements in the rulemaking process would encourage 
copyright misuse); see also OmniQ Reply at 5 (arguing that the private performance of a work is “always 
noninfringing”). 
695 OmniQ Reply at 1, 5-9 (citing C. M. Paula Co. v. Logan, 355 F. Supp. 189 (N.D. Tex. 1973) and Lee v. 
Deck the Walls, Inc., 925 F. Supp. 576, 580 (N.D. Ill. 1996), aff’d sub nom. Lee v. A.R.T. Co., 125 F.3d 580 
(7th Cir. 1997)). 
113
 

[PAGE 118]
     
    
   
   
  
   
    
   
 
   
 
  
     
  
     
  
 
     
    
 
   
 
   
    
  
               
                 
              
             
        
      
             
                 
               
               
             
             
               
       
           
            
          
              
     
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
ii. Proposed Class 10:  Literary Works Distributed Electronically 
In his petition, proponent Meadows asserts that reading e-books on other devices 
and “archiving them in a universally-readable form against the possibility the current ebook vendor will go out of business” are forms of space- and format-shifting and, as 
such, are fair uses.696 While Meadows briefly references the Sony and Diamond 
Multimedia decisions in his petition, he did not file supporting comments.697 Other 
commenters submitted brief statements expressing their desire to create back-up copies of 
e-books for personal or library uses, but did not specifically address or explain how those 
uses were noninfringing.698 
c. Asserted Adverse Effects 
i. Proposed Class 8: Audiovisual Works 
Public Knowledge argues that preventing users from engaging in fair use of 
purchased media is itself an adverse effect under section 1201.699 Public Knowledge 
contends that “the monetary costs to consumers who avail themselves of . . . alternatives 
[are] real,” as consumers will be forced to spend millions of dollars purchasing duplicate 
copies of audiovisual works and will lose billions of dollars in decreased utility (such as 
the ability to transfer files) without an exemption.
700 Public Knowledge explains that 
DVD drives are becoming less common on modern devices and suggests that consumers 
will be forced to buy “duplicate, expensive computing devices.”
701 Public Knowledge 
conceded, however, that a consumer who wishes to “rip” a DVD would need some sort of 
DVD drive to do so.702 In addition, Public Knowledge argues that because DVD and 
696 Meadows Pet. at 4. 
697 Id. 
698 Englander Supp. at 1 (noting that “[a] library should be able to take preventive measures to ensure the 
continued access of its information by its patrons”); MLA Class 10 Supp. at 1 (stating “[a]s e-book readers 
and file formats become obsolete, and as permissible under section 108, music librarians need to create 
preservation copies of textual works”); FSF Class 10 Supp. at 1 (stating that “[u]sers should be able to view 
or edit literary works in a free format”). 
699 Public Knowledge Class 8 Supp. at 12. 
700 Tr. at 89:07-21 (May 19, 2015) (Siy, Public Knowledge); see also Public Knowledge Class 8 Supp. at 
12-13; Public Knowledge Space-Shifting Pet. at 3; Duran Reply at 1 (“[I do not] have the means, that 
would allow me to re-purchase any of the DVDs in my collection.”). Public Knowledge also argues that 
“when consumers buy a DVD or Blu-ray disc, they are buying a copy of a work which they own outright,” 
in response to the assertion by the DVD Copy Control Association and the Advanced Access Content 
System Licensing Administrator (“DVD CCA/AACS LA”), who submitted a joint filing, that consumers 
are purchasing the right to access a copyrighted work. Public Knowledge Class 8 Reply at 6; see also DVD 
CCA/AACS LA Class 8 Opp’n at 4-5. 
701 Public Knowledge Class 8 Supp. at 13; see also Public Knowledge Space-Shifting Pet. at 3. 
702 Tr. at 156:22-157:18 (May 19, 2015) (Charlesworth, USCO; Siy, Public Knowledge); see also Public 
Knowledge Class 8 Supp. at 7-8 n.20 (citing Copy A DVD, WIRED, http://howto.wired.com/wiki/ 
Copy_a_DVD (last visited Oct. 7, 2015) and Whitson Gordon, How to Rip a DVD to Your Computer, 
LIFEHACKER (Feb. 21, 2014), http://lifehacker.com/5809765/how-to-rip-a-dvd-to-your-computer). 
114
 

[PAGE 119]
     
    
 
 
 
    
     
 
  
  
   
 
  
   
   
 
   
  
     
   
   
  
  
  
  
  
     
       
     
                
                 
                   
    
    
            
                
    
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Blu-ray discs degrade over time, in order to preserve their content, “consumers need to be 
able to extract those contents and shift them to a different format.”703 
Public Knowledge further claims that alternatives to circumvention, such as the 
streaming services, disc-to-digital services, and cloud-based digital rights locker services 
discussed below, are inadequate to remedy these harms.704 Public Knowledge notes that 
many works are unavailable through streaming services, and that those that are may only 
be available intermittently or through the use of multiple pay services.705 Additionally, 
Public Knowledge asserts that those titles that are offered by online services may not be 
practically available to all users due to lack of adequate broadband, ISP data caps, or 
incompatible hardware and software platforms.706 
ii. Proposed Class 10:  Literary Works Distributed Electronically 
Proponents of Class 10 contend that consumers risk losing access to purchased ebooks in the event that an e-book company fails and a backup copy cannot be made or the 
format becomes incompatible with future devices.707 Proponents did not offer any 
specific examples of works that could not be accessed; however, Meadows further asserts 
that users are unfairly tied to one manufacturer’s e-book device by the inability to render 
e-books purchased for use on one type of device, such as a Kindle, compatible with a new 
device, such as a Nook.708 
d. Argument Under Statutory Factors 
i. Proposed Class 8: Audiovisual Works 
Proponents claim that the statutory factors set forth in section 1201(a)(1) support 
the granting of this exemption.  First, proponents explain that the exemption will enhance 
the availability of copyrighted works because large quantities of works are only available 
in DVD format and are purportedly inaccessible to consumers whose devices lack DVD 
drives.709 Second, regarding the availability for use of works for nonprofit archival, 
preservation, and educational purposes, proponents argue that “[a]llowing personal spaceshifting creates a more robust environment for the preservation of works.”
710 Third, with 
703 Public Knowledge Space-Shifting Pet. at 3-4.
 
704 Public Knowledge Class 8 Supp. at 14-19.
 
705 Id. at 14-15.
 
706 Id. at 15-19. Public Knowledge also notes there is no central data source that is comprehensive and up ­
to-date that lists where works are available. See Public Knowledge Class 8 Reply at 8, App. A. 
707 Englander Supp. at 1; Meadows Pet. at 5 (contending that a number of e-book stores have gone out of
 
business in recent years).
 
708 Meadows Pet. at 5.
 
709 Public Knowledge Class 8 Supp. at 20; OmniQ Reply at 9.
 
710 Public Knowledge Class 8 Supp. at 20; see also MLA Class 8 Supp. at 1; MLA Class 10 Supp. at 1; 
OmniQ Reply at 10-11. 
115
 

[PAGE 120]
     
    
  
     
 
 
   
  
  
     
  
   
     
 
  
    
    
  
   
 
  
   
   
 
 
            
                 
  
             
          
                
                   
              
              
         
              
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
respect to the impact of the prohibition on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, 
scholarship or research, Public Knowledge states that “while the primary purpose of the 
use in this exemption is purely personal, the proliferation of privately-held and 
compatible copies serves as a redundancy measure that helps protect potential later uses 
for these other fair uses.”711 Fourth, proponents argue that the value of the works for 
purchasers would increase as a result of an exemption, and that any predicted harm to 
copyright owners is merely speculative since consumers already engage in space-shifting 
even without an exemption.712 
ii. Proposed Class 10:  Literary Works Distributed Electronically 
No Class 10 proponent directly addressed the statutory factors. 
2. Opposition 
a. Proposed Class 8: Audiovisual Works 
Proposed Class 8 is opposed by DVD CCA/AACS LA and Joint Creators.713 All 
of the Class 8 opponents take the position that this exemption should be rejected “in its 
entirety,” noting that in the past the Librarian has repeatedly declined to grant this 
class.
714 
i. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Opponents argue that space- and format-shifting are not established fair uses.715 
DVD CCA/AACS LA explain that consumers do not have an “unqualified right to access 
a work on a particular device,” but instead purchase “only the right to access the work 
according to the format’s particular specifications.”
716 They argue that “[c]onsumers are 
able to purchase [a DVD or Blu-ray disc] at its retail price because it is distributed on a 
specific medium that will play back on only a licensed player,” thus suggesting that retail 
prices would have been set higher if the seller intended to convey to purchasers the 
ability to view the copyrighted work in all potential formats.
717 DVD CCA/AACS LA 
dispute Public Knowledge’s interpretation of legislative history, explaining that the 1971 
Sound Recording Act concerns only “the creation of the sound recording right” and that 
711 Public Knowledge Class 8 Supp. at 20; see also OmniQ Reply at 11-12. 
712 Public Knowledge Class 8 Supp. at 6-8, 20-21; OmniQ Reply at 12; Tr. at 91:08-23 (May 19, 2015) (Siy,
 
Public Knowledge).
 
713 The trade groups represented by Joint Creators are the Motion Picture Association of America, the
 
Entertainment Software Association, and the Recording Industry Association of America.
 
714 Joint Creators Class 8 Opp’n at 2; DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 8 Opp’n at 2.
 
715 DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 8 Opp’n at 4-8; Joint Creators Class 8 Opp’n at 3-4. Joint Creators,
 
however, express a willingness to consider a future class proposal if it were tailored to archival preservation 
uses and tracked the language of section 108. Joint Creators Class 8 Opp’n at 3 n.3.
 
716 DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 8 Opp’n at 4-5.
 
717 Id. at 5; see also Tr. at 104:01-07 (May 19, 2015) (Turnbull, DVD CCA/AACS LA) (same).
 
116
 

[PAGE 121]
     
    
  
  
  
   
   
    
   
      
    
  
   
       
   
   
 
    
    
   
  
  
   
  
  
  
 
   
         
         
                   
         
             
         
                 
                
            
               
                
                   
              
              
 
 
                                                 
 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
the 1961 Copyright Office Report “does not constitute legislative history for any law that 
Congress ultimately approved.”718 Joint Creators stress that “not one of the four factors 
weighs in favor of a conclusion that space-shifting and format-shifting are fair uses.”719 
Opponents further assert that Dish does not alter the fair use status of spaceshifting or format-shifting.  They argue that the decision is erroneous because it equates 
space-shifting with time-shifting under Sony and mischaracterizes Diamond Multimedia 
as holding that space-shifting is a fair use under section 107 as opposed to a fair personal 
use under the Audio Home Recording Act of 1992 (“AHRA”).720 In addition, DVD 
CCA/AACS LA urge that, even if correct, the Dish opinion is distinguishable, because 
the Hopper Transfers service at issue imposed many restrictions on copying works to 
other devices and was limited to verified current subscribers, whereas the proposed 
exemption would make protected content “entirely freed, forever, from any restraints on 
consumer use.”
721 DVD CCA/AACS LA also suggest that the fair use ruling in Dish was 
dicta:  only a small portion of the Dish decision addressed space-shifting, and the court 
ultimately decided the case in the copyright holders’ favor, “essentially holding that the 
contractual arrangement between the parties superseded the fair use finding, thus 
negating any practical effect of the fair use conclusions.”
722 Opponents finally note that 
the Dish case is currently stayed pending settlement negotiations and is “far from 
concluded.”723 
ii. Asserted Adverse Effects 
Opponents assert that proponents have failed to show that access controls have 
adverse effects on noninfringing uses, particularly in the face of available market 
alternatives.724 Opponents provide examples of numerous alternatives to circumvention 
that provide digital audiovisual content, including (1) digital rights locker services such 
as UltraViolet and Disney Movies Anywhere, which allow consumers to verify their 
purchases of physical discs and subsequently download or stream verified films onto 
multiple devices;725 (2) disc-to-digital services like VUDU or Flixter that allow 
718 DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 8 Opp’n at 5-6.
 
719 Joint Creators Class 8 Opp’n at 3-4 (citing to previous 1201 rulemakings).
 
720 DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 8 Opp’n at 6-8; Joint Creators Class 8 Opp’n at 4; see also Tr. at 138:18­
139:11 (May 19, 2015) (Turnbull, DVD CCA/AACS LA).
 
721 DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 8 Opp’n at 6-7; Tr. at 101:21-23 (May 19, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators).
 
722 DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 8 Opp’n at 7-8 n.4. 
723 Id. at 7; see also Joint Creators Class 8 Opp’n at 4; Tr. at 101:05-07 (May 19, 2015) (Williams, Joint 
Creators); Tr. at 139:15-20 (May 19, 2015) (Turnbull, DVD CCA/AACS LA). The Office notes that the 
stay in the Dish case automatically lifted on October 1, 2015, after the record in this rulemaking was 
closed. See Order Re Second Joint Status Report, No. CV 12-4529 DMG SHX (C.D. Cal. Sept. 30, 2015). 
724 DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 8 Opp’n at 8-10; Joint Creators Class 8 Opp’n at 4-5. 
725 DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 8 Opp’n at 8-10; Joint Creators Class 8 Opp’n at 5-9, Exhibits 1-6; Tr. at 
105:06-16 (May 19, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators); Tr. at 129:05-130:02 (May 19, 2015) (V oris, The 
Walt Disney Studios). Opponents claim that almost 20 million households in the United States use 
117
 

[PAGE 122]
     
    
  
  
 
    
  
    
 
  
  
 
   
      
    
   
 
  
  
   
   
 
 
                
             
         
               
           
                
                 
      
                  
          
    
     
               
   
     
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
consumers to convert their already purchased DVD or Blu-ray discs to high-quality 
digital files for a small fee, and then access those copies from a range of participating 
retailers;726 (3) “download-to-own” video services such as Google Play, iTunes, and 
Amazon;727 (4) online streaming services such as Hulu, Amazon Instant Video, or 
Netflix;728 and (5) “TV Everywhere”-type services that allow subscribers to access 
movies and television programs on various platforms and devices on-demand or through 
live streaming.729 Opponents suggest that as a general matter, these various services are 
rapidly growing, both in terms of number of users and catalog sizes, and comprise 
reasonable alternatives to circumvention.730 
iii. Argument Under Statutory Factors 
Opponents additionally argue that the statutory factors under section 1201(a)(1) 
militate against the proposed exemption.  First, Joint Creators contend that “the use of 
access controls has facilitated wider availability of copyrighted motion pictures” as well 
as digital copying methods in the marketplace that do not involve circumvention.
731 
Opponents do not directly address the second or third factors concerning the impact of 
the prohibition on preservation or criticism.
732 With respect to the fourth factor, DVD 
CCA/AACS LA argue that an exemption would harm the market for DVD and Blu-ray 
discs because circumvention results in “a perfect copy of the work being ‘in the clear’” 
that can be “freely copied and redistributed” and would ultimately “reduce the number of 
copyrighted works distributed through market channels.”
733 
Under the fifth factor, directing the Librarian to examine “such other factors as 
the Librarian considers appropriate,”734 opponents argue that granting an exemption 
would undermine the purposes of section 1201 because “the DMCA was intended to 
encourage digital business models . . . that depend upon robust access control measures in 
order to increase consumer options and promote the flow of copyrighted materials to the 
UltraViolet to access “over 130 million movies and TV shows” and that hundreds of films are available 
through Disney Movies Anywhere. Tr. at 121:19-24 (May 19, 2015) (Teitell, DECE/UltraViolet); see also 
Joint Creators Class 8 Opp’n at Exhibit 3. 
726 Joint Creators Class 8 Opp’n at 7, Exhibits 4-5; Tr. at 116:23-117:06 (May 19, 2015) (Teitell, 
DECE/UltraViolet); Tr. at 130:15-131:06 (May 19, 2015) (V oris, The Walt Disney Studios). 
727 DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 8 Opp’n at 9-10; Joint Creators Class 8 Opp’n at 8. 
728 DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 8 Opp’n at 10; Joint Creators Class 8 Opp’n at 8; see also Tr. at 110:22­
111:09 (May 19, 2015) (Teitell, DECE/UltraViolet).
 
729 DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 8 Opp’n at 10; Joint Creators Class 8 Opp’n at 7-8, Exhibit 6.
 
730 See, e.g., Joint Creators Class 8 Opp’n at 4-5.
 
731 Id. at 7.
 
732 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(ii)-(iii).
 
733 DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 8 Opp’n at 11-12; see also Tr. at 141:03-17 (May 19, 2015) (Turnbull,
 
DVD CCA/AACS LA).
 
734 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(v).
 
118
 

[PAGE 123]
     
    
    
   
  
   
 
   
   
   
    
    
  
 
   
 
    
    
   
   
                 
               
  
              
       
      
             
         
  
        
             
           
              
               
              
             
        
 
           
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
public.”735 DVD CCA/AACS LA assert that an exemption would “undermine” 
established licensing regimes for CSS and AACS by inhibiting these licensors from 
enforcing standard licensing terms, such as prohibitions on including DVD or Blu-ray 
copiers in products, or otherwise ensuring the uniformity of the licensing systems.736 
b. Proposed Class 10:  Literary Works Distributed Electronically 
Proposed Class 10 was opposed by Joint Creators and the Software & Information 
Industry Association (“SIIA”).  Opponents of this class maintain that proponents have 
failed to support their allegations of harm or their claims that space-shifting and formatshifting are noninfringing uses with sufficient factual or substantive legal arguments.
737 
Opponents note that the Librarian has repeatedly concluded in previous rulemakings that 
“there is no basis under the law to conclude that back-up copying, format-shifting and 
space-shifting are fair uses,”
738 and argue that proponents have not presented any “new 
evidence, legal arguments or legal authorities in support of the exemption.”739 
3. Discussion 
The Register recognizes the consumer and policy appeal of the proposed 
exemptions.740 Consumers may feel frustrated when they purchase a movie or book in 
one format and are unable to watch that movie or read that book in a different format on 
another device.  Recognizing this consumer interest, some countries have adopted private 
copying exceptions, which are often paired with schemes to compensate rightsholders 
through levies on blank media or copying equipment.
741 The United States itself in 1992 
enacted AHRA to compensate copyright owners for the private copying of music on 
certain types of digital media.742 
735 Joint Creators Class 8 Opp’n at 9; see also DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 8 Opp’n at 12-13. 
736 DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 8 Opp’n at 13-16 (referencing court decisions enjoining Kaleidescape and
 
Real Networks).
 
737 Joint Creators Class 10 Opp’n at 2; SIIA Class 10 Opp’n at 1.
 
738 Joint Creators Class 10 Opp’n at 2. 
739 SIIA Class 10 Opp’n at 1. 
740 The Copyright Office received over 150 comments in support of Class 8. 
741 See WORLD INTELL. PROP. ORG., INTERNATIONAL SURVEY ON PRIVATE COPYING (2013), available at 
http://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/copyright/1037/wipo_pub_1037_2013.pdf (surveying private 
copying exceptions and related compensation schemes in 32 countries). The EU InfoSoc Directive states 
that EU member states may exempt “certain types of reproduction of audio, visual and audiovisual material 
for private use, accompanied by fair compensation.” See Directive 2001/29, of the European Parliament 
and of the Council of 22 May 2001 on the Harmonisation of Certain Aspects of Copyright and Related 
Rights in the Information Society, 2001 O.J. (L 167), 38 (EC). The UK enacted a private use exemption in 
2014; however, the UK High Court recently held it to be unlawful because a compensation mechanism was 
not included. British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors v. Secretary of State for Business, 
Innovation and Skills, [2015] EWHC 1723 (Admin), available at https://www.judiciary.gov.uk/wp­
content/uploads/2015/06/basca-v-sofs-bis-judgment.pdf. 
742 See AHRA, Pub. L. No. 102-563, 106 Stat. 4237 (1992) (codified at 17 U.S.C. §§ 1001-1010). 
119
 

[PAGE 124]
     
    
   
   
  
    
   
    
     
   
    
 
   
   
       
  
  
 
  
  
  
    
   
   
                 
             
               
            
                
          
               
              
 
              
              
       
                
    
         
               
             
       
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
At the same time, the section 1201 rulemaking is a carefully tailored proceeding 
that is designed to incorporate, not replace, the determinations of Congress and the 
courts.  In reviewing the law, the Register does not find any fair use precedent that 
sanctions broad space-shifting or format-shifting.  Moreover, as part of that proceeding, 
the Register must recognize marketplace efforts to meet consumer demand by providing 
alternative solutions, including a wide range of services that offer digital distribution of 
movies, television shows, and books under varying pricing schemes that motivate 
copyright owners to invest in future markets.743 There are also services that convert 
DVD and Blu-ray discs to online formats.744 Many of these offerings are significantly 
more evolved than at the time of the last rulemaking.745 
These marketplace developments confirm that the policy judgments surrounding 
the creation of a novel exception for space- or format-shifting of copyrighted works are 
extremely complex and not at all self-evident.746 Further, as explained more fully below, 
proponents have failed to meet their burden to show adverse effects that are the result of 
TPMs. 
a. Noninfringing Uses 
The legislative history relied upon by Public Knowledge does not support its 
claim that space- and format-shifting are generally recognized as fair uses.  Public 
Knowledge borrows its interpretation of that legislative history from the district court 
decision in Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Sony Corp., which examined the 1971 Sound 
Recording Act.747 As Professor Nimmer has explained, however, this interpretation 
“does not survive careful scrutiny.”748 Contrary to Public Knowledge’s interpretation, the 
Sound Recording Act history spoke only to the copyright status of home audio recordings 
under the 1909 Copyright Act—a status which was quite limited given that the 1909 Act 
743 See, e.g., Joint Creators Class 8 Opp’n at 6-9 (describing disc to digital, UltraViolet, Disney Movies 
Anywhere, digital download, internet streaming, TV Everywhere, and other on demand services); DVD 
CCA/AACS LA Class 8 Opp’n at 8-10; Tr. at 121:19-21 (May 19, 2015) (Teitell, DECE/UltraViolet) 
(stating that the UltraViolet system is used by 20 million U.S. households). 
744 See Joint Creators Class 8 Opp’n at 6-9; DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 8 Opp’n at 8-10. 
745 For example, opponents provided evidence demonstrating that services including cloud-based digital 
rights lockers UltraViolet and Disney Movies Anywhere, disc to digital services VUDU and Flixter, and 
various TV Everywhere offerings have launched or experienced rapid growth since the last rulemaking. 
See id. 
746 As the Register has stated repeatedly, this rulemaking is not the appropriate forum to break new ground 
on the scope of fair use, or to evaluate whether an exception for private copying is sound policy. 2012 
Recommendation at 163; 2003 Recommendation at 106. 
747 Public Knowledge Class 8 Supp. at 3 n.3 (citing Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Sony Corp., 480 F. Supp. 
429, 444-46 (1979)). 
748 2 NIMMER ON COPYRIGHT § 8B.01[D][1][a], [b]. For example, Nimmer analyzes Register Ringer’s 
testimony and concludes that “[f]ar from endorsing the Sony district court’s view that the 1971 Amendment 
created a home recording exemption, Ms. Ringer was careful not to claim even that home recording would 
constitute fair use.” Id. 
120
 

[PAGE 125]
     
    
   
   
  
 
   
   
 
  
       
  
    
   
  
  
 
    
  
  
   
 
   
   
   
  
 
                  
             
               
             
             
         
             
        
     
         
              
               
       
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
did not at the time recognize copyright protection for sound recordings.749 The cited 
history therefore does not support proponents’ sweeping proposition that all types of 
space- or format-shifting are noninfringing. 
Public Knowledge’s interpretation of the relevant case law is equally 
unpersuasive. As the Register has explained previously, the Sony and Diamond 
Multimedia decisions upon which proponents purport to rely do not in fact address the 
space- and format-shifting uses proposed for these classes.  As noted before, Diamond 
Multimedia, which interpreted AHRA, “did not hold that ‘space-shifting’ is fair use,” but 
instead “state[d], in dicta, that ‘space-shifting’ of digital and analog musical recordings is 
a noncommercial personal use consistent with the Audio Home Recording Act.”750 
Nor did Sony address whether space-shifting was a fair use.  The Supreme Court 
in Sony conducted its analysis solely on the basis of “time-shifting,” or “record[ing] a 
program [one] cannot view as it is being televised [] to watch it once at a later time.”751 
The Court declined to address the practice of “librarying,” or maintaining long-term 
copies of works.752 “Librarying,” however, is clearly one of the uses contemplated by 
proponents here.753 
Proponents assert that the recent Dish decision provides new and persuasive legal 
authority for the view that space- and format-shifting are noninfringing.  But in the 
Register’s view, such a reading is not justified by the facts of the Dish case or the opinion 
itself.  Dish involved a much more circumscribed use than the uses proposed for this 
exemption.  The Hopper Transfers service—a subscriber -based offering—included many 
safeguards to prevent unfettered use of the content.  For instance, content obtained 
through the Hopper Transfers service would be deactivated if the device on which it was 
stored had not connected to the Dish website in the past 30 days.
754 In addition, certain 
programs were deleted from the set-top box once they were transferred to another device, 
and Dish placed limitations on the number of devices to which a work could be 
749 Nimmer also notes that “even if the Sony district court were right in finding a home-use exemption in 
the 1971 Amendment, there is no suggestion in the legislative history that the 1976 Act incorporated a 
similar exemption.” Id. Instead, “it was the judicial doctrine of fair use developed under the 1909 Act, not 
any legislative directives accompanying the 1971 Amendment, that the 1976 Act adopted.” Id. Public 
Knowledge’s reliance upon the 1961 Copyright Office Report is similarly unpersuasive, not least because 
Register Kaminstein was addressing whether the public performance right should be extended to motion 
pictures, and not private reproduction or the technologies at issue in the current exemption. 
750 2003 Recommendation at 130 n.234; see also 2012 Recommendation at 162 (same). 
751 Sony, 464 U.S. at 421. 
752 Id. at 422-23, 442; see also 2012 Recommendation at 162-63; 2003 Recommendation at 106. 
753 See, e.g., Public Knowledge Space-Shifting Pet. at 4 (stating the desire to “to make backup copies of 
their movie collections in case of corrupted, lost, or stolen files”); Englander Supp. at 1. 
754 Dish, 2015 WL 1137593, at *6, *29. 
121
 

[PAGE 126]
     
    
   
   
     
  
  
 
  
    
     
    
  
    
   
  
      
 
    
 
  
  
  
     
   
 
   
                  
                   
   
   
       
            
 
   
   
               
        
                
              
       
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
transferred, as well as the length of time content would be available on the device.755 In 
contrast, proponents request an exemption that would place works permanently “in the 
clear,” that is, fully free of technical restrictions on further copying and distribution. 
Moreover, the Dish court engaged in only minimal analysis of the fair use issue, 
reaching its conclusion in a single paragraph without discussing the statutory fair use 
factors (and ultimately concluding that the Hopper Transfers service in any event violated 
relevant contractual provisions).
756 The only support the court cited for the proposition 
that the space-shifting at issue was fair use was Diamond Multimedia.757 As explained 
above, though, Diamond Multimedia did not address whether space-shifting was a fair 
use under copyright law generally; instead, it merely characterized space-shifting as a 
noncommercial personal use in the context of AHRA.758 
In contrast, the recent case Fox News Network, LLC v. TVEyes Inc.,759 which 
issued after the Dish opinion, confirms that courts do not accept the proposition that 
space-shifting as a general matter constitutes a fair use. TVEyes involved a video clip 
downloading tool offered to subscribers by a news monitoring service.760 Noting that 
“[c]onvenience alone is not ground for finding fair use,” the TVEyes court rejected 
defendant TVEyes’ argument that offering a downloading service was “absolutely 
critical” to allow subscribers to view the monitored clips offline.761 In so doing, the court 
cited a long line of precedent, including cases holding that the photocopying of physical 
journals
762 and a digital service designed to allow subscribers to access music purchased 
on CDs via the internet,763 were not fair uses. 
In the absence of clear supporting precedent, the fair use analysis here largely 
follows the 2012 analysis.764 Under the first fair use factor, proponents are not persuasive 
that the purpose and character of the proposed use favors an exemption; proponents 
plainly seek to use works for the same entertainment purposes as were originally 
intended.
765 Proponents do not address the second factor, the nature of the copyrighted 
755 Id. For example, “[t]here are some types of DVR recordings that can only be transferred once (i.e.,
 
HBO content), after which the original recording will be deleted from the Hopper.” Id. at *6.
 
756 Id. at *30-31.
 
757 Id. at *30.
 
758 Diamond Multimedia, 180 F.3d at 1079; see also 2003 Recommendation at 130 n.234.
 
759 Fox News Network, LLC v. TVEyes Inc., No. CV 13-5315 AKH, 2015 WL 5025274 (S.D.N.Y . Aug. 25,
 
2015).
 
760 See id. at *7.
 
761 See id. at *9.
 
762 See id. (citing Am. Geophysical Un. v. Texaco, Inc., 60 F.3d 913, 923 (2d Cir. 1994) (rejecting fair use
 
where employees photocopied scientific journals for “personal convenience”)).
 
763 See id. at *8(citing UMG Recordings, Inc. v. MP3.Com, Inc., 92 F. Supp. 2d 349, 351 (S.D.N.Y . 2000)).
 
764 See 2012 Recommendation at 163-65; see also 2012 Final Rule, 77 Fed. Reg. at 65,277.
 
765 See Public Knowledge Class 8 Supp. at 6.
 
122
 

[PAGE 127]
     
    
 
   
 
 
   
   
 
 
   
   
    
    
  
 
   
 
 
   
     
     
   
 
 
    
    
 
   
     
         
                 
              
     
                
               
                 
 
             
             
               
                    
             
 
 
                                                 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
work, but the Register notes that the proposals would encompass films, television 
programs, books, and other works that are likely to be highly creative in nature and at the 
core of copyright’s protective purpose.  Proponents are equally silent regarding the third 
factor, the “amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the copyrighted 
work as a whole,”
766 but the proposed exemptions are predicated on a desire to reproduce 
entire copyrighted works.  The second and third factors thus weigh significantly against 
fair use. 
As to the fourth factor, Public Knowledge has not offered a factual record to 
support its assertion that space- or format-shifting would not negatively impact the 
market for or value of copyrighted works.767 By contrast, opponents submitted extensive 
evidence concerning existing markets for DVD and Blu-ray discs, as well as a variety of 
emerging internet-based distribution services.768 Opponents assert that unfettered 
personal copying will harm these distribution models, some of which are specifically 
aimed at allowing consumers to access works already owned on physical media through 
online channels.
769 The burden lies with proponents to show lack of market harm.  On 
the record as presented, the Register is unable to conclude that the proposed exemption 
will not negatively impact this market. 
Proponent OmniQ contends that the “non-reproductive” space-shifting model it 
describes in its comments is a noninfringing use because the process described does not 
constitute reproduction under the Copyright Act.770 The Register cannot credit OmniQ’s 
arguments in light of its failure to establish that the technology it advocates has actually 
been developed. The question therefore appears to be a hypothetical one.  In any event, 
the cases on which OmniQ seeks to rely for its assertions involve physical rather than 
digital copies of copyrighted works.771 The most closely analogous case appears instead 
to be Capitol Records v. ReDigi,772 which concluded that transferring digital files from 
one location to another implicates the reproduction right and is therefore infringing, even 
where the original copy is contemporaneously or subsequently deleted.
773 
766 17 U.S.C. § 107(3).
 
767 See Public Knowledge Class 8 Supp. at 6-8.
 
768 DVD CCA Class 8 Opp’n at 11-12; Tr. at 106:22-23 (May 19, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators).
 
769 DVD CCA Class 8 Opp’n at 12; Joint Creators Class 8 Opp’n at 5-9.
 
770 OmniQ Reply at 6-8.
 
771 Id. (citing Théberge v. Galerie d’Art du Petit Champlain Inc., [2002] 2 S.C.R. 336 (Can.) (involving the
 
physical transfer of art to canvas); Lee v. A.R.T., 125 F.3d at 581 (involving the mounting of art on ceramic
 
tiles); C. M. Paula v. Logan, 355 F. Supp. 189 (involving the transfer of a print from one backing to 
another)).
 
772 Capitol Records, LLC v. ReDigi Inc., 934 F. Supp. 2d 640, 648 (S.D.N.Y . 2013) (finding that because the 
unauthorized transfer and sale of digital music files on the internet was a reproduction under the Copyright
 
Act, even where the original copy was deleted, neither fair use nor the first sale doctrine applied).
 
773 Id. at 650 (“It is beside the point that the original phonorecord no longer exists. It matters only that a
 
new phonorecord has been created.”). OmniQ also argues that private performance is a noninfringing use
 
123
 

[PAGE 128]
     
    
 
   
  
   
   
    
  
     
  
      
   
 
    
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
                 
          
         
                 
             
              
    
           
               
               
 
               
     
         
       
        
                   
              
  
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
In sum, based on the evidentiary record in this proceeding and under current law, 
the Register is unable to determine that the proposed uses are noninfringing.  
b. Adverse Effects 
Even if the Register were to conclude that the uses here are noninfringing, 
proponents have not offered a sufficient record of adverse effects to warrant the granting 
of an exemption.  Public Knowledge’s principal claim is that it would be costly for 
consumers to re-purchase a digital version of lawfully acquired physical audiovisual 
works.774 However, as the Register has previously noted, the 1201 exemption process is 
meant to ensure that users have access to copyrighted works; it is not meant to guarantee 
consumers the ability to access content through their preferred method or format.775 
Moreover, the premise of Public Knowledge’s concern about costs appears somewhat 
misplaced.  Public Knowledge suggests at several points that consumers are not 
purchasing DVDs but are purchasing access to the content contained on those DVDs.
776 
Based on opponents’ submissions, however, consumers pay lower prices for movies on 
DVD or Blu-ray discs than they would pay if those movies could be converted to any 
digital format and/or copied an unlimited number of times.777 Assuming that is correct, 
then consumers purchasing DVDs or Blu-ray discs are not necessarily harmed in 
economic terms.778 
Nor have proponents sufficiently demonstrated that services, including online 
download or streaming services, disc-to-digital services, digital rights locker systems, 
“TV Everywhere” or similar on-demand services, do not provide reasonable alternatives 
to circumvention.779 Opponents introduced detailed evidence of a wide variety of 
platforms and media that can serve as alternatives to circumvention.780 As noted above, 
that supports an exemption. OmniQ Reply at 5. As the Register has previously noted, however, spaceshifting for noninfringing private performance is insufficient grounds for an exemption if the space-shifting
 
also requires a reproduction. See 2006 Recommendation at 70.
 
774 See Public Knowledge Class 8 Supp. at 7. C lass 10 petitioner Meadows did not provide written
 
comments in response to the Office’s NPRM. The potential harms outlined in the initial petition, such as
 
the possible future bankruptcy of e-book stores, are therefore rejected as speculative due to lack of
 
evidentiary support.
 
775 2012 Recommendation at 163; see also Corley, 273 F.3d at 459. Opponents also introduced evidence
 
that, in many cases, consumers who have purchased a physical copy of a motion picture can obtain a digital
 
copy for free or a fee depending on the service and the audiovisual work. Joint Creators Clas s 8 Opp’n at 
6-8.
 
776 Public Knowledge Class 8 Supp. at 8-9; Public Knowledge Class 8 Reply at 5-7; Tr. at 94:01-07 (May
 
19, 2015) (Siy, Public Knowledge).
 
777 See DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 8 Opp’n at 4-5.
 
778 See Tr. at 103:05-07 (May 19, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators). 
779 Public Knowledge Class 8 Reply at 7-8. 
780 See DVD CCA/AACS LA Class 8 Opp’n at 9-10; Joint Creators Class 8 Opp’n at 5-9, Exhibits 1-6; Tr. 
at 105:06-16 (May 19, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators) (referencing the wide availability of content on 
various platforms). 
124
 

[PAGE 129]
     
    
  
   
   
     
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
   
   
 
  
  
  
 
   
   
   
   
               
         
           
           
           
    
             
     
          
       
   
   
   
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
the record shows that these alternatives have expanded since the last rulemaking, and that 
such services’ catalogs continue to grow. Additionally, it remains possible to access disc 
media through the use of peripheral devices.781 The many alternatives suggest that the 
market is responding to consumer demand for the very uses proponents desire to make.782 
Accordingly, on the present record, the Register is not persuaded that the inability 
to engage in the activities described by proponents is adversely affecting consumers’ 
ability to make noninfringing uses of copyrighted works.
783 
4. NTIA Comments 
As it did in the last rulemaking, in evaluating Proposed Class 8, NTIA again 
supports what it terms a “narrowed version” of an exemption to allow circumvention 
“when the disc neither contains nor is accompanied by an additional copy of the work in 
an alternate digital format, and when circumvention is undertaken solely in order to 
accomplish the noncommercial space shifting of the contained motion picture.”
784 NTIA 
frames the exemption as an issue of consumer protection.785 In support of its view, NTIA 
cites an article by scholar Pamela Samuelson maintaining that “format shifting” or 
“platform shifting” is “widely accepted as fair.”786 
At the same time, NTIA acknowledges that “there has been considerable debate 
over whether, and under what circumstances, space shifting may be considered a 
noninfringing use.”787 In noting that NTIA’s comments may diverge from the Register’s 
ultimate recommendation, NTIA observes that “[t]he disagreement between our two 
offices is reflective of a larger debate over the merits and legality of noncommercial 
space shifting.”788 
NTIA recognizes that the industry has created services to meet consumer demand, 
finding that UltraViolet specifically “enables consumers to lawfully experience works on 
a range of devices and formats.”
789 NTIA, however, believes that “such services have not 
781 Compare Public Knowledge Class 8 Supp. at 14-15, and Public Knowledge Class 8 Reply at 7-8, with
 
Joint Creators Class 8 Opp’n at 4-5 (disputing same).
 
782 See Tr. at 105:06-16 (May 19, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators).
 
783 Because proponents have failed to make their case on the fundamental prerequisites to recommend an
 
exemption, the Register sees no need to consider the statutory factors enumerated in section 1201(a)(1)(C).
 
See 2012 Recommendation at 166 n.935.
 
784 NTIA Letter at 32-33; see also 2012 Recommendation at 166 (same, for DVDs only).
 
785 NTIA Letter at 29-33.
 
786 Id. at 30 (citing Pamela Samuelson, The Generativity of Sony v. Universal: The Intellectual Property 
Legacy of Justice Stevens, 74 FORDHAM L. REV. 1831, 1866 (2006)).
 
787 Id. at 29.
 
788 Id. at 30.
 
789 Id. at 31-32.
 
125
 

[PAGE 130]
     
    
  
 
   
 
   
  
   
     
   
   
  
  
 
  
  
   
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
been made available with the large majority of the physical media ever sold” and are 
limited to those with high speed internet access.790 
With respect to Class 10, concerning space-shifting of literary works, NTIA 
declines to recommend an exemption due to the lack of evidentiary submissions.  
Nonetheless, NTIA explains that it “is open to this type of exemption in principle.”791 
5. Conclusion and Recommendation 
While the Register recognizes the continuing interest in the proposed exemptions 
represented in Classes 8 and 10, for the reasons discussed above, the Register is unable to 
recommend these classes.  Based on the record presented during the proceeding, the 
Register cannot conclude that the space- and format-shifting activities advocated by 
proponents are noninfringing, or that the prohibition on circumvention has, or is likely to 
have, an adverse impact on noninfringing uses of the underlying works.  The Register 
therefore declines to recommend these classes. 
790 Id. 
791 Id. at 35. 
126
 

[PAGE 131]
     
    
    
 
  
 
    
   
  
 
 
 
   
  
    
 
 
  
   
   
  
  
  
   
             
               
          
             
             
                
            
           
          
      
    
      
                 
         
 
 
                                                 
	
	 
	 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
C. Proposed Class 9:	  Literary Works Distributed Electronically – Assistive 
Technologies 
1.	 Proposal 
Proposed Class 9 would allow circumvention of technological measures 
protecting literary works distributed in electronic form so that such works can be 
accessed by persons who are blind, visually impaired, or print disabled. The exemption 
would apply to e-books, digital textbooks, and PDF articles. The American Foundation 
for the Blind (“AFB”), American Council for the Blind (“ACB”), Samuelson-Glushko 
Technology Law & Policy Clinic at Colorado Law (“Samuelson-Glushko TLPC at 
Colorado Law”), and the Library Copyright Alliance (“LCA”) filed petitions seeking to 
have the Librarian renew the exemption granted in 2012 for these purposes.792 The 
NPRM described the exemption as follows: 
Proposed Class 9: This proposed class would allow circumvention of 
access controls on lawfully made and acquired literary works distributed 
electronically for purposes of accessibility for persons who are print 
disabled.  This exemption has been requested for literary works distributed 
electronically, including e-books, digital textbooks, and PDF articles.
793 
Additional comments supporting this exemption were filed by the Association of 
American Publishers (“AAP”), Music Library Association (“MLA”), iFixit, the Free 
Software Foundation (“FSF”), 121AuthEnt.org, Inc., and over 1200 individuals. 
794 
a.	 Background 
E-books are books in digital formats that are distributed electronically and are 
downloaded by users to their personal computers or portable devices.  Although a variety 
of sources and e-book formats are available, the three leading e-book platforms are 
Amazon’s Kindle, Barnes & Noble’s Nook, and Apple’s iBooks, the last of which is an 
792 AFB/ACB/Samuelson-Glushko TLPC at Colorado Law (“AFB Parties”) Pet. at 2; LCA Literary Works 
Pet. at 1. In subsequent comments, AFB Parties were joined by LCA. The 2012 exemption specifies: 
Literary works, distributed electronically, that are protected by technological measures which 
either prevent the enabling of read-aloud functionality or interfere with screen readers or other 
applications or assistive technologies in the following instances: (i) when a copy of such a work is 
lawfully obtained by a blind or other person with a disability, as such a person is defined in 17 
U.S.C. 121; provided, however, the rights owner is remunerated, as appropriate, for the price of 
the mainstream copy of the work as made available to the general public through customary 
channels; or (ii) when such work is a nondramatic literary work, lawfully obtained and used by an 
authorized entity pursuant to 17 U.S.C. 121. 
37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1). 
793 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,863. 
794 See AAP Supp.; MLA Class 9 Supp.; FSF Class 9 Supp.; iFixit Class 9 Supp.; 121AuthEnt.org Reply; 
Digital Right to Repair Class 9 Supp. (1292 individuals). 
127
 

[PAGE 132]
     
    
   
   
  
     
  
    
  
  
      
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
   
  
   
   
  
    
  
   
    
    
   
               
               
                 
              
              
    
     
    
          
         
             
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
application that can be used with Apple devices such as the iPhone and iPad.795 In 
previous rulemaking proceedings, the Register has noted the significant role of e-books in 
improving accessibility for persons who are blind, visually impaired or print disabled.796 
At the same time, as the Register has also recognized, many e-books are protected by 
TPMs that interfere with the proper operation of assistive technologies.797 As a result, the 
Librarian has adopted exemptions in previous rulemaking proceedings allowing 
circumvention of such technological measures.798 
The current exemption allows for circumvention by individuals and entities that 
qualify for the exceptions set forth in section 121 of the Copyright Act, also known as the 
“Chafee Amendment.” The Chafee Amendment provides that it is not an infringement of 
copyright “for an authorized entity to reproduce or to distribute copies or phonorecords of 
a previously published, nondramatic literary work if such copies or phonorecords are 
reproduced or distributed in specialized formats exclusively for use by blind or other 
persons with disabilities.”
799 The Amendment defines “authorized entities” to include “a 
nonprofit organization or a governmental agency that has a primary mission to provide 
specialized services relating to training, education, or adaptive reading or information 
access needs of blind or other persons with disabilities,” and also provides a definition of 
“blind or other persons with disabilities.”
800 The 2012 exemption incorporates these 
definitions.801 Notably, the current exemption was designed to benefit not only blind 
persons or others with disabilities, but also “authorized entities” that provide services for 
such persons.  The Register explained in 2012 that “authorized entities should enjoy an 
exemption to the extent required for them to carry out their work under Section 121.”
802 
b. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Class 9 proponents assert that reproducing copies in accessible formats is a 
noninfringing use under the Chafee Amendment, because it “allows authorized entities to 
create and provide copies of accessible works for use by people who are blind, visually 
impaired, or print disabled.”
803 In addition, proponents explain that converting e-books 
795 2012 Recommendation at 16.
 
796 See, e.g., id.
 
797 Id. at 23.
 
798 2012 Final Rule, 77 Fed. Reg. at 65,262-63; 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,837; 2006 Final Rule,
 
71 Fed. Reg. at 68,475. The Librarian also designated a similar class in 2003. See 2003 Final Rule, 68 
Fed. Reg. at 62,014 (“Literary works distributed in ebook format when all existing ebook editions of the
 
work (including digital text editions made available by authorized entities) contain access controls that
 
prevent the enabling of the ebook’s read-aloud function and that prevent the enabling of screen readers to
 
render the text into a ‘specialized format.’”).
 
799 17 U.S.C. § 121(a).
 
800 Id. § 121(d)(1)-(2).
 
801 2012 Recommendation at 16-17; 2012 Final Rule, 77 Fed. Reg. at 65,278.
 
802 2012 Recommendation at 24; 2012 Final Rule, 77 Fed. Reg. at 65,262.
 
803 AFB Parties Supp. at 10; see also iFixit Class 9 Supp. at 4.
 
128
 

[PAGE 133]
     
    
 
   
      
  
 
  
 
   
   
   
   
  
 
  
  
  
   
 
   
  
    
   
    
                 
             
                  
           
       
               
           
        
      
    
               
 
 
    
       
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
into accessible formats is an “uncontroversial” noninfringing fair use, citing the 
legislative history of the 1976 Copyright Act and the recent Authors Guild, Inc. v. 
HathiTrust decision as support.804 iFixit, a supporting party, adds that the Americans 
with Disabilities Act (“ADA”) supports the view that making copies of e-books 
accessible is noninfringing, because “[v]isual-impairments, including blindness, clearly 
fit under the ADA’s definition of a disability, which is defined as ‘a physical or mental 
impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities of such individual,’ 
including the act of reading.”805 Proponents also note that most of the commenters do not 
dispute that “making e-books accessible is an archetypical fair use.”806 Ultimately, in 
proponents’ words, their desire is simply to “guarantee[] the right of people who are blind 
or visually impaired to read books.”
807 
c. Asserted Adverse Effects 
Class 9 proponents observe that millions of Americans are blind, visually 
impaired, or print disabled, including approximately 80,000-120,000 students.808 They 
contend that renewal of the exemption is necessary because, “[a]lthough some 
improvements in accessibility have been made since the last triennial review, TPMs 
continue to effectively control accessibility technology’s access to many e-books and 
other electronically distributed literary works.”
809 Proponents explain that all three major 
e-book platform providers—Amazon, Barnes and Nobl e, and Apple—utilize TPMs that 
can affect accessibility or render an otherwise accessible e-book “completely 
inaccessible.”810 For example, only 28.26% of Pulitzer Prize-winning and 33.33% of 
Hugo Award-winning e-books of the past fifty years have Text-To-Speech (“TTS”) 
capabilities enabled on Amazon.com.811 iFixit pointed to a lack of accessible books as 
well, noting that “[o]nly 1% of published books are available in braille.”812 Moreover, 
proponents assert that even if the market evolves over the next three years to increase 
804 See AFB Parties Supp. at 11-13 (citing H.R. REP. NO. 94-1476, at 73 (1976), reprinted in 1976 
U.S.C.C.A.N. 5659, 5687; S. REP. NO. 94-473, at 80 (1975); Authors Guild, Inc. v. HathiTrust, 755 F.3d 87, 
103 (2d Cir. 2014) (holding that “fair use allows the Libraries to provide full digital access to copyrighted 
works to their print-disabled patrons”)); see also iFixit Class 9 Supp. at 4. 
805 iFixit Class 9 Supp. at 3-4. 
806 AFB Parties Reply at 5. Proponents also state that “the record contains no evidence suggesting that
 
proving [sic] e-books in accessible formats is not clearly a fair use.” Id.
 
807 Tr. at 64:11-12 (May 29, 2015) (Reid, AFB Parties).
 
808 AFB Parties Supp. at 14.
 
809 Id. at 4.
 
810 Id. at 5 (citing Sarah Hilderley, Accessible Publishing Best Practice Guidelines for Publishers 8 (version 
4, May 2013), http://www.accessiblebooksconsortium.org/export/sites/visionip/inclusive_publishing/
 
en/pdf/accessible_best_practice_guidelines_for_publishers.pdf (“Hilderley”)).
 
811 Id. at Apps. E-F.
 
812 iFixit Class 9 Supp. at 2.
 
129
 

[PAGE 134]
     
    
    
   
   
 
   
 
  
    
    
  
     
 
   
 
   
  
  
   
    
  
  
  
     
  
 
 
 
          
       
                
                
               
      
  
              
      
  
   
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
accessibility of current titles, it appears likely that many older titles will still remain 
inaccessible without circumvention of access controls.813 
With respect to students who are blind, visually impaired, or print disabled, while 
a recent settlement agreement with the U.S. Department of Justice and Department of 
Education requires universities to convert e-textbooks to accessible formats, proponents 
note that circumvention is often necessary in order to make e-textbooks accessible for 
these students and is generally performed by disability services offices at universities, 
libraries and other institutions of higher education.
814 Proponents contend that 
“[p]roviding alternate format[s] for students with print disabilities puts them on a level 
footing with other students, and providing those materials quickly and accurately is 
critical to their success.”
815 Proponents note, however, that the “overwhelming majority” 
of learning materials, including university websites, digital books, PDFs, and online 
research journals, remain inaccessible.816 
Proponents further observe that other e-book formats and platforms do not 
provide adequate alternatives to circumvention.  They explain that audiobooks— 
“expressive reproductions of copyrighted works that use one or more voice actors to 
perform the work”
817—are inadequate “because audio versions are not available for the 
vast majority of e-books.”818 For example, only 150,000 audiobooks are offered by 
Audible.com, the leading provider of audiobooks, and only 300,000 titles—not all in 
audiobook format—are available through “the world’s largest accessible online library 
for people with print disabilities.”819 By comparison, there are more than one million ebook titles offered by Amazon.com.820 According to proponents, audiobooks are in any 
event inadequate because they are not necessarily navigable by page numbers and chapter 
titles by persons who are blind, visually impaired or print disabled, and because they are 
far more expensive than e-books, “costing up to three times as much.”
821 
Proponents also assert that technical standards to facilitate accessibility 
technologies have not been comprehensively implemented in the three years since the last 
rulemaking.  While the EPUB3 standard for e-book creation and distribution provides a 
host of accessibility options and was adopted by the International Digital Publishing 
813 See Tr. at 68:24-69:06 (May 29, 2015) (Band, LCA); id. at 69:07-13 (Reid, AFB Parties).
 
814 AFB Parties Supp. at 14-15, App. A.
 
815 Id. at App. A at ¶ 12; see also id. at 20-21, App. B; AFB Parties Reply at 6.
 
816 AFB Parties Supp. at 14-15; see also AFB Parties Reply at 4 (noting that “[a]ccessing academic and
 
technical writing is especially difficult for readers who are blind, visually impaired, or print disabled”).
 
817 AFB Parties Supp. at 15.
 
818 Id. 
819 Id. (citing AUDIBLE, http://www.audible.com (last visited Oct. 7, 2015) and Who We Are, BOOKSHARE, 
https://www.bookshare.org/cms/about (last visited Oct. 7, 2015)). 
820 Id. 
821 Id. at 16. 
130
 

[PAGE 135]
     
    
   
    
  
 
    
 
 
   
   
   
   
   
    
     
   
  
   
  
 
   
  
  
                
                   
              
        
      
              
         
         
          
              
        
 
   
  
              
      
       
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Forum in 2013, it has still not been widely implemented by publishers and consequently 
is not considered an adequate alternative by proponents.822 Proponents further note that 
“all commenters in this proceeding agreed that ePub3 and HTML 5 standards do not 
currently satisfy the needs of consumers who are blind, visually impaired, or print 
disabled.”823 
Although an e-book that is inaccessible on one platform may be accessible on 
another, Class 9 proponents explain that it would be “unjust to require [persons who are 
blind, visually impaired, or print disabled] to expend their resources on extraneous 
devices when they may already have an otherwise perfectly capable device,” pointing in 
particular to the fact that nearly 8.2 million such Americans are “near or below the 
poverty level.”
824 Proponents further note that many e-reader devices “remain extremely 
expensive and complex” and provide only limited accessibility features.825 For example, 
proponents note that several popular e-book readers—the Kindle Paperwhite, Kindle 
Reader, and the Nook—do not offer TTS accessibility, while cheaper e -reader devices, 
such as Kobo and Sony Reader, are “totally inaccessible out of the box.”
826 Proponents 
also explain that popular accessible devices, such as the Kindle Fire HDX 8.9, are still of 
only limited utility since they are locked to certain services, such as Amazon.827 
d. Argument Under Statutory Factors 
Proponents urge that the statutory factors set forth in section 1201(a)(1) support 
granting this exemption as well.  With respect to the first factor, which addresses the 
general availability of copyrighted works, proponents explain that the exemption would 
improve the availability of accessible works for people who are blind, visually impaired, 
or print disabled.
828 Regarding the second factor, which considers availability for 
educational purposes, proponents contend that the exemption would facilitate use of 
works by students as well as university disability offices and specialty libraries assisting 
822 The EPUB standard is an “open standard for e-book creation and distribution . . . . [that] can be ‘read’ on 
almost all e-reader devices.” Hilderley at 11 (cited in AFB Parties Supp. at 5 n.5). EPUB3 is the latest 
version of the EPUB standard, consisting of a file format using HTML and CSS, and provides a “host of 
accessibility options.” Id. at 11-12. 
823 AFB Parties Reply at 3. 
824 AFB Parties Supp. at 17-18. AFB Parties also pointed to the NTIA ’s comments during the 2012 
rulemaking proceeding, which stated that “[r]equiring visually impaired Americans to invest hundreds of 
dollars in an additional device (or even multiple additional devices), particularly when an already-owned 
device is technically capable of rendering literary works accessible, is not a reasonable alternative to 
circumvention.” Id. at 17 (citing Letter from Lawrence E. Strickling, Assistant Secretary, NTIA, to Maria 
Pallante, Register of Copyrights, at 5 (Sept. 21, 2012), http://copyright.gov/1201/2012/2012_NTIA_ 
Letter.pdf). 
825 Id. at 18. 
826 Id. 
827 Id. Separately, Proposed Class 12 addresses whether to adopt an exemption to allow unlocking of allpurpose tablet computers, including the Kindle Fire. 
828 Id. at 19-20; AFB Parties Reply at 5. 
131
 

[PAGE 136]
     
    
    
 
     
  
  
    
 
     
  
       
  
 
      
  
     
 
     
  
   
    
 
  
   
 
          
         
       
                   
                
            
     
          
           
               
             
      
    
                  
                     
              
     
          
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
them.829 On the third factor, proponents argue that the exemption would facilitate equal 
access to information for purposes of criticism, commentary, news reporting, teaching, 
scholarship, or research.830 As for the fourth factor, proponents assert that the prior 
exemptions have had no effect on the market for the underlying copyrighted works, as the 
e-book market has “grown substantially since 2008 notwithstanding the exemption.”831 
They further note that the AAP does not oppose an exemption in recognition that the 
market has not yet provided an adequate alternative to circumvention.832 
Finally, for the fifth factor, concerning such other factors as the Librarian 
considers appropriate, proponents suggest that renewing an e-book accessibility 
exemption will serve to bring the United States into compliance with the Marrakesh 
Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works for Persons Who Are Blind, Visually 
Impaired or Otherwise Print Disabled (“Marrakesh Treaty”) and signal the U.S.’s 
“commitment to equal access for people who are blind, visually impaired, or print 
disabled” to information.
833 The Marrakesh Treaty, which the United States helped 
negotiate and to which it is a signatory, creates international standards to promote the 
accessibility of literary and artistic works.834 The Marrakesh Treaty requires contracting 
states to provide for “a limitation or exception to the right of reproduction, the right of 
distribution, and the right of making available to the public . . . to facilitate the 
availability of works in accessible format copies,” and to ensure that anticircumvention 
laws do not prevent persons who are blind, visually impaired, or print disabled “from 
enjoying the limitations and exceptions provided for in this Treaty.”
835 Consequently, 
proponents suggest that an exemption from the prohibition on circumvention in order to 
promote accessibility is consistent with the mandate of the Marrakesh Treaty and would 
put the United States on equal footing with countries that are already implementing the 
Treaty.
836 
829 AFB Parties Supp. at 20-21; AFB Parties Reply at 6. 
830 AFB Parties Supp. at 21-22; AFB Parties Reply at 6. 
831 See, e.g., AFB Parties Supp. at 23. 
832 Id.; AFB Parties Reply at 7; see also AFB Parties Reply at 4 (stating that “it is undisputed that the 
present-day market for books accessible to the handicapped is so insignificant that ‘it is common practice in 
the publishing industry for authors to forego royalties for books manufactured in specialized formats for the 
blind’”) (citing HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 103). 
833 AFB Parties Reply at 7; AFB Parties Supp. at 23. 
834 See AFB Parties Supp. at 23; Marrakesh Treaty, June 27, 2013, available at http://www.wipo.int/ 
treaties/en/text.jsp?file_id=301016. While the United States is a signatory to the Marrakesh Treaty, it has 
not yet ratified the Treaty. WIPO-Administered Treaties: Notifications > Marrakesh VIP Treaty (Treaty not 
yet in force), WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY ORGANIZATION, http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ 
ShowResults.jsp?lang=en&search_what=N&treaty_id=843 (last visited Oct. 7, 2015). 
835 Marrakesh Treaty arts. 4, 7; see also Tr. at 66:21-67:02 (May 29, 2015) (Band, LCA) (“The treaty has a 
provision, I believe it is Article VII, that indicates countries need to have a way for people who are blind or 
authorized entities have to have a way to circumvent technological protection measures in order to take 
advantage of any exception under the treaty.”). 
836 AFB Parties Supp. at 23-24; AFB Parties Reply at 7. 
132
 

[PAGE 137]
     
    
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
    
    
  
   
  
   
  
  
  
   
 
 
 
  
   
   
  
  
            
      
       
  
               
   
     
         
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
2. Opposition 
There was no opposition to renewing the 2012 exemption.837 Significantly, AAP, 
representing book publishers, filed supportive comments indicating that it had no 
objection to a renewal of the existing exemption.  AAP acknowledges that despite the 
proliferation of mobile devices used to read e-books, the market “do[es] not yet offer 
inherent accessibility across such platforms or in the commercially-available versions of 
such works for consumers with print disabilities.”
838 
AAP does note, however, that it disagrees with the removal from the 2012 
exemption of “the requirement . . . that circumvention [is] permitted only if all existing ebook editions of the work (including digital text editions made available by authorized 
entities under Section 121 of the Copyright Act) contain[] restrictive access controls.”
839 
At the recommendation of the Register, the 2012 exemption eliminated the condition in 
earlier versions of the exemption that all e-book editions be inaccessible in order for the 
exemption to apply.840 AAP further opines that the Register and Librarian should 
“remain open to narrowing or rejecting such an exemption in the future as market 
conditions . . . limit the variability of accessibility capabilities across such devices and 
increase the commercial availability of accessible versions of such works in the 
marketplace.”
841 
3. Discussion 
The Register is sensitive to the need to ensure that access controls do not prevent 
persons who are blind, visually impaired, or print disabled from gaining meaningful 
access to books distributed in electronic formats.
842 The need for and desirability of 
access to such works by those with impairments—access that might otherwise be 
denied—present a quintessential case for an exemption to the prohibition on 
circumvention. 
a. Noninfringing Uses 
Citing the legislative history of the 1976 Copyright Act, the 1996 passage of the 
Chafee Amendment, the 2014 HathiTrust decision, and other authority, Class 9 
proponents offer strong support for their claim that converting e-books into accessible 
formats is a noninfringing fair use. 
837 121AuthEnt disagreed with AFB Parties’ interpretation of HathiTrust, but did not oppose granting the
 
requested exemption. 121AuthEnt Opp’n at 3-4.
 
838 AAP Supp. at 1.
 
839 Id. 
840 See 2012 Recommendation at 21; see also 2006 Final Rule, 71 Fed. Reg. at 68,475; 2003 Final Rule, 68
 
Fed. Reg. at 62,014.
 
841 AAP Supp. at 1.
 
842 See 2003 Recommendation at 64; 2006 Recommendation at 37; 2012 Recommendation at 24-25.
 
133
 

[PAGE 138]
     
    
 
   
  
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
   
  
    
   
 
    
   
 
   
 
 
    
  
   
      
              
              
     
   
            
              
        
            
             
    
   
   
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
In passing the 1976 Act, Congress expressed concern for the ability of blind 
individuals to access copyrighted works, observing in a House Report that “the making of 
a single copy or phonorecord by an individual as a free service for a blind persons [sic] 
would properly be considered a fair use under section 107.”
843 Subsequently, in 1996, 
Congress passed the Chafee Amendment, codified in section 121 of the Copyright Act, to 
“end the unintended censorship of blind individuals’ access to current information” by 
allowing groups that produce specialized formats for persons who are blind, visually 
impaired, or print disabled to do so without first having to gain permission from 
copyright owners.
844 
As the Register noted in her 2012 Recommendation, however, “several provisions 
in Section 121 appear ill-suited to the digital world and could benefit from 
comprehensive review by Congress.”845 Subsequently, in 2014, Congress held a hearing 
on exceptions for the visually impaired, at which Representative Bob Goodlatte explained 
that “the visually impaired community has the expectation and the right to participate in 
our community and the copyrighted works created within it,” and further observed that 
“[t]he technology used to access copyrighted works for the visually impaired has changed 
with the digital revolution.”
846 In 2015 testimony before Congress, addressing areas that 
are ripe for legislative action, the Register reinforced Chairman Goodlatte’s observation, 
noting that the Chafee Amendment “would benefit from immediate attention through a 
legislative process . . . . [so it can] better address the current needs of the visually 
impaired community and developments in the commercial marketplace.”847 
Additionally, since the last triennial rulemaking, the Court of Appeals for the 
Second Circuit in HathiTrust determined that providing print-disabled patrons with 
accessible versions of works in a library’s digital archive was a fair use.848 In HathiTrust, 
several research universities allowed Google to electronically scan the books in their 
collections so they could be included in a repository, the HathiTrust Digital Library 
(“HDL”).
849 The HDL, among other uses, “allows member libraries to provide patrons 
with certified print disabilities access to the full text of copyrighted works” in their 
collections, using adaptive technologies.850 In assessing whether this was a fair use, the 
843 H.R. REP. NO. 94-1476, at 73.
 
844 142 CONG. REC. S9764 (daily ed. Sept. 3, 1996) (statement of Sen. Chafee); see also HathiTrust, 755 
F.3d at 102 (noting that “the Chafee Amendment illustrates Congress’s intent that copyright law make 
appropriate accommodations for the blind and print disabled”).
 
845 2012 Recommendation at 24.
 
846 Copyright Issues in Education and for the Visually Impaired: Hearing Before the Subcomm. On Courts, 
Intellectual Property, and the Internet of the H. Comm. on the Judiciary, 113th Cong. 3-4 (2014) (statement 
of Rep. Bob Goodlatte, Chairman, H. Comm. on the Judiciary). 
847 The Register’ s Perspective on Copyright Review: Hearing Before the H. Comm. on the Judiciary, 114th 
Cong. 21 (2015) (statement of Maria A. Pallante, Register of Copyrights and Dir., USCO).
 
848 HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 101-03.
 
849 Id. at 90.
 
850 Id. at 91.
 
134
 

[PAGE 139]
     
    
 
  
 
  
    
 
   
  
    
  
 
 
    
 
 
  
     
  
  
 
  
    
  
    
   
 
  
 
              
           
          
     
            
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
court emphasized that providing access to the print disabled is a favored purpose under 
copyright law.  The court pointed in particular to the statement by the Supreme Court in 
in Sony v. Universal that “[m]aking a copy of a copyrighted work for the convenience of 
a blind person is expressly identified by the House Committee Report as an example of 
fair use, with no suggestion that anything more than a purpose to entertain or to inform 
need motivate the copying.”851 
In sum, the Register finds that for purposes of this rulemaking, proponents have 
made a compelling case that making e-books accessible to persons who are blind, 
visually impaired or print disabled is a noninfringing use.
852 
b. Adverse Effects 
The Register finds that proponents have demonstrated that all major e-book 
platforms employ TPMs that to some degree hinder accessibility software, and that only a 
fraction of e-book titles are currently available in accessible formats.  Proponents have 
demonstrated that popular e-reader devices still have substantial limitations—for 
example, in lacking built-in accessibility features such as TTS capabilities—or are 
completely inaccessible out of the box.  In addition, as demonstrated by proponents, 
alternatives, such as audiobook formats, are insufficient alternatives due to limited 
availability or functionalities.  The Register also notes that AAP concedes that the current 
market does not yet meet the accessibility needs of consumers with print disabilities;
853 a 
great many e-books are not available in accessible formats, and older titles are even less 
likely to be available.  Proponents have also demonstrated that a significant number of 
learning materials are inaccessible to blind, visually impaired and print disabled students. 
For these reasons, the Register believes that proponents have amply demonstrated that the 
presence of TPMs on electronically distributed literary works is likely to have an adverse 
impact on noninfringing activities in the upcoming three-year period. 
c. Statutory Factors 
Out of the five statutory factors set forth in section 1201(a)(1) that the Librarian 
and the Register are to consider, the Register finds that all five factors strongly favor the 
exemption.  First, an exemption to facilitate assistive technologies enhances the 
availability for use of copyrighted works because it increases the number of works that 
may be accessed by people who are blind, visually impaired, or print disabled.
854 
Second, proponents have established that the exemption will facilitate the use of works 
for non-profit educational purposes, including the efforts of university disability offices 
and specialty libraries to provide accessible versions of e-books, thus “help[ing] afford all 
851 Id. at 101-102; Sony Corp. of Am. v. Universal City Studios, Inc., 464 U.S. 417, 455 n.40 (1984). 
852 See, e.g., 2006 Recommendation at 38 (noting that “[t]here was also no dispute that rendering an ebook 
accessible to visually impaired persons is a noninfringing activity”); 2003 Recommendation at 70.
 
853 AAP Supp. at 1.
 
854 See, e.g., AFB Parties Supp. at 19-20, Apps. E-F; AFB Parties Reply at 5-6.
 
135
 

[PAGE 140]
     
    
   
    
  
 
   
   
   
  
    
 
  
     
     
  
 
 
   
  
  
   
    
   
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
             
     
      
    
     
   
   
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
citizens equal access to education, education technologies, and democratic 
participation.”855 Third, it will promote access to works by all for purposes of research 
and criticism.  And fourth, there is no evidence that it will undermine the value of or 
market for e-books, as that market has grown substantially in recent years despite the 
existence of earlier exemptions. 
Finally, the statute also permits the Librarian to consider “such other factors” as 
may be appropriate.856 As proponents note, an exemption to promote accessibility would 
be consistent with the mandate of the Marrakesh Treaty, which the United States helped 
negotiate and to which it is a signatory.
857 As is globally recognized and as the Register 
noted in her 2012 Recommendation, an exception to promote accessibility “is not merely 
a matter of convenience, but is instead intended to enable individuals who are blind or 
visually impaired to have meaningful access to the same content that individuals without 
such impairments are able to perceive.”
858 
4. NTIA Comments 
NTIA recommends renewing the current exemption allowing people who are 
blind, visually impaired, or print disabled, as well as the authorized entities that serve 
them, to circumvent TPMs that prevent or interfere with the use of assistive technologies 
with e-books.  NTIA notes that the Librarian has granted an exemption for this particular 
purpose since 2003, and finds that the evidence in the record shows that the state of 
accessibility of literary works in electronic format is not substantially different than it was 
three years ago.
859 NTIA states that many Americans are adversely affected when they 
cannot use assistive devices to gain access to e-books, and finds that the record contains 
clear and specific examples of the many ways disabled users and authorized entities are 
utilizing this exemption as intended and thus making literary works more accessible with 
assistive technologies.860 NTIA therefore supports renewing the current exemption, 
without change.861 
As explained above, the Register also finds that this exemption should be renewed 
in its current form. 
5. Conclusion and Recommendation 
Class 9 proponents have demonstrated that individuals who are blind, visually 
impaired, or print disabled are significantly disadvantaged with respect to obtaining 
855 See, e.g., AFB Parties Supp. at 21-22; AFB Parties Reply at 6.
 
856 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(v).
 
857 AFB Parties Supp. at 23.
 
858 2012 Recommendation at 22.
 
859 NTIA Letter at 34.
 
860 Id. at 34-35.
 
861 Id. at 35.
 
136
 

[PAGE 141]
     
    
  
       
  
 
  
  
  
    
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
   
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
               
 
 
 
                                                 
	 
	 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
accessible e-book content because the platforms and devices on which e-books are 
consumed incorporate TPMs that inhibit the use of assistive technologies. They have 
further established that the facilitation of accessible formats has been recognized by 
Congress and the courts to be a noninfringing fair use.  There was no opposition to 
renewing the exemption in its current form.  
The Register therefore recommends an exemption in the form requested to permit 
circumvention of TPMs on e-books to permit the use of assistive technologies. Like the 
existing exemption, the recommended exemption references section 121 so that the 
intended beneficiaries of section 121 are able to benefit from the waiver on 
circumvention.  Accordingly, the Register recommends that the following class of works 
be exempt from the prohibition on circumvention for the next three years:
862 
Literary works, distributed electronically, that are protected by 
technological measures that either prevent the enabling of read-aloud 
functionality or interfere with screen readers or other applications or 
assistive technologies, 
(i)	 When a copy of such a work is lawfully obtained by a blind or 
other person with a disability, as such a person is defined in 17 
U.S.C. 121; provided, however, that the rights owner is 
remunerated, as appropriate, for the price of the mainstream 
copy of the work as made available to the general public 
through customary channels, or 
(ii)	 When such work is a nondramatic literary work, lawfully 
obtained and used by an authorized entity pursuant to 17 
U.S.C. 121. 
862 As with the 2012 Recommendation, the recommended class has been fashioned with reference to section 
121. 
137
 

[PAGE 142]
     
    
    
   
 
   
  
    
   
   
  
    
   
 
  
      
  
   
 
  
   
             
           
                 
           
            
               
             
          
            
             
             
     
     
         
          
           
          
      
            
           
 
 
                                                 
	
	 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
D. Proposed Classes 11 to 15:	  Computer Programs That Enable Devices To 
Connect to a Wireless Network That Offers Telecommunications and/or 
Information Services (‘‘Unlocking’’) 
1.	 Proposals 
Proposed Classes 11 through 15 would allow circumvention of access controls on 
wireless devices such as cellphones and all-purpose tablet computers to allow them to 
connect to the network of a different mobile wireless carrier.863 This process is 
commonly known as “unlocking.”864 Wireless carriers typically lock wireless devices to 
their networks when they have subsidized the cost of a device at the time of purchase; 
carriers recoup that subsidy through wireless service charges paid by the purchaser.865 
The purchaser often also makes a contractual commitment to use the device on the 
carrier’s network (or to pay a termination fee),866 although that is not necessarily true for 
prepaid wireless services, as discussed below. 
The Register recommended, and the Librarian adopted, exemptions permitting 
unlocking of wireless telephone handsets (referred to for purposes of this exemption as 
“cellphones”) in 2006,867 2010,868 and 2012.869 Additionally, in 2012, the Register 
declined to recommend a broader exemption for “tablets” or for all “wireless devices” 
because the record in that rulemaking was “devoid of any evidence” to support the 
existence of adverse effects caused by TPMs preventing unlocking of such devices.870 
The 2012 version of the exemption was limited to cellphones obtained on or 
before January 26, 2013.871 In 2014, however, Congress passed the Unlocking Act, 
863 These exemptions are relevant only to devices that are locked to cellular networks operated by 
commercial mobile radio and data services like Verizon Wireless, AT&T, Sprint, and T-Mobile (referred to 
here as “wireless carriers”), using protocols such as CDMA, GSM, HSPA+, and LTE. Consistent with the 
Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act (“Unlocking Act”), these networks are referred 
to here as “wireless telecommunications networks.” See Unlocking Act, Pub. L. No. 113–144, § 2(e), 128 
Stat. 1751, 1752 (2014) (defining the term). No party in this proceeding has claimed that the concept of 
unlocking is relevant to other wireless communications technologies, such as those using the IEEE 802.11 
standard employed in Wi-Fi routers, the Bluetooth standard, ANT wireless network technology, or mesh 
networks. See NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,864 n.40 (inviting comment on this point). 
864 The Register notes that although the terms “firmware” and “software” are variously used throughout this 
Recommendation, both are “computer programs” within the meaning of the Copyright Act. See 17 U.S.C. 
§ 101 (definition of “computer program”). 
865 TracFone Opp’n Comments at 2. 
866 See, e.g., Consumers Union Class 11 Supp. at 14. 
867 2006 Recommendation at 42-53; 2006 Final Rule, 71 Fed. Reg. at 68,477. 
868 2010 Recommendation at 163; 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,839. 
869 2012 Recommendation at 99-100; 2012 Final Rule, 77 Fed. Reg. at 65,264-66. 
870 See 2012 Recommendation at 99 & n.545. 
871 2012 Final Rule, 77 Fed. Reg. at 65,264 (sun-setting the exemption 90 days after the effective date of 
the rule, October 28, 2012, in light of the availability of unlocked phones). 
138
 

[PAGE 143]
     
    
 
     
   
   
 
    
  
  
   
   
  
 
   
   
    
 
   
    
  
   
   
 
           
           
    
         
                   
          
           
            
              
              
        
          
              
            
                 
               
    
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
reinstating the unlocking exemption for cellphones adopted in 2010, which lacked such a 
limitation.872 In that same Act, Congress also instructed the Librarian to review any 
future proposal for a cellphone unlocking exemption according to the usual process in 
this triennial rulemaking, as well as to consider in this rulemaking whether to “extend” 
the cellphone unlocking exemption “to include any other category of wireless devices in 
addition to wireless telephone handsets.”
873 
In the Unlocking Act, Congress defined, on a permanent basis, the categories of 
persons and entities that could take advantage of the exemption.  In particular, Congress 
specified that the circumvention permitted under the reinstated 2010 exemption, as well 
as any future exemptions to permit cellphones or other wireless devices to connect to 
wireless telecommunications networks, could be initiated by the owner of the handset or 
device, by another person at the direction of the owner, or by “a provider of commercial 
mobile radio or a commercial mobile data service” (e.g., a wireless carrier) to enable such 
owner or a family member to connect to a wireless network when authorized by the 
network operator.
874 
Notably, the unlocking exemptions granted in 2010 and 2012 specified that only 
the owner of the copy of the computer program on a cellphone could pursue 
circumvention.
875 That is because proponents in those prior rulemakings relied 
principally on section 117(a)(1), which authorizes the “owner” of a copy of a computer 
program to make or authorize the making of another copy or adaptation of that program; 
they did not invoke fair use.
876 Accordingly, when recommending adoption of the 
cellphone unlocking exemptions, the Register relied on section 117(a)(1), and imported 
that provision’s  requirement that the person engaging in circumvention be the owner of 
the computer program.
877 The Unlocking Act, however, suggests Congress’s intent that 
any unlocking exemption allow the owner of the device to engage in circumvention, 
without regard to whether the software is owned by or licensed to the owner of the 
872 Unlocking Act § 2(a). See Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems 
for Wireless Telephone Handsets, 79 Fed. Reg. 50,552, 50,554 (Aug. 25, 2014). 
873 Unlocking Act § 2(b). 
874 Id. § 2(c); H.R. REP. NO. 113-356, at 8 (2014). 
875 See 2012 Final Rule, 77 Fed. Reg. at 65,278; 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,839. The cellphone 
unlocking exemption granted in 2006 did not specify the persons entitled to engage in circumvention, or the 
precise legal ground on which unlocking was determined to likely involve noninfringing uses. 2006 Final 
Rule, 71 Fed. Reg. at 68,480; 2006 Recommendation at 50 (“The underlying activity sought to be 
performed by the owner of the handset is to allow the handset to do what it was manufactured to do— 
lawfully connect to any carrier. This is a noninfringing activity by the user.”). 
876 2012 Recommendation at 83; 2010 Recommendation at 120 & n.412. 
877 2010 Recommendation at 167 (“[B]ecause the basis for finding that the prohibition on circumvention 
has adversely affected the ability of users to engage in noninfringing uses was the conclusion that those 
uses are privileged under Section 117, and because the Section 117 privilege may be exercised only by the 
owner of the copy of the computer program, the users who may benefit from the designation of this class 
must necessarily be confined to ‘the owner of the copy of such a computer program.’”); see also 2012 
Recommendation at 89-93, 100. 
139
 

[PAGE 144]
     
    
   
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
  
    
  
   
      
             
          
              
                 
                
          
             
              
             
          
              
               
         
                  
             
             
              
          
         
                   
            
              
           
            
             
        
 
 
                                                 
 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
device.878 In this regard, as discussed below, proponents in this rulemaking for the first 
time invoke fair use, in addition to section 117(a)(1). 
Consistent with Congress’s directive in the Unlocking Act, the Copyright Office 
invited proposals to continue an unlocking exemption for wireless telephone handsets 
and/or to extend the exemption to other categories of wireless devices.  The petitions 
received generally asked for continuation of the current cellphone unlocking exemption, 
and extension of that exemption to new categories of devices.  In the NPRM, the Office 
grouped the petitions into five distinct classes based on the type of device at issue, 
described as follows: 
Proposed Class 11: This proposed class would allow the unlocking of 
wireless telephone handsets.  “Wireless telephone handsets” includes all 
mobile telephones including feature phones, smart phones, and “phablets” 
that are used for two-way voice communication.
879 
Petitions proposing an unlocking exemption for cellphones were filed by Consumers 
Union,880 the Competitive Carriers Association (“CCA”),881 the Institute of Scrap 
Recycling Industries (“ISRI”),882 Pymatuning Communications (“Pymatuning”),883 and 
878 Unlocking Act § 2(c). 
879 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,864. 
880 Consumers Union’s proposed regulatory language reads as follows: “Computer programs, in the form 
of firmware or software, that enable a mobile wireless communications device to connect to a wireless 
communications network, when circumvention is initiated by (1) the owner of the device, (2) another 
person at the direction of the owner, [or] (3) a provider of a commercial mobile radio service or a 
commercial mobile data service at the direction of such owner or other person, solely in order to enable the 
device to connect to other wireless communications networks, subject to the connection to any such other 
wireless communications network being authorized by the operator of such network. The term ‘mobile 
wireless communications device’ means (1) a wireless telephone handset, or (2) a hand-held mobile 
wireless device used for any of the same wireless communications functions, and using equivalent 
technology, as a wireless telephone handset.” Consumers Union Pet. at 3. 
881 CCA’s proposed regulatory language reads as follows: “Computer programs, in the form of firmware, 
software, or data used by firmware or software, that enable wireless handsets to connect to a wireless 
network that offers telecommunications and/or information services, when circumvention is initiated by the 
owner of the device, or by another person at the direction of the owner of the device, in order to connect to 
a wireless network that offers telecommunications and/or information services, and access to the network is 
authorized by the operator of the network.” CCA Cellphone Unlocking Pet. at 1-2. 
882 ISRI’s proposed regulatory language reads as follows: “Computer programs, in the form of firmware or 
software, that enable wireless telephone handsets to connect to a wireless telecommunications network, 
when circumvention, including individual and bulk circumvention for used devices, is initiated by the 
owner of any such handset, by another person at the direction of the owner, or by a provider of a 
commercial mobile radio service or a commercial mobile data service at the direction of such owner or 
other person, solely in order to enable such owner, family member of such owner, or subsequent owner or 
purchaser of such handset to connect to a wireless telecommunications network when such connection is 
authorized by the operator of such network.” ISRI Cellphone Unlocking Pet. at 1. 
883 Pymatuning’s proposed regulatory language reads as follows: “Computer programs, in the form of 
firmware or software, that enable used wireless telephone handsets and other used wireless 
140
 

[PAGE 145]
     
    
    
  
   
  
  
  
 
  
 
       
           
               
           
    
               
            
           
          
             
      
                
              
      
      
            
         
            
    
               
              
        
                
          
                
              
          
         
                     
           
              
            
         
            
               
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 
 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
the Rural Wireless Association (“RWA”).884 Additional comments supporting this 
exemption were filed by Catherine Gellis and the Digital Age Defense project 
(“Gellis/Digital Age Defense”), eBay, Inc. and Gazelle, Inc. (“eBay/Gazelle”), Free 
Software Foundation (“FSF”), iFixit, and over 2300 individuals.885 
Proposed Class 12: This proposed class would allow the unlocking of allpurpose tablet computers. This class would encompass devices such as 
the Apple iPad, Microsoft Surface, Amazon Kindle Fire, and Samsung 
Galaxy Tab, but would exclude specialized devices such as dedicated ebook readers and dedicated handheld gaming devices.
886 
Petitions proposing an unlocking exemption for all-purpose tablet computers were filed 
by Consumers Union,
887 CCA,888 ISRI,889 Pymatuning,890 and RW A.891 As reflected in 
telecommunications devices to connect to a wireless telecommunications network, when circumvention is 
initiated by the owner of the copy of the computer program solely in order to connect to a wireless 
telecommunications network and access to the network is authorized by the operator of the network.” 
Pymatuning Pet. at 2. 
884 RWA’s proposal would “allow for the circumvention of the technological measures that control access to 
Wireless Telephone Handset software and firmware to allow the owner of a lawfully acquired handset, or a 
person designated by the owner of the lawfully acquired handset, to modify the device’s software and 
firmware so that the wireless device may be used on a technologically compatible wireless network of the 
customer’s choosing when the connection to the network is authorized by the operator of the network.” See 
RWA Cellphone Unlocking Pet. at 1-2. 
885 Gellis/Digital Age Defense Class 11 Supp.; eBay/Gazelle Supp.; FSF Class 11 Supp.; iFixit Class 11 
Supp.; Mervin Rosario Supp.; Digital Right to Repair Class 11 Supp. (2304 individuals); Digital Right to 
Repair Class 11 Reply (268 individuals). 
886 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,865. 
887 Consumers Union sought a tablet unlocking exemption as part of its cellphone unlocking petition. 
Consumers Union Pet. at 2-3 (‘‘Consumers Union’s proposed exemption accordingly includes all hand-held 
mobile wireless devices that are used for essentially the same functions and in the same manner as wireless 
telephone handsets, including tablets.’’). 
888 CCA’s proposed regulatory language reads as follows: “Computer programs, in the form of firmware or 
software, or data used by firmware or software, that enable all-purpose tablet computers to connect to a 
wireless network that offers telecommunications and/or information services, when circumvention is 
initiated by the owner of the device, or by another person at the direction of the owner of the device, in 
order to connect to a wireless network that offers telecommunications and/or information services, and 
access to the network is authorized by the operator of the network.” CCA Tablet Unlocking Pet. at 1-2. 
889 ISRI’s proposed regulatory language reads as follows: “Computer programs, in the form of firmware or 
software, that enable all-purpose tablet computers to connect to a wireless telecommunications network, 
when circumvention, including individual and bulk circumvention for used devices, is initiated by the 
owner of any such tablet, by another person at the direction of the owner, or by a provider of a commercial 
mobile radio service or a commercial mobile data service at the direction of such owner or other person, 
solely in order to enable such owner, family member of such owner, or subsequent owner or purchaser of 
such tablet to connect to a wireless telecommunications network when such connection is authorized by the 
operator of such network.” ISRI Tablet Unlocking Pet. at 1. 
890 Pymatuning sought a tablet unlocking exemption as part of its cellphone unlocking petition. 
Pymatuning Pet. at 2 (stating that because ‘‘the justifications underlying the [Unlocking] Act also apply to 
141
 

[PAGE 146]
     
    
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
     
  
           
            
              
  
               
               
                 
           
              
       
                  
     
      
               
              
           
                
          
              
    
            
         
              
              
                
            
            
               
              
  
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
the proposal, the petitions were limited to “all-purpose” tablet computers—that is, tablet 
computers that can run a wide variety of programs—as opposed to dedicated devices like 
e-book readers or media players.  Comments supporting this exemption were also filed by 
Gellis/Digital Age Defense, FSF, iFixit, and over 2300 individuals.
892 
Proposed Class 13: This proposed class would allow the unlocking of 
mobile connectivity devices.  “Mobile connectivity devices” are devices 
that allow users to connect to a mobile data network through either a direct 
connection or the creation of a local Wi-Fi network created by the device.  
The category includes mobile hotspots and removable wireless broadband 
modems.
893 
Petitions proposing an exemption for mobile connectivity devices were filed by CCA894 
and RW A.895 Comments supporting this exemption were also filed by Gellis/Digital Age 
Defense, FSF, and nearly 1900 individuals.896 
all portable computers, tablets and other types of devices that communicate via wireless 
telecommunications networks, and that are often locked much the same as wireless telephone handsets, 
Pymatuning requests that the scope of ‘handsets’ be clarified to include all such wireless 
telecommunications devices’’). 
891 RWA’s proposal would “allow for the circumvention of the technological measures that control access to 
all purpose tablet computer (‘Tablet’) software and firmware to allow the owner of a lawfully acquired 
Tablet, or a person designated by the owner of the lawfully acquired Tablet, to modify the device’s software 
and firmware so that the wireless device may be used on a technologically compatible wireless network of 
the customer’s choosing, and when the connection to the network is authorized by the operator of the 
network.” RWA Tablet Unlocking Pet. at 1-2. 
892 Gellis/Digital Age Defense Class 12 Supp.; FSF Class 12 Supp.; iFixit Class 12 Supp.; Digital Right to 
Repair Class 12 Supp. (2309 individuals). 
893 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,865. 
894 CCA’s proposed regulatory language reads as follows: “Computer programs, in the form of firmware or 
software, or data used by firmware or software, that enable mobile hotspots and MiFi devices to connect to 
a wireless network that offers telecommunications and/or information services, when circumvention is 
initiated by the owner of the device, or by another person at the direction of the owner of the device, in 
order to connect to a wireless network that offers telecommunications and/or information services, and 
access to the network is authorized by the operator of the network.” CCA Mobile Hotspot and MiFi Device 
Unlocking Pet. at 2. 
895 RWA filed two petitions, one addressed to mobile broadband wireless modems and the other addressed 
to mobile hotspots. See RWA Mobile Broadband Wireless Unlocking Pet. at 1-2 (seeking exemption “to 
allow for the circumvention of the technological measures that control access to the software and firmware 
of mobile broadband wireless modems, which are also known as wireless air cards (‘Air Card’), to allow 
the owner of a lawfully acquired Air Card, or a person designated by the owner of the lawfully acquired Air 
Card, to modify the Air Card’s software and firmware so that the device may be used on a technologically 
compatible wireless network of the customer’s choosing, and when the connection to the network is 
authorized by the operator of the network”); RWA Mobile Hotspots Unlocking Pet. at 1-2 (same, except 
that it seeks to circumvent access controls on “Mobile Wireless Personal Hotspots (‘Mobile Hotspot’) 
software and firmware”). 
142
 

[PAGE 147]
     
    
   
 
   
   
  
    
   
   
   
 
 
   
   
   
                  
             
            
      
              
               
    
            
        
                
          
          
               
              
         
              
                  
 
      
              
                
          
                
             
              
              
       
   
        
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Proposed Class 14: This proposed class would allow the unlocking of 
wearable wireless devices.  “Wearable wireless devices” include all 
wireless devices that are designed to be worn on the body, including smart 
watches, fitness devices, and health monitoring devices.
897 
Petitions proposing an exemption for wearable wireless devices were filed by CCA898 
and RW A.899 Comments supporting this exemption were also filed by Gellis/Digital Age 
Defense, FSF and over 1600 individuals.900 
Proposed Class 15: This proposed class would allow the unlocking of all 
wireless “consumer machines,” including smart meters, appliances, and 
precision-guided commercial equipment.901 
The petition proposing a wide-ranging exemption for all wireless “consumer machines” 
was filed by CCA.902 As the Copyright Office noted in the NPRM, the request is for a 
“broad, open-ended exemption for all ‘consumer machines’—or ‘the “Internet of 
Things”’—which would encompass a diverse range of devices and equipment.”
903 In its 
896 Gellis/Digital Age Defense Class 13 Supp.; FSF Class 13 Supp.; Digital Right to Repair Class 13 Supp. 
(1895 individuals). SAE International, Vehicle Electrical System Security Committee (“SAE VESS”) filed 
comments neither in support nor opposition to the proposed exemption. SAE VESS Class 13 Supp. 
897 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,865. 
898 CCA addressed what it called “connected wearables” in the course of its broad catch-all proposal, the 
remainder of which is addressed in Proposed Class 15. See CCA Connected Wearables and Consumer 
Machines Unlocking Pet. at 1-2. 
899 RWA’s proposed exemption would “allow for the circumvention of the technological measures that 
control access to wearable mobile wireless device (‘Wearable Wireless Device’) software and firmware to 
allow the owner of a lawfully acquired Wearable Wireless Device, or a person designated by the owner of 
the lawfully acquired Wearable Wireless Device, to modify the device’s software and firmware so that the 
Wearable Wireless Device may be used on a technologically compatible wireless network of the customer’s 
choosing, and when the connection to the network is authorized by the operator of the network.” RWA 
Wearable Wireless Devices Unlocking Pet. at 1-2. RWA explains that “[a] Wearable Wireless Device is a 
wearable Internet-connected, voice and touch screen enabled, mobile wireless computing device that is 
designed to be worn on the body, including but not limited to a smart watch.” Id. at 2 n.3. 
900 Gellis/Digital Age Defense Class 14 Supp.; FSF Class 14 Supp.; Digital Right to Repair Class 14 Supp. 
(1632 individuals). 
901 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,866. 
902 In relevant part, CCA proposes the following regulatory language: “Computer programs, in the form of 
firmware or software, or data used by firmware or software, that enable . . . consumer machines to connect 
to a wireless network that offers telecommunications and/or information services, when circumvention is 
initiated by the owner of the device, or by another person at the direction of the owner of the device, in 
order to connect to a wireless network that offers telecommunications and/or information services, and 
access to the network is authorized by the operator of the network.” CCA Connected Wearables and 
Consumer Machines Unlocking Pet. at 2. CCA states that the “consumer machines” category encompasses 
“smart meters, connected appliances, connected precision-guided commercial equipment, among others.” 
Id. at 1. 
903 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,866. 
143
 

[PAGE 148]
     
    
 
  
     
   
  
  
   
  
   
 
 
    
   
    
  
  
  
        
                  
     
               
                 
              
                    
              
               
                
              
           
                  
       
           
               
                     
           
            
                  
                
        
     
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
opening comments, CCA confirmed this understanding, urging the Office to define the 
exemption as encompassing “any ‘smart’ device that utilizes a data connection to connect 
to the Internet or to interact with other smart devices.”904 Supporting comments were 
filed by Gellis/Digital Age Defense, FSF, iFixit, and over 1500 individuals.905 
Because the proposed unlocking exemptions involve many overlapping factual 
and legal issues, Proposed Classes 11 through 15 are to some degree addressed 
collectively. 
a. Background 
i. Proposed Classes 11 to 14 
The devices encompassed by Proposed Classes 11 to 14 (cellphones, tablets, 
mobile connectivity devices, and consumer wearables such as smartwatches) employ one 
or more known TPMs, including subscriber identity module (“SIM”) card locks,906 
service provider code (“SPC”) locks,907 system operator code (“SOC”) locks,908 and band 
order locks.909 Consumers Union notes, however, that “technological advances could 
create new measures that function in the same way.”910 Unlocking can be accomplished 
in a variety of ways. In some cases, unlocking can occur without having to circumvent 
any access control by entering in a model- or device-specific code to provide access to 
the relevant carrier settings in the phone software; this approach, however, may require 
904 CCA Class 15 Supp. at 2. 
905 Gellis/Digital Age Defense Class 15 Supp.; FSF Class 15 Supp.; iFixit Class 15 Supp.; Digital Right to 
Repair Class 15 Supp. (1589 individuals). 
906 SIM cards “store information used by a mobile device to identify and authenticate itself on a wireless 
network.” Consumers Union Class 11 Supp. at 5. A SIM lock is software tha t “causes the device reject any 
SIM card it has not been programmed to recognize, namely SIM cards that would connect to other wireless 
networks.” Id.; see also ISRI Class 12 Supp. at 4 (noting that SIM locks are used for tablets); CCA Class 
13 Supp. at 3 (same for mobile hotspots); CCA Class 14 Supp. at 4 (same for wearable devices). 
907 SPC locks are used by phones using the code-division-multiple-access standard. ISRI Class 11 Supp. at 
4. The SPC is a unique number generated using the device’s electronic serial number and an algorithm 
specific to a particular wireless carrier; thus, unless a new code is obtained “the user is blocked from 
programming the device to work on another network.” Id.; see also Consumers Union Class 12 Supp. at 6 
(noting that SPC locks are used for tablets); CCA Class 13 Supp. at 3 (same for mobile hotspots); CCA 
Class 14 Supp. at 4 (same for wearable devices). 
908 SOCs are “code numbers, associated with particular carriers, that prevent mobile devices from 
connecting to wireless networks not identified by the codes.” Consumers Union Class 11 Supp. at 6; see 
also ISRI Class 12 Supp. at 4 (noting that SOC locks are used on tablets); CCA Class 13 Supp. at 3 (same 
for mobile hotspots); CCA Class 14 Supp. at 4 (same for wearable devices). 
909 A band order lock “restricts mobile devices to using the wireless communications radio frequencies 
controlled by a particular carrier.” Consumers Union Class 11 Supp. at 6; see also ISRI Class 12 Supp. at 4 
(noting that band order locks are used for tablets); CCA Class 13 Supp. at 3 (same for mobile hotspots); 
CCA Class 14 Supp. at 4 (same for wearable devices). 
910 Consumers Union Class 11 Supp. at 5. 
144
 

[PAGE 149]
     
    
    
 
  
   
 
  
 
  
    
  
  
 
   
  
   
 
   
 
 
     
  
  
 
  
  
   
   
        
    
        
     
           
              
             
        
             
   
      
        
             
           
 
 
                                                 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
the assistance of the carrier or device manufacturer.911 Absent such assistance, unlocking 
a phone requires circumvention of an access control.  According to ISRI, circumvention 
generally involves running software that exploits security defects in the device to 
“modif[y] a variable or replace a short piece of code” on the device’s operating system.
912 
An issue dividing proponents to some extent is whether the Class 11 or Class 12 
exemptions should cover only “used” cellphones and tablets. The current cellphone 
unlocking exemption (as reinstated by Congress in the Unlocking Act) extends only to 
“used” phones.913 Some proponents of Classes 11 and 12, namely Consumers Union and 
eBay/Gazelle, call for elimination of that limitation for cellphones and tablets.914 Other 
proponents of Classes 11 and 12, however, namely, ISRI and CCA, expressly request an 
exemption limited to “used” devices.
915 ISRI specifically proposes that “used” be 
defined for purposes of the proposed exemption as a device “that has been lawfully 
acquired and activated on the wireless telecommunications network of a carrier.”916 With 
respect to devices potentially to be covered under Classes 13, 14, and 15, no participant 
seemed to be seeking an exemption for unused devices.917 
Another issue in this rulemaking is the extent to which so-called “bulk” unlocking 
can and should be accommodated in any unlocking exemption.918 A number of legitimate 
charities and commercial enterprises (such as bulk recyclers of cellphones and other 
devices represented by ISRI) obtain used devices from consumers and unlock them in 
large quantities for the purposes of resale or redistribution.919 But there is also an 
unlawful form of large-scale unlocking that involves the bulk purchase of unused 
handsets that have been offered for sale at subsidized prices by prepaid wireless carriers, 
and then unlocking and reselling those unlocked handsets for a profit.  This concern is 
described in greater detail in the course of addressing opponent TracFone, Inc.’s 
(“TracFone’s”) comments below.  The 2010 rulemaking addressed this issue; the Register 
explained that by requiring that the cellphones be “used,” the 2010 exemption was 
designed to prevent the “illegal trafficking of mobile phones.”
920 
911 See, e.g., ISRI Class 11 Supp. at 5.
 
912 Id.
 
913 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Wireless Telephone
 
Handsets, 79 Fed. Reg. at 50,553-54.
 
914 Consumers Union Class 11 Supp. at 1; eBay/Gazelle Supp. at 5.
 
915 See, e.g., ISRI Class 11 Reply at 5 (emphasizing that its proposal was designed to encompass only used 
devices); CCA/TracFone Reply at 2 (agreeing to joint proposal limited to used phones).
 
916 See, e.g., ISRI Class 11 Supp. at 14. 
917 See Tr. at 18:24-25 (May 21, 2015) (Wiens, iFixit) (agreeing that it “would be reasonable” to limit
 
unlocking exemptions to used devices).
 
918 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,864.
 
919 See, e.g., ISRI Class 11 Supp. at 12-14.
 
920 2010 Recommendation at 169. An earlier version of the Unlocking Act included language that might
 
have been construed as prohibiting all bulk unlocking for purposes of resale. See Unlocking Consumer 
145
 

[PAGE 150]
     
    
  
   
   
  
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
  
  
  
   
 
    
  
   
              
              
           
                   
                
               
           
         
  
  
  
       
               
                  
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
ii. Proposed Class 15:  Consumer Machines 
As the Office described it in the NPRM, Class 15 is a “broad, open-ended 
exemption for all consumer machines—or the Internet of Things—which would 
encompass a diverse range of devices and equipment.”921 In the NPRM, the Office noted 
its concern that “it may be difficult to build an adequate administrative record for this 
exemption in light of the fact-bound analysis required by section 1201(a)(1).”922 For 
instance, the Office noted that CCA referred to “precision-guided commercial equipment” 
in its petition, but “provide[d] no explanation as to the kind of equipment to which it 
refers.”923 The Office accordingly encouraged CCA and other proponents “to provide 
targeted argument and evidence that would allow the Office to narrow this category 
appropriately.”
924 
CCA filed the sole substantive comment in support of the exemption, and failed to 
further define the kinds of “smart” devices the exemption would cover beyond those 
already encompassed by Classes 11 through 14, let alone the types of TPMs used by such 
devices or the methods of circumvention.  Indeed, it is not apparent from the record 
whether such devices even exist.  For instance, while CCA suggested that smart power 
meters would be encompassed by the proposal,
925 evidence at the public hearing (at 
which CCA did not participate) indicates that smart meters generally do not have mobile 
data (e.g., 3G/4G) connections, rendering the concept of unlocking irrelevant to that type 
of device.926 
Choice and Wireless Competition Act, H.R. 1123, 113th Cong. § 2(c)(2) (2014) (“Nothing in this 
subsection shall be construed to permit the unlocking of wireless handsets or other wireless devices, for the 
purpose of bulk resale, or to authorize the Librarian of Congress to authorize circumvention for such 
purpose[.]”). That provision was added to the House bill after it passed out of committee, and was a matter 
of substantial debate on the House floor. See 160 C
ONG REC. H1904-13 (daily ed. Feb. 25, 2014). The 
bulk unlocking ban was not included in the Senate version of the bill, which was the one enacted into law. 
See Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act, S.517, 113th Cong (2014). 
921 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,866 (internal quotations omitted). 
922 Id. 
923 Id. 
924 Id. 
925 CCA Class 15 Supp. at 9. 
926 See Tr. at 28:03-06 (May 21, 2015) (Wiens, iFixit) (“[W]e’re talking about connections to cellular 
networks. Smart meters don’t connect to the cellular network. So smart meters establish their own mesh 
network.”). 
146
 

[PAGE 151]
     
    
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
    
   
   
  
 
    
  
 
    
 
  
   
   
   
                
               
              
           
                
                   
             
               
  
        
                
           
             
     
              
     
     
               
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
b. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
To support the claim that unlocking constitutes a noninfringing use of the device 
software, proponents of the unlocking classes advance three general arguments across all 
of the unlocking classes.927 
First, they note that in many instances, unlocking a wireless device does not 
implicate any of the copyright owner’s exclusive rights under the Copyright Act.  CCA 
explains, for example, that cellphones are “typically” unlocked “by changing the 
variables in certain handset memory locations and updating the preferred roaming list 
(‘PRL’) to make the handset compatible with a new network.”
928 According to 
proponents, changing such variables in software does not involve reproduction of a 
copyrighted work or result in a derivative work.929 
Second, as in past rulemakings, proponents of the unlocking classes argue that, to 
the extent unlocking implicates any of the exclusive rights of the copyright owner,  the 
activity falls within the limitation on exclusive rights in computer programs set forth in 
section 117(a)(1).
930 That provision allows the “owner” of a copy of a computer program 
to make or authorize the making of another copy or adaptation of that program created 
“as an essential step in the utilization of the computer program in conjunction with a 
machine and that [] is used in no other manner.”931 Proponents contend that the owners 
of wireless devices are the owners of the underlying device software under either of the 
two leading cases on software ownership932—Krause v. Titleserv, Inc. 933 and Vernor v. 
Autodesk, Inc.934 Proponents also argue that unlocking is an “essential step” for using the 
device software with a wireless service provider of a consumer’s choice, and note that the 
Register reached the same conclusion in 2012.935 
927 Consumers Union also urges a point not made by other proponents: that the software that enables 
connectivity between a mobile device and a wireless network “likely falls outside the Copyright Act’s 
protection for expressive works” because it is “functional” in nature. Consumers Union Class 11 Supp. at 
10-11. At the same time, Consumers Union acknowledges that “mobile device manufacturers and wireless 
carriers have not conceded this point” and that, given the uncertainty about the merits of this argument, “a 
DMCA exemption is still necessary.” Id. at 11. In light of that acknowledgment, and the other bases for 
recommending an exemption, it is unnecessary to address this point further, except to observe that 
computer programs are protectable under the Copyright Act. See 17 U.S.C. § 101 (definition of “computer 
program”). 
928 CCA Class 11 Supp. at 3. 
929 Consumers Union Class 11 Supp. at 11-12; ISRI Class 12 Supp. at 6-7; CCA Class 13 Supp. at 4; CCA
 
Class 14 Supp. at 5; CCA Class 15 Supp. at 5.
 
930 See, e.g., CCA Class 11 Supp. at 4-7; ISRI Class 12 Supp. at 9-12.
 
931 17 U.S.C. § 117(a). 
932 See, e.g., CCA Class 11 Supp. at 5-7; ISRI Class 12 Supp. at 10-11. 
933 402 F.3d 119 (2d Cir. 2005). 
934 621 F.3d 1102 (9th Cir. 2010). 
935 See, e.g., CCA Class 12 Supp. at 5; ISRI Class 12 Supp. at 12. 
147
 

[PAGE 152]
     
    
    
 
   
  
   
    
 
    
   
    
   
 
    
 
    
   
   
   
 
    
 
 
   
 
              
                 
                
    
        
              
              
  
            
                  
            
        
               
           
              
      
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Third, for the first time, proponents of the unlocking classes also argue that any 
reproductions or derivative works created in the process of unlocking would constitute 
fair use under section 107.936 ISRI urges that each of the four fair use factors supports 
this view.  First, ISRI argues that the purpose of the use is to make purely functional 
adjustments to the software to enable interoperability with a different wireless carrier, and 
that such uses have been recognized by courts to be fair.937 In addition, ISRI, 
representing bulk recyclers, asserts that any commercial aspect of bulk unlocking is 
“fairly attenuated from the unlocking use of the . . . software and does not involve selling 
copies or derivative works of it other than as a tiny component of a used device.”
938 With 
respect to the second factor, ISRI notes that the nature of the software at issue is highly 
functional, and is thus entitled to less protection than more creative works.939 On the 
third factor, ISRI asserts that the amount of the work used is small, because unlocking 
only changes those portions of the software that help connect the phone to a particular 
carriers’ network, leaving the rest intact.940 On the last factor, both ISRI and CCA 
maintain that unlocking has no appreciable adverse effect on the market for or value of 
the device software.
941 Indeed, they urge that “the ability to lawfully unlock mobile 
devices likely increases the value of those devices (including the embedded software)” 
because it allows them to be resold more easily to new users.942 
Some proponents also rely on the Unlocking Act to reinforce their argument that 
unlocking is a noninfringing activity.  Relying upon the Senate report for the Unlocking 
Act, Consumers Union asserts that the Act “embodies Congress’s view that unlocking a 
mobile device is a legitimate non-infringing use.”
943 ISRI similarly asserts that the 
Unlocking Act “should properly be read as Congress’ determination that the unlocking 
that Petitioner seeks here should be lawful, whatever the precise legal ownership status of 
software . . . on the unlocked devices.”
944 ISRI points to the legislative history of the 
Unlocking Act as evidence that Congress wanted to accommodate bulk unlocking.  ISRI 
936 See, e.g., ISRI Class 11 Supp. at 7-9; CCA Class 12 Supp. at 4. 
937 See, e.g., ISRI Class 12 Supp. at 7 (citing Sega Enters. Ltd. v. Accolade, Inc., 977 F.2d 1510, 1520 (9th 
Cir. 1992) and Sony Computer Entm’t, Inc. v. Connectix Corp., 203 F.3d 596, 602-603 (9th Cir. 2000)).
 
938 Id. at 8.
 
939 See, e.g., id. (citing Sega, 977 F.2d at 1524).
 
940 See, e.g., id. (“[T]he changes are limited to the portion of the software that prevents unlocking—while
 
the vast remainder of the software remains undisturbed and allows the device to continue functioning as
 
intended.”).
 
941 See, e.g., id. at 9; CCA Class 11 Supp. at 4.
 
942 ISRI Class 12 Supp. at 9; see also CCA Class 11 Supp. at 4 (“[T]he market for and value of the
 
copyrighted work actually increases, as it allows the handset to be transferred on the secondary market
 
more easily and to a broader array of buyers.”).
 
943 Consumers Union Class 11 Supp. at 10; see S. REP. NO. 113-212, at 6 (2014) (“Unlike many other
 
situations where an exemption from the circumvention prohibition may be sought or granted, unlocking a
 
cell phone to connect to a wireless network typically does not facilitate copyright infringement.”).
 
944 ISRI Class 12 Supp. at 12. 
148
 

[PAGE 153]
     
    
 
  
   
  
  
  
    
  
 
  
    
  
  
    
 
 
   
    
   
 
    
 
   
 
  
  
 
    
    
  
 
           
    
           
            
        
     
        
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
notes that an earlier version of the bill included language that could have been construed 
as prohibiting bulk unlocking for the purpose of resale, but that this language was 
stripped out before the Unlocking Act was passed into law.945 
c. Asserted Adverse Effects 
Although proponents assert some of the same adverse effects across all the 
unlocking classes, there are sufficient differences in the factual record to warrant a 
separate discussion of each class. 
i. Proposed Class 11: Wireless Telephone Handsets 
Class 11 proponents assert that wireless carriers commonly install TPMs on 
cellphone software that prevent consumers from using the cellphone on another carrier’s 
network in order to enforce the consumer’s commitment to use the phone on the original 
carrier’s network.
946 Proponents note, however, that once consumers have satisfied their 
commitments to the carriers, the TPMs remain in place. They assert that, absent a 
continued exemption, the prohibition on circumvention of those TPMs will lead to 
several adverse effects. First, CCA and Consumers Union ass ert that the prohibition 
impedes consumers’ ability to switch their existing cellphones to the wireless carrier of 
their choice.  Instead, consumers must continue with a wireless carrier they may be 
dissatisfied with, or spend sometimes significant sums to purchase a new phone that can 
function on the network of their desired wireless carrier.
947 CCA notes consumers also 
invest sometimes substantial sums on music, apps, and peripheral equipment that is tied 
to their existing cellphone, and that these investments might be lost if the consumer is 
forced to purchase a new phone from their desired carrier.
948 In addition to these harms 
to individual consumers, Consumers Union suggests that the prohibition on cellphone 
unlocking has broader anti-competitive effects: by “ensur[ing] that customers cannot 
easily be lured away by a competitor,” the prohibition “dampens competitive pressure on 
carriers to improve prices and terms of service.”
949 
Second, Class 11 proponents point to evidence that locked cellphones have 
significantly lower resale value than unlocked ones, disadvantaging consumers who want 
to resell their used locked phones and businesses that resell used phones.950 Gazelle, a 
leading reseller of used cellphones, explains that “because much of the market for eligible 
iPhones, particularly AT&T phones, is overseas, Gazelle cannot obtain as high a price for 
resale of a locked phone as it can for resale of the same phone when it has been or can be 
945 See ISRI Class 11 Supp. at 14 & n.61 (citing Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition 
Act, H.R. 1123 § 2(c)(2)).
 
946 See Consumers Union Class 11 Supp. at 4-5, 13-14; eBay/Gazelle Supp. at 2.
 
947 CCA Class 11 Supp. at 9-10; Consumers Union Class 11 Supp. at 13-14.
 
948 CCA Class 11 Supp. at 9.
 
949 Consumers Union Class 11 Supp. at 14
 
950 Id. at 15-16; CCA Class 11 Supp. at 12.
 
149
 

[PAGE 154]
     
    
    
  
  
     
   
   
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
   
  
    
  
 
   
   
  
 
     
   
             
    
                
   
      
        
      
  
  
              
       
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
unlocked.”951 As a result, “Gazelle cannot make as valuable an offer to a consumer for 
an eligible locked AT&T phone as it can for that phone when it is unlocked or when 
Gazelle is confident that it can unlock that phone, or have it unlocked, on behalf of the 
phone’s legitimate seller.”952 Proponent ISRI similarly provides evidence that locked 
cellphones are resold at a substantial discount compared to unlocked phones, making it 
more difficult for legitimate resellers to operate.
953 
Third, Consumers Union points to environmental harms that flow from the 
abandonment of functional locked cellphones that could be reused on a different network 
if they could be unlocked.  It asserts that “restrictions on unlocking turn perfectly 
functional equipment into environmental waste” because “[t]he decrease in usefulness 
makes it more likely that consumers will simply discard their old devices, [or] that they 
will end up gathering dust in a drawer, . . . eventually slowly deteriorating in a 
landfill.”
954 
Proponents also addressed two possible alternatives to circumvention, finding that 
neither mitigates the adverse effects of the inability to engage in unlocking. 
First, a number of wireless carriers, including the four largest national carriers, 
have voluntarily adopted policies based on a “Consumer Code for Wireless Service” 
established by CTIA-The Wireless Association, under which they have agreed to help 
consumers unlock their cellphones under specified conditions.
955 For prepaid phones, 
carriers have agreed to unlock the devices “no later than one year after initial activation, 
consistent with reasonable time, payment or usage requirements.”
956 For non-prepaid 
phones, carriers have agreed to unlock the phone, or provide the necessary information to 
unlock the phone, “after the fulfillment of the applicable postpaid service contract, device 
financing plan, or payment of applicable early termination fee.”957 
Class 11 proponents assert, however, that these voluntary policies fall short in 
several respects.  Proponents note that they are voluntary, and could be revoked or 
changed by the carriers unilaterally.958 CCA also points to the Senate report for the 
Unlocking Act,959 which acknowledged that there were “circumstances in which 
951 eBay/Gazelle Supp. at 7 (declaration of Chris Sullivan, President & CEO, Gazelle).
 
952 Id. (emphasis in original).
 
953 ISRI Class 11 Supp. at 17 (noting a twenty-five dollar price drop in cellphones after the cellphone
 
unlocking exemption lapsed in 2013).
 
954 Consumers Union Class 11 Supp. at 17.
 
955 See Consumer Code for Wireless Service, CTIA-THE WIRELESS ASSOCIATION, http://www.ctia.org/
 
policy-initiatives/voluntary-guidelines/consumer-code-for-wireless-service (last visited Oct. 7, 2015). 
956 Id. 
957 Id. 
958 Consumers Union Class 11 Supp. at 17; ISRI Class 11 Supp. at 19. 
959 CCA Class 11 Supp. at 7. 
150
 

[PAGE 155]
     
    
  
   
   
    
   
 
   
  
   
  
     
 
  
    
  
 
  
   
 
 
    
 
   
  
  
     
   
 
   
   
        
  
     
        
       
   
      
        
     
      
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
additional avenues for unlocking may be preferable over attempting to unlock through the 
carrier.”960 The Senate report noted, for example, that “some carriers require customers 
to bring their devices to the carrier’s physical store to have them unlocked,” but that 
“[f]or those customers who do not live near the carrier’s retail location . . . this 
requirement may prevent them from being able to get their devices unlocked.”961 
Proponents highlight other difficulties that consumers may face when asking carriers to 
unlock their phones.  Consumers Union notes that T-Mobile “require[s] that the customer 
provide proof of purchase for the device,” and that T-Mobile and AT&T impose certain 
device eligibility requirements.
962 CCA also notes unlocking a device may require a code 
provided by the original equipment manufacturer (“OEM”), but that OEMs are not 
signatories to the agreement and could decline to provide that code.963 In addition, ISRI 
explains that the carriers’ voluntary policies do not cover entities that engage in bulk 
unlocking.964 
Second, proponents reject the availability of new unlocked cellphones as a viable 
alternative to circumvention.  Although ISRI acknowledges that “[a]n increasing number 
of wireless devices . . . are now being sold unlocked,” it observes that there are “millions 
of devices previously sold that are currently locked,” and more “that will continue to be 
sold locked.”965 ISRI thus argues that the existence of unlocked phones “does nothing to 
eliminate the loss of choice and value caused by the inability to unlock the millions of 
recent-model devices that have already been sold to consumers and could be resold on the 
secondary market.”966 CCA further notes that “a consumer may not find her desired 
handset as one of the unlocked options,” and that this is a particular concern for 
consumers with disabilities, who may have very specific device requirements.
967 
As noted above, Consumers Union and eBay/Gazelle also argue that consumers 
will suffer if the existing exemption is not extended to new devices still under contract. 
eBay/Gazelle did not explain what uses would be permitted by allowing such phones to 
be unlocked under the exemption.
968 For its part, Consumers Union points only to the 
possibility that a consumer might want to give a new subsidized phone received from a 
wireless carrier to a friend or family member who uses a different wireless carrier, while 
continuing to use their old phone on their existing wireless carrier (thus satisfying the 
service commitment).
969 But, at the public hearing on Proposed Classes 11 and 12, 
960 S. REP. NO. 113-212, at 2. 
961 Id. 
962 Consumers Union Class 11 Supp. at 18.
 
963 CCA Class 11 Supp. at 8.
 
964 ISRI Class 11 Supp. at 16.
 
965 Id. at 20.
 
966 Id.; see also eBay/Gazelle Supp. at 5.
 
967 CCA Class 11 Supp. at 9.
 
968 See eBay/Gazelle Supp. at 5.
 
969 Consumers Union Class 11 Supp. at 1.
 
151
 

[PAGE 156]
     
    
  
     
   
    
    
  
     
  
     
  
   
 
  
     
  
  
   
  
  
      
                
             
        
             
               
   
                
              
  
             
               
               
           
     
 
               
                       
           
       
                
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Consumers Union acknowledged that this scenario was not the focus of the requested 
exemption.970 Moreover, Consumers Union conceded that a wireless carrier was unlikely 
to allow a consumer to leave a store with a subsidized cellphone that was not connected 
to that carrier’s wireless network.971 
ii. Proposed Class 12: All- Purpose Tablets 
An initial question concerning the need for an exemption for tablet devices is the 
extent to which tablets are locked to particular wireless carriers. To begin with, unlike 
cellphones, many tablets are sold only with Wi-Fi capabilities and cannot connect to a 
wireless telecommunications network (e.g., a 3G/4G network).  Even tablets that can 
connect to such networks are frequently sold unlocked.
972 For instance, iFixit, a 
supporter of the tablet unlocking exemption, concedes that the highly popular Apple iPad 
is generally sold unlocked.
973 Nonetheless, Class 12 proponents provide some evidence 
that tablets purchased through wireless carriers may be locked.  Consumers Union 
submitted the unlocking policies for the major carriers, some of which acknowledge the 
locking of tablets to carrier networks.
974 ISRI, representing electronics recyclers, reports 
that “increasingly tablet computers are being sold that connect to wireless 
communications networks and are locked to a particular carrier.”
975 
Class 12 proponents make the same points as Class 11 proponents with respect to 
the adverse effects of the unlocking ban for tablets—that the prohibition on 
circumvention impedes consumers’ ability to choose their preferred wireless carriers, 
harms the resale value of used devices, and creates environmental harms by encouraging 
disposal rather than reuse of devices.
976 They also reiterate that the potential alternative 
970 Tr. at 224:19-21 (May 26, 2015) (Slover, Consumers Union) (“We think, as a practical matter, most of 
the phones that are going to be involved here are going to be used phones.”). 
971 Id. at 259:11-18 (Charlesworth, USCO; Slover, Consumers Union). 
972 By comparison, the wireless device reseller Gazelle reports that 74% of all of the smartphones it 
received in 2014 were locked to a carrier. eBay/Gazelle Supp. at 7 (declaration of Chris Sullivan, President 
& CEO, Gazelle). 
973 Tr. at 12:13-15 (May 21, 2015) (Wiens, iFixit); CCA Class 12 Supp. at 7 (noting that “iOS alone 
accounts for nearly one-third of the tablet market”); see also iPad Q&A, EVERYIPAD.COM (Nov. 25, 2014), 
http://www.everymac.com/systems/apple/ipad/ipad-faq/ipad-design-info-font-where-to-buy-unlocked.html 
(stating that “iPad models equipped with wireless mobile data connectivity (3G or 4G+LTE), regardless of 
generation, are ‘unlocked’ and not tied to a carrier in the United States”). Some iPads are sold with SIM 
cards that can only be used on a particular carrier, but the device can be moved to another carrier simply by 
swapping out the SIM card. See Kevin C. Tofel, Fenced In: That Unlocked Apple IPad SIM Gets Locked 
When Activated on AT&T, G
IGAOM (Oct. 24, 2014), https://gigaom.com/2014/10/24/fenced-in-that­
unlocked-apple-ipad-sim-gets-locked-when-activated-on-att. 
974 See Consumers Union Class 12 Supp. at Exhibit G (unlocking policy for Sprint) (“Many Sprint phones 
or tablets . . . have been programmed with a master subsidy lock . . . that locks the device . . . .”); id. at 
Exhibit H (unlocking policy for AT&T covering both wireless phones and tablets). 
975 ISRI Class 12 Supp. at 3. 
976 See, e.g., Consumers Union Class 12 Supp. at 13-18; CCA Class 12 Supp. at 7-8. 
152
 

[PAGE 157]
     
    
  
    
 
  
 
  
    
      
   
   
    
 
   
 
    
    
    
  
 
 
 
 
  
   
     
   
 
 
               
       
        
        
  
  
          
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
avenues to circumvention are inadequate—that the wireless carriers’ voluntary unlocking 
policies and the availability of unlocked tablets do not adequately mitigate the adverse 
effects of the unlocking ban.977 
iii. Proposed Class 13:  Mobile Connectivity Devices 
Class 13 proponents observe that mobile connectivity devices, such as mobile 
hotspots and removable wireless broadband modems, are used by “[m]illions of 
Americans”978 and that such devices are expected to “gain in popularity” over the next 
three years.979 Proponents also provide evidence that wireless carriers are locking mobile 
connectivity devices to their networks.  CCA explains that “AT&T, one of the largest 
wireless carriers in the nation, makes their locking policy for all devices clear, explicitly 
stating that they place software locks on mobile hotspots.”
980 
With respect to the adverse effects caused by the prohibition on circumvention, 
CCA, as the sole proponent to file detailed comments for this class in response to the 
NPRM, focuses on the fact that the prohibition on circumvention impedes consumers’ 
ability to choose their preferred wireless carrier.
981 CCA identifies the additional concern 
that carriers’ voluntary unlocking policies are not a viable alternative to circumvention 
for mobile connectivity devices because they are limited to phones and tablets and “do[] 
not include mobile hotspots.”982 
iv. Proposed Class 14: Wearable Computing Devices 
Concerning the proposed class of “wearable computing devices,” a question 
highlighted by the Office in the NPRM is the extent to which such devices—which would 
include smartphones, fitness devices, and smart glasses—have dedicated connections to 
wireless telecommunications networks (e.g., 3G/4G connections) and are locked to a 
particular wireless carrier.  CCA agrees with the Office that “most smart watches, and 
most if not all fitness and health monitoring devices, do not employ mobile 
telecommunications or data networks . . . for wireless connections, but instead use either 
Wi-Fi to connect to a local wireless network, or Bluetooth or ANT technologies to 
connect to a smartphone or computer.”
983 But CCA and other Class 14 proponents 
observe that wearable devices with freestanding mobile data connections are beginning to 
emerge in the marketplace.  Proponents note that the Samsung Gear S smartwatch, which 
features a dedicated 3G connection, was introduced last year; moreover, AT&T sells a 
locked version of that watch for a subsidized price in exchange for a service 
977 See, e.g., Consumers Union Class 12 Supp. at 17-19; CCA Class 12 Supp. at 8-10.
 
978 CCA Class 13 Supp. at 7.
 
979 RWA Mobile Hotspots Unlocking Pet. at 4.
 
980 CCA Class 13 Supp. at 7.
 
981 Id. 
982 Id. 
983 CCA Class 14 Supp. at 3 (quoting NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,866). 
153
 

[PAGE 158]
     
    
    
  
    
 
 
 
 
   
   
  
   
  
   
      
 
  
    
 
 
  
   
     
  
           
          
            
        
                    
                 
            
            
       
        
       
     
      
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
commitment.984 CCA asserts, moreover, that this trend is likely to continue, explaining 
that “[a]s batteries and radio transmitters become ever-smaller, it is highly likely that in 
the very near term such devices will no longer be dependent on Wi-Fi or smartphones for 
their data connection.”985 
With respect to the adverse effects caused by the prohibition on circumvention, 
Class 14 proponents reiterate the points made by proponents in the other unlocking 
classes—that the prohibition on circumvention impedes consumers’ ability to choose 
their preferred wireless carriers, harms resale value, and creates environmental harms.986 
As with the mobile hotspots addressed in Class 13, CCA again points out that the carriers’ 
voluntary unlocking policies do not include wearable devices.
987 
v. Proposed Class 15:  Consumer Machines 
As noted above, CCA fails to provide any specific information about the types of 
devices encompassed by the proposed exemption for “consumer machines,” or the types 
of adverse effects faced by users of such devices.  For instance, CCA makes a passing 
reference to Verizon’s “Smart Cities solutions.”988 It appears that Verizon markets this 
technology to municipalities as a means of adding wireless monitoring and control 
capabilities to water and sewage systems, public lighting, traffic controls, and other 
elements of municipal infrastructure.
989 But CCA offers no evidence that a municipality 
using such a system would want to switch wireless carriers, or even that such systems 
contain TPMs preventing municipalities from doing so. 
d. Argument Under Statutory Factors 
Proponents of all of the unlocking classes make the same basic arguments under 
the 1201(a)(1) statutory factors. First, with respect to the availability for use of 
copyrighted works, proponents note that by allowing used devices to be unlocked, the 
984 Id. at 3-4; Tr. at 16:24-17:02 (May 21, 2015); see also Samsung Gear S-Black, AT&T, http://www.att 
.com/devices/samsung/gear-s.html (last visited Oct. 7, 2015) (“Samsung Gear S-Black”) (offering the 
Samsung Gear S for $99.99 with a two year contract, and $299.99 without a contract). 
985 CCA Class 14 Supp. at 4. 
986 Id. at 7 (“The most clear, and most immediate, adverse effect . . . is to prevent consumers from easily 
switching their wearable devices to the competing network of their choice.”); eBay Class 14 Reply at 1 
(noting that unlocked smartwatches have “higher values in the resale market”); Tr. at 17:23-18:08 (May 21, 
2015) (Wiens, iFixit) (noting that a month after the introduction of the Samsung Galaxy Gear, an 
electronics recycling facility had 200 of them). 
987 CCA Class 14 Supp. at 8. 
988 CCA Class 15 Supp. at 3. 
989 See Smart Cities, VERIZON, http://www.verizonenterprise.com/solutions/connected-machines/smart­
cities (last visited Oct. 7, 2015). 
154
 

[PAGE 159]
     
    
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
 
 
 
    
  
 
   
 
    
  
  
 
  
   
  
  
               
     
       
      
       
                  
         
              
            
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
devices (and the copyrighted software embedded within the devices) will remain usable 
for longer periods of time, and will contribute to a more robust resale market.990 
Second, some proponents argue that an unlocking exemption will make 
copyrighted works more available for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational 
purposes.  For example, Consumers Union notes that “[c]onsumers increasingly use 
mobile devices as educational tools both in and out of the classroom.”991 In contrast, in 
its submissions supporting the exemptions in Classes 11 and 12, ISRI suggests that the 
prohibition on circumvention “does not directly bear on” these types of activities in the 
context of the proposed unlocking exemptions.
992 
Third, some proponents argue that the exemption will promote criticism, 
comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, and research.  For example, Consumers 
Union argues that granting the exemption “would make it easier for more consumers to 
obtain a mobile device affordably and get the benefits of the digital news revolution.”993 
In contrast, ISRI again indicates that the prohibition on circumvention “does not directly 
bear on the . . . activities” listed in the third statutory factor.”
994 
Fourth, proponents argue that permitting circumvention will have no adverse 
effect on the market for or value of wireless device software.  Several proponents note 
that during the period in which the prior and current unlocking exemptions have been in 
effect, sales of wireless devices increased rapidly.995 Indeed, as noted above, some 
proponents assert that granting the exemption in fact enhances the value of the devices 
(and presumably the software embedded within them), because unlocked phones can be 
resold for significantly higher sums than locked phones.996 
Under the fifth statutory factor, which allows for consideration of such other 
factors as the Librarian considers appropriate, many proponents urge that granting the 
exemption would increase consumer choice and competition among wireless carriers and 
devices.997 
990 See, e.g., CCA Class 11 Supp. at 10-11; ISRI Class 12 Supp. at 23.
 
991 Consumers Union Class 11 Supp. at 21.
 
992 ISRI Class 11 Supp. at 23.
 
993 Consumers Union Class 11 Supp. at 22.
 
994 ISRI Class 11 Supp. at 23.
 
995 ISRI Class 12 Supp. at 22 (citing cellphone industry research); CCA Class 11 Supp. at 12 (citing
 
research showing growth in the number of devices connected to wireless networks).
 
996 See, e.g., Consumers Union Class 11 Supp. at 23; ISRI Class 12 Supp. at 23-24.
 
997 See, e.g., ISRI Class 11 Supp. at 24; Consumers Union Class 11 Supp. at 14-15.
 
155
 

[PAGE 160]
     
    
  
    
  
   
   
  
   
 
      
  
   
   
    
 
  
    
  
  
 
 
   
   
    
 
  
     
                 
          
              
 
     
    
    
     
    
    
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
2. Opposition 
a. Proposed Class 11: Wireless Telephone Handsets 
Although prepaid wireless carrier TracFone nominally filed comments in 
opposition to the cellphone unlocking exemption,998 at bottom it is not opposed to a 
narrow “pro-consumer” exemption.999 
TracFone’s chief concern is that any exemption exclude illegitimate phone 
trafficking that could damage its prepaid wireless service. In a prepaid service, customers 
do not pay usage charges for service for the preceding month, as in a typical postpaid 
service, but instead pay for a set amount of usage in advance. TracFone explains that it 
and other prepaid wireless carriers “subsidize and discount the retail price of their phones 
to make them affordable to consumers, often reducing their prices significantly below the 
wholesale cost.”
1000 For instance, TracFone offers “smartphones with prices as low as 
$9.99.”1001 According to TracFone, prepaid carriers “recoup their subsidy investments 
over time, through charges their customers pay to use the subsidized phones on their 
networks.”
1002 Unlike a traditional postpaid wireless service, prepaid wireless services 
do not typically require customers to make a fixed service commitment at the time of 
purchase.1003 
This business model makes prepaid services particularly susceptible to 
illegitimate phone trafficking.  TracFone explains that “service providers in foreign 
countries do not subsidize wireless handsets,” and phone traffickers “buy phones here and 
export them overseas for profit—stealing the subsidies that were intended to benefit 
legitimate American consumers.”
1004 TracFone notes that to mitigate this problem, it 
“protects its phones with locks that prevent traffickers from modifying its copyrighted 
software embedded in each phone in order to use the phone on foreign networks,” and 
that it has aggressively filed suits under the DMCA against phone traffickers.
1005 
998 See TracFone Opp’n at 9-17. 
999 Id. at 3 (stressing that it supports “a pro-consumer exemption to 17 U.S.C. § 1201 that permits legitimate 
consumers acting in good faith to unlock their wireless telephone handsets, so long as the exemption 
expressly excludes any provision that could be exploited by traffickers to steal subsidies and harm 
consumers”). 
1000 Id. at 2. 
1001 Id. 
1002 Id. 
1003 See id. at 2, 5. 
1004 Id. at 2. 
1005 Id. 
156
 

[PAGE 161]
     
    
  
  
    
   
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
   
   
     
 
  
   
     
  
    
  
 
    
      
      
   
               
          
            
  
                 
          
            
 
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Opposing any exemption that “could be construed to immunize illegal activities 
of phone traffickers,” TracFone has proposed an alternative exemption with particularized 
limitations to address the trafficking concern:1006 
Computer programs, in the form of firmware or software, or data used by 
firmware or software, that enable wireless devices to connect to a different 
wireless network than the network to which it was previously locked (the 
“Original Network”), when initiated by the owner of the device (the 
“Owner”), or by another person at the direction of the Owner, but only if: 
(a) all legal obligations to the Original Network service provider 
associated with the provision of any subsidy, discount, installment plan, 
lease, rebate or other incentive program (collectively, “Subsidy”) have 
been satisfied by or waived for the Owner; (b) the device was not obtained 
by theft or fraud; and (c) such unlocking is not for any unlawful purpose, 
including, but not limited to, obtaining unauthorized access to a wireless 
network or profiting from the Subsidy.
1007 
In a joint reply filed with TracFone, proponent CCA agreed to support this narrower 
proposal.
1008 Notwithstanding the specific formulation above, however, TracFone 
indicates that its concerns could instead be addressed by “official comments in the record 
making clear that the intent of the exemption is not to benefit traffickers.”
1009 
Several other Class 11 proponents oppose the specific language of TracFone’s 
alternative proposal.1010 But notably, each of these proponents concurs that any 
exemption should exclude the sort of trafficking of which TracFone complains.  
Consumers Union emphasizes that “‘subsidy thieves’ or phone traffickers that concern 
TracFone are not included in the exemption.”
1011 Similarly, ISRI states that it “condemns 
illegal trafficking of new phones.”1012 Both Consumers Union and ISRI, however, 
contend that their proposals, as well as the current exemption, already exclude such 
illegal trafficking without the added conditions proposed by TracFone.  ISRI notes that 
under the existing exemption, TracFone has “made extensive use of lawsuits against 
illegal phone traffickers raising a variety of legal claims, including the DMCA, to protect 
1006 Id. at 3-4. 
1007 CCA/TracFone Reply at 2. 
1008 Id. at 1-2. 
1009 TracFone Opp’n at 7. 
1010 See Consumers Union Class 11 Reply at 2-3; ISRI Class 11 Reply at 1-2. 
1011 Consumers Union Class 11 Reply at 5 (“Consumers Union’s proposed exemption strikes the right 
balance in both protecting the rights of consumers and protecting parties like TracFone from illegal phone 
trafficking.”). 
1012 ISRI Class 11 Reply at 2; see also id. at 5 (quoting TracFone Opp’n at 3(“The exemption proposed by 
ISRI, while applying to both direct consumers and legitimate bulk recyclers, is carefully crafted to 
‘expressly exclude any provision that could be exploited by traffickers’ and it effectively achieves that 
exclusion.”)). 
157
 

[PAGE 162]
     
    
   
  
     
    
 
 
  
  
 
    
   
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
   
    
  
   
   
     
              
               
              
            
     
      
     
     
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
its subsidies.”1013 Thus, Consumers Union and ISRI claim that the modifications to the 
proposed exemption offered by TracFone are unnecessary to address TracFone’s 
concerns, and would merely create confusion about the scope of the exemption.1014 
b. Proposed Class 12: All- Purpose Tablets 
There is no opposition to the proposed unlocking exemption for all-purpose tablet 
computers. 
c. Proposed Class 13:  Mobile Connectivity Devices 
There is no opposition to the proposed unlocking exemption to the extent it covers 
the sort of portable mobile connectivity devices addressed in the NPRM—hotspots and 
removable wireless broadband modems. The Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers 
(“Auto Alliance”) and General Motors LLC (“GM”), however, filed opposition 
comments in Class 13 solely to stress that any exemption should exclude mobile 
connectivity devices embedded in motor vehicles.
1015 As GM explains, many 
automobiles come equipped with in-vehicle telematics and communications systems, 
including Wi-Fi hotspots, that rely on wireless telecommunications networks.1016 In the 
case of GM’s OnStar service, the wireless carrier is AT&T, and the OnStar system is 
locked to AT&T’s network.1017 
The record at the hearing demonstrated that, circumvention aside, there are 
currently no apparent means for users to unlock in-vehicle telematics and 
communications systems to connect to alternative networks, and no proponent expressed 
a desire to do so. As a GM representative explained at the public hearing, because the 
OnStar service “is designed to be used in the event that the vehicle crashes or there is an 
emergency,” the company “build[s] the OnStar module into the vehicle . . . in a way to 
enhance the survivability of the module if there is a dramatic crash event.”
1018 To achieve 
this result, the module “is buried as deep into the car as it can possibly be put,” and the 
SIM card that allows the module to connect to AT&T’s wireless network is “basically 
hard wired into the module.”
1019 Indeed, a supporter of the proposed unlocking 
exemptions confirmed that understanding during the public hearing, testifying that it is 
not possible to switch networks without destroying your car, or perhaps “in the process[] 
1013 Id. at 6. 
1014 Consumers Union Class 11 Reply at 2; ISRI Class 11 Reply at 8-9. 
1015 Auto Alliance Class 13 Opp’n at 1; GM Class 13 Opp’n at 3. 
1016 GM Class 13 Opp’n at 4; Tr. at 21:13-25 (May 21, 2015) (Charlesworth, USCO; Damle, USCO; 
Lightsey, GM). Exemptions to allow access to vehicle telematics and communications systems are 
discussed and considered in Proposed Classes 21 and 22. 
1017 Tr. at 22:10-11 (May 21, 2015) (Lightsey, GM). 
1018 Id. at 22:13-21 (Lightsey, GM). 
1019 Id. at 23:21-23, 24:02-03 (Lightsey, GM). 
158
 

[PAGE 163]
     
    
   
  
  
  
    
 
 
  
   
    
  
   
 
  
  
    
  
    
  
    
 
 
  
    
   
 
   
 
       
       
          
     
      
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
of destroying your car.”1020 GM’s representative further testified that even if it were 
physically possible to select a different wireless carrier, the OnStar system would not 
operate because “[a]ll of the protocols and the data that is pulled out of the vehicle [are] 
engineered to work through a specific carrier.”
1021 
d. Proposed Class 14: Wearable Computing Devices 
There is no opposition to the proposed unlocking exemption for wearable 
computing devices. 
e. Proposed Class 15:  Consumer Machines 
Auto Alliance opposes the exemption for “consumer machines,” as it “could 
inadvertently sweep cars and trucks into the exemption.”1022 Auto Alliance notes that the 
term “consumer machine” is “ill-defined” and turns on “the applicability of a completely 
undefined term, ‘smart device.’”1023 Otherwise, there is no specific opposition to this 
class. 
3. Discussion 
a. Noninfringing Uses 
i. Proposed Classes 11 to 14 
The Register concludes that proponents have provided sufficient support for the 
claim that unlocking a wireless device is likely to be a noninfringing use in the case of 
Classes 11 through 14—that is, cellphones, all-purpose tablet computers, portable mobile 
connectivity devices, and wearable computing devices. As discussed below, the record 
was too sparse to reach a similar conclusion with respect to “consumer machines” (Class 
15). 
At the outset, the Register notes that Congress, in the legislative history of the 
Unlocking Act, stated that “[u]nlike many other situations where an exemption from the 
circumvention prohibition may be sought or granted, unlocking a cell phone to connect to 
a wireless network typically does not facilitate copyright infringement.”
1024 Although 
this statement from the legislative history is not in and of itself dispositive of the issue, 
Congress’s opinion is relevant to the analysis.  
The Register concludes that there are three grounds on which unlocking is likely 
to be considered a noninfringing activity.  
1020 Id. at 39:06-13 (Charlesworth, USCO; Wiens, iFixit). 
1021 Id. at 24:15-24 (Charlesworth, USCO; Lightsey, GM). 
1022 Auto Alliance Class 15 Opp’n at 1. 
1023 Id. 
1024 S. REP. NO. 113-212, at 5. 
159
 

[PAGE 164]
     
    
    
  
 
  
  
   
    
   
      
    
  
 
     
   
 
  
    
   
   
  
  
   
    
          
                
           
               
              
 
       
             
           
     
             
              
            
          
           
   
                
            
           
     
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
First, as proponents note, there are likely to be a significant number of cases 
where unlocking a device does not require the user to reproduce the device software or 
create a derivative work.  Proponents provide evidence that cellphones and other wireless 
devices can be unlocked and transferred to an alternative network simply by changing 
variables in the cellphone’s software in a manner that is intended by the software’s 
creator.
1025 Thus, as the Register concluded in 2010 and again in 2012, in such cases, 
“the elimination and insertion of codes or digits . . . cannot be considered an infringement 
of the computer program controlling the device,” because such “minor alterations of data 
. . . do not implicate any of the exclusive rights of copyright owners.”1026 Indeed, it may 
be that such a system does not function as a TPM at all, thus obviating the need for an 
exemption.1027 
Second, as the Register has concluded in past rulemakings, even where unlocking 
a cellphone requires reproduction or creation of a derivative work, those acts may be 
noninfringing under section 117.1028 The applicability of section 117 requires 
consideration of two questions:  whether the owner of a wireless device is also an 
“owner” of the embedded operating system software, and whether creating a new copy or 
adaptation of that software is an “essential step” in utilization of the software with the 
wireless device. 
In past rulemaking proceedings, the Register has reviewed case law governing the 
determination of ownership of a software copy for purposes of section 117 when formal 
title is lacking and/or a license imposes restrictions on the use of the computer program, 
and has concluded that application of the law can be unclear in some contexts.
1029 The 
Register observed that while Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc.1030 and Krause v. Titleserv, Inc.1031 
1025 For instance, cellphone manufacturers design their software to work with a “preferred roaming list” that 
is provided by the wireless carrier, and lists the frequencies and systems that the device can connect to. See 
Jerry Hildenbrand, What is a PRL? [Android A to Z], ANDROID CENTRAL (Jan. 30, 2014), http://www. 
androidcentral.com/what-prl-android-z. CCA notes that connecting a device to an alternative network 
requires replacing that preferred roaming list with one for the new wireless carrier. CCA Class 11 Supp. at 
3.
 
1026 2010 Recommendation at 134; 2012 Recommendation at 90.
 
1027 See Lexmark Int’l v. Static Control Components, Inc., 387 F.3d 522, 546-47 (6th Cir. 2004) (concluding 
that section 1201(a)(1) did not apply “where the access-control measure left the literal code or text of the 
computer program or data freely readable”). 
1028 Section 1201(f), which permits reverse engineering of computer programs for purposes of enabling 
interoperability with other programs, was not raised as a potential avenue to permit circumvention. In any 
event, that provision would not cover the full range of activities in question; among other things, 
circumvention here is not done to enable interoperability of “an independently created computer program 
with other programs,” 17 U.S.C. § 1201(f)(1), but to allow a device to connect to an alternate wireless 
network. 
1029 See 2010 Recommendation at 90 (noting that “the law relating to who is the owner of a copy of a 
computer program under [s]ection 117 is in flux”); see also 2012 Recommendation at 92 (“The Register 
concludes that the state of the law remains unclear.”); 2010 Recommendation at 129, 132. 
1030 621 F.3d 1102. 
160
 

[PAGE 165]
     
    
 
    
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
     
  
  
 
      
   
   
    
  
   
 
  
    
  
  
     
     
   
    
  
  
   
   
    
  
   
       
                
             
                 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 
 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
may provide some useful guidance in this area, they are “controlling precedent in only 
two circuits and are inconsistent in their approach.”1032 
In Krause, the Second Circuit held that formal title was not necessary to 
demonstrate ownership under section 117, and that courts should instead look to a range 
of factors to determine “whether the party exercises sufficient incidents of ownership 
over a copy of the program to be sensibly considered the owner of the copy.”
1033 These 
factors include:  (1) whether substantial consideration was paid for the copy; (2) whether 
the copy was created for the sole benefit of the purchaser; (3) whether the copy was 
customized to serve the purchaser’s use; (4) whether the copy was stored on property 
owned by the purchaser; (5) whether the creator reserved the right to repossess the copy; 
(6) whether the creator agreed that the purchaser had the right to possess and use the 
programs forever regardless of whether the relationship between the parties terminated; 
and (7) whether the purchaser was free to discard or destroy the copy anytime it 
wished.
1034 By contrast, in Vernor, the Ninth Circuit held that “a software user is a 
licensee rather than an owner of a copy where the copyright owner (1) specifies that the 
user is granted a license; (2) significantly restricts the user’s ability to transfer the 
software; and (3) imposes notable use restrictions.”1035 These tests remain the two 
dominant approaches to the question of whether software is owned or licensed. 
The record contains some evidence to support the conclusion that the owner of a 
wireless device—whether a consumer or a bulk recycler—should be considered the 
owner of the software on that device for purposes of section 117.  CCA notes that a 
number of factors set forth in Krause favor the conclusion that wireless device owners 
own the software that runs the device:  the copy of the software is stored on property 
owned by the user, namely the cellphone or other wireless device; device owners have the 
right to use the programs indefinitely on those devices; and device owners have the right 
to discard or destroy the device (along with the copy of the software) at any time.1036 
CCA reaches a similar conclusion under the Vernor analysis, noting that device 
manufacturers and wireless carriers do not impose “notable use restrictions.”1037 
Thus, as the Register concluded with respect to cellphones in 2012, the record 
compels a finding that it is likely that “some subset of wireless customers . . . is entitled 
1031 402 F.3d 119.
 
1032 2012 Recommendation at 92.
 
1033 Krause, 402 F.3d at 124.
 
1034 Id. 
1035 Vernor, 621 F.3d at 1111. 
1036 CCA Class 11 Supp. at 6. 
1037 Id. at 6-7. Indeed, for cellphones and tablets encompassed by Classes 11 and 12, CCA presents 
evidence that two major mobile operating systems (Apple iOS 8.1 and Windows Phone 7) expressly permit 
the transfer of the software to a third party in connection with the sale of a device. Id. at 7. 
161
 

[PAGE 166]
     
    
      
 
 
   
  
   
   
   
  
 
      
  
    
   
    
    
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
   
    
     
               
     
             
           
          
               
 
         
       
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
to exercise the Section 117 privilege.”1038 In this regard, it is worth noting that while 
previous cellphone exemptions— including the existing provision1039—have identified the 
owner of the copy of the computer program on a cellphone as the person entitled to 
engage in unlocking, as discussed above, the Unlocking Act demonstrates Congress’s 
intent that device owners be entitled to engage in circumvention independent of the 
question of legal ownership of device software.
1040 
The record further establishes that reproduction or adaptation of the work is likely 
to constitute an “essential step” in the operation of the cellphone or other wireless device. 
A wireless device such as a cellphone or mobile hotspot can fulfill its function only when 
connected to a wireless service.  It thus follows that if modifications to device software 
are necessary to make that device operate with a wireless carrier of the user’s choice, 
those modifications can be considered an essential step in the use of the device.
1041 
Third, the Register concludes, as a matter of first impression, that unlocking as a 
general matter is also likely to be a fair use. The fair use analysis here is in many 
respects analogous to the reasoning that has led the Register to conclude in past 
rulemakings that “jailbreaking” of smartphones is likely to be fair use.
1042 
The first fair use factor examines the purpose and character of the use. As 
proponents note, the purpose of the use here is to make functional adjustments to the 
device software to enable the operation of a device on the wireless network of the user’s 
choice.  Courts have held that enabling interoperability with other software is favored 
under the first factor,1043 and the logic of those cases can reasonably be extended to uses 
that enable interoperability of a device with a specific wireless network.  Although such a 
use may not be “transformative” in that the software is used for the same essential 
purpose—to operate the device—a lack of transformativeness does not necessarily 
preclude a finding of fair use.  The Register has previously concluded in the course of 
recommending an exemption for “jailbreaking” of smartphones that even if use of the 
copyrighted device software is considered nontransformative, the first factor may 
nonetheless favor fair use where the purpose and character of the use is “noncommercial 
1038 2012 Recommendation at 93. 
1039 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(c). 
1040 See Unlocking Act § 2(c) (providing that circumvention “may be initiated by the owner of any such 
handset or other device” (emphasis added)). 
1041 See 2012 Recommendation at 93 (“Modifications to the firmware or software on the phone may be 
necessary to make the device functional with another service and better serve the legitimate needs of the 
consumer. From a copyright perspective, these individual changes benefit the purchaser despite the fact 
that some wireless carriers would like to have complete control over the device by restricting its use to their 
service.”). 
1042 See, e.g., id. at 72-74 (citing 2010 Recommendation at 92-93). 
1043 See Connectix, 203 F.3d at 607-608; Sega, 977 F.2d at 1522-23. 
162
 

[PAGE 167]
     
    
  
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
     
    
 
 
 
   
  
   
   
   
 
  
 
  
  
 
   
  
 
 
   
   
       
          
       
         
         
           
          
                      
 
       
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
and personal” and it enhances an owner’s ability to make use of a device “for the purpose 
for which [it was] intended.”1044 
That said, while unlocking may represent a personal, noncommercial activity for 
an individual consumer, the proposed exemption would also encompass commercial uses 
as well—namely, unlocking to facilitate resale of used devices.  The Supreme Court has 
held, however, that commerciality alone does not defeat a finding of fair use.1045 
Moreover, as noted, interoperability is favored under the law.  Additionally, Congress 
seems to have recognized that bulk resale activities can be legitimate in declining to 
exclude them from the Unlocking Act.  Overall, while the first factor is somewhat mixed, 
the Register finds on this record that it tends to support a finding of fair use. 
The second fair use factor—the nature of the copyrighted work—weighs strongly 
in favor of such a finding.  The works at issue, software used to connect wireless devices 
to wireless networks, are highly functional.  They are thus outside the “core of intended 
copyright protection.”
1046 
With respect to the third fair use factor, which considers the amount of the work 
used, proponents assert that unlocking requires changes only to limited parts of the 
device’s operating system, and that the remainder remains intact.
1047 But to the extent the 
changes being made to the device’s operating system require significant copying of 
software or result in a derivative work, a substantial portion of the original is being used. 
This arguably renders the third factor unfavorable to a fair use finding.  But in this 
context—where the use is necessary to engage an otherwise benign activity —the factor is 
entitled to only modest weight.  This approach is consistent with the Register’s reasoning 
in granting jailbreaking exemptions for smartphones in prior proceedings.
1048 
Finally, under the fourth fair use factor, concerning the effect on the market for or 
value of the copyrighted work—often considered to be the most important 
consideration—the record establishes that the market for mobile device software is not 
likely to be harmed by the unlocking of used cellphones.  In the time the existing and 
prior cellphone exemptions have been in effect, the market for cellphones (including the 
embedded computer programs) has expanded rapidly.
1049 Except in the case of prepaid 
cellphones, no opponent has suggested that the market for software used to operate 
1044 2012 Recommendation at 74 (referring to 2010 Recommendation at 92-93).
 
1045 See, e.g., Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 586 (1994).
 
1046 Id. at 584-85; see also Sega, 977 F.2d at 1524.
 
1047 See, e.g., ISRI Class 11 Supp. at 8.
 
1048 2012 Recommendation at 74 (footnote omitted) (“Those engaged in jailbreaking use only that which is
 
necessary to engage in the activity, which is often de minimis, rendering the third factor potentially
 
unfavorable, but nevertheless of minimal consequence.”); see also Sega, 977 F.3d at 1526-27 (“[W]here the 
ultimate (as opposed to direct) use is as limited as it was here, the [third fair use] factor is of very little
 
weight.”).
 
1049 See ISRI Class 11 Supp. at 23. 
163
 

[PAGE 168]
     
    
   
 
   
   
   
  
 
 
     
 
  
    
  
  
  
 
  
   
  
 
   
  
  
 
 
  
    
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
cellphones or other wireless devices would be harmed by allowing those devices to be 
unlocked.  Indeed, there is evidence that unlocked cellphones (and the software they 
contain) are more valuable in the market than those that are locked—at least to the device 
owners.1050 But the same may not be true with respect to the unlocking of new, carriersubsidized prepaid cellphones, where it appears that such unlocking may facilitate illicit 
and commercially harmful activities.  For this reason, as discussed below, the Register 
recommends that any unlocking exemption for cellphones be tailored to exclude 
unlocking in that context. 
With respect to Classes 12 through 14—comprising all-purpose tablet computers, 
portable mobile connectivity devices, and wearable computing devices—there is no 
evidence in the record to suggest that unlocking of used devices will cause market harm. 
In sum, as a general matter, the Register concludes that the unlocking of used 
cellphones and other wireless devices as described in Classes 11 through 14 to render 
them interoperable with alternative networks is likely to be a fair and noninfringing use, 
except in the case of certain illicit unlocking practices, which accordingly should be 
excluded from the scope of the exemption. 
ii. Proposed Class 15:  Consumer Machines 
Unlike for the above classes, the record does not establish that the proposed 
exemption for all “consumer machines” and “smart devices” would facilitate any 
noninfringing uses.  CCA’s failure to provide any information about the kinds of devices 
covered by the proposed exemption makes it impossible to evaluate, among other things, 
whether unlocking would require creation of copies or derivative works, whether the 
owners of such devices are likely to own the software that operates those devices, and 
whether permitting unlocking is likely to adversely impact the market for copyrighted 
works for purposes of the fair use analysis.  Given those deficiencies in the record, the 
Register cannot conclude that granting an exemption for Proposed Class 15 is likely to 
facilitate noninfringing uses.  
b. Adverse Effects 
i. Proposed Class 11: Wi reless Telephone Handsets 
The Register concludes that there is substantial evidence on this record that 
consumers are likely to be adversely impacted by an inability to unlock their cellphones.  
Most significantly, consumers who wish to switch to a new wireless carrier must 
purchase a new phone that will work on that carrier’s network, even if they would prefer 
to keep their existing phone (with its existing embedded software).  This places a burden 
on consumers’ use of their cellphones (and noninfringing uses of the software on those 
phones).  Those burdens are particularly notable today given that, as Congress observed 
in enacting the Unlocking Act, there has been “a shift away from the earlier practice of 
1050 Id. at 17. 
164
 

[PAGE 169]
     
    
  
  
   
    
 
  
   
   
 
  
   
   
 
      
   
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
    
  
 
 
      
  
         
             
          
  
       
              
        
        
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
consumers essentially disposing of their old cellphones after a few years.”1051 Instead, 
“consumers now use their cell phones for longer periods of time; reuse their devices upon 
upgrading by giving their older devices to family members; or sell their used devices in a 
growing marketplace for used phones and then us[e] the proceeds from the sale to offset 
the cost of replacement devices.”
1052 These legitimate uses are hindered by the ban on 
circumvention. 
The Register likewise concludes that the prohibition on circumvention would 
likely have an adverse impact on the activities of bulk recyclers, charities, and other 
entities that purchase used cellphones and unlock them for redistribution or resale.  This 
legitimate activity facilitates a broader market for used cellphones (and the copyrighted 
software they contain).
1053 
The Register also concludes that the potential available alternatives to 
circumvention are insufficient to mitigate these adverse effects.  First, proponents have 
put forward unrebutted evidence that consumers may have trouble taking advantage of 
voluntary carrier unlocking policies because of the conditions imposed by certain 
wireless carriers.
1054 And it is undisputed that these voluntary carrier policies may not 
accommodate the needs of legitimate bulk recyclers.1055 Second, the record reflects that 
the availability of new, unlocked cellphones in the marketplace does not fully mitigate the 
adverse effects flowing from the inability to unlock used, locked cellphones.
1056 And 
third, as CCA explains, consumers with very specific device requirements—such as 
consumers with disabilities—may not find the precise device they desire as an unlocked 
option.1057 
Although Consumers Union and eBay/Gazelle ask that the exemption be extended 
to new phones and tablets still under contract, they have failed to put forward convincing 
evidence of any cognizable adverse effects stemming from consumers’ inability to unlock 
such cellphones.  As explained above, testimony at the public hearing indicated that it 
was not reasonable to assume that this would be a realistic possibility when purchasing a 
subsidized device, as the seller would presumably require such a device to be activated 
by the purchaser. 
1051 H.R. REP. NO. 113-356, at 3. 
1052 Id. 
1053 See 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,831-32.
 
1054 See Consumers Union Class 11 Supp. at 18-19; see also S. REP. NO. 113-212, at 2 (2014) (observing
 
that there were “circumstances in which additional avenues for unlocking may be preferable over
 
attempting to unlock through the carrier”).
 
1055 ISRI Class 11 Supp. at 18.
 
1056 Id. at 20. By contrast, in the 2012 proceeding, proponents failed to make any meaningful showing in 
this regard. 2012 Recommendation at 95 -96.
 
1057 CCA Class 11 Supp. at 9.
 
165
 

[PAGE 170]
     
    
    
 
   
     
    
  
 
    
   
    
  
  
   
      
  
  
  
   
    
  
   
 
  
 
    
   
   
  
               
                        
           
                  
      
     
            
               
               
                
            
       
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
ii. Proposed Class 12: All- Purpose Tablets 
As noted, the key issue concerning the unlocking of all-purpose tablets is the 
extent to which tablet devices are locked to a particular wireless carrier. Although it 
appears that most tablets with mobile data connections are not locked at the time of 
purchase, the evidence shows that at least some tablets are sold with carrier locks.1058 
The evidence of the adverse effects that flow from that fact is essentially the same as that 
addressed above for cellphones:  the ban on circumvention burdens consumers’ ability to 
switch wireless carriers, and impedes legitimate bulk recycling activities. Moreover, the 
record supports the conclusion that the alternatives to circumvention are inadequate for 
the same reasons as discussed under Class 11. 
iii. Proposed Class 13:  Mobile Connectivity Devices 
With respect to mobile connectivity devices such as mobile hotspots and 
removable wireless broadband modems, as mentioned above, it is apparent from the 
record that at least some such devices are sold locked to a wireless network.
1059 No 
commenter disputed proponents’ claims that the inability to unlock these devices 
adversely affects users’ ability to connect these devices to an alternative wireless carrier’s 
network, or the assertion that carriers’ voluntary unlocking policies do not necessarily 
encompass mobile connectivity devices.
1060 
iv. Proposed Class 14: Wearable Computing Devices 
As noted, the central issue in relation to wearable computing devices is the extent 
to which such devices include mobile data (e.g., 3G/4G) connections, rather than Wi-Fi 
or Bluetooth connections, and if so, whether they are locked to a particular wireless 
carrier.  Here the evidence was limited:  the record put forth by proponents revealed a 
single smartwatch—the Samsung Gear S—that has a dedicated 3G connection and is sold 
locked to a wireless carrier.1061 Proponents assert that more wearable computing devices 
with mobile data connections are soon likely to be introduced in the marketplace, and that 
some of these will be locked by wireless carriers.  Notwithstanding the very limited 
selection of consumer wearable devices with mobile data connections currently in the 
1058 See Consumers Union Class 12 Supp. at Exhibit G (unlocking policy for Sprint) (“Many Sprint phones 
or tablets . . . have been programmed with a master subsidy lock . . . that locks the device . . . .); id. at 
Exhibit H (unlocking policy for AT&T covering both wireless phones and tablets). 
1059 CCA Class 13 Supp. at 7 (citing AT&T’s locking policy, which explicitly states that it places software 
locks on mobile hotspots it sells). 
1060 Id. 
1061 CCA Class 14 Supp. at 4; Tr. at 16:24-17:02 (May 21, 2015); see also Samsung Gear S-Black (offering 
the Samsung Gear S for $99.99 with a two year contract, and $299.99 without a contract). The Register 
observes that a fitness device was introduced last year that includes a dedicated connection to AT&T’s 
network, although it is not clear whether the device is locked to that network, and proponents have not 
relied on it. See Ironman One GPS+, TIMEX, http://www.timex.com/one-gps (last visited Oct. 7, 2015) 
(noting that three years of AT&T mobile data service are included). 
166
 

[PAGE 171]
     
    
  
   
 
  
 
    
     
 
  
    
   
  
  
  
   
   
    
  
   
 
  
 
    
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
      
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
marketplace, the Register concludes that there is sufficient evidence to support a 
conclusion that adverse effects are likely to increase in the next three years.  In this 
context, it is appropriate to consider the rapid pace of technological development, 
especially in the mobile computing context.  CCA argues, and no opponent disputes, that 
batteries and radio transmitters are becoming smaller and smaller, thus making it likely 
that manufacturers will add dedicated connections to a broader range of wearable 
devices. And given that wireless carriers have locked other new wireless devices that 
have been recently introduced, it is reasonable to assume that the same will be true for at 
least some of the devices introduced in the future. 
To the extent such devices are locked to a wireless carrier, the adverse effects 
flowing from the inability to unlock the devices are the same as for the other classes of 
devices addressed above. And, as CCA’s unrebutted evidence indicates, the carriers’ 
voluntary unlocking policies do not necessarily include wearable devices.
1062 
v. Proposed Class 15:  Consumer Machines 
As discussed, CCA, the main proponent of the proposed exemption for all 
“consumer machines,” failed to provide any specific information about the kinds of 
devices that its proposal would encompass.  As a result, it is impossible on this record to 
assess the adverse effects of the ban on circumvention with respect to the devices that 
might theoretically fall within this proposed class. 
c. Statutory Factors 
i. Proposed Classes 11 to 14 
With respect to the devices covered by Classes 11 to 14 (cellphones, all-purpose 
tablet computers, mobile connectivity devices, and wearable computing devices), the 
statutory factors favor an exemption.  
The first factor, the availability for use of copyrighted works, favors an 
exemption.  Proponents have provided evidence that unlocking a device can extend its 
useful life (and, thus, the useful life of the software it contains), because it can be ported 
to a new wireless carrier.  Moreover, devices (and their resident software) can be recycled 
and made available for use by others. At the same time, there is no evidence in the record 
to suggest that granting an exemption would discourage the development and 
dissemination of new wireless device software; to the contrary, experience with the 
cellphone unlocking exemption suggests that an unlocking exemption has no such 
adverse effect. 
The second factor, the availability for use of works for nonprofit archival, 
preservation, and educational purposes, and the third factor, the effect on criticism, 
comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship and research, are neutral. Although the 
1062 CCA Class 14 Supp. at 8. 
167
 

[PAGE 172]
     
    
    
 
 
  
  
  
 
     
 
    
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
   
    
    
  
  
    
   
     
 
 
  
  
   
            
         
     
   
  
  
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Register agrees with proponents that wireless devices are useful tools for education and 
news consumption, such general observations have little direct connection to the 
proposed exemption, which is focused on allowing the device to be used on the network 
of a different wireless carrier. 
With respect to the fourth factor, except in the case of prepaid, subsidized 
cellphones—a matter that can be addressed by an appropriately crafted exemption—the 
record here supports a finding that the market for wireless device software is unlikely to 
be affected by enabling consumers to alter that software to connect the device to an 
alternative network.
1063 Indeed, the record indicates that, during the time that the 
exemption for cellphone unlocking has been in place, the market for cellphones 
(including their embedded software) has continued to expand rapidly.
1064 Further, there is 
nothing in the record to suggest that a different result would obtain for any of the other 
classes of device. 
With respect to the fifth factor, allowing consideration of such factors as the 
Librarian considers appropriate, the Register agrees with proponents that permitting an 
exemption is likely to have beneficial effects on consumer choice and competition. 
ii. Proposed Class 15:  Consumer Machines 
As discussed, CCA, the main proponent of the proposed exemption for all 
“consumer machines,” failed to provide any specific information about the kinds of 
devices that its proposal would encompass. Therefore, it is impossible to analyze the 
statutory factors with respect to this proposed class. 
4. NTIA Comments 
According to NTIA, “[p]roponents have offered detailed evidence as to the need 
for an unlocking exemption, as well as its noninfringing nature.”
1065 NTIA urges that the 
exemption should simply extend to all “used wireless devices,” rather than enumerating 
the types of devices to which the exemption applies.
1066 NTIA asserts that “[t]he record 
and evidence presented during the hearings demonstrate that, at a software level, there is 
often little technical difference between these types of devices, and the works at issue are 
frequently similar or even identical.”
1067 NTIA expresses concern that “enumerating a 
list of covered devices . . . will inevitably prove ambiguous or obsolete within the next 
three years.”1068 
1063 See 2012 Recommendation at 98 (reaching same conclusion with respect to cellphones).
 
1064 See, e.g., CCA Class 11 Supp. at 12.
 
1065 NTIA Letter at 39.
 
1066 Id. at 42.
 
1067 Id. 
1068 Id. 
168
 

[PAGE 173]
     
    
 
   
    
 
    
   
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
    
   
  
  
  
  
   
 
   
   
   
   
 
  
   
 
  
  
   
   
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
NTIA acknowledges the record shows a “lack of desire” on the part of consumers 
to unlock wireless hotspots embedded in motorized vehicles, and notes that such 
unlocking “is not achievable without destroying the vehicle.”1069 Accordingly, NTIA 
states that it “would not oppose the exclusion of wireless [devices] embedded in vehicles 
from the exemption at this time.”1070 
The Register concludes based on the record that the exemption should set forth, at 
least in general terms, the types of devices to which it applies. This approach is 
consistent with Congress’s intent that exemptions be focused and reflect marketplace 
developments.  Such an approach is also more consistent with the record in this 
proceeding.  Notably, proponents have excluded one type of wireless device—vehicle­
based hotspots—from their request, and NTIA does not oppose this exclusion.  Moreover, 
there was no evidence offered to explain the potentially expansive class of “consumer 
machines” that would be covered by the exemption.  In any event, notwithstanding the 
specification of categories, as discussed below, the Register has recommended granting 
exemptions for a broad range of devices. 
5. Conclusion and Recommendation 
Proponents of Classes 11 to 14 have demonstrated that in the absence of an 
exemption to allow circumvention, owners of cellphones, all-purpose computing tablets, 
mobile connectivity devices, and wearable computing devices will be adversely affected 
in their ability to unlock those devices to connect to a different wireless carrier. This 
includes entities that obtain used cellphones and unlock them in bulk for redistribution or 
resale.  In addition, three of the five statutory factors tend to favor the proponents, while 
the other two are neutral.  The Register therefore recommends that exemptions for these 
classes be granted, although some points of clarification are in order. 
First, unlike past rulemakings where the finding of noninfringing use rested solely 
on section 117, the Register here also concludes that the exemption is likely to facilitate 
fair use of the computer programs on the covered devices.  Because, unlike the section 
117 privilege, fair use is not limited to the owner of the computer program, there is no 
need for the Register to limit the exemption to such persons.  Moreover, because the 
Unlocking Act
1071 and the resulting rule1072 already specify the persons who are entitled 
to initiate circumvention, there is no need for the exemption to do the same. 
Second, there was universal agreement that any exemption for cellphones should 
be fashioned so as to exclude trafficking activities that seek illegitimately to profit from 
subsidies offered by prepaid phone providers.  As in previous proceedings, the Register 
concludes that the requirement that the wireless devices be “used” should be adequate to 
1069 Id. 
1070 Id. 
1071 Unlocking Act § 2(c). 
1072 See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(c). 
169
 

[PAGE 174]
     
    
  
    
  
  
  
   
   
  
  
    
 
    
    
     
    
   
 
  
   
   
  
  
 
   
   
  
    
 
 
  
   
 
 
  
    
   
        
       
   
 
 
                                                 
	 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
exclude such trafficking from the reach of the exemption.1073 The Register, however, 
adopts ISRI’s proposal to clarify that a device is “used” if it “has been lawfully acquired 
and activated on the wireless telecommunications network of a carrier.”1074 
The Register has considered TracFone’s request for an exemption that adds 
additional conditions (such as requiring that all legal obligations to the original wireless 
carrier be satisfied before the device is unlocked). The Register has concluded, however, 
that adopting these conditions would render the exemption unwieldy in practice.  For 
instance, ISRI notes that it would be difficult for downstream purchasers of locked 
cellphones to assess whether legal obligations to the original wireless carrier were 
satisfied.
1075 In any event, TracFone suggested that its concerns could be alleviated 
through “official comments in the record making clear that the intent of the exemption is 
not to benefit traffickers,” a caveat that is emphasized above.1076 
Third, the exemption for mobile connectivity devices should be clarified to 
confirm that it is limited to devices such as those specified in the NPRM, e.g., hotspots 
and removable wireless broadband modems.  The Register understands that proponents 
do not seek to circumvent wireless connectivity devices that are embedded in “mobile” 
motor vehicles, such as in-vehicle telematics and communications systems, for unlocking 
purposes, and that in any event it does not appear to be feasible to do so.  Based on this, 
the Register recommends devices embedded in motor vehicles be excluded from the 
exemption by including the condition that the devices be “portable.” 
In contrast to Classes 11 through 14, as the above discussion indicates, proponents 
of Class 15, encompassing a broad and undefined range of “consumer machines” or 
“smart devices,” have failed to make a case for an exemption.  Proponents declined to 
provide any specific information about the kinds of devices the proposal encompasses, 
what noninfringing uses would be facilitated by circumvention of TPMs on those 
devices, or any adverse effects understood to flow from the prohibition on circumvention.  
The Register therefore recommends that the proposed exemption in Class 15 be denied. 
Accordingly, the Register recommends that the Librarian designate the following 
classes: 
(i)	 Computer programs that enable the following types of wireless 
devices to connect to a wireless telecommunications network, 
when circumvention is undertaken solely in order to connect to a 
wireless telecommunications network and such connection is 
authorized by the operator of such network, and the device is a 
used device: 
1073 2010 Recommendation at 169. 
1074 See, e.g., ISRI Class 11 Supp. at 14. 
1075 ISRI Class 11 Reply at 8-9. 
1076 TracFone Opp’n at 7. 
170
 

[PAGE 175]
     
    
   
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
	
	
	
	
	 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
(A) 	 Wireless telephone handsets (i.e., cellphones); 
(B) 	 All-purpose tablet computers; 
(C) 	 Portable mobile connectivity devices, such as mobile 
hotspots, removable wireless broadband modems, and 
similar devices; and 
(D) 	 Wearable wireless devices designed to be worn on the body, 
such as smartwatches or fitness devices. 
(ii)	 A device is considered “used” for purposes of this exemption 
when it has previously been lawfully acquired and activated on 
the wireless telecommunications network of a wireless carrier. 
171
 

[PAGE 176]
     
    
    
 
 
      
 
 
  
    
   
    
  
 
  
     
   
  
 
     
  
    
 
 
            
              
              
           
                
                 
               
          
              
  
         
         
           
              
    
  
         
               
 
 
                                                 
 
	
	 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
E. Proposed Classes 16 and 17:	  Jailbreaking – Smartphones and All-Purpose 
Mobile Computing Devices 
Proposed Classes 16 to 20 each address an activity commonly known as 
“jailbreaking.” As the Register has previously explained, “jailbreaking” refers to the 
process of gaining access to the operating system of a computing device, such as a 
smartphone or tablet, to install and execute software that could not otherwise be installed 
or run on that device, or to remove pre-installed software that could not otherwise be 
uninstalled.
1077 Each proposal in Classes 16 through 20 covers a different type of device. 
This section addresses Proposed Classes 16 and 17, directed to smartphones and allpurpose mobile computing devices (including tablets) respectively; the remaining classes 
are each considered in their own sections below. 
1.	 Proposals 
EFF filed a petition seeking a jailbreaking exemption for all “mobile computing 
devices,” including wireless telephone handsets that are capable of running a wide range 
of applications (i.e., “smartphones”) and tablet computers (“tablets”).
1078 EFF explains 
that “[m]obile device users jailbreak for a variety of reasons, such as to install the latest 
fixes for security vulnerabilities, to keep the software on a device current after the 
manufacturer has stopped supporting it, and to run many kinds of important and useful 
software excluded by the manufacturer.”1079 EFF’s petition specifies that the requested 
exemption is “not intended to apply to computer programs running on devices designed 
primarily for the consumption of a single type of media, such as dedicated e-book 
readers, nor to programs running on desktop or laptop computers.”1080 In addition to 
EFF’s proposal, Maneesh Pangasa filed a separate petition seeking an exemption for 
tablet computers.1081 
1077 2012 Recommendation at 66 & n.306; see also Electronic Frontier Foundation (“EFF”) Class 16 Supp.
 
at 6-7 (describing process of jailbreaking); Jay Freeman Class 16 Supp. at 4-5 (same). According to EFF,
 
the act of gaining administrative access to a device’s operating system is variously referred to as
 
“jailbreaking,” “rooting,” or “unlocking a bootloader” depending upon the mobile device platform,
 
although the terms are sometimes used interchangeably. EFF Class 16 Supp. at App. A (Statement of Dr.
 
Jeremy Gillula at 1-2). For ease of reference, all such processes will be referred to here as “jailbreaking.” 
A smartphone’s operating system can also be referred to as “firmware.” See id. at 4 n.16. Although the
 
terms “firmware” and “software” are variously used throughout the Recommendation, both are considered
 
computer programs within the meaning of the Copyright Act. See 17 U.S.C. § 101 (definition of “computer
 
program”).
 
1078 EFF’s proposed exemption encompassed “[c]omputer programs that enable mobile computing devices,
 
such as telephone handsets and tablets, to execute lawfully obtained software, where circumvention is
 
accomplished for the sole purposes of enabling interoperability of such software with computer programs
 
on the device, or removing software from the device.” EFF Jailbreaking Pet. at 1.
 
1079 Id. at 2. 
1080 Id. 
1081 Pangasa’s tablet jailbreaking petition encompassed two distinct proposals, one for all-purpose tablets 
and one for e-book readers. Pangasa Tablet and E -Book Reader Jailbreaking Pet. at 1-4. The Office 
172
 

[PAGE 177]
     
    
 
   
    
   
 
   
 
   
     
   
    
  
   
 
    
          
                  
                
                
            
    
          
            
               
                 
               
           
             
  
        
     
     
       
     
                 
         
                
           
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
The Copyright Office divided these proposals into two proposed classes to ensure 
an adequate administrative record on which to make a recommendation.1082 The first 
encompasses smartphones,1083 and was described in the NPRM as follows: 
Proposed Class 16: This proposed class would permit the jailbreaking of 
wireless telephone handsets to allow the devices to run lawfully acquired 
software that is otherwise prevented from running, or to remove unwanted 
preinstalled software from the device.
1084 
Along with EFF, comments supporting Proposed Class 16 were filed by New Media 
Rights (“NMR”),
1085 Free Software Foundation (“FSF”),1086 Catherine Gellis and the 
Digital Age Defense project (“Gellis/Digital Age Defense”),1087 and Jay Freeman, the 
proprietor of an app store for jailbroken devices.1088 In addition, over 2000 individuals 
filed comments in support of Proposed Class 16.1089 
The other class encompasses “all-purpose mobile computing devices,” including 
tablets, and was described in the NPRM as follows: 
Proposed Class 17: This proposed class would permit the jailbreaking of 
all-purpose mobile computing devices to allow the devices to run lawfully 
acquired software that is otherwise prevented from running, or to remove 
unwanted preinstalled software from the device. The category “all­
consolidated the portion of Pangasa’s petition addressing jailbreaking of general-purpose tablets with EFF’s 
proposal in Proposed Class 17. See id. at 1 (“I would like to request an exemption to the Digital 
Millennium Copyright Act for jail-breaking or rooting tablets like the Apple iPad Air & iPad Mini, 
Amazon’s Kindle Fire HD, Microsoft Surface line of tablets (particularly the RT version to install hacks 
that permit running desktop applications on RT devices).”). Pangasa’s proposal with respect to e-book 
readers is addressed in Proposed Class 18. 
1082 In 2012, based on the Register’s Recommendation, the Librarian granted a jailbreaking exemption for 
smartphones, but not for tablets, on the ground that there was an insufficient record to develop “an 
appropriate definition for the ‘tablet’ category of devices.” 2012 Final Rule, 77 Fed. Reg. at 65,264. 
1083 The Register uses the term “smartphone” in Class 16 to refer specifically to those wireless telephone 
handsets that are capable of running a wide variety of software applications. In contrast, in the unlocking 
exemption in Class 11, the Register uses the more general terms “cellphones” or “wireless telephone 
handsets,” because the unlocking exemption is potentially relevant to all types of mobile phones, not just 
smartphones. 
1084 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,866-67. 
1085 NMR Class 16 Supp. 
1086 FSF Class 16 Supp. 
1087 Gellis/Digital Age Defense Class 16 Supp. 
1088 Freeman Class 16 Supp. 
1089 See Digital Right to Repair Class 16 Supp. (2087 individuals); AK Wong Class 16 Supp.; Andrew de 
Kroon Class 16 Supp.; Anthony Marquez Supp.; Blinky X Supp.; David Darling Supp.; Edward Winget Jr. 
Supp.; Eli Cantarero Supp.; Jeffrey Philip Roddy Supp.; Kevin Chen Class 16 Reply; Kyle Moschell Class 
16 Supp.; Micah Ross Supp.; Nathan Vahrenberg Supp.; Robert Ross Class 16 Supp. 
173
 

[PAGE 178]
     
    
 
   
 
  
 
 
       
  
 
  
 
  
 
    
  
    
  
    
  
  
  
        
     
     
       
     
           
              
                 
                 
  
                
                 
            
                  
  
             
             
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
purpose mobile computing device’’ includes all-purpose non-phone 
devices (such as the Apple iPod touch) and all-purpose tablets (such as the 
Apple iPad or the Google Nexus).  The category does not include 
specialized devices such as e-book readers or handheld gaming devices, or 
laptop or desktop computers.1090 
In addition to EFF, comments supporting Proposed Class 17 were filed by NMR,1091 
FSF,1092 Gellis/Digital Age Defense,1093 Freeman,1094 and nearly 1900 individuals.1095 
Because the proposed exemptions for jailbreaking of smartphones and all-purpose 
mobile computing devices involve overlapping factual and legal issues, Proposed Classes 
16 and 17 are discussed together.  
a. Background 
According to EFF, “controls within the firmware on nearly all phones (and other 
mobile devices),” including all-purpose tablets and handheld computing devices such as 
the iPod touch, “prevent the owner of the device from installing, removing or modifying 
software to some degree.”
1096 EFF notes that either Apple’s iOS or Google’s Android 
operating system is installed on the vast majority of smartphones and all-purpose tablets 
and that both operating systems use access controls.1097 
EFF explains that iOS “contains cryptographic verification that prevents any 
application from running on a device unless it bears a digital signature from Apple.”1098 
In addition, iOS “contains cryptographic checks at various levels of the software stack 
that prevent modification or replacement of the operating system itself.”1099 On Android 
devices, the “fundamental access control . . . is the bootloader,” which “verifies the 
1090 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,867.
 
1091 NMR Class 17 Supp.
 
1092 FSF Class 17 Supp.
 
1093 Gellis/Digital Age Defense Class 17 Supp.
 
1094 Freeman Class 17 Supp.
 
1095 See Digital Right to Repair Class 17 Supp. (1884 individuals); Andrew de Kroon Class 17 Supp.;
 
Christian Clark Class 17 Reply; David Garver Supp.; Evan Abitbol Reply; George G. Deriso Supp.; Juan 
Pablo Zapata Díaz Class 17 Reply; Kyle Moschell Class 17 Supp.; Michael Horton Class 17 Reply; Nathan
 
Scandella Supp.; Robert Ross Class 17 Supp. Petitioner Pangasa did not file written comments in support
 
of his proposal.
 
1096 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 4; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 5 (same).
 
1097 EFF states that as of October 2014, iOS and Android together “control 94.2% of smartphones.” EFF
 
Class 16 Supp. at 4. And, according to EFF, worldwide in 2014, “iPads (running iOS) represented about 
27% of tablet sales, whereas tablets running Android made up about 67% of the market.” EFF Class 17
 
Supp. at 5.
 
1098 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 4; see also EFF Class 17 Supp. at 5.
 
1099 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 4; see also EFF Class 17 Supp. at 5-6.
 
174
 

[PAGE 179]
     
    
 
   
 
    
  
    
 
    
  
   
  
    
 
 
 
    
   
 
 
   
  
  
     
  
           
  
             
             
                  
       
     
      
                   
          
             
       
       
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
operating system on the device cryptographically, and will refuse to run an operating 
system not approved by the device manufacturer, or one that has been modified.”1100 The 
Android operating system, in turn, “does not allow the device owner, or any programs 
installed by the owner, to acquire full administrative access to the device,” which limits 
the functionality and data that the user or application can access.1101 The Android 
operating system also “prohibits the user from removing unwanted programs that were 
installed by the manufacturer.”1102 EFF also explains that other, less-common mobile 
operating systems, such as Windows Phone and BlackBerry OS, contain similar access 
controls.
1103 
According to EFF, “[j]ailbreaking most mobile devices requires making use of a 
security vulnerability in either the operating system or the bootloader.”1104 On iOS 
devices, jailbreaking involves “modifying the firmware so that it will run software code 
without checking to see if the code has been cryptographically signed by Apple.”1105 On 
Android devices, jailbreaking involves modifying the bootloader to permit loading of a 
modified operating system.1106 
The Register has twice before recommended, and the Librarian has twice adopted, 
an exemption permitting jailbreaking of smartphones.1107 The current smartphone 
exemption covers: 
[c]omputer programs that enable wireless telephone handsets to execute 
lawfully obtained software applications, where circumvention is 
accomplished for the sole purpose of enabling interoperability of such 
applications with computer programs on the telephone handset.
1108 
In previously recommending adoption of this exemption, the Register concluded that the 
intended use—to render certain lawfully acquired applications interoperable with the 
handset’s software—was likely fair.
1109 Further, the Register concluded that consumers 
were adversely impacted by TPMs preventing jailbreaking, and that this impact was not 
1100 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 5; see also EFF Class 17 Supp. at 6.
 
1101 Id.
 
1102 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 5; see also EFF Class 17 Supp. at 6-7.
 
1103 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 6; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 7 (emphasis in original).
 
1104 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 7; see also Freeman Class 17 Supp. at 6 (explaining that access controls can be
 
circumvented by exploiting “common software security vulnerabilities such as ‘buffer overruns,’ ‘use-after­
frees’ and ‘format string attacks’”).
 
1105 EFF Class 17 Supp. at 7.
 
1106 See id.; see also EFF Class 16 Supp. at App. A (Statement of Dr. Jeremy Gillula at 2) (describing
 
process of jailbreaking an Android device running version 2.3 of the operating system).
 
1107 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,830-32; 2012 Final Rule, 77 Fed. Reg. at 65,263-66.
 
1108 2012 Final Rule, 77 Fed. Reg. at 65,263.
 
1109 2012 Recommendation at 74; see also 2010 Recommendation at 100.
 
175
 

[PAGE 180]
     
    
   
  
    
 
  
     
 
 
  
   
  
 
   
 
    
  
 
 
  
     
 
   
  
 
     
   
 
       
       
       
       
      
                
     
      
                   
          
           
    
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
mitigated by available alternatives to circumvention.1110 Proponents seek not only to 
continue the jailbreaking exemption for smartphones but also to expand it to specifically 
permit removal of unwanted preinstalled software.1111 
In the 2012 rulemaking, the Register also considered for the first time a proposed 
exemption permitting jailbreaking of “tablet” computers.  The Register recommended 
against adopting that exemption on the ground that there was an insufficient record to 
develop “an appropriate definition for the ‘tablet’ category of devices.”
1112 In the current 
rulemaking, as noted above, proponents renew the request for an exemption to cover 
general-purpose mobile computing devices, including tablets.  In response to opponents’ 
concerns, described below, about the uncertain scope of the proposed exemption, EFF 
offered two further criteria to define such devices:  first, that they are portable, in the 
sense that they are “designed to be carried or worn;” and second, that they “come 
equipped with an operating system that is primarily designed for mobile use,” such as 
Android, iOS, Blackberry OS, and Windows Phone.1113 This additional limitation would 
exclude devices that run operating systems designed for desktops or laptops, such as 
Mac OS and Windows 8.
1114 
In arguing for the exemption in Proposed Class 17, proponents urge the Office to 
avoid distinguishing between smartphones and all-purpose mobile computing devices, 
such as tablets and handheld computers, for purposes of the jailbreaking exemptions.  
According to EFF, “[t]hough mobile computing devices can be subdivided based on their 
size and their ability to make and receive telephone calls, they are in many respects a 
single category of device.”
1115 EFF notes that “[t]he same mobile firmware, primarily 
Apple’s iOS and varieties of the Android operating system, is sold on smartphones, 
tablets, and other handheld devices such as the iPod Touch.”
1116 Indeed, according to 
Freeman, “[t]he iPhone, iPad, iPod touch, and Apple TV . . . all run the exact same code 
from Apple for their operating system,” and “Samsung’s Galaxy S5 (a phone), Galaxy 
Tab (a tablet), and their ‘Smart TV’ all use virtually identical code from Google for their 
operating system.”
1117 Additionally, EFF asserts that “smartphones and tablets are largely 
able to run the same applications,” and that “[t]he common practice among software 
1110 2012 Recommendation at 76; see also 2010 Recommendation at 100.
 
1111 EFF Jailbreaking Pet. at 2.
 
1112 2012 Final Rule, 77 Fed. Reg. at 65,264.
 
1113 Tr. at 50:12-20 (May 21, 2015) (Stoltz, EFF).
 
1114 EFF Class 17 Supp. at 3-4.
 
1115 Id. at 2; see also Tr. at 58:09-25, Exhibit 8 (May 21, 2015) (Charlesworth, USCO; Freeman, SaurikIT)
 
(photographs of devices showing differences in size).
 
1116 EFF Class 17 Supp. at 2.
 
1117 Freeman Class 17 Supp. at 2 (emphasis in original). Although Freeman mentioned the Apple TV , at the
 
public hearing on Proposed Classes 16 and 17, he confirmed that he was not seeking an exemption 
permitting jailbreaking of a dedicated media consumption device like the Apple TV . Tr. at 56:03-16 (May 
21, 2015) (Freeman, SaurikIT).
 
176
 

[PAGE 181]
     
    
   
 
   
   
  
   
 
  
   
 
 
    
  
    
 
  
   
  
  
  
 
  
   
                   
              
              
    
      
     
    
  
  
    
      
            
                 
                  
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
developers is to write software that is meant to be used on both phones and tablets.”1118 
And, according to EFF, “[m]ost phones and tablets use the same processor architecture, 
known as ARM, giving a degree of uniformity to the development process across 
devices.”
1119 
EFF also claims that even “the presence or absence of particular types of cellular 
radio hardware” does not always “distinguish phones from tablets.”1120 EFF notes that 
the 4G LTE cellular communications protocol “treats voice calls and data transmissions 
identically, meaning that any phone or tablet that uses LTE can make and receive 
voicecalls . . . regardless of whether the device is marketed as a phone.”
1121 EFF also 
notes that the growing market for “phablets,” which are “devices of intermediate size 
between a smartphone and a tablet and that function as either,” demonstrates the 
difficulty of drawing meaningful distinctions between different categories of generalpurpose mobile devices.
1122 EFF thus concludes that “[s]martphones and tablets today 
are best seen as a continuum of devices varying primarily by size, rather than distinct 
categories.”1123 
At the same time, EFF believes it is appropriate to distinguish mobile computing 
devices from laptop and desktop PCs, noting that there are technical differences between 
those platforms and that “PC operating systems do not, as yet, impose the sort of severe 
restrictions on which applications can be run, and what those applications can do, which 
are the norm for mobile devices.”1124 EFF also believes it appropriate to distinguish 
between mobile computing devices and “dedicated media consumption devices such as ebook readers and handheld gaming devices,” as those devices “do not come with generalpurpose operating systems capable of running a large variety of application software.”
1125 
Thus, as EFF explains, while the Kindle Paperwhite, as a dedicated e-book reader, would 
not fall within the scope of the requested exemption, the Kindle Fire, as a generalpurpose mobile computing device, would.
1126 
1118 EFF Class 17 Supp. at 2; see also Freeman Class 17 Supp. at 2 (“[I]t is one of the primary benefits of 
these platforms . . . that all different devices can easily be targeted by developers using a single 
development toolchain [so that] a single resulting ‘app’ not only can be but should be usable on all classes 
of device.”) (emphasis in original). 
1119 EFF Class 17 Supp. at 2-3. 
1120 Id. at 3. 
1121 Id. 
1122 Id. 
1123 Id. 
1124 Id. at 3-4. 
1125 Id. at 4. 
1126 Id. Proponent Freeman appeared to disagree with EFF to some extent on this point; as discussed in 
Proposed Class 18, Freeman asserts that “[a]n e-book reader that is ‘only’ an e-book reader . . . up until the 
moment that someone jailbreaks it: then it becomes like any other device.” Freeman Class 18 Supp. at 3. 
177
 

[PAGE 182]
     
    
  
 
  
      
   
  
    
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
   
     
  
   
   
 
   
  
    
 
                   
                    
            
                 
       
   
             
  
            
           
             
         
              
         
    
         
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
b. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Proponents make virtually identical arguments to support the claims that 
jailbreaking of smartphones and all-purpose mobile computing devices constitute fair 
uses of mobile computing device software under section 107.1127 Relying on case law 
and determinations of the Register in earlier section 1201 rulemakings, EFF maintains 
that “modifying the firmware in one’s device in order to run lawfully acquired software 
. . . fall[s] squarely within Congress’s intent to promote software interoperability.”1128 
EFF explains that the Register found smartphone jailbreaking to be a fair use in the 2012 
and 2010 proceedings1129 and that BSA | The Software Alliance (“BSA”), the sole 
opponent of the exemption, does not dispute the noninfringing nature of jailbreaking in 
its comments.
1130 
According to EFF, the purpose and character of jailbreaking “weighs heavily in 
favor of a finding of fair use.”1131 EFF relies in particular on the Ninth Circuit’s 
decisions in Sega Enterprises Ltd. v. Accolade, Inc. and Sony Computer Entertainment, 
Inc. v. Connectix Corp., which concluded that reverse-engineering video game systems in 
order to facilitate the creation of interoperable third-party software is a fair use.1132 EFF 
argues that the copying in Sega and Connectix is analogous to jailbreaking because it also 
enables “greater access to information” and facilitates the creation of new, independent 
software that can run on the device.
1133 EFF points as well to the Register’s findings in 
2010 and 2012 that Congress affirmed the holdings of Sega and Connectix in the 
legislative history of section 1201, “express[ing] a commitment to permit and encourage 
interoperability.”
1134 
EFF further argues that jailbreaking is noncommercial and transformative under 
the first fair use factor.1135 EFF asserts that jailbreaking is transformative because it 
allows smartphones and mobile devices, and the firmware contained on them, “to be used 
1127 See, e.g., EFF Class 16 Supp. at 7-14; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 7-13. Proponents did not rely on section 
117 as legal support for Classes 16 or 17. Section 117 permits the owner of a copy of a computer program 
to reproduce and adapt the program in certain circumstances, and thus potentially could be relevant to 
jailbreaking activities. See 17 U.S.C. § 117. Prior rulemakings, however, have relied on fair use as the 
basis to find that jailbreaking can facilitate noninfringing uses. 2012 Recommendation at 74; 2010 
Recommendation at 92-93. 
1128 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 7; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 9. 
1129 Id. 
1130 EFF Class 16 Reply at 3; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 6.
 
1131 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 9; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 11.
 
1132 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 8 (discussing Sega, 977 F.2d 1510, 1514 (9th Cir. 1992), as amended (Jan. 6,
 
1993), and Connectix, 203 F.3d 596, 608 (2000)); EFF Class 17 Supp. at 9 (same).
 
1133 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 8; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 9.
 
1134 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 8 (quoting 2010 Recommendation at 92; 2012 Recommendation at 71-72); EFF 
Class 17 Supp. at 9-10 (same).
 
1135 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 9; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 10-11.
 
178
 

[PAGE 183]
     
    
  
 
    
    
 
 
     
    
   
  
   
   
 
   
  
  
  
  
   
 
    
 
          
  
  
            
              
                   
             
     
                   
             
            
             
     
             
    
         
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
for new purposes, imbuing them with further usefulness, personalization, and 
meaning.”1136 EFF states that jailbreaking is noncommercial because smartphone and 
device owners who jailbreak “do not do so for profit, but rather to enhance and 
personalize their devices,”1137 and that jailbreaking serves a public purpose by 
“promot[ing] additional creativity and expand[ing] access to knowledge.”1138 
EFF argues that the second fair use factor, the nature of the copyrighted work, 
weighs in favor of fair use, because “bootloaders and operating systems are largely 
functional works.”
1139 It asserts that this view is consistent with the Federal Circuit’s 
2014 decision in Oracle America, Inc. v. Google Inc., in which the court observed that 
“‘where the nature of the work is such that purely functional elements exist in the work 
and it is necessary to copy the expressive elements in order to perform those functions, 
consideration of this second factor arguably supports a finding that the use is fair.’”
1140 
EFF further argues that because access controls on smartphones and mobile devices “are 
dictated almost entirely by external considerations” and “must be used to enable 
compatibility with independently created programs,” the second factor tilts in favor of 
fair use.
1141 
With respect to the third fair use factor, the amount and substantiality of the 
portion of the work used, EFF asserts that the portion used need only be “‘reasonable’ 
and for a legitimate purpose.”1142 EFF appears to acknowledge that circumvention may 
require copying of the device firmware in its entirety, but cites examples from case law 
where the copying of whole works was deemed to be “necessary to achieving a favored 
purpose” and therefore fair.1143 EFF argues that “the amount of code copied in the course 
of a jailbreak is necessary and reasonable for the purpose of ensuring interoperability 
with third party applications.”1144 EFF further states that the amount of code that is 
actually modified is sometimes de minimis, thus minimizing the significance of this 
1136 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 9; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 10. 
1137 Id. 
1138 Id. 
1139 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 10; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 11. 
1140 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 10 (quoting Oracle v. Google, 750 F.3d 1339, 1375 (Fed. Cir. 2014)); EFF Class 
17 Supp. at 11-12 (same). While the Federal Circuit discussed fair use in Oracle v. Google, it ultimately 
concluded that the factual record on fair use was insufficient and remanded for additional fact finding. 
Oracle v. Google, 750 F.3d at 1377. 
1141 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 10-11; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 12. EFF further argues that device access controls 
are equivalent to “lockout codes” which are either uncopyrightable, or only bear thin copyright protection. 
See EFF Class 16 Supp. at 11; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 12. 
1142 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 11 (quoting Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 586 (1994)); EFF 
Class 17 Supp. at 12 (same). 
1143 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 11-12 (citing Sega, 977 F.2d at 1526 and Connectix, 203 F.3d at 605-06); EFF 
Class 17 Supp. at 12-13 (same). 
1144 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 12; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 13. 
179
 

[PAGE 184]
     
    
      
 
 
  
     
    
   
  
  
   
  
   
    
 
 
   
    
   
  
 
   
  
   
  
  
           
         
       
         
                 
         
              
         
         
             
       
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
factor in those instances.1145 EFF therefore asserts that the third factor either favors fair 
use or is neutral.1146 
For the fourth factor, EFF asserts that no market harm to the smartphone market 
has been shown as a result of the grant of the smartphone jailbreaking exemption in the 
past.1147 To the contrary, it claims that the evidence indicates continued growth in this 
market.1148 EFF notes that “[t]he percentage of U.S. adults who are smartphone users has 
increased by 23% since 2011 to 58%, but among millennials (people in the 18-34 age 
group), smartphone ownership is nearly universal at 85%.”
1149 EFF urges that the same 
result would hold true if an exemption were extended to all-purpose mobile devices.1150 
In this regard, EFF notes that “jailbreaking does not foreclose sales of mobile device 
firmware, nor are users jailbreaking their devices to compete in the marketplace for 
firmware sales.”
1151 Indeed, EFF argues that rather than causing harm, “jailbreaking 
contributes to the success of” the relevant markets because it “push[es] the entire mobile 
device industry towards improved performance, security, and functionality.”
1152 
Proponents additionally maintain that the marketplace for manufacturer-approved 
apps has thrived notwithstanding the existing exemption.  For instance, Kevin Chen, an 
iOS app developer, states that “there has been no detrimental effect on the profitability of 
app developers like me, or on the innovation and variety of apps.”
1153 EFF further notes 
that any harm resulting from other types of legitimate competition—for example, because 
device owners prefer to install third-party apps—is not cognizable under the fourth 
factor.
1154 Overall, EFF urges that jailbreaking is a noninfringing fair use.1155 
c. Asserted Adverse Effects 
Proponents again rely on the same asserted adverse effects for both Class 16 and 
Class 17.1156 EFF argues that the “exemptions granted by the Librarian in 2010 and 2012 
for jailbreaking phones removed a cloud of legal uncertainty from phone owners, and 
spurred vibrant markets and communities of developers,”1157 and it asserts that 
1145 Id. 
1146 Id. 
1147 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 12-13; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 13-14.
 
1148 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 12; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 14.
 
1149 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 2.
 
1150 Id. at 12-13; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 13-14.
 
1151 EFF Class 17 Supp. at 14; see also EFF Class 16 Supp. at 12 (same with respect to smartphones).
 
1152 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 13; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 14.
 
1153 Chen Class 16 Reply at 1-2; see also EFF Class 17 Supp. at 19-20.
 
1154 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 12; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 14.
 
1155 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 13; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 14.
 
1156 See, e.g., EFF Class 16 Supp. at 13-21; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 14-19.
 
1157 EFF Class 17 Supp. at 14.
 
180
 

[PAGE 185]
     
    
 
   
 
  
    
    
 
  
  
  
 
   
  
    
 
  
   
  
   
   
    
  
 
    
  
  
                   
                
          
                    
             
              
                  
                  
           
             
                     
                 
                    
  
         
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
“[e]xtending an exemption to mobile devices such as tablets that run the same operating 
systems as smartphones would extend the benefits of the earlier exemptions.”1158 At the 
same time, EFF urges that rejecting the exemption for jailbreaking of smartphones 
“would be a leap backwards for personal data security, mobile innovation, consumer 
choice and competition.”1159 
Proponents present a series of alleged benefits arising from the ability to jailbreak 
smartphones and mobile computing devices.  EFF observes that independent security 
researchers can uncover certain vulnerabilities in smartphones and mobile devices only 
by examining jailbroken devices, pointing to the example of an independently discovered 
Apple iOS flaw in the Secure Sockets Layer code that provides security for internet 
traffic but could only be found by jailbreaking an iOS device and accessing its “lower­
level functionality.”
1160 Proponents point to evidence that security vulnerabilities are 
often patched through official channels only after several weeks or months, whereas a 
user can patch her own device immediately if it is jailbroken.
1161 They also note a 
number of privacy and security-enhancing features that are only available on jailbroken 
devices, such as the ability to install third-party firewall and permission control apps on 
jailbroken devices.1162 
EFF and NMR further explain that smartphone and mobile device manufacturers 
reject apps from official distribution channels based on private selection criteria and to 
prevent competition with their own products, thereby stifling the creative expression of 
users and independent developers.
1163 For example, EFF notes that Apple “has excluded 
a game with marijuana related content, a game that depicts the ongoing civil war in Syria, 
an app that reports the locations of U.S. military drone strikes, and a dictionary app 
(reportedly because it contained objectionable words).”
1164 In addition, “[b]oth Apple 
and Google reject applications that use payment systems run by other companies for the 
1158 Id. 
1159 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 13. No party analyzes the applicability of section 1201(f), which permits certain 
acts of reverse engineering. But as the Register concluded in 2012, that provision does not authorize the 
full range of activities requested here. See 2012 Recommendation at 85. 
1160 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 13, App. A (Statement of Marc Rogers at 1) (noting that access to lower-level 
functionality is “necessary to detect many security threats”); EFF Class 17 Supp. at 1 (same). A proposed 
exemption to permit security research across all devices and software is addressed under Class 25. 
1161 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 13-14; EFF Class 16 Supp. at App. A (Supplemental Material on Jailbreaking at 
1-2); EFF Class 16 Supp. at App. A (Statement of Marc Rogers at 2) (describing security vulnerabilities in 
mobile phones and comparing the effect of such vulnerabilities on jailbroken and non-jailbroken phones); 
see also Freeman Class 16 Supp. at 9; NMR Class 16 Supp. at 23. 
1162 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 15; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 16-17; see also Freeman Class 16 Supp. at 9; Freeman 
Class 17 Supp. at 9; FSF Class 16 Supp. at 1; FSF Class 17 Supp. at 1. 
1163 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 17; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 19; NMR Class 16 Supp. at 20-21; NMR Class 17 
Supp. at 20-21. 
1164 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 17; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 19. 
181
 

[PAGE 186]
     
    
   
  
  
 
  
     
 
   
 
    
 
  
  
 
    
 
  
  
 
  
   
   
  
  
  
            
             
  
                     
         
                 
           
             
                  
                  
               
                   
        
             
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
purchase of digital goods.”1165 Apple is also said to reject “competing Web browsers, 
cloud storage services, app choosers, and home screen alternatives” from its app store.1166 
Proponents also assert that jailbreaking fosters creativity and competition.  EFF 
points in particular to the popularity of Cydia, an online marketplace for non-Apple­
approved iOS apps.  It notes that, from 2012 to 2014, “between 11.9 million and 16.3 
million iOS devices in the U.S. were registered with Cydia.”
1167 Freeman, Cydia’s 
proprietor, estimated that “Cydia has been used, at least once, on over 10% of all devices 
that have ever been sold by Apple.”
1168 Freeman also notes that, over six years, Cydia 
has brought in “$40 million in revenue, with approximately 80% (>$30m) of this having 
been paid out to developers and artists.”1169 Proponents also note that jailbroken devices 
are platforms for innovation, explaining that many independent innovations are 
subsequently incorporated into manufacturers’ official releases—such as “[a] rotary lock 
screen with the ability to unlock and immediately launch specific apps,” and “[t]he ability 
to dismiss individual notifications from the notification area by swiping them,” both of 
which were created by developers for jailbroken smartphones and later incorporated into 
official Android releases.
1170 
Proponents note other beneficial uses facilitated by jailbreaking as well, including 
accessibility features for the disabled.1171 For instance, iOS includes a “Screen Curtain” 
accessibility feature, which turns off the screen of devices for users who are blind or 
visually impaired so that they save battery power, but does not provide an easy way for a 
user to know if that feature is active. To solve this deficiency, a developer created a 
program called “curtainChecker” for jailbroken iOS devices to audibly inform users if the 
Screen Curtain feature is active.
1172 In addition, proponents point to the fact that 
consumers are adversely impacted by loss of performance and storage space resulting 
1165 Id. 
1166 Id. 
1167 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 6-7; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 8. 
1168 Freeman Class 16 Supp. at 1; Freeman Class 17 Supp. at 1. 
1169 Id. 
1170 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 18; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 20; EFF Class 16 Supp. at App. A (Supplemental 
Material on Jailbreaking at 1) (listing independently developed programs which were later incorporated 
into official Android releases); see also EFF Class 16 Supp. at App. A (Statement of James Wilcox at 1-2) 
(describing independent software development that requires root access for bug detection and product 
testing); Freeman Class 16 Supp. at 8; NMR Class 16 Supp. at 18-20. 
1171 See Digital Right to Repair Class 17 Supp. at 15 (Abraham Levine) (“My autistic brother’s iPad has 
Springtomize to make the icons large and to make his device easier to use.”); Digital Right to Repair Class 
17 Supp. at 240 (Brandon Isralsky) (“If you don’t let people with disabilities customize their devices, they 
may not be able to use them.”); see also Freeman Class 17 Supp. at 7-8; Freeman Class 16 Supp. at 7-8; 
Blinky X Supp. at 1; Cantarero Supp. at 1-2. 
1172 Freeman Class 16 Supp. at 8; Freeman Class 17 Supp. at 8. 
182
 

[PAGE 187]
     
    
     
   
 
   
 
   
 
    
   
    
 
  
 
  
   
  
 
     
           
                
               
        
       
                  
        
                
          
              
          
            
  
                   
       
               
            
        
                 
   
         
                
                
            
             
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
from unwanted software that cannot be removed without jailbreaking the device.1173 For 
example, EFF notes that on a Verizon Droid 4 the following apps come preinstalled and 
cannot be removed without jailbreaking the device:  Facebook, Google+, NFL Mobile, 
Slacker Radio, Amazon Kindle, and Forest Wallpaper.
1174 EFF further observes that 
jailbreaking reduces consumer electronics waste since it prolongs the lifespan of device 
hardware by allowing the user to install otherwise unsupported upgrades.
1175 For 
instance, EFF notes that the Samsung Galaxy Tab was released in September 2010, and 
that the manufacturer stopped providing updates to the operating system in December 
2010; but by jailbreaking the device, more recent versions of the operating system can be 
installed.1176 EFF notes that the inability to install software updates can affect the 
security of the device, because those updates often fix later-discovered security 
vulnerabilities.1177 
Proponents and other supporters also argue that market alternatives to jailbreaking 
do not negate the need for a jailbreaking exemption.  First, while acknowledging that 
“Android devices, whether jailbroken or not, have long given users the ability to load 
application software from any source,”
1178 EFF and others assert that jailbreaking of 
Android devices is necessary for other uses covered by the exemption, including removal 
of unwanted software and installation of security fixes and alternative operating 
systems.
1179 For instance, EFF explains that “[w]ithout jailbreaking, Android will not run 
1173 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 16 (describing “bloatware” commonly installed on smartphones); EFF Class 17 
Supp. at 18 (noting that “[t]ablets and other devices are sold with similar pre-installed software”); EFF 
Class 16 Supp. at App. A (Supplemental Material on Jailbreaking at 3) (listing software which cannot be 
removed from an example smartphone); EFF Class 16 Supp. Multimedia Submission (showing software 
that cannot be removed without jailbreaking). 
1174 EFF Class 16 Supp. at App. A (Supplemental Material on Jailbreaking at 3); EFF Class 17 Supp. at 
App. A (Supplemental Material on Jailbreaking at 3). 
1175 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 19, App. A (Supplemental Material on Jailbreaking at 2-3) (comparing firmware 
releases available on jailbroken versus non-jailbroken smartphones); EFF Class 17 Supp. at App. A 
(Supplemental Material on Jailbreaking at 2-3) (same); see also, e.g., Digital Right to Repair Class 16 
Supp. at 202 (individual commenter explaining that although his smartphone was no longer supported by 
the manufacturer, he was able to continue using the smartphone by jailbreaking it and installing an updated 
operating system). 
1176 EFF Class 16 Supp. at App. A (Supplemental Material on Jailbreaking at 3); EFF Class 17 Supp. at 
App. A (Supplemental Material on Jailbreaking at 3). 
1177 EFF Class 16 Supp. at App. A (Supplemental Material on Jailbreaking at 1) (providing examples of 
“security vulnerabilities that affect older versions of Android and have been fixed in subsequent releases” 
and noting that “[s]ome devices retain these vulnerabilities because the manufacturer and carriers have 
ceased to send updates”); EFF Class 17 Supp. at App. A (Supplemental Material on Jailbreaking at 1) 
(same). 
1178 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 20; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 22. 
1179 See EFF Class 16 Supp. at App. A (Supplemental Material on Jailbreaking at 1-2) (providing examples 
of security defects that can be corrected and new operating systems that can be installed only on jailbroken 
Android smartphones); EFF Class 17 Supp. at App. A (Supplemental Material on Jailbreaking at 1-2) 
(same); EFF Class 16 Reply at 3; Freeman Class 16 Reply at 1. 
183
 

[PAGE 188]
     
    
   
 
    
  
   
   
     
 
  
   
  
  
     
  
     
  
   
  
 
    
    
   
                 
           
   
                
  
  
                   
             
       
              
         
       
      
         
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
software that requires access to lower-level functionality on the phone.”1180 EFF 
acknowledges that two manufacturers, Nexus and HTC, have begun to provide an 
authorized means of jailbreaking certain smartphones.1181 Nonetheless, it argues that 
“this development does not eliminate the adverse effects of the ban on circumvention”1182 
in light of the expense of acquiring new smartphone hardware.1183 Proponents emphasize 
the small portion of the market currently served by these alternate options; for instance, 
Freeman noted that “fewer than 1% of users” own a Nexus device.
1184 EFF stresses that 
“[o]f the hundreds of millions of smartphones in use in the U.S., including Android 
phones, the overwhelming majority require jailbreaking” in order to engage in the 
proposed uses.
1185 
d. Argument Under Statutory Factors 
Proponents’ analyses of the statutory factors are, once again, substantially the 
same for both Class 16 and Class 17.1186 Under the first statutory factor, concerning the 
availability of copyrighted works, EFF notes that the smartphone market has only 
continued to grow throughout the duration of the existing exemption and suggests that 
“[t]he lack of an exemption would likely decrease the appeal of smartphones for many 
consumers and innovators.”
1187 It notes that the Register previously concluded that 
jailbreaking increases the availability of smartphone software, “‘while simultaneously 
being unlikely to interfere with the availability of smartphone operating systems.’”1188 
EFF urges that the same conclusion “holds true for other multipurpose devices.”1189 
EFF concedes that the second factor, which addresses nonprofit and educational 
concerns, is not relevant to this class, though it notes that “[t]he availability of mobile 
device firmware for nonprofit purposes will not be harmed by an exemption.”1190 On the 
third factor, pointing to examples of apps with political content that have been rejected 
from Apple’s app store and the use of jailbroken smartphones to uncover security 
1180 EFF Class 16 Reply at 3; see also EFF Class 16 Supp. at 20 (noting that by giving the software 
administrative access to the operating system, those programs are given “more capabilities and more ability 
to interoperate with other programs”). 
1181 See EFF Class 16 Supp. at 20 (citing Nexus and HTC authorized jailbreaking options); EFF Class 17 
Supp. at 22 (same). 
1182 Id. 
1183 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 20-21; EFF Class 16 Reply at 4; see also Freeman Class 16 Reply at 1.
 
1184 Freeman Class 16 Supp. at 3-4; Freeman Class 17 Supp. at 3-4.
 
1185 EFF Class 16 Reply at 3.
 
1186 See, e.g., EFF Class 16 Supp. at 14-21; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 13-19.
 
1187 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 20; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 22.
 
1188 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 19 (quoting 2010 Recommendation at 102).
 
1189 EFF Class 17 Supp. at 21.
 
1190 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 21; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 23.
 
184
 

[PAGE 189]
     
    
  
    
 
  
 
 
     
   
 
 
   
  
    
   
     
   
  
  
  
   
    
 
    
  
 
                    
                
             
            
         
    
       
        
  
  
      
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
vulnerabilities, EFF asserts that “[m]obile device jailbreaking has spurred both valuable 
commentary and important security research.”1191 
On the fourth factor, concerning market impact, EFF argues that rather than 
harming the market for device firmware, “the proposed exemption is likely to stimulate 
the market for such works by providing developers with incentives to develop third party 
applications, thus making these devices—together with their copyrighted firmware — 
more attractive to consumers.”
1192 EFF further maintains that “[t]he ability to jailbreak 
has never been shown to contribute significantly to copyright infringement.”1193 Finally, 
EFF argues that access controls on smartphones are not intended to protect copyrighted 
content but instead are intended to protect manufacturers’ business interests, which is not 
a legitimate concern of copyright law.1194 
2. Opposition 
Opponents make somewhat different points with respect to Proposed Classes 16 
and 17, so their arguments are treated separately. 
a. Proposed Class 16:  Jailbreaking – Wireless Telephone Handsets  
BSA filed a brief comment in opposition to the exemption for smartphones.1195 
BSA argues that market alternatives to jailbreaking of smartphones obviate the need for 
an exemption.  First, it points to EFF’s statement that “Android devices, whether 
jailbroken or not, have long given users the ability to load application software from any 
source.”
1196 BSA contends that this statement reveals that consumers have the ability to 
purchase mobile devices “that run an operating system that allows installation of 
applications obtained from virtually anywhere on the Internet.”1197 Second, BSA 
highlights EFF’s concession that certain manufacturers have facilitated authorized 
jailbreaking, and argues that this constitutes a sufficient alternative to circumvention.1198 
BSA further notes that “phones are available without the restrictions that EFF describes,” 
pointing to “developer editions” of phones offered by certain manufacturers.
1199 
1191 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 21; see also EFF Class 17 Supp. at 17 (noting that Apple had rejected an app that
 
“depicts the ongoing civil war in Syria” and one that “reports the locations of U.S. military drone strikes”).
 
1192 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 21; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 21-22.
 
1193 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 21; EFF Class 17 Supp. at 23-24.
 
1194 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 22 (citing 2010 Recommendation at 96-97; 2006 Recommendation at 152); EFF
 
Class 17 Supp. at 24 (same).
 
1195 BSA Class 16 Opp’n.
 
1196 Id. at 2 (quoting EFF Class 16 Supp. at 20).
 
1197 Id.
 
1198 Id. 
1199 Id. at 2 & n.3. 
185
 

[PAGE 190]
     
    
  
  
   
 
 
  
  
 
     
     
   
   
 
  
  
  
 
  
   
 
   
  
 
   
   
  
  
  
  
 
     
        
        
  
       
    
    
 
 
                                                 
	 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
In addition, BSA broadly observes that “circumvention related to mobile phones 
is detrimental to the secure and trustworthy innovative platforms that mainstream 
consumers demand.”1200 BSA claims that the first and fourth statutory factors in section 
1201(a)(1) weigh against granting an exemption because “access controls have increased, 
rather than decreased, the availability of software applications designed for use on mobile 
phones” and also “preserve the ‘market for and value of’ legitimate software.”
1201 BSA 
fails to elaborate on these points or cite supporting evidence, however.  Nor does BSA 
respond to proponents’ arguments that jailbreaking is a noninfringing use. 
Finally, SAE Vehicle Electrical System Security Committee (“SAE VESS”) 
requests that “vehicle-embedded computing devices” should be excluded from any 
exemption for Class 16.1202 At the same time, however, SAE VESS acknowledges that 
an “automotive vehicle is not a wireless telephone handset device.”1203 
b.	 Proposed Class 17:  Jailbreaking – All-Purpose Mobile Computing 
Devices 
BSA filed somewhat more substantial comments in opposition to the exemption 
for general-purpose computing devices.  First, BSA argues that, as in 2012, the Register 
cannot recommend the proposed exemption because EFF’s definition of “‘all-purpose 
mobile computing device’” is “amorphous” and provides “no principled basis by which 
to determine whether any particular device will be subject to the proposed 
exemption.”
1204 BSA challenges in particular EFF’s effort to distinguish between allpurpose mobile computing devices on the one hand, and laptops on the other.  BSA notes 
that “the trend in personal computing is for distinctions that used to exist between tablets 
and laptops to disappear,” as “[m]any laptops are sold with touch screens, cameras, and 
detachable keyboards,” while “‘hybrid’ tablets, such as the Microsoft Surface, are 
designed to run substantially the same operating systems and range of software that 
laptops traditionally run.”
1205 BSA also argues that there are a number of available 
alternatives to circumvention—such as use of Android devices that allow the use of 
applications from any source, or the use of laptops, which generally lack access 
controls.
1206 
BSA also urges that the statutory factors weigh against the exemption.  With 
respect to the first factor, the availability for use of copyrighted works, BSA asserts that 
access controls “protect the investments companies and individual developers make in” 
1200 Id. at 1. 
1201 Id. at 2-3 (quoting 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(iv)). 
1202 SAE VESS Class 16 Reply at 2. 
1203 Id. 
1204 BSA Class 17 Opp’n at 2.
 
1205 Id. at 2-3.
 
1206 Id. at 4.
 
186
 

[PAGE 191]
     
    
   
   
 
   
  
  
  
   
      
 
   
    
   
  
   
  
   
  
    
  
  
    
    
           
   
           
           
               
               
              
                 
                  
  
              
             
            
          
          
              
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
mobile devices, device firmware, and mobile applications.1207 It claims that the “closed 
ecosystem” created by the use of TPMs “create[s] a reliable, secure platform that 
ultimately leads to the vast proliferation of copyrighted content because users come to 
expect a good experience.”
1208 BSA argues that the second and third factors are not 
relevant, and that in any event EFF failed to support its claim that granting the exemption 
would further criticism and commentary.
1209 Finally, BSA argues that the fourth factor, 
regarding the effect of circumvention on the market for or value of copyrighted works, 
weighs against an exemption because “circumvention of access controls on tablets 
increases application piracy.”1210 In support of this last assertion, however, it cites a 
single 2012 news report about the shutdown of a store that sold pirated apps that could be 
installed on jailbroken iPhones and iPads.1211 
General Motors (“GM”), the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers (“Auto 
Alliance”), Motor & Equipment Manufacturers Association (“MEMA”) and SAE VESS 
also filed comments under Class 17, all raising the same basic concern—that the class is 
framed in such a manner that it could arguably encompass computing systems that are 
embedded in “mobile” automobiles and other vehicles.1212 In this regard, however, EFF 
clarifies that Class 17 “does not include software running on vehicle electronics” and that 
only portable devices—meaning devices designed to be carried or worn by a person—are 
meant to be encompassed by the class.
1213 
3. Discussion 
The Register appreciates the significant consumer appeal of these proposed 
classes.1214 Smartphones, tablets, and other all-purpose mobile computing devices are 
1207 Id. 
1208 Id. 
1209 Id. at 4-5. 
1210 Id. at 5. 
1211 Id. at 5 n.13 (citing Christopher MacManus, Pirated iOS App Store Installous Shutters, CNET (Dec. 
31, 2012), http://www.cnet.com/news/pirated-ios-app-store-installous-shutters). 
1212 See GM Class 17 Opp’n at 3-4 (“[A]s drafted the Proponents’ Class 17 could be construed to 
encompass in-vehicle telematics and communication systems . . . . [The Office] should narrow Class 17 to 
exclude in-vehicle telematics systems such as OnStar.”); Auto Alliance Class 17 Opp’n at 1 (urging the 
Office “to ensure that vehicles are not inadvertently swept into the exemption”); MEMA Class 17 Reply at 
1 (“The proposed exemption is . . . so broad that it may arguably include communications and in-vehicle 
telematics systems.”); SAE VESS Class 17 Reply at 2 (“[I]f [t]he Librarian were to consider an exemption 
under this class 17 . . . then vehicle-embedded computers should be excluded from the list of devices for 
which this exemption applies.”). 
1213 EFF Class 17 Reply at 2-3; cf. Tr. at 27:02-06 (May 21, 2015) (Lightsey, GM) (suggesting that 
inclusion of language stating that the device must be “portable” would exclude vehicles). 
1214 As previously mentioned, the Office received over 2000 individual submissions expressing support for 
Proposed Class 16, and nearly 1900 such submissions supporting Proposed Class 17. Additionally, 
attached to its reply comments, proponent EFF submitted a petition in support with over 20,000 signatures. 
EFF Class 16 Reply at App. A; EFF Class 17 Reply at App. A. 
187
 

[PAGE 192]
     
    
 
   
   
  
   
       
 
   
     
    
  
 
  
  
  
   
  
 
  
   
  
     
   
 
  
 
     
    
              
      
       
     
       
    
                 
   
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
now a ubiquitous part of American life, and substantial numbers of device owners seek to 
take advantage of the existing smartphone jailbreaking exemption.1215 
Based upon the current record, the Register concludes that proponents have 
successfully met their burden supporting an exemption for Classes 16 and 17.  As 
explained, review in these proceedings is de novo, and proponents must therefore present 
persuasive evidence to support their case in each triennial rulemaking.1216 The Register 
has explained, however, that where a legal analysis has previously been developed and no 
new law or arguments have been presented, the earlier legal determination can serve to 
support a renewed exemption, “provided that the evidence in the present record supports 
it.”
1217 That principle is relevant here.  
a. Noninfringing Uses 
As noted, EFF argues that jailbreaking smartphones and all-purpose mobile 
computing devices for the purpose of running lawfully purchased software and the 
removal of unwanted software is likely to be a fair use.  This argument is supported by 
the Register’s reasoning in both the 2010 and 2012 rulemakings, both of which found, 
based on a review of the four fair use factors, that jailbreaking is likely to be a 
noninfringing fair use.
1218 
As suggested above, the parallel record permits a combined fair use analysis of 
jailbreaking of smartphones and other portable all-purpose mobile computing devices.  
Considering the first factor, the purpose and character of the use, the goal of jailbreaking 
is to allow the operating system on a device to interoperate with other programs, a 
favored purpose under the law.
1219 Even if this use is not considered transformative in 
nature—because the computer program is still being used for its intended purpose—that 
is not in and of itself a basis to reject a fair use claim. As the Register concluded in 2010 
and 2012, even if a use is nontransformative, the first factor may nonetheless favor fair 
use where, as here, the purpose and character of the use is “noncommercial and personal” 
and enhances functionality.
1220 
Looking to the second fair use factor, also as in 2010 and 2012, the record 
establishes that the firmware modified in the course of jailbreaking to permit 
interoperability is largely functional, rather than expressive, in nature, thus weighing in 
favor of fair use.
1221 With regard to the third factor, the Register once again concludes 
1215 See Freeman Class 16 Supp. at 1; Freeman Class 17 Supp. at 1.
 
1216 See 2012 Recommendation at 71; 2010 Recommendation at 14.
 
1217 2012 Recommendation at 71; see also 2006 Recommendation at 40.
 
1218 2012 Recommendation at 72-74; 2010 Recommendation at 92-100.
 
1219 See 2012 Recommendation at 72; 2010 Recommendation at 93-95.
 
1220 2012 Recommendation at 72 (citing 2010 Recommendation at 93).
 
1221 EFF Class 16 Supp. at 6; Freeman Class 16 Supp. at 6; see also 2012 Recommendation at 74; 2010 
Recommendation at 95-97. 
188
 

[PAGE 193]
     
    
     
   
  
 
    
     
    
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
    
  
     
   
             
       
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
that, while jailbreaking often requires making a complete reproduction of the firmware, in 
light of the de minimis nature of the modifications ultimately made to the firmware to 
enable jailbreaking, this factor, while not favorable to fair use, is of limited relevance.1222 
Finally, regarding the effect on the market value of the work, the Register noted in 
her 2012 recommendation that “the fourth factor calculus favors a fair use finding even 
more than it did in 2010,” due to the evidence then presented that demonstrated the 
growth of the smartphone market during the period the previous exemption was in 
effect.
1223 The evidence in the current proceeding is much the same, with smartphone 
sales continuing to increase.1224 This suggests that the market for smartphone firmware 
has not been harmed by jailbreaking.  Furthermore, there is no reason on this record to 
reach a different conclusion for all-purpose mobile computing devices; opponents have 
put forth no evidence to demonstrate that the market for firmware or any other 
copyrighted works would be harmed by granting the jailbreaking exemption for allpurpose mobile devices. Thus, the fourth factor also favors fair use with respect to both 
of the proposed classes.  
Accordingly, the Register concludes that proponents have met their burden of 
demonstrating that jailbreaking of smartphones and all-purpose mobile computing 
devices is likely to be a fair use. 
Furthermore, the record of this proceeding shows that the category of “all-purpose 
mobile computing devices” has been meaningfully defined.  To begin with, proponents 
suggest that the device must be portable or wearable.  It also must be designed for general 
purpose computing rather than the consumption of a specific type of content.  Although 
the Register appreciates BSA’s point that the differences between tablet computers (which 
are included in the exemption) and laptops (which proponents did not seek to include and 
are thus excluded from the exemption) may be difficult to discern at the margins, this is 
not a reason to deny an exemption for all-purpose mobile computing devices. 
The Register agrees with EFF’s suggestion that a credible distinction can be made 
based on the type of operating system installed on the device.
1225 A device with an 
operating system that is primarily designed for mobile use, such as iOS, Android, or 
Windows RT, would be within the exemption, and those with operating systems designed 
primarily for desktop or laptop use, such as Windows 8 or Mac OS, would be outside it.  
If a hybrid device can act either as a laptop or a tablet, the user will need to investigate 
what type of operating system it contains in order to determine whether the exemption 
applies. To ensure sufficient guidance as to what is and is not covered, the Register 
proposes clarifying language for the tablet class, as discussed below. 
1222 2012 Recommendation at 73-74; 2010 Recommendation at 96-97.
 
1223 2012 Recommendation at 74.
 
1224 See EFF Class 16 Supp. at 2, 12-13; Chen Class 16 Reply at 1-2.
 
1225 Tr. at 50:12-20 (May 21, 2015) (Stoltz, EFF).
 
189
 

[PAGE 194]
     
    
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
  
  
   
  
   
  
 
    
  
 
 
      
 
        
      
                   
        
     
       
          
 
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
b. Adverse Effects 
Proponents have also established that a prohibition on jailbreaking would have an 
adverse impact on noninfringing uses of mobile device firmware protected by TPMs.  
The record shows that millions of consumers currently jailbreak their smartphones and 
that jailbreaking has facilitated a robust and profitable market for legitimate third-party 
software that cannot be used on non-jailbroken devices.1226 The record also shows that 
jailbreaking can help ensure that older devices that may no longer be supported by their 
manufacturers are able to benefit from software updates, which may include fixes to 
security vulnerabilities.
1227 The record thus demonstrates that consumers will be 
adversely impacted if they are unable to engage in jailbreaking activities as a result of the 
prohibition on circumvention, because the inability to jailbreak will impede their ability 
to enhance the functionality, security, and longevity of smartphones and other devices. 
The Register also concludes that alternatives to circumvention are inadequate to 
mitigate these adverse effects.  Although Android is a somewhat more open platform than 
Apple’s iOS in terms of the applications it will allow, the record shows that at least some 
functionalities may not be achievable unless an Android device is jailbroken, and it may 
not be possible to uninstall applications.  The fact that some manufacturers have begun to 
authorize jailbreaking of certain devices or to sell already jailbroken devices does not 
alter this conclusion, as the record suggests that these phones and devices currently 
represent only a small fraction of the market.
1228 
c. Statutory Factors 
Under the first statutory factor, the Register must consider the “availability for use 
of copyrighted works.”1229 As the Register noted in the 2010 and 2012 rulemakings, 
access controls prevent consumers from using third-party applications, so denying a 
jailbreaking exemption would significantly diminish the availability of those works.1230 
At the same time, granting the exemption is unlikely to discourage use or development of 
devices or the copyrighted firmware needed to run them. 
As also noted in previous rulemakings, factor two, concerning the impact on 
nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational uses, does not appear to be directly 
implicated in these classes.
1231 Although in the past this has also been the conclusion for 
factor three, concerning the impact on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, 
1226 See, e.g., EFF Class 16 Supp. at 20.
 
1227 See id. at App A.
 
1228 See id. (Statement of Dr. Jeremy Gillula at 2 n.2); EFF Class 16 Reply at 3-5; Freeman Class 16 Supp.
 
at 3-4; Freeman Class 16 Reply at 1.
 
1229 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(i).
 
1230 2012 Recommendation at 76; 2010 Recommendation at 101.
 
1231 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(ii)-(iii); 2012 Recommendation at 77; 2010 Recommendation at 101­
102. 
190
 

[PAGE 195]
     
    
   
 
    
  
  
 
 
 
 
    
 
       
  
  
   
     
 
 
   
 
   
 
  
 
  
     
  
   
              
     
                   
   
     
    
   
                   
          
 
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
scholarship, or research, the Register notes that the current record suggests that 
jailbreaking may help further research of security flaws by allowing users to access a 
device’s “lower-level functionality” to detect vulnerabilities.1232 
As for the fourth factor, concerning the “effect of circumvention of technological 
measures on the market for or value of the copyrighted works,”1233 there is no evidence 
on the current record that jailbreaking will harm the market for smartphones, devices, or 
the firmware within them.  To the contrary, during the time that the jailbreaking 
exemptions for smartphones have been in place, the record shows that both the 
smartphone market and the market for independent apps have grown, while the 
manufacturer-authorized app market continues to thrive.1234 There is no reason on this 
record to believe that a different result would obtain for all-purpose mobile computing 
devices, given that such devices operate in similar ways and with similar capabilities. 
The fourth factor therefore favors granting the proposed exemption. 
4. NTIA Comments 
NTIA proposes a jailbreaking exemption for all “mobile computing devices,” a 
category which would include dedicated e-book readers separately addressed in Proposed 
Class 18 below.
1235 Quoting the Register’s recommendation to exempt smartphone 
jailbreaking in 2010, NTIA stresses that “‘[i]t does not and should not infringe any of the 
exclusive rights of the copyright owner to run an application program on a computer over 
the objections of the owner of the copyright in the computer’s operating system.’”
1236 
NTIA also notes that “the mobile applications market has thrived despite the existence of 
an exemption [for smartphone jailbreaking] for over five years.”
1237 
NTIA believes that an exemption covering all “mobile computing devices”— 
including dedicated e-book readers and, apparently, other devices that are primarily 
designed for the consumption of particular content, such as handheld video game 
consoles—is warranted because “regardless of a device’s particular form factor, the 
works and TPMs at issue are strikingly similar and many times identical.”
1238 But NTIA 
does not cite any evidence that this fact is true with respect to dedicated e-book readers, 
handheld video game consoles, or other dedicated media consumption devices.1239 
Moreover, NTIA does not explain why it departs from EFF’s original proposal, which 
1232 EFF Class 17 Supp. at 21, App. A (Statement of Marc Rogers at 1).
 
1233 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(iv).
 
1234 BSA Class 16 Opp’n at 3; EFF Class 16 Supp. at 3, 12-13, 19; Chen Class 16 Reply at 2; Freeman 
Class 16 Supp. at 1.
 
1235 NTIA Letter at 43-44.
 
1236 Id. at 43 (quoting 2010 Recommendation at 96-97).
 
1237 Id. at 45.
 
1238 Id. at 44. NTIA states that it does not “intend to include vehicles in this exemption.” Id. at 46.
 
1239 Id. at 44 & n.203 (citing only evidence regarding smartphones and all-purpose mobile computing 
devices). 
191
 

[PAGE 196]
     
    
 
    
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
    
    
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
  
      
             
                  
           
              
         
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
expressly excludes devices that are “designed primarily for the consumption of a single 
type of media,” including “dedicated e-book readers.”1240 Accordingly, as discussed 
below, the Register recommends in favor of an exemption that reflects the proposals for 
Classes 16 and 17. 
5. Conclusion and Recommendation 
For the reasons described above, proponents of both Class 16 and Class 17 have 
satisfied their burden of showing that technological measures applied to smartphones and 
all-purpose mobile computing device software have an adverse effect on noninfringing 
uses.  The statutory factors also tip in favor of granting the exemption.  
As noted above, to address concerns regarding the scope of the category “all­
purpose mobile computing device,” the Register recommends several refinements to the 
proposed class, consistent with proponents’ suggestions:  the devices must be “portable,” 
in the sense that they are designed to be carried or worn by individuals; they must be 
“designed to run a wide variety” of applications; and they must come “equipped with an 
operating system primarily designed for mobile use.”  The class thus excludes vehicleembedded systems, devices designed primarily for consumption of a specific type of 
media (such as e-book readers and handheld gaming devices), and computers confined to 
desktop or laptop operating systems.  The exemption also specifies that circumvention 
can be for the purpose of removing undesired software from the device.  Finally, to 
simplify the language, the exemption substitutes “smartphone” for the less descriptive 
term “wireless telephone handset.”
1241 
Accordingly, the Register recommends that the Librarian designate the following 
class: 
Computer programs that enable smartphones and portable allpurpose mobile computing devices to execute lawfully obtained 
software applications, where circumvention is accomplished for the 
sole purpose of enabling interoperability of such applications with 
computer programs on the smartphone or device, or to permit 
removal of software from the smartphone or device. For purposes of 
this exemption, a “portable all-purpose mobile computing device” is a 
device that is primarily designed to run a wide variety of programs 
rather than for consumption of a particular type of media content, is 
equipped with an operating system primarily designed for mobile use, 
and is intended to be carried or worn by an individual. 
1240 EFF Jailbreaking Pet. at 2. 
1241 As previously noted, the term “wireless telephone handset” encompasses both phones that do and do 
not have the ability to run a wide range of software applications. The term is thus appropriately used in the 
context of the cellphone unlocking exemption in Class 11, since unlocking is potentially relevant to all 
types of mobile phones. Here, where the exemption is focused on interoperability of software applications, 
the Register uses the more descriptive term “smartphones.” 
192
 

[PAGE 197]
     
    
   
  
  
 
  
   
   
 
    
 
  
   
    
     
 
 
  
  
     
  
    
  
              
          
        
     
     
       
          
                    
                 
                   
         
         
           
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
F. Proposed Class 18:  Jailbreaking – Dedicated E-Book Readers 
1. Proposal 
This class would allow circumvention of technological measures protecting 
dedicated e-book readers, such as Amazon’s Kindle Paperwhite, to run lawfully acquired 
third-party applications or software on such devices.  Maneesh Pangasa filed a petition 
seeking this exemption,1242 and the NPRM described the class as follows: 
Proposed Class 18: This proposed class would permit the jailbreaking of 
dedicated e-book readers to allow those devices to run lawfully acquired 
software that is otherwise prevented from running.1243 
Pangasa, however, failed to submit subsequent written comments or evidentiary 
materials in support of the petition or participate in the public hearings.  Comments 
expressing general support for the proposed exemption were filed by the Free Software 
Foundation (“FSF”),
1244 Jay Freeman, the proprietor of an app store for jailbroken 
devices,1245 Catherine Gellis and the Digital Age Defense project (“Gellis/Digital Age 
Defense”),1246 and over 1600 individuals.1247 The written comments provided no specific 
factual information in support of the exemption.1248 Nor did they provide legal argument; 
no commenter explained why the proposed uses are noninfringing, how such uses are 
adversely impacted by the prohibition on circumvention, or why granting an exemption 
would be consistent with the statutory factors. 
At the public hearing, Freeman briefly mentioned that people have jailbroken 
Kindle Paperwhite e-book readers to install screen savers or achieve broader 
functionality.
1249 But Freeman could not answer the significant question of whether the 
circumvention of TPMs protecting dedicated e-book readers would allow a user to access 
pirated books or other content on these platforms.1250 This is just one of the many factors 
that would seem to be relevant to the consideration of Pangasa’s proposal. 
1242 Pangasa Tablet Jailbreaking Pet. at 2 (seeking an exemption “extending the protections for (class #5)
 
mobile phones to include . . . dedicated e-readers like the Amazon Kindle”).
 
1243 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,867.
 
1244 FSF Class 18 Supp.
 
1245 Freeman Class 18 Supp.
 
1246 Gellis/Digital Age Defense Class 18 Supp.
 
1247 Digital Right to Repair Class 18 Supp. (1608 individuals).
 
1248 See, e.g., FSF Class 18 Supp. at 1 (stating only that an e-book reader “should be under the control of the
 
user”); Freeman Class 18 Supp. at 3 (This comment was written generally to apply to multiple jailbreaking
 
classes, noting that “[a]n e-book reader . . . is ‘only’ an e-book reader . . . up until the moment that someone
 
jailbreaks it: then it becomes like any other device.”).
 
1249 Tr. at 84:08-14 (May 21, 2015) (Freeman, SaurikIT).
 
1250 Id. at 85:06-10 (Charlesworth, USCO; Freeman, SaurikIT) (discussing the “classic” Kindle and Nook).
 
193
 

[PAGE 198]
     
    
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
   
 
  
  
  
  
   
  
     
      
      
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Perhaps because of the lack of a written record in support of the proposed 
exemption, no opposition comments were filed. 
2. NTIA Comments 
As noted above in the discussion of Classes 16 and 17, covering smartphone and 
all-purpose mobile computing device jailbreaking, NTIA supports a jailbreaking 
exemption for all “mobile computing devices,” a category which would presumably 
include dedicated e-book readers.1251 NTIA, however, points to nothing in record to 
support a jailbreaking exemption for dedicated e-book readers.  Instead, NTIA’s analysis 
cites only evidence submitted for Classes 16 and 17, none of which supports an 
exemption for dedicated e-book readers.
1252 Indeed, EFF, the chief proponent of those 
classes, expressly excluded e-book readers from its proposal.1253 
3. Conclusion and Recommendation 
Pangasa and the supporters of this proposal have failed to provide meaningful 
evidentiary or legal support for Proposed Class 18.  Because there is no record on which 
to assess whether the exemption satisfies the criteria set forth in section 1201(a)(1), the 
Register declines to recommend the adoption of Proposed Class 18. 
1251 NTIA Letter at 43-44.
 
1252 See id. at 42-46.
 
1253 EFF Jailbreaking Pet. at 2.
 
194
 

[PAGE 199]
     
    
   
  
  
   
    
   
    
 
   
  
  
   
    
 
 
    
    
    
 
 
 
   
    
          
                
            
     
        
        
     
     
       
          
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
G. Proposed Class 19:  Jailbreaking – Video Game Consoles 
1. Proposal 
Maneesh Pangasa filed a petition proposing an exemption to permit 
circumvention of TPMs on home video game consoles for an assortment of asserted 
noninfringing uses, including installing alternative operating systems and removing 
region locks.1254 Such circumvention is often referred to as “jailbreaking.”  In general, 
access controls on video game consoles prevent the use of unauthorized video games. 
“Region locks” prevent the console from playing games from outside a particular 
geographic territory.  The NPRM described the class as follows: 
Proposed Class 19: This proposed class would permit the jailbreaking of 
home video game consoles.  Asserted noninfringing uses include installing 
alternative operating systems, running lawfully acquired applications, 
preventing the reporting of personal usage information to the 
manufacturer, and removing region locks.  The requested exemption 
would apply both to older and currently marketed game consoles.
1255 
As discussed below, a similar exemption was considered and rejected in 2012 due to 
concerns about video game piracy.
1256 
Despite having submitted a petition, Pangasa failed to file supporting comments 
or participate in the public hearings.  Short comments expressing general support for the 
proposed exemption were filed by iFixit,1257 Free Software Foundation (“FSF”),1258 
Catherine Gellis and the Digital Age Defense project (“Gellis/Digital Age Defense”),1259 
and over 1600 individuals.1260 None of the written comments, however, provided details 
about the TPMs or circumvention methods at issue or analyzed the statutory criteria for 
an exemption—i.e., whether the proposed uses are noninfringing, whether the prohibition 
on circumvention was causing adverse effects, or whether an exemption would be 
justified under the factors set forth in section 1201(a)(1). 
Moreover, the factual support offered by the supporting parties was scant and 
dated.  In its brief written comments, iFixit cites a 2012 news article referring to the fact 
1254 Pangasa’s petition sought an exemption ‘‘for jail-breaking or rooting home video game consoles like
 
Nintendo’s Wii U, Sony’s Play Station 4, Microsoft’s Xbox One and home media devices like Apple TV
 
which may in future gain the ability to natively play video games.’’ Pangasa Video Game Console
 
Jailbreaking Pet. at 1.
 
1255 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,868.
 
1256 2012 Final Rule, 77 Fed. Reg. at 65,272-74.
 
1257 iFixit Class 19 Supp.
 
1258 FSF Class 19 Supp.
 
1259 Gellis/Digital Age Defense Class 19 Supp.
 
1260 Digital Right to Repair Class 19 Supp. (1647 individuals).
 
195
 

[PAGE 200]
     
    
  
 
    
 
  
 
     
   
   
      
  
   
   
  
  
  
   
     
    
     
                  
        
 
   
            
                
    
             
  
        
               
              
                   
             
         
               
     
               
                 
         
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
that, in an unspecified year, the U.S. Air Force networked 1700 PlayStation 3 consoles to 
use as a supercomputing platform, and that a researcher at the University of 
Massachusetts had used a grid of eight PlayStation 3 consoles to simulate gravitational 
waves.
1261 iFixit adds that “[u]sers of jailbroken consoles also have the ability to run 
‘homebrewed’ [i.e., independently developed] software,” although it does not provide 
specific evidence regarding such activities.1262 
iFixit’s written comments make passing reference to jailbreaking for the purpose 
of repairing video game consoles, a topic on which iFixit’s representative elaborated at 
the public hearing.
1263 At the hearing and in a post-hearing follow-up, iFixit urged that 
certain repairs might be less expensive if circumvention of access controls on the 
consoles were permitted, though it conceded that consoles can also be repaired without 
circumvention, including through official repair channels.
1264 For instance, iFixit 
described a malfunction on the Xbox 360 console known as the “red ring of death,” but 
also acknowledged that this problem stemmed from a defect that could be repaired 
without circumvention.
1265 
iFixit also explained that, when the optical drive of a console fails, it may be 
challenging (though, as explained below, still feasible) to replace the drive without 
circumventing console TPMs because “the optical drives are cryptographically linked via 
their serial numbers to the motherboard” of the console.
1266 According to iFixit, by 
circumventing the TPMs, a user can modify the firmware on the motherboard to accept a 
new optical drive.1267 But iFixit acknowledges that there are other methods of replacing 
a malfunctioning optical drive that do not require circumvention.  First, the optical drive 
and the motherboard can be replaced at the same time.
1268 Second, it notes that the 
1261 See iFixit Class 19 Supp. at 3 (citing Jason Koebler, Sony, Microsoft Battle Hackers Over Right to 
‘Jailbreak’ Video Game Systems, U.S. NEWS (Feb. 29, 2012), http://www.usnews.com/news/articles/ 
2012/02/29/sony-microsoft-battle-hackers-over-right-to-jailbreak-video-game-systems). 
1262 See id. 
1263 See id. at 2; Tr. at 273:10-282:02 (May 20, 2015) (Wiens, iFixit; Charlesworth, USCO); Tr. at 275:22­
24, Exhibit 6 (May 20, 2015) (Wiens, iFixit) (guide to repairing the Xbox 360 hardware error known as the 
“red ring of death”). 
1264 Tr. at 282:03-286:06 (May 20, 2015) (Wiens, iFixit; Charlesworth, USCO; Damle, USCO); iFixit PostHearing Resp. 
1265 Tr. at 274:14-277:21 (May 20, 2015) (Wiens, iFixit; Charlesworth, USCO). 
1266 iFixit Post-Hearing Resp. at 2; see also Tr. at 281:02-282:07 (Wiens, iFixit; Damle, USCO). 
1267 iFixit Post-Hearing Resp. at 2. At the hearing, the representative for the Entertainment Softwar e 
Association (“ESA”) suggested that it may be possible to replace the firmware on the optical drive so that it 
matches an existing motherboard without the need for circumvention. Tr. at 305:19-306:02 (Frankel, ESA). 
In response to post-hearing questions posed by the Copyright Office, however, ESA and iFixit agreed that 
circumvention would be necessary to replace an entire optical drive. ESA Class 19 Post-Hearing Resp. at 
1-3; iFixit Post-Hearing Resp. 1-2. 
1268 iFixit explains that, for a PlayStation 4, the cost of replacing both the optical drive and the motherboard 
would be about $200, while the cost of replacing just the optical drive (if circumvention were permitted) 
would be only about $100. Tr. at 282:08-24 (May 20, 2015) (Wiens, iFixit). 
196
 

[PAGE 201]
     
    
    
    
 
 
    
 
   
 
   
 
     
   
   
   
  
   
    
  
   
  
   
  
   
 
     
       
       
        
      
               
              
           
         
          
            
    
             
     
       
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
relationship between the drive and motherboard is not “one to one” and that there are a 
“number of different permutations of optical drives and [motherboards].”1269 As a result, 
it is possible to replace just a malfunctioning optical drive, while keeping the existing 
motherboard, if one identifies a replacement drive that functions with that 
motherboard.1270 iFixit urges, however, that finding a matching drive may be quite 
difficult, because the number of drive-to-motherboard permutations makes it difficult to 
stock the required parts.1271 Third, iFixit acknowledges that, in addition to consoles still 
under warranty, the console manufacturers themselves provide official repair channels, 
noting that Sony will repair out-of-warranty PlayStation 3 consoles for a flat rate of $79, 
$99, or $129, depending on the edition of the console, and that Microsoft will repair out­
of-warranty Xbox 360 consoles for a flat rate of $99.99 or $119.99, depending on 
“whether the repair is processed via an online portal or over the phone, respectively.”1272 
Proponents’ assertions in this proceeding mirror claims made in the 2012 
rulemaking.  Just as iFixit does here, proponents in 2012 argued that jailbreaking would 
facilitate scientific research and homebrew activities.
1273 Indeed, with respect to those 
uses, proponents in 2012 relied on the same evidentiary examples that iFixit cites 
here.1274 Like iFixit, the 2012 proponents also suggested that the “repair of outmoded 
gaming consoles” justified the jailbreaking exemption.1275 
2. Opposition 
Class 19 was opposed by ESA and Joint Creators.1276 In brief, opponents urge the 
Register to recommend against adoption of the proposed exemption on the same grounds 
as in 2012.1277 In particular, ESA asserts that “the ability to access and distribute 
infringing content is, in fact, a principal reason why users hack their video game 
consoles,” and substantiates that claim with documentary evidence drawn from online 
forums and other sources that specifically describe jailbreaking as a means to allow users 
1269 Id. at 281:08-10 (Wiens, iFixit).
 
1270 Id. at 281:11-283:11 (Wiens, iFixit; Damle, USCO).
 
1271 Id. at 281:16-283:21 (Wiens, iFixit; Damle, USCO).
 
1272 iFixit Class 19 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2-3.
 
1273 2012 Recommendation at 39.
 
1274 Id. at 27 (noting that proponent cited “an Air Force project that made use of 1700 PS3s”); EFF,
 
Comments Submitted in Response to the Sept. 29, 2011 Notice of Inquiry on the Exemption to Prohibition
 
on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies 22 (Dec. 1, 2011),
 
available at http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2011/initial/eff.pdf (noting that “an astrophysicist at the
 
University of Massachusetts[] created complex simulations of gravitational waves using a grid of eight
 
PS3s he developed as an alternative to more costly and inefficient methods of scientific research”).
 
1275 2012 Recommendation at 31, 44. 
1276 The trade groups represented by Joint Creators are the Motion Picture Association of America, ESA,
 
and the Recording Industry Association of America.
 
1277 ESA Class 19 Opp’n; Joint Creators Opp’n.
 
197
 

[PAGE 202]
     
    
     
  
  
   
 
 
   
     
   
   
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
    
   
 
   
    
   
                
                 
    
   
   
        
       
         
            
                
             
               
                
                
 
 
                                                 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
to access unauthorized content on a console.1278 Indeed, ESA asserts that “virtually all” 
video game console jailbreaking tools are “bundled with applications that permit users to 
play pirated content,” a claim that is supported by documentary evidence from online 
sources.
1279 ESA thus urges that the primary effect of permitting users to jailbreak 
consoles would be to encourage piracy rather than the noninfringing uses cited by 
proponents. 
Opponents also note that proponents rely on the same claimed harms that the 
Register deemed insufficient to support an exemption in 2012.
1280 With respect to the 
claim that jailbreaking video game consoles gives researchers access to affordable 
computing resources, ESA urges that “[n]eeding to spend fair market value for access to 
computing resources (as opposed to the below market cost of the video game console) is 
not the kind of harm that this rulemaking is intended to address.”1281 Moreover ESA 
notes the ready availability of other affordable computing resources, including “the 
emergence of ‘cloud computing’ and ‘cloud service providers,’ which have revolutionized 
access to scalable, customizable processing resources that can be continuously tailored to 
specific computing needs.”
1282 
With respect to homebrew uses, opponents observe that there are a wide range of 
platforms on which to play independently developed games, including personal 
computers and Android devices.1283 
Finally, ESA responds to iFixit’s concerns about the ability to repair video game 
consoles by noting that all major console manufacturers offer repair services for both inwarranty and out-of-warranty consoles.1284 In a post-hearing letter, ESA confirms that 
manufacturers of the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 consoles provide official repair 
services.  Services for consoles under warranty “are offered at no charge to the 
customer.”1285 For out-of-warranty consoles, manufacturers also offer repair or 
replacement services ranging in price from $99 to $149.1286 ESA argues that, to the 
1278 ESA Class 19 Opp’n at 3-4, Exhibit A; see also Joint Creators Class 19 Opp’n at 3-4. 
1279 ESA Class 19 Opp’n at Statement 1 at ¶ 9 (Statement of Dylan Rhoads), Exhibit A. 
1280 Id. at 8-9. 
1281 Id. at 9. 
1282 Id. at 10. 
1283 Id. at 11-12; Joint Creators Opp’n at 4. 
1284 ESA Class 19 Post-Hearing Resp. at 3-4. 
1285 Id. at 3; see also id. at 4. 
1286 For out-of-warranty consoles, manufacturers also offer repair services. According to ESA, for Xbox 
360 consoles produced in or after 2008, Microsoft provides repair services for “a current flat fee of $99 for 
any hardware-related issues, including parts and labor;” while older models “are no longer supported,” 
“[u]sed replacement consoles . . . are frequently sold for well under $99” via online marketplaces such as 
eBay. Id. at 4. ESA explains that Sony Computer Entertainment America (“SCEA”) provides repair 
services for all models of the PlayStation 3 except three early models; for those older models, however, 
198
 

[PAGE 203]
     
    
 
 
  
 
    
   
 
     
 
    
   
  
  
   
  
    
   
 
  
  
   
   
  
   
                 
        
     
     
   
   
   
   
   
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
extent proponents claim that repair through official channels is more difficult or 
expensive than engaging in circumvention, this does not provide a basis for an 
exemption.1287 
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA recommends in favor of a video game console jailbreaking exemption 
limited to “the purpose of repairing malfunctioning hardware, for systems that are 
obsolete or no longer covered by manufacturer warranty.”1288 In NTIA’s view, “[t]he 
record indicates that circumvention is sometimes necessary to effectively perform . . . 
repairs,” and that “[c]onsole owners may need to perform repairs well after warranty 
coverage has expired.”
1289 NTIA maintains that alternatives to circumvention are 
inadequate because “[m]ost of those alternatives require the owner to submit the console 
to the manufacturer and, in some circumstances, pay a substantial fee to repair the item if 
the warranty has expired.”
1290 
At the same time, NTIA concludes that a broader exemption to allow for the 
installation of alternative software and third-party applications is not warranted “due to 
an insufficient record.”  Indeed, according to NTIA, “the current record to support [such 
an] exemption is significantly less robust and detailed than it was in the last 
rulemaking.”
1291 
As discussed below, the Register concludes that the current record does not 
support an exemption for jailbreaking of video game consoles, even one limited to 
console repair. The evidence shows that consoles can be repaired without the need to 
engage in circumvention. 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
In 2012, the Register determined that “access controls on gaming consoles protect 
not only the console firmware, but the video games and applications that run on the 
console as well,” many of which are owned by the console manufacturers.
1292 Based on 
extensive record evidence provided by opponents in that proceeding, the Register 
concluded that “the circumvention of console restrictions—even when initially 
undertaken for salutary purposes—is inextricably linked to and tends to fost er piracy.”
1293 
SCEA “offers a replacement model for $149 where the consumer is not required to send in the older unit, or 
[a] $99 exchange for a newer model.” Id. at 3.
 
1287 Id. at 4-5.
 
1288 NTIA Letter at 49.
 
1289 Id. at 48 
1290 Id. at 48-49.
 
1291 Id. at 48.
 
1292 2012 Recommendation at 41.
 
1293 Id. at 43.
 
199
 

[PAGE 204]
     
    
  
 
   
   
  
 
 
  
 
    
    
  
    
   
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
    
   
  
 
    
 
   
   
  
   
   
                 
    
  
  
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
She further concluded that “circumvention of access controls to permit interoperability of 
video game consoles—regardless of purpose—has the effect of diminishing the value of, 
and impairing the market for, the affected code, because the compromised code can no 
longer serve as a secure platform for the development and distribution of legitimate 
content.”
1294 The Register thus determined that proponents had “failed to fulfill their 
obligation to establish persuasively that fair use can serve as a basis for the exemption 
they seek.”1295 
The Register additionally determined in 2012 that proponents had failed to satisfy 
their burden to show that the claimed noninfringing uses were adversely affected by the 
prohibition on circumvention.  The record there referenced three academic research 
projects and one military project that employed video game consoles instead of allpurpose computers.
1296 But this showing did not change the fact that “alternative 
computing resources for such projects are available in the marketplace.”1297 The record 
also demonstrated that there were relatively few users of “homebrew” video game 
programs
1298 and that, in any event, “independent development of video games and other 
applications can be pursued on thousands of other Linux-based devices and other 
platforms, as well as through various programs offered by the console manufacturers 
themselves.”
1299 Finally, the Register also found in 2012 that proponents had failed to 
substantiate their claim that the prohibition on circumvention was impeding repair of 
outmoded consoles.1300 
In this rulemaking, proponents have failed to offer a legal or factual basis to 
support a different outcome here.  Proponents have not provided any legal analysis, let 
alone an explanation of why the Register’s legal conclusions should be different now than 
in 2012.  The sparse evidence proffered by proponents in this proceeding is not materially 
different from the evidence considered in 2012.  At the same time, opponents have 
provided substantial evidence to support the conclusion that jailbreaking of video game 
consoles leads to infringing activity and that there continue to be readily available 
alternatives to circumvention for each of the activities proffered by proponents. 
Although the record in this proceeding is somewhat more developed with respect 
to the issue of console repair, it still does not support the need for an exemption.  The 
major game console manufacturers appear to offer repair services for in- and out-of­
warranty consoles either for free or at reasonable prices.  Moreover, the record shows that 
1294 Id. at 44. 
1295 Id. 
1296 Id. at 45-46.
 
1297 Id. at 47.
 
1298 Id. (noting that “some homebrew applications attract only thousands of users, or fewer, from the tens of
 
millions of console owners”). 
1299 Id. 
1300 Id. 
200
 

[PAGE 205]
     
    
  
   
  
  
 
 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
proponents themselves are able to offer repair services without the need to circumvent. 
Proponents did not provide any examples of an actual inability to repair a console 
through one of these means. 
Accordingly, the Register recommends against adoption of Proposed Class 19. 
201
 

[PAGE 206]
     
    
   
  
   
  
   
  
  
  
 
    
   
    
 
  
    
  
   
  
   
    
   
           
            
           
           
        
      
      
     
       
               
             
             
               
              
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
H. Proposed Class 20:  Jailbreaking – Smart TVs 
1. Proposal 
In addition to their traditional functionality, many modern televisions (“TVs”) 
have built-in software features that can stream content over the internet, interact with 
other devices in the home, or run applications.1301 The Software Freedom Conservancy 
(“SFC”) proposed an exemption to permit circumvention of access controls on firmware 
(i.e., the operating system) of such internet-enabled TVs—often referred to as “smart 
TVs”—to enable installation of third -party software.1302 According to SFC, third-party 
software applications can allow a smart TV to interoperate with local computer networks 
and external peripherals, access media stored on external storage devices, and improve 
the TV’s accessibility features.
1303 The NPRM described the class as follows: 
Proposed Class 20: This proposed class would permit the jailbreaking of 
computer-embedded televisions (‘‘smart TVs’’). Asserted noninfringing 
uses include accessing lawfully acquired media on external devices, 
installing user-supplied licensed applications, enabling the operating 
system to interoperate with local networks and external peripherals, and 
enabling interoperability with external devices, and improving the TV’s 
accessibility features (e.g., for hearing-impaired viewers). The TPMs at 
issue include firmware encryption and administrative access controls that 
prevent access to the TV’s operating system.
1304 
Along with SFC, comments supporting Proposed Class 20 were filed by Free Software 
Foundation (“FSF”),
1305 Catherine Gellis and the Digital Age Defense project 
(“Gellis/Digital Age Defense”),1306 The Exploiteers, which described itself as a “group of 
hobbyist security researchers,”1307 and Jay Freeman, who runs an app store for jailbroken 
1301 See SFC Pet. at 3; The Exploiteers Supp. at 1. 
1302 SFC’s proposal was to ‘‘permit owners of computer-embedded televisions (‘Smart TVs’) to circumvent 
firmware encryption and administrative access controls that control access to the TVs’ operating systems, 
for the purpose of accessing lawfully-acquired media, installing licensed applications, and enabling 
interoperability with external devices.’’ SFC Pet. at 1. 
1303 Id. at 2. 
1304 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,868. 
1305 FSF Class 20 Supp. 
1306 Gellis/Digital Age Defense Class 20 Supp. 
1307 The Exploiteers Supp. at 1. In its brief comments, The Exploiteers also asked that Class 20 be extended 
to “streaming media players,” such as the Logitech Revue, Google Chromecast, and Boxee Box. Id. No 
record was made, however, to support a jailbreaking exemption for such devices. The petition filed by 
SFC— the sole party to offer substantive legal argument and factual evidence in support of Proposed Class 
20— was limited to smart TVs, as were all of SFC’s later submissions. 
202
 

[PAGE 207]
     
    
  
   
  
   
    
    
    
   
  
   
   
  
    
   
  
    
    
 
   
 
  
      
  
 
   
   
    
       
            
    
    
  
  
  
    
  
  
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
devices.1308 In addition, over 1700 individuals filed comments in support of Proposed 
Class 20.1309 
a. Background 
According to SFC, manufacturers of smart TVs restrict access to the TV’s 
firmware using two types of TPMs.  First, the firmware may be encrypted on the smart 
TV .  To circumvent that encryption scheme, a user must first obtain a copy of the smart 
TV’s firmware by obtaining a firmware update from the manufacturer that contains an 
entire copy of the firmware.
1310 Because the firmware update is also encrypted, the user 
must then decrypt the update.  According to SFC, “[d]ifferent encryption schemes are 
used by different manufacturers (and on different TVs produced by a single 
manufacturer).”
1311 SFC explains, however, that most encryption schemes “involve the 
application of a well-known encryption algorithm such as Advanced Encryption System 
(AES), in conjunction with a secret key selected by the manufacturer.”
1312 
SFC further explains that in some cases, “[s]mart TV modification enthusiasts 
have discovered the ‘secret key’ by ‘brute force,’ i.e. by using a program to guess every 
possible key until the correct key is found, yielding the ability to decrypt the contents of 
updates.”
1313 Once the firmware is decrypted, a user can make any desired modification 
to that firmware, including adding new applications.  The firmware update can then be reencrypted using the manufacturer’s specified scheme.  When the update is installed on 
the smart TV , the modified firmware and new applications are then available on the smart 
T V.
1314 
Further, smart TVs may include “administrative access controls” that limit users’ 
ability to install or execute applications. To bypass these access controls, “it is often 
necessary to identify and exploit a security vulnerability exposed by an application 
installed on the TV .”
1315 SFC explains, for example, that “the administrative access 
controls employed by certain models of Sony Bravia Smart TVs can be circumvented by 
causing the TV to run a program that exploits a memory error to give the user 
administrative access.”
1316 According to SFC, “[t]his is the same type of technique used 
to jailbreak many smartphones, an activity for which an exemption has been granted.”1317 
1308 Freeman Class 20 Supp. at 1.
 
1309 See Digital Right to Repair Class 20 Supp. (1724 individuals).
 
1310 SFC Supp. at 1-4.
 
1311 Id. at 3. 
1312 Id. 
1313 Id. 
1314 Id. 
1315 Id. at 4. 
1316 Id. 
1317 Id. 
203
 

[PAGE 208]
     
    
 
   
   
 
   
   
    
   
  
   
 
 
  
  
   
   
   
 
    
    
    
 
    
   
      
       
                 
           
    
    
    
               
                       
                  
                  
     
    
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
SFC notes as well that access to copyrighted media or works displayed or played 
on smart TVs “is controlled by separate TPMs” from those used to protect the smart TV 
firmware.1318 At the public hearing, SFC elaborated on this point, explaining that “smart 
TVs are typically mostly platforms for streaming content from providers such as Netflix 
or Amazon or Hulu and those providers provide their own applications that embed their 
own encrypted stream handling.”1319 SFC thus expressed its understanding that 
circumventing the TPM protecting the firmware of a smart TV “does not weaken or affect 
. . . the TPM that is separately on Netflix.”1320 
b. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
SFC explains that although smart TV manufacturers place TPMs on the firmware 
as a whole, the “overwhelming majority” of that firmware incorporates the 
manufacturer’s own proprietary applications along with free, libre, and open source 
software (“FLOSS”) applications produced by third parties.
1321 These open source 
applications are licensed under terms that give anyone broad rights to use, copy, modify, 
and distribute the software.
1322 SFC asserts that, under the relevant FLOSS licenses, 
smart TV owners “are explicitly permitted to access these applications, modify their 
functionality, and install new or modified versions of the applications onto their TVs.”
1323 
For example, according to SFC, “[t]he flagship Smart TVs of the top manufacturers— 
Samsung, Sony, and LG—all run operating systems based on Linux.” 1324 Linux is 
licensed under the General Public License (“GPL”), a FLOSS license which “permits 
recipients of the software to obtain the software’s source code and to copy, modify, and 
redistribute the software without [a] fee (and requires distributors of the software to 
extend these rights to recipients).”1325 SFC further explains that “[t]he GPL’s terms 
permit television manufacturers to use GPL-licensed software in their Smart TVs, but 
they also ensure that consumers who purchase TVs containing that software have the 
right to modify it and to run it without restriction.”
1326 
1318 Id. at 10.
 
1319 Tr. at 121:10-14 (May 20, 2015) (Williamson, SFC).
 
1320 Id. at 124:18-23 (Damle, USCO; Williamson, SFC).
 
1321 SFC Supp. at 1-2, 4; see also id. at 13-15 (list of FLOSS software components used by major smart TV
 
manufacturers); id. at 38 (photograph of open source license notification on Samsung smart TV).
 
1322 Id. at 2.
 
1323 Id. at 4-5. 
1324 SFC Pet. at 2. 
1325 Id.; see also SFC Supp. at 17 (version 2 of the GPL) (“These [license] restrictions translate to certain 
responsibilities for you if you distribute copies of the software, or if you modify it . . . . For example, if you 
distribute copies of such a program, whether gratis or for a fee, you must give the recipients all the rights 
you have. You must make sure that they, too, receive or can get the source code.”); SFC Supp. at 25 
(version 3 of the GPL). 
1326 SFC Pet. at 2. 
204
 

[PAGE 209]
     
    
   
  
 
 
  
   
   
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
     
    
 
    
 
   
    
    
                  
                
                    
 
    
    
     
     
              
                
              
                
              
      
     
    
  
   
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Accordingly, with respect to the FLOSS applications that are incorporated into 
smart TV firmware, SFC asserts that circumvention of the access controls on the 
firmware would permit licensed, and therefore noninfringing, uses of those applications.  
Although SFC asserts that installation of third-party applications typically only 
requires access to, and presumably modification of, FLOSS firmware applications,1327 it 
acknowledges that jailbreaking may also require access to proprietary, non-FLOSS 
firmware applications found in some smart TVs.1328 With respect to those proprietary 
applications, SFC invokes fair use as a basis for making the necessary reproductions and 
modifications to permit installation and execution of lawfully acquired programs.
1329 
Although SFC does not specifically analyze the four statutory fair use factors, it cites 
Sega Enterprises Ltd. v. Accolade, Inc.1330 and Lexmark International, Inc. v. Static 
Control Components, Inc.1331 in support of the proposition that “[c]opyright law 
recognizes that an owner’s access to and modification of software to allow 
interoperability is fair use.”1332 
Related to the question of fair use, SFC disputes opponent Joint Creators’s 
argument, discussed below, that the Federal Circuit’s decision in Oracle America, Inc. v. 
Google Inc.1333 should change prior reasoning of the Register that facilitating 
interoperability may be considered a non-infringing use for purposes of an exemption.  
SFC argues that Oracle v. Google is distinguishable.  SFC observes that the case was 
principally about the copyrightability of certain code, and that SFC “does not question the 
copyrightability of code or applications.”1334 Furthermore, SFC argues that the decision 
has no bearing on its fair use claim because the court of appeals remanded the fair use 
issue for further consideration.
1335 SFC also notes that the Federal Circuit did not 
overrule the Ninth Circuit’s decisions in either Sega1336 or Sony Computer Entertainment, 
1327 Id. SFC explains, for instance, that “on some Smart TV models, once the owner has circumvented the 
firmware encryption, they can enable the TV to connect to other devices on their local network simply by 
causing the FLOSS operating system to run a FLOSS application (a telnet server) when it starts up.” Id. at 
2-3. 
1328 SFC Supp. at 2. 
1329 Id. at 5-7. 
1330 977 F.2d 1510 (9th Cir. 1992). 
1331 387 F.3d 522 (6th Cir. 2004). 
1332 SFC Supp. at 7 & nn.33-34 (citing Sega, 977 F.2d at 1528 and Lexmark, 387 F.3d at 550-51). SFC also 
makes a passing reference to section 117(a)(1), which permits the owner of a copy of a computer program 
to make a copy or adaptation of a computer program under certain circumstances. 17 U.S.C. § 117(a). 
Because SFC provides no evidence to demonstrate that the owner of a smart TV owns, rather than licenses, 
the copy of proprietary applications included in the smart TV’s firmware, as required to invoke section 117, 
the Register analyzes only SFC’s fair use claim. 
1333 750 F.3d 1339 (Fed. Cir. 2014). 
1334 SFC Reply at 5. 
1335 Id. 
1336 977 F.2d 1510. 
205
 

[PAGE 210]
     
    
  
 
  
   
 
   
     
    
  
   
  
  
 
 
     
  
 
  
   
 
   
 
 
     
     
            
                  
                 
     
    
     
    
    
    
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Inc. v. Connectix Corp.,1337 both of which treated uses necessary to enable 
interoperability as fair uses.1338 
c. Asserted Adverse Effects 
SFC points to several adverse effects resulting from section 1201(a)(1)’s 
prohibition on circumvention.1339 First, SFC notes that it is “primarily concerned with 
facilitating the use of FLOSS applications produced by its member projects and other 
FLOSS community members.”1340 SFC explains that, in general, the goal of section 1201 
is to give copyright owners control and circumscribe the use of their works.1341 Smart 
TV manufacturers, however, do not own the copyright in the FLOSS applications 
included in the firmware.  By nevertheless installing TPMs on those TVs that limit access 
to the firmware as a whole, SFC suggests that those manufacturers are frustrating the 
wishes of the copyright owners of FLOSS applications, who chose to license their 
software on terms specifically allowing broad access to and modification of their 
works.
1342 
Second, SFC asserts that the TPMs adversely affect the ability to enable the smart 
TV firmware (and the TV itself) to interoperate with third-party software and devices.  
SFC notes that some independent developers have created a number of applications to 
modify the behavior of jailbroken TVs.  For instance, SFC cites the SamyGo project, 
which distributes software for Samsung-branded TVs that performs functions such as 
“modify[ing] subtitles to be larger, brighter, or outlined to enhance readability,” 
“enabl[ing] or expand[ing] the TV’s compatibility with peripheral hardware, such as 
mice, keyboards, and external storage devices,” and “chang[ing] the aspect ratio, 
resolution, or scale of the TV’s display.”
1343 According to SFC, by prohibiting the 
jailbreaking of smart TVs to permit the installation of these independently developed 
applications, section 1201(a)(1) “limits creativity and the production of new copyrighted 
works.”
1344 
SFC also notes that many of these enhancements “make the TVs more accessible 
to people with disabilities”—such as “text -to-speech applications to read subtitles aloud 
to sight-impaired users”—or enable smart TVs to “work with accessibility pro ducts such 
1337 203 F.3d 596 (9th Cir. 2000).
 
1338 SFC Reply at 5.
 
1339 The Register notes that proponents do not address the reverse engineering or encryption exemptions
 
under section 1201. See, e.g., 17 U.S.C. § 1201(f), (g). However, as observed by the Register in other
 
contexts, these exemptions are unlikely to cover the full range of activities at issue. See 2010
 
Recommendation at 94 & n.318, 199.
 
1340 SFC Supp. at 4.
 
1341 Id. at 6.
 
1342 Id. at 6-7
 
1343 Id. at 5.
 
1344 Id. at 7.
 
206
 

[PAGE 211]
     
    
   
 
   
   
 
  
    
 
  
   
  
 
    
 
   
   
    
    
   
  
      
    
 
   
 
    
  
                    
      
            
      
    
     
    
  
     
  
  
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
as headphones [or] powered neckloop devices.”1345 In response to a claim by opponent 
LG Electronics U.S.A., Inc. (“LG”), discussed below, that LG-manufactured smart TVs 
already contain many accessibility features, SFC testified that TVs made by other 
manufacturers lack such accessibility features.1346 
SFC also suggests that there is no viable alternative to circumvention because 
“[t]here is no other way to access the firmware and filesystem on which [FLOSS software 
is] installed.”1347 SFC rejects the suggestion that connecting a laptop to the TV is a 
viable alternative to circumvention because this solution does not permit users to access 
the FLOSS software they are entitled to access, and does not permit the installation of 
software to enhance the operation of the TV itself.1348 
d. Argument Under Statutory Factors 
SFC argues that the proposed exemption is supported by each of the statutory 
factors.  First, it argues that the exemption would enhance the availability for use of 
copyrighted works by allowing users to access FLOSS applications running on smart 
TVs, and to make modifications to those applications that will themselves become 
available to other users—and to manufacturers—under the applicable FLOSS license. 1349 
In addition, SFC claims that the exemption would “increase the availability of third-party 
applications . . . that are designed to run on Smart TVs and enhance their 
functionality.”1350 At the same time, SFC argues that the availability of smart TV 
firmware itself will not be adversely affected, because “[t]here is no market for Smart TV 
firmware sold separately from the TVs themselves” and “the proprietary software on 
Smart TVs would be useless if separated from the TV it is intended to run on.”
1351 In 
particular, SFC notes that firmware “exists on the TV in compiled, object code form” that 
is “compiled for the specific hardware architecture and software environment of the TV it 
runs on.”
1352 According to SFC, “[d]ivorced from that environment, [the firmware] 
cannot be used.”1353 
Second, SFC claims that the exemption will enhance the availability of works for 
nonprofit educational uses.  It argues that giving users access to the FLOSS applications 
1345 Id. at 5-6. A powered neckloop is a device that can connect a TV or other device to a hearing aid. See
 
Clearsounds Quattro Amplified Bluetooth Neckloop, CLEARSOUNDS, https://www.clearsounds.com/
 
product/quattro-40-adaptive-bluetooth-system (last visited Oct. 7, 2015) (cited in SFC Supp. at 6 n.24).
 
1346 Tr. at 132:11-133:08 (May 20, 2015) (Williamson, SFC).
 
1347 SFC Supp. at 7.
 
1348 See SFC Reply at 4.
 
1349 SFC Supp. at 7.
 
1350 Id. 
1351 Id. at 8. 
1352 Id. 
1353 Id. 
207
 

[PAGE 212]
     
    
    
  
   
 
    
  
    
    
  
  
 
  
    
    
    
 
   
    
  
    
  
  
      
   
 
  
   
  
   
   
  
  
    
   
    
   
    
  
    
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
installed on smart TVs will further “[o]ne of the fundamental purposes of the [GPL] and 
other FLOSS licenses,” which is “to give users the freedom to study and learn from the 
software they use.”1354 Third, SFC argues that the exemption would further “criticism, 
comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, [and] research” by “enabl[ing] 
researchers to find and expose security and privacy issues in Smart TVs.”
1355 SFC states 
that “Smart TVs have been shown to contain security vulnerabilities that can be exploited 
by malicious hackers to access them remotely and run harmful code,” including 
vulnerabilities that “make use of a Smart TVs’ built-in microphone and camera.”1356 
Fourth, SFC argues that circumvention will not have an adverse effect on the 
market for or value of copyrighted works.  It notes that circumvention would facilitate a 
market for third-party software, including FLOSS software that can benefit the 
manufacturers themselves, who would “have the right under the applicable FLOSS 
license to use these modifications in their products.”1357 SFC explains that permitting 
circumvention could enhance the market for smart TVs by making them more useable 
and increasing the demand for more customizable TVs.1358 SFC also stresses that 
circumvention “would neither impact the availability of copyrighted media or works 
displayed or played on Smart TVs nor encourage infringement of them,” because, as 
described above, “[a]ccess to this content is controlled by separate TPMs.”1359 
SFC makes several points in response to the claim, discussed below, that 
jailbreaking a smart TV would enable piracy.  SFC emphasizes that its petition “does not 
propose, and would not enable, circumvention of the Digital Rights Management 
(‘DRM’) systems and other TPMs” controlling access to copyrighted works that are 
played on smart TVs.
1360 SFC maintains that opponents have provided no evidence that 
jailbreaking would enable piracy of proprietary applications installed on smart TVs.  SFC 
notes that “even if a proprietary application . . . was extracted from an unlocked Smart 
TV , it could not be trivially shared in the same way software on a personal computer can 
be.”1361 According to SFC, that is because “[t]he hardware architecture of Smart TVs 
often var[ies] significantly from one model to the next, and each application must be 
compiled for the architecture of the TV it is intended to run on—if it was copied to a TV 
with a different architecture, it simply wouldn’t run.”1362 
1354 Id. 
1355 Id. 
1356 Id. at 9. 
1357 Id. 
1358 Id. at 9-10. 
1359 Id. at 10. 
1360 SFC Reply at 2. 
1361 Id. 
1362 Id. 
208
 

[PAGE 213]
     
    
  
 
     
     
  
   
    
 
   
  
  
      
      
  
     
    
   
  
  
   
    
 
 
    
  
  
 
 
    
  
       
     
     
     
    
    
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
With respect to other factors that the Librarian should consider, SFC argues that 
the exemption would “give users a means to extend the effective lifespan of their Smart 
TVs” by allowing them to “add features to their TVs rather than purchase a new one” that 
has those features.1363 SFC gives the example by analogy of the Linksys WRT54G 
router, which SFC claims was on the market for a longer period of time than nearly any 
other consumer router because it permitted installation of “FLOSS community firmware . 
. . which unlocked latent capabilities that the manufacturer did not provide.”
1364 
SFC disputes LG’s claim, addressed below, that permitting jailbreaking would 
harm “platform security” by making smart TVs more vulnerable to malicious software or 
hacking.  SFC acknowledges that “to some extent these TPMs are primarily designed for 
systems security,” specifically, to “prevent unauthorized software from being installed 
inadvertently or against the user’s wishes.”
1365 SFC also acknowledges LG’s suggestion 
that a jailbroken TV might not receive further manufacturer-authorized updates.1366 But 
SFC expresses doubt that “these TVs are updated so frequently or for such a long period 
by the manufacturers that they really are kept much safer by keeping them in the stock 
configuration.”
1367 Moreover, SFC emphasizes that ultimately, “[t]he user is making an 
active choice to stop receiving those updates in order to have access to more functionality 
on the television.”
1368 
SFC also suggests that, in at least some cases, the exemption under consideration 
would not make smart TVs more vulnerable to unwanted software because the TPMs on 
the TV would not be eliminated by the circumvention process.
1369 To support that claim, 
SFC points specifically to the fact that, as noted above, the circumvention of the 
encryption-type TPMs takes place externally to the TV , using an encrypted firmware 
update; the encryption checks on the TV ultimately remain in place.
1370 Accordingly, 
SFC suggests, any unwanted software would continue to be blocked by the encryption 
scheme.  By contrast, however, SFC did not address whether the alternative method of 
circumvention, involving bypass of administrative access controls, would similarly leave 
the relevant protections in place. 
1363 SFC Supp. at 10. 
1364 Id. 
1365 Tr. at 129:06-12 (May 20, 2015) (Williamson, SFC).
 
1366 Id. at 130:16-20 (Williamson, SFC).
 
1367 Id. at 131:22-25 (Williamson, SFC).
 
1368 Id. at 131:14-16 (Williamson, SFC).
 
1369 Id. at 129:13-130:15 (Williamson, SFC).
 
1370 SFC Supp. at 10.
 
209
 

[PAGE 214]
     
    
  
    
  
  
  
    
  
  
   
  
   
    
  
  
  
  
 
     
 
 
 
   
   
  
   
                
         
 
                   
         
              
                 
             
            
                      
  
          
     
   
               
      
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
2. Opposition 
Proposed Class 20 was opposed by Joint Creators1371 and LG.1372 
a. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Opponents do not appear to take issue with proponents’ assertion that much of the 
computer code embedded by manufacturers in smart TVs may be accessed and altered by 
TV owners because it is subject to FLOSS open source licenses.1373 Joint Creators, 
however, dispute proponents’ invocation of fair use as a basis for copying and modifying 
the non-FLOSS proprietary software in smart TVs, although they do not engage in 
specific analysis of the four fair use factors. While acknowledging the Register’s earlier 
determinations that jailbreaking of smartphones to permit independently created software 
applications to run is likely to be a fair use, they offer two reasons why the same logic 
does not extend to smart TVs.1374 
First, Joint Creators assert that proponents “have not described in any detail the 
process of circumventing access controls used on computer programs resident on smart 
TVs,” and that proponents have therefore not met their burden of demonstrating that the 
exemption would facilitate a noninfringing use.
1375 Joint Creators do not explain, 
however, how this argument ties into the fair use analysis.  Second, Joint Creators invoke 
the Federal Circuit’s decision in Oracle v. Google.
1376 In that case, the lower court had 
held that the “declaring code” of software packages written in the Java programming 
language was uncopyrightable, in part based on its conclusion that copying that code was 
necessary to enable interoperability with other software written in the Java programming 
language.
1377 The Federal Circuit reversed, rejecting the argument that there is an 
“interoperability exception” to copyrightability.1378 While acknowledging that fair use 
was a separate issue that was not finally decided by the Federal Circuit, Joint Creators 
nevertheless claim that the decision “calls into question the Register’s reasoning from 
1371 Joint Creators Class 20 Opp’n. The trade groups represented by Joint Creators are the Motion Picture 
Association of America, the Entertainment Software Association, and the Recording Industry Association 
of America. 
1372 LG Reply. The Register notes that LG filed its comments in the reply phase of the written comment 
period, which had been designated as allowing proponents and neutral commenters to respond to points 
made by the opposition. Because only two comments were filed in opposition to this proposed class, the 
Register will exercise her discretion to consider LG’s comments in reply, while at the same time being 
mindful that proponents did not have an opportunity to file written comments in response to LG. 
1373 See Joint Creators Class 20 Opp’n at 3-4 (in considering the TPMs and asserted noninfringing use at 
issue, Joint Creators do not attempt to rebut the claim that much of the code in smart TVs is subject to an 
open source license). 
1374 Id. at 3 (citing 2012 Recommendation at 72, 74); see also 2010 Recommendation at 92-94. 
1375 Joint Creators Class 20 Opp’n at 3. 
1376 750 F.3d 1339. 
1377 Oracle Am., Inc. v. Google Inc., 872 F. Supp. 2d 974, 976-77 (N.D. Cal. 2012). 
1378 Oracle v. Google, 750 F.3d at 1370. 
210
 

[PAGE 215]
     
    
     
  
  
 
 
  
  
    
 
 
 
  
   
  
  
  
   
   
  
 
    
 
    
      
  
  
 
   
        
  
      
     
         
      
     
             
     
 
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
prior cycles” that jailbreaking smartphones to enable interoperability is likely to be a fair 
1379use. 
b. Asserted Adverse Effects 
Joint Creators assert that any of the adverse effects claimed by proponents of the 
exemption are mitigated by the availability of laptop computers that “can be connected to 
television sets such that the output of these applications would be viewable on television 
screens,” noting that a laptop is “capable of running whatever applications the proponents 
would like to develop and run.”
1380 
LG, for its part, suggests circumvention is unnecessary because LG smart TVs 
already provide all of the features that SFC claims can be added only by jailbreaking 
smart TVs, including the ability to modify subtitles and to change the aspect ratio, to 
accommodate people with disabilities, and to connect to peripheral hardware such as 
mice and keyboards.
1381 
c. Argument Under Statutory Factors 
Under the first statutory factor, “the availability for use of copyrighted works,”1382 
Joint Creators urge that an exemption would undermine the dissemination of legitimate 
applications and creative content. Joint Creators argue that “the platforms and devices 
that smart TV manufacturers and software providers design not only provide software 
developers and consumers with reliable ecosystems within which to offer innovative new 
products, but they also prevent application piracy by proactively excluding infringing 
applications.”
1383 Joint Creators note that not only can “applications that themselves are 
infringing copies of other applications” be installed on jailbroken TVs, but “applications 
that infringe other types of works such as movies and television shows” can also be 
installed.
1384 Joint Creators point in particular to the application “Popcorn Time,” which 
uses the BitTorrent protocol to facilitate viewing of pirated movies and TV shows.1385 
According to an article submitted by Joint Creators, Popcorn Time has millions of users 
and has “made BitTorrent piracy as easy as Netflix, but with far more content and none of 
those pesky monthly payments.”
1386 
1379 Joint Creators Class 20 Supp. at 4. 
1380 Id. 
1381 LG Reply at 3.
 
1382 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(i).
 
1383 Joint Creators Class 20 Opp’n at 4-5.
 
1384 Id. at 5. 
1385 Id. 
1386 Id. at Exhibit 2 (reproducing Andy Greenberg, Inside the Popcorn Time, The Piracy Party Hollywood 
Can’t Stop, WIRED (Mar. 18, 2015), http://www.wired.com/2015/03/inside-popcorn-time-piracy-party­
hollywood-cant-stop). 
211
 

[PAGE 216]
     
    
  
 
   
  
  
  
 
   
    
 
   
   
  
 
  
   
    
     
  
    
   
   
   
  
   
 
    
 
   
  
     
  
  
     
       
     
           
     
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
LG also disputes SFC’s claim under the first statutory factor that the exemption 
would enhance the availability of copyrighted works, noting that LG “not only provides 
its users with extensive availability to [sic] third party applications, but also provides 
open-source programs which allow users to connect with other external devices and 
applications.”1387 
Under the second statutory factor, LG takes issue with SFC’s claim that having 
access to FLOSS applications will enable users to study and learn from open source 
software. LG states that “it cannot be assumed that all users will be utilizing the 
capability to study the design and formation of copyright protected software merely for 
educational purposes,” and that some users “will utilize these capabilities to copy and 
infringe on another’s copyright[] protected property.”
1388 Under the third factor, LG 
challenges SFC’s proposition that allowing circumvention would spur research, 
comment, and reporting on security and privacy issues in smart TVs.  LG states that it 
“provides a number of means for consumers to communicate their concerns or any 
defects that may exist in a television’s system.”1389 
Under the fourth factor, Joint Creators argue that allowing jailbreaking would 
undermine the “market for and value of copyrighted works”1390 by enabling piracy of 
smart TV applications and permitting installation of applications that can be used to 
consume pirated content.1391 LG similarly asserts that “this exemption would restrict the 
ability of LG and other Smart TV manufacturers from developing Smart TV services with 
content owners and distributors, such as Amazon, Hulu, Netflix, and additional content 
distributors of all sizes since circumvention would expose their products to infringing 
users and unauthorized distribution.”1392 But LG and Joint Creators do not dispute SFC’s 
assertion that streaming services that are accessed via smart TVs have TPMs that operate 
separate and apart from the TPMs on the smart TV firmware. 
Finally, LG also expresses concern that “[a]llowing this exemption would affect 
the value of the product and dilute the LG brand,” and it specifically references 
“OpenLGTV ,” an unauthorized reverse-engineering project that creates third-party 
applications for jailbroken LG smart TVs.
1393 LG expresses concern that “many 
consumers that may come across OpenLGTV are likely to be unaware that OpenLGTV is 
not affiliated with their LG Smart TV before permanently altering their television.”1394 
Under the fifth statutory factor—concerning such other factors as may be appropriate for 
1387 LG Reply at 4. 
1388 Id. 
1389 Id. 
1390 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(iv).
 
1391 Joint Creators Class 20 Opp’n at 5.
 
1392 LG Reply at 4.
 
1393 Id. at 5; see also SFC Supp. at 7 (describing OpenLGTV projects).
 
1394 LG Reply at 5.
 
212
 

[PAGE 217]
     
    
 
 
      
    
 
  
   
   
   
    
  
  
  
  
 
    
    
   
 
 
     
 
  
   
     
 
  
  
    
    
  
    
             
               
              
                 
             
 
 
                                                 
 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
the Librarian’s consideration—LG challenges SFC’s claim that circumvention would 
extend the lifespan of smart TVs by allowing users to add functionality that would 
otherwise require the purchase of a new TV . LG asserts instead that “circumvention of 
TPMs would only make the television more vulnerable to malware and hackers and 
thereby effectively decrease the life span of the product.”
1395 In particular, LG argues 
that permitting circumvention would “compromise the overall platform security of Smart 
TVs,” and in doing so, “place the consumer’s privacy in jeopardy and expose 
manufacturers of Smart TVs to liability.”1396 LG urges that the TPMs “fundamentally 
protect the consumer’s software from security risks,” including by “block[ing] malware 
from infiltrating the television’s systems.”1397 LG asserts that “circumvention of TPMs 
would disable the security installed in Smart TVs to prevent hackers and malware from 
gaining access to the user’s television” such that bad actors would be able to access “a 
user’s content and personal information.”
1398 
3. Discussion 
a. Noninfringing Uses 
The Register concludes that proponents have carried their burden of 
demonstrating that circumvention of access controls on smart TV firmware is likely to 
enable noninfringing uses of that firmware.  First, it appears to be undisputed that smart 
TV firmware includes a substantial number of third-party FLOSS applications, and that 
the licenses by which those applications are distributed expressly permit anyone to 
“access [them], modify their functionality, and install new or modified versions of the 
applications onto their TVs.”1399 In such cases, the Register concludes that the proffered 
uses would be licensed and thus noninfringing.  
Second, with respect to non-FLOSS proprietary software applications that are part 
of smart TV firmware, modifications to that firmware to enable interoperability with 
third-party software are likely to constitute a fair use. Although SFC was rather 
conclusory in its fair use argument, it provided case law to support its claim that copying 
and alteration of computer programs to achieve interoperability can be a permissible fair 
1400use. 
1395 Id. 
1396 Id. at 4. 
1397 Id. at 2. 
1398 Id. 
1399 SFC Supp. at 5. 
1400 See id. at 6-7 & nn.33-34 (citing Sega, 977 F.2d at1528 and Lexmark, 387 F.3d at 550-51); SFC Reply 
at 5 (citing Connectix, 203 F.3d 596). The Register disagrees with Joint Creators’s contention that SFC 
cannot establish fair use because it has failed to “describe[] in any detail the process of circumventing 
access controls.” Joint Creators Class 20 Opp’n at 3. The identification of access controls is relevant to the 
question of whether the section 1201(a)(1) exemption process has been properly invoked, not whether the 
213
 

[PAGE 218]
     
    
   
 
  
   
 
 
  
  
   
   
   
  
     
   
  
   
   
   
   
  
    
 
   
    
   
    
 
               
    
   
     
      
                  
            
    
    
    
     
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Considering the first statutory factor for fair use, the purpose and character of the 
use, SFC points to a well-established line of cases supporting the conclusion that enabling 
interoperability with other computer programs is a favored purpose under the law, 
including Sega and Connectix. The Register has relied on these decisions in the past in 
recommending exemptions for smartphone jailbreaking.1401 Even if the use is not 
considered transformative—because the firmware will still be used for its intended 
purpose—that is not in and of itself dispositive.  As the Register concluded in 2012 in the 
context of granting an exemption for the jailbreaking of smartphones, even where a use is 
nontransformative, the first factor may nonetheless favor fair use where, as here, the 
purpose and character of the use is “noncommercial and personal” and the use enhances 
functionality.
1402 Contrary to Joint Creators’ assertion, the Federal Circuit’s decision in 
Oracle v. Google does not warrant a different conclusion.  That case held only that 
interoperability concerns are not determinative of copyrightability; it expressly 
acknowledged that interoperability concerns “may be relevant to a fair use analysis.”1403 
Looking to the second factor, it appears indisputable that the smart TV firmware 
at issue is functional, rather than creative, in nature, thus weighing in favor of fair use.1404 
With regard to the third factor, the amount and substantiality of the portion taken, SFC 
acknowledges that jailbreaking a smart TV may require making a full copy of the 
firmware, including any proprietary components.
1405 This factor thus tends to weigh 
against fair use.  But the weight afforded this factor in the overall analysis is lessened by 
the fact that modification of proprietary software is not always a necessity; SFC asserts, 
and opponents do not dispute, that installation of third-party applications may only 
require access to FLOSS-based firmware applications.
1406 In any event, as the Register 
has previously found in the smartphone context, copying of an entire computer program, 
when required to facilitate interoperability, does not necessarily defeat fair use.
1407 
Finally, considering the effect on the market for or value of the work, the Register 
agrees with SFC that “[t]here is no market for Smart TV firmware sold separately from 
the TVs themselves.”
1408 Moreover, opponents do not explain how jailbreaking will 
diminish the market value of that firmware. Although LG asserts that permitting 
jailbreaking could “compromise the overall platform security of Smart TVs” by 
requested use is fair. In any event, the Register finds that the access controls are sufficiently described to
 
consider SFC’s proposal.
 
1401 2010 Recommendation at 91-94.
 
1402 2012 Recommendation at 72, 74 (citing 2010 Recommendation at 93).
 
1403 Oracle v. Google, 750 F.3d at 1376-77.
 
1404 See SFC Supp. at 2; SFC Reply at 3 (highlighting the functional nature of the firmware by noting that it
 
“must be compiled for the architecture of the TV it is intended to run on”).
 
1405 SFC Supp. at 2.
 
1406 Id. at 5-6.
 
1407 See 2012 Recommendation at 90, 93.
 
1408 SFC Supp. at 8.
 
214
 

[PAGE 219]
     
    
  
    
 
     
 
   
  
   
    
     
 
    
 
 
 
     
  
  
  
 
   
  
  
 
  
     
    
              
             
       
           
          
              
                
            
                  
                
      
    
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
“plac[ing] the consumer’s privacy in jeopardy and expos[ing] manufacturers of Smart 
TVs to liability,”1409 on the current record, the Register finds these concerns to be 
unsubstantiated and speculative.  No actual evidence was submitted to illustrate the claim 
that jailbreaking of smart TVs will make it easier to gain unauthorized access to 
copyrighted content, or that it would otherwise undermine smart TVs as a platform for 
the consumption of expressive works.  SFC explains that access to copyrighted 
programming displayed or played on smart TVs from services like Hulu and Netflix “is 
controlled by separate TPMs” from those used to protect the smart TV firmware,
1410 and 
Joint Creators do not rebut this claim.  Although Joint Creators express concern that 
jailbreaking smart TVs would permit the installation of applications that are themselves 
infringing—or applications such as Popcorn Time that are used to consume infringing 
content—once again, they do not supply actual evidence to support their claims. 1411 The 
Register also agrees with proponents that users who jailbreak their own smart TVs are 
necessarily accepting the risks that come with engaging in that activity, including the 
possibility of exposing themselves to malware or voiding the manufacturer’s warranty.  
Thus, the fourth factor also favors fair use. 
Accordingly, the Register concludes that proponents have met their burden of 
demonstrating that jailbreaking of smart TVs is likely to be a fair use.
1412 
b. Adverse Effects 
Proponents have established that the prohibition on circumvention is adversely 
affecting legitimate noninfringing uses of smart TV firmware.  In particular, SFC has 
provided substantial evidence that the prohibition on circumvention is preventing 
installation of legitimate third-party software applications that can enhance the smart 
TV’s functionality. These applications include software to improve accessibility features 
for disabled users, to enable or expand the TV’s compatibility with peripheral hardware 
and external storage devices, and to make changes to the features of the TV such as the 
aspect ratio.
1413 
1409 LG Reply at 4. 
1410 SFC Supp. at 10. 
1411 The Register notes that if such a correlation were to be demonstrated in a future proceeding, it could 
impact the Register’s analysis. In the case of video game consoles, for example—where opponents have 
shown that jailbreaking of consoles is strongly associated with the consumption of unauthorized content— 
the Register has declined to grant a jailbreaking exemption. See 2012 Recommendation at 42-44. 
1412 Although no opponent opposed SFC’s invocation of section 117 as another potential basis for 
noninfringing use, the burden is on the proponent to establish entitlement to the exemption. NOI, 79 Fed. 
Reg. at 55,689. SFC fails to carry that burden here, because it provided no evidence or argument to 
demonstrate that the owner of a smart TV owns, rather than licenses, the proprietary applications 
incorporated into a smart TVs firmware. 17 U.S.C. § 117(a)(1) (extending the limitation to “the owner of a 
copy of a computer program”); see also Krause v. Titleserv, Inc., 402 F.3d 119, 122 (2d Cir. 2005); Vernor 
v. Autodesk, Inc., 621 F.3d 1102, 1111-12 (9th Cir. 2010). 
1413 SFC Supp. at 5-6. 
215
 

[PAGE 220]
     
    
    
     
   
 
  
    
  
 
  
  
  
     
 
  
     
   
    
  
  
 
  
    
 
  
    
 
  
  
  
 
   
       
        
        
    
              
           
  
     
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Even assuming LG is correct that its smart TVs already provide some or all of 
these capabilities, SFC testified that the same is not true of all smart TVs.1414 
Furthermore, the Register rejects Joint Creators’ suggestion that connecting a laptop to a 
TV serves as a viable alternative to circumvention.  That solution would only provide 
access to applications and content accessible from the laptop.  It would not allow 
installation of software on the smart TV to improve its functioning as a TV , such as 
making changes to permit better interoperability of the TV with accessibility devices or 
facilitating more prominent subtitles. 
c. Statutory Factors 
Under the first statutory factor, the availability for use of copyrighted works, the 
record indicates that third-party applications exist to improve the functionality of smart 
TVs.
1415 Similar to past determinations reached with respect to jailbreaking of 
smartphones, the Register concludes that the access controls at issue prevent consumers 
from using these third-party applications, and that denying a jailbreaking exemption for 
smart TVs would diminish the availability of such works.1416 At the same time, as 
explained above, there is no evidence that granting the exemption would diminish the 
availability of manufacturer-installed smart TV firmware. 
The Register concludes that factor two, concerning the availability of works for 
nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational uses, marginally favors granting the 
exemption.  SFC credibly asserts that one of the primary purposes of the FLOSS licenses 
is to allow users to study and learn from the FLOSS applications they use and that the 
exemption here will further that purpose.
1417 With respect to factor three, the impact on 
criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research, while the Register 
acknowledges SFC’s observation that jailbreaking might enable some types of security 
research, such activities are not the focus of the proposal.
1418 Factor three is therefore 
neutral. 
Under the fourth factor, concerning the “effect of circumvention of technological 
measures on the market for or value of the copyrighted works,”1419 as noted above in the 
fair use analysis, there is no evidence in the current record that jailbreaking smart TVs 
will harm the market for smart TV firmware or for other expressive works.  Under the 
fifth statutory factor, SFC asserts that the exemption would extend the lifespan of smart 
1414 Tr. at 132:10-133:08 (May 20, 2015) (Williamson, SFC).
 
1415 See SFC Supp. at 5-6 (citing SamyGO project).
 
1416 See 2012 Recommendation at 76 (citing 2010 Recommendation at 101).
 
1417 SFC Supp. at 8.
 
1418 Id. at 8-9; Tr. at 143:03-19 (May 20, 2015) (noting the potential for serious security vulnerabilities in 
smart TV software). Circumvention for purposes of security research is considered in Proposed Classes 22,
 
25, and 27A.
 
1419 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(iv).
 
216
 

[PAGE 221]
     
    
   
  
   
   
  
  
 
    
  
  
    
  
    
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
    
     
     
   
  
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
TVs by allowing users to add new functionality to them,1420 while LG argues that the 
exemption would shorten the lifespan of smart TVs by making them more vulnerable to 
malware.1421 As neither of these competing claims is adequately substantiated, the 
Register concludes that the fifth factor is neutral. 
In sum, on the whole, the statutory factors support the granting of an exemption. 
4. NTIA Comments 
NTIA supports an exemption to allow circumvention of access controls on smart 
TV firmware for purposes of enabling interoperability with third-party applications.1422 
In NTIA’s view, the proposed exemption “does not raise significantly different issues than 
those the Register has previously considered regarding the jailbreaking of mobile 
phones.”1423 NTIA notes in particular that “there are accessibility needs that cannot 
always be met without circumvention, such as modifying subtitles to enhance readability 
or changing the aspect ratio or resolution of the television.”1424 
5. Conclusion and Recommendation 
For the reasons described above, proponents of Class 20 have satisfied their 
burden of showing that TPMs applied to smart TVs have an adverse effect on 
noninfringing uses.  The statutory factors also tip in favor of granting the exemption.  
Accordingly, the Register recommends that the Librarian designate the following 
class: 
Computer programs that enable smart televisions to execute lawfully 
obtained software applications, where circumvention is accomplished 
for the sole purpose of enabling interoperability of such applications 
with computer programs on the smart television. 
1420 SFC Supp. at 10. 
1421 LG Reply at 5. 
1422 NTIA Letter at 52. 
1423 Id. at 50. 
1424 Id. 
217
 

[PAGE 222]
     
    
       
  
   
 
  
   
    
  
 
     
  
 
  
   
  
   
    
  
 
            
               
          
       
          
             
    
           
            
              
            
      
               
                
              
                
               
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
I. Proposed Class 21: Vehicle Software – Diagnosis, Repair or Modification 
1. Proposals 
Modern automobiles and agricultural vehicles and machinery are equipped with 
systems of interconnected computers that monitor and control a variety of vehicle 
functions.1425 As modern vehicles have become more reliant on software to operate, a 
wide variety of diagnostic, repair and modification activities now require access to and 
sometimes alteration of those computer programs, including identifying malfunctions, 
installing replacement parts, and customizing vehicles for specialized uses.
1426 As is 
explained below, however, manufacturers restrict access to vehicle computer programs in 
a variety of ways.  Accordingly, proponents are requesting an exemption to permit 
circumvention of TPMs protecting computer programs
1427 that control the functioning of 
vehicles for the purposes of diagnosis, repair and modification of the vehicles. 
EFF filed a petition seeking an exemption to allow the circumvention of TPMs on 
computer programs that are embedded in vehicles for purposes of personalization, 
modification, or other improvement of the vehicle.  The exemption would apply to all 
motorized land vehicles.1428 
IPTC USC proposed two similar exemptions for agricultural machinery 
specifically.1429 The proposed exemptions would allow owners of agricultural vehicles to 
circumvent the TPMs on computer programs that are embedded in their vehicles for the 
purpose of modifying, and to diagnose and/or repair, those vehicles. 
These proposals were consolidated by the Office into a single proposed class, 
described as follows in the NPRM: 
1425 The Electronic Frontier Foundation (“EFF”) Vehicle Software Repair Pet. at 2. 
1426 Id. ; The Intellectual Property & Technology Law Clinic of the University of Southern California Gould 
School of Law (“IPTC USC”) Vehicle Software Modification Pet. at 1, 4; IPTC USC Vehicle Software 
Repair Pet. at 1, 4. 
1427 The Register notes that throughout this Recommendation, the terms “firmware” and “software” are 
variously used, although both are “computer programs” within the meaning of the Copyright Act. See 17 
U.S.C. § 101 (definition of “computer program”). 
1428 EFF’s proposed regulatory language reads as follows: “Lawfully -obtained computer programs that 
control or are intended to control the functioning of a motorized land vehicle, including firmware and 
firmware updates, where circumvention is undertaken by or on behalf of the lawful owner of such a vehicle 
for the purpose of lawful aftermarket personalization, improvement, or repair.” EFF Vehicle Software 
Repair Pet. at 1. 
1429 IPTC USC filed two petitions relating to agricultural machinery software. The first see ks an exemption 
to “allow[] farmers to circumvent . . . TPMs for the purpose of modifying their own agricultural machinery 
to improve efficiency and/or functionality.” IPTC USC Vehicle Software Modification Pet. at 1. The 
second seeks an exemption to “allow[] farmers to circumvent . . . TPMs for the purpose of diagnosing 
and/or repairing their own agricultural machinery.” IPTC USC Vehicle Software Repair Pet. at 1. 
218
 

[PAGE 223]
     
    
   
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
   
   
      
   
   
 
  
 
  
  
 
    
                 
         
  
   
    
       
   
   
    
            
      
     
   
                 
                
               
                
          
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Proposed Class 21: This proposed class would allow circumvention of 
TPMs protecting computer programs that control the functioning of a 
motorized land vehicle, including personal automobiles, commercial 
motor vehicles, and agricultural machinery, for purposes of lawful 
diagnosis and repair, or aftermarket personalization, modification, or other 
improvement.  Under the exemption as proposed, circumvention would be 
allowed when undertaken by or on behalf of the lawful owner of the 
vehicle.
1430 
In addition to EFF and IPTC USC, the Office received comments supporting the 
proposed exemption from AAA,1431 Auto Care Association and Automotive Parts 
Remanufacturers Association (“Auto Care”),1432 Catherine Gellis and the Digital Age 
Defense project (“Gellis/Digital Age Defense”),1433 Consumer Electronics Association 
(“CEA”),1434 Farm Hack,1435 Free Software Foundation (“FSF”),1436 iFixit,1437 National 
Corn Growers Association,1438 Randy’s Repair, LLC.,1439 Specialty Equipment Market 
Association (“SEMA”),1440 and over 2500 individuals.1441 Two parties, SAE 
International Dedicated Short Range Communication Standards Committee (“SAE 
DSRC”) and SAE Vehicle Electrical System Security (VESS) Committee (“SAE 
VESS”), submitted neutral comments, along with offers to assist the Copyright Office by 
providing and sharing their technical expertise.
1442 
a. Background 
As noted above, modern vehicles are equipped with computers that monitor and 
control vehicle functions. These computers are referred to as electronic control units, or 
1430 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,869. In discussing this class, the Register uses the term “vehicle” to refer 
generally to all the types of motorized vehicles listed in the proposed exemption language, including 
agricultural machinery. 
1431 AAA Reply. 
1432 Auto Care Reply. 
1433 Gellis/Digital Age Defense Class 21 Supp. 
1434 CEA Reply. 
1435 Farm Hack Supp. 
1436 FSF Class 21 Supp. 
1437 iFixit & Kyle Wiens Supp.; iFixit Class 21 Supp.; iFixit Reply. 
1438 National Corn Growers Association Reply. 
1439 Randy’s Repair, LLC. Reply. 
1440 SEMA Reply. 
1441 Digital Right to Repair Class 21 Supp. (2284 individuals); Jay Freeman Class 21 Supp.; Scott Rogers 
Supp.; Digital Right to Repair Class 21 Reply (298 individuals); DANNiE D Reply; David M. Lawrence 
Reply; David Ricotta Reply; Donna Eno Class 21 Reply; Drayton Green Reply; Edward Brown Reply; 
George Cothran Reply; George Sawyer Class 21 Reply; Louis Wesler Class 21 Reply; Perry Bruns Reply. 
1442 SAE DSRC Class 21 Supp.; SAE VESS Class 21 Reply. 
219
 

[PAGE 224]
     
    
     
  
    
 
   
  
   
  
    
   
     
  
  
  
  
 
  
   
 
  
 
    
     
 
   
              
      
               
             
      
         
       
               
                  
   
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
ECUs.1443 A vehicle may have several ECUs that facilitate its operation. The individual 
ECUs are programmed to fulfill specific vehicular functions, such as engine control, fuel 
efficiency and braking.1444 There are several types of TPMs that restrict access to the 
software programs contained in ECUs, including challenge-response mechanisms, 
encryption, and disabled access ports on the circuitry itself.1445 
EFF explains that while vehicle owners expect to be able to engage in diagnosis, 
repair, and modification activities, TPMs on vehicle software “block such legitimate 
activities, forcing vehicle owners to choose between breaking the law or tinkering [with] 
and repairing their vehicles.”
1446 IPTC USC similarly notes that farmers specifically 
require access to vehicle software “to make any significant modifications to the 
efficiency and/or functionality of . . . their increasingly sophisticated agricultural 
machinery”
1447 and to “obtain vital diagnostic information.”1448 
b. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Citing the four-factor fair use test set forth in section 107, Class 21 proponents 
assert that vehicle owners, independent mechanics, and third-party innovators are entitled 
to use the computer programs in ECUs to diagnose, repair, or modify vehicles as a matter 
of fair use.  They further assert that these activities are noninfringing pursuant to the 
statutory exception for computer programs embodied in section 117, which exempts 
certain uses of computer programs from infringement liability. The Register reviews 
each theory of noninfringing use in turn. 
i. Fair Use 
On the question of fair use, addressing the first statutory factor, proponents 
maintain that accessing and using copyright-protected ECU computer programs to 
diagnose, repair and modify vehicles serve transformative purposes.
1449 Proponents 
assert that if the exemption were to be granted, users would be empowered to dissect and 
understand the functional aspects of these programs in order to create tools and 
applications for use on or in coordination with ECUs.
1450 In the case of modification, 
proponents maintain that the exemption would allow the addition of new functions and 
enhancement of existing functions to suit users’ particular needs, as well as necessary 
1443 EFF Vehicle Software Repair Pet. at 2; IPTC USC Vehicle Software Modification Pet. at 1; IPTC USC 
Vehicle Software Repair Pet. at 1.
 
1444 EFF Vehicle Software Repair Pet. at 1; IPTC USC Vehicle Software Modification Pet. at 4.
 
1445 See, e.g., EFF Class 21 Supp. at 3-4; IPTC USC Class 21 Supp. at 5-6.
 
1446 EFF Vehicle Software Repair Pet. at 5.
 
1447 IPTC USC Vehicle Software Modification Pet. at 1.
 
1448 IPTC USC Vehicle Software Repair Pet. at 1.
 
1449 EFF Class 21 Supp. at 8-9 (citing Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 579 (1994)).
 
1450 Id. at 8; see also EFF Class 21 Reply at 4-7; IPTC USC Class 21 Supp. at 11-12; IPTC USC Class 21
 
Reply at 8-9.
 
220
 

[PAGE 225]
     
    
   
    
  
 
   
    
  
  
 
    
  
   
  
 
  
 
    
    
 
    
 
     
  
   
   
                   
     
                
    
       
                    
               
 
                 
      
                
 
               
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
modifications to ECUs to accommodate replacement parts. They urge that these uses are 
transformative, and that this conclusion alone requires a finding of fair use.1451 
Turning to the second fair use factor, proponents state that the nature of the 
computer programs on ECUs weighs heavily in favor of fair use because the programs 
contain “unprotected aspects that cannot be examined without copying.”1452 They also 
note that the computer programs at issue act much like an internal operating system and 
thus lie “‘at a distance from the core’ of copyright protection.”1453 In particular, 
proponents observe that in prior 1201 rulemaking proceedings, the Register had 
concluded that computer programs comprising bootloaders and operating systems are 
essentially functional and that “[a]s functional works, certain features are dictated by 
function and in order to interoperate with [other] works certain functional elements of 
those programs, elements that in and of themselves may or may not be copyrightable, 
must be modified.”
1454 Proponents thus urge that “where the nature of the work is such 
that purely functional elements exist in the work and it is necessary to copy the 
expressive elements in order to perform those functions, consideration of this second 
factor arguably supports a finding that the use is fair.”1455 
With regard to the third factor, the amount of the copyrighted work used, 
proponents recognize that the entire work may be used.  However, they note that this does 
not preclude a finding of fair use.  They observe that the relevant analysis includes a 
consideration of whether the quantity and value of the materials used are reasonable in 
relation to the purpose of the copying.
1456 They reiterate that because it is necessary to 
copy the entire work in order to achieve a transformative purpose, consideration of this 
third factor arguably supports a finding that the use is fair.
1457 They assert that in the case 
of the diagnosis, repair, or modification of vehicle functions, any reproduction or 
alteration of computer programs on ECUs will only be that which is reasonable and for a 
legitimate purpose.1458 
1451 See, e.g., EFF Class 21 Supp. at 7-11; EFF Class 21 Reply at 4-8; IPTC USC Class 21 Supp. at 11-12;
 
IPTC USC Class 21 Reply at 8-10.
 
1452 See, e.g., IPTC USC Class 21 Supp. at 12 (quoting Sony Computer Entm’t, Inc. v. Connectix Corp., 203 
F.3d 596, 603 (9th Cir. 2000)).
 
1453 See, e.g., id.
 
1454 EFF Class 21 Supp. at 9 (quoting 2010 Recommendation at 96); Auto Care Class 21 Reply at 8 (same). 
1455 EFF Class 21 Supp. at 9 (quoting Oracle Am., Inc. v. Google Inc., 750 F.3d 1339, 1375 (Fed. Cir.
 
2014)).
 
1456 Id. at 10 (citing Campbell, 510 U.S. at 586-87); IPTC USC Class 21 Supp. at 11 (citing Perfect 10, Inc.
 
v. Amazon, Inc., 508 F.3d 1146, 1165 (9th Cir. 2007)). 
1457 IPTC USC Class 21 Reply at 9 (citing Authors Guild, Inc. v. HathiTrust, 755 F.3d 87, 98 (2d Cir.
 
2014)).
 
1458 EFF Class 21 Supp. at 10; EFF Class 21 Reply at 7-8.
 
221
 

[PAGE 226]
     
    
     
 
  
    
  
   
    
  
   
 
  
   
  
   
 
 
   
  
  
   
   
    
 
                    
     
              
        
            
     
     
     
                   
               
                 
     
             
               
    
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Finally, proponents assert that the fourth factor, the effect on the market for or 
value of the copyrighted work, also favors fair use.1459 Proponents note that there is no 
market for computer programs on ECUs apart from the sale of vehicles themselves, and 
so the uses encompassed by the proposed exemption, by definition, cannot substitute for 
sales of the vehicle software.1460 Proponents also maintain that the relevant market for 
consideration is the market for the copyrighted works themselves and not the market for 
vehicles containing the ECUs.1461 Accordingly, proponents reject as inapposite 
opponents’ claims regarding market effects such as vehicle values and brand equity.1462 
ii. Section 117 
Proponents also assert that vehicle owners’ copying or alteration of computer 
programs for diagnosis, repair or modification purposes on ECUs is noninfringing under 
section 117. That provision allows the owner of a copy of a computer program to make 
or authorize the making of another copy or adaptation of that program “as an essential 
step in the utilization of the computer program in conjunction with a machine and [if] it is 
used in no other manner.”
1463 
A key consideration with respect to the application of section 117 is who owns the 
computer program in question.  Proponents argue that under either of the two leading 
tests for ownership under section 117—Krause v. Titl eserv, Inc.1464 and Vernor v. 
Autodesk, Inc.1465—it is the owners of the vehicles who own the copies of the programs 
on ECUs embedded within those vehicles.1466 Proponents state that most vehicle ECUs 
are transferred with the vehicle with no explicit agreements governing title to the copies 
of ECU computer programs.1467 Proponents explained during the initial round of 
comments that they were able to identify only a few license agreements pertaining to 
ECUs. These agreements addressed only specific telematics 1468 or entertainment 
systems; proponents did not locate any licenses covering more general vehicle 
1459 See, e.g., EFF Class 21 Supp. at 11; EFF Class 21 Reply at 8; IPTC USC Class 21 Supp. at 12; IPTC 
USC Class 21 Reply at 10.
 
1460 EFF Class 21 Supp. at 11; IPTC USC Class 21 Supp. at 12.
 
1461 IPTC USC Class 21 Reply at 10.
 
1462 EFF Class 21 Reply at 8; IPTC USC Class 21 Reply at 10.
 
1463 17 U.S.C. § 117(a)(1).
 
1464 402 F.3d 119 (2d Cir. 2005).
 
1465 621 F.3d 1102 (9th Cir. 2010).
 
1466 See, e.g., EFF Class 21 Supp. at 11-15; EFF Class 21 Reply at 9-12; IPTC USC Class 21 Reply at 4-5.
 
1467 EFF Class 21 Supp. at 13; see also Tr. at 183:02-12 (May 19, 2015) (Walsh, EFF).
 
1468 EFF Class 21 Supp. at 14 (citing Terms and Conditions of Your Safety Connect Telematics Service,
 
TOYOTA 4 (Oct. 20, 2010), http://www.toyota.com/safety-connect/img/safetyconnect-terms.pdf 
(establishing that telematics systems are vehicle systems that combine global positioning satellite tracking
 
and other wireless communications to identify the location of vehicles for a variety of purposes such as
 
automatic roadside assistance)).
 
222
 

[PAGE 227]
     
    
    
  
    
  
  
  
    
 
   
 
   
  
 
  
  
 
 
   
     
  
  
 
   
  
    
 
             
     
            
          
  
           
             
          
              
             
        
            
  
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
functions.1469 And, during the reply phase, proponents noted that opponents had failed to 
offer any further evidence that copies of computer programs on ECUs are licensed rather 
than sold to vehicle purchasers.1470 
Proponents further maintain that even if written license terms exist, a vehicle 
owner can nonetheless be considered the owner of the ECU software copies.  They note 
that possessing actual title to a copy of a work is not an “absolute prerequisite” to section 
117(a) protection.1471 Rather, a party who exercises sufficient incidents of ownership 
over a copy of the program can be considered the owner of it.1472 They assert that such 
incidents of ownership exist for vehicle purchasers, noting that vehicle owners are 
understood to have the right to indefinitely use, possess, resell, discard or destroy their 
vehicles, including the embedded ECUs, without any material restriction from the 
manufacturer, and that no opponent has introduced any contrary evidence.
1473 
Proponents rely as well on the Register’s conclusion, in the context of granting an 
exemption for cellphone “unlocking,” that under applicable precedent, at least some 
subset of cellphone owners may be considered to own the copy of the cellphone software 
on their devices.
1474 
Proponents additionally assert that making copies or adaptations of ECU 
computer programs for the desired uses is “an essential step in the utilization of the 
computer program in conjunction with a machine and that [the copy or adaptation] is 
used in no other manner,” as required to invoke section 117.
1475 Although proponents 
concede that making such copies and adaptations may not be essential to using the 
vehicle in the manner intended by the manufacturer, they stress that section 117 allows 
the making of such copies and adaptations for the purpose of adding new features and 
capabilities to that software, noting that Krause had “approved the modifications and 
deemed them essential not because they were necessary to make the software work, but 
because they were necessary to make the software helpful or worth using.”
1476 
Additionally, proponents maintain that the creation of a backup copy to protect against 
destruction of or damage to the ECU software in the process of diagnosis, repair or 
1469 Id. at 13-14 (citing end-user license agreements for GM OnStar, Pioneer AppRadioLIVE, Ford Sync, 
Toyota Safety Connect, and Mercedes-Benz mbrace). 
1470 EFF Class 21 Reply at 9; IPTC USC Class 21 Reply at 4-5. 
1471 IPTC USC Class 21 Reply at 4 (citing Krause, 402 F.3d at 124). 
1472 Id. 
1473 Id. at 4-5; EFF Class 21 Reply at 9-10. 
1474 IPTC USC Class 21 Reply at 7 (citing 2012 Recommendation at 92-93). 
1475 See, e.g., EFF Class 21 Supp. at 13 (quoting 17 U.S.C. § 117(a)(1)). 
1476 Id. at 15 (internal quotation marks omitted) (citing Softech Worldwide, LLC v. Internet Tech. Broad. 
Corp., 761 F. Supp. 2d 367, 373 & n.2 (E.D. Va. 2011) (describing Krause)); see also Krause, 402 F.3d at 
126-27 (holding that section 117 encompassed “changes [that] were not strictly necessary to keep the 
programs functioning, but were designed to improve their functionality in serving the business for which 
they were created”). 
223
 

[PAGE 228]
     
    
 
 
  
 
    
  
  
  
   
  
 
 
   
   
   
    
     
 
    
    
 
         
                 
       
      
  
        
   
                   
               
          
         
                
             
         
          
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
modification is covered by the archival purposes exception set forth in section 
117(a)(2).1477 
c. Asserted Adverse Effects 
Proponents maintain that vehicle owners expect to have the freedom to diagnose, 
repair, or modify their own vehicles, and that access to the computer programs in the 
ECUs is required for these purposes.1478 They cite numerous examples of diagnosis, 
repair and/or modification activities in which vehicle owners have traditionally 
engaged—such as performance of routine maintenance, including oil changes, 1479 
resetting service warning lights,1480 fixing safety items like seatbelts,1481 and enhancing 
suspensions1482—that would, or would likely be, impeded by the prohibition on 
circumvention today.  Moreover, EFF explains that “it is common for repairs that replace 
hardware components to require modifications [of ECU programs] in order to calibrate 
the new part,” explaining, for example, that “[i]f new gears have a different radius than 
old ones, the computer needs to know so that the speedometer will work correctly.”
1483 
Proponents claim, however, that because of the existence of TPMs on vehicle 
software, vehicle owners must take their cars to authorized repair shops, or purchase 
expensive manufacturer-authorized tools, to diagnose and repair their vehicles.
1484 They 
also suggest that in some instances, TPMs prevent vehicle owners from making lawful 
modifications to their vehicles, such as modifying the car “to cap the speed when they 
lend the car to their teenage children or to a valet.”
1485 Moreover, proponents allege that 
manufacturer-licensed tools may not always allow a user to diagnose and repair a 
problem.1486 For instance, Craig Smith of Open Garages gave the example of a colleague 
who attempted to diagnose an inoperable power window on a car, where the authorized 
diagnostic tool indicated the window was operational.  Smith explained that through 
1477 See, e.g., EFF Class 21 Reply at 11-12. 
1478 See, e.g., EFF Class 21 Supp. at 16-23; EFF Class 21 Reply at 12-20; IPTC USC Class 21 Supp. at 12­
18; IPTC USC Class 21 Reply at 10-11.
 
1479 EFF Class 21 Supp. at 18.
 
1480 Id. 
1481 IPTC USC Class 21 Supp. at 14.
 
1482 Id. at 10.
 
1483 EFF Class 21 Supp. at 7; see also id. at App. A at 1-2 (Statement of David Blundell) (highlighting
 
modifications that require reprogramming of ECUs, including installing “a different rear axle gear . . . to 
improve its ability to tow heavy loads” and to accommodate changes in tire size).
 
1484 Id. at 17-19; IPTC USC Class 21 Supp. at 14-15.
 
1485 EFF Class 21 Supp. at 20-21; see also IPTC USC Supp. at 16-17 (explaining that manufacturers of
 
agricultural equipment “tend to program ECUs to completely shut the machine down if they detect
 
aftermarket ‘modules’ which users can attach to modify performance characteristics”).
 
1486 Tr. at 223:22-224:10 (May 19, 2015) (Charlesworth, USCO; Smith, Open Garages). 
224
 

[PAGE 229]
     
    
   
  
   
 
  
    
  
  
  
  
 
  
     
   
 
    
  
   
  
    
  
    
                 
               
             
     
               
            
        
                  
         
          
          
    
               
              
               
         
              
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
reverse engineering the vehicle software, he and his colleague were able to determine that 
the communications system for the power window unit was faulty.1487 
IPTC USC maintains that TPMs restricting access to agricultural vehicles and 
machinery place the livelihoods of farmers and other business owners at risk, because 
vehicle owners must sometimes wait significant periods of time before their disabled 
vehicles can be repaired by an authorized technician.
1488 Proponents further assert that 
TPMs force vehicle owners to pay higher prices to authorized repair shops; prevent them 
from using their local, chosen and/or trusted service providers; reduce competition in the 
repair market by allowing manufacturers to monopolize diagnosis and repair of vehicles; 
cause vehicle owners to delay repairs, sometimes at a cost to user comfort, ease or safety; 
prevent vehicle owners from safely increasing engine power; prevent vehicle owners 
from increasing environmental efficiency; prevent vehicle owners with disabilities from 
enhancing accessibility; and distort secondary markets for vehicles.
1489 Proponents assert 
that as vehicles are embedded with greater capabilities, such as self-driving functions, 
that are controlled by TPM-protected ECUs, the negative effects will only increase.1490 
Proponents also challenge opponents’ claim that alternatives to circumvention 
mitigate the adverse impact of TPMs.  As explained in greater detail below, opponents 
assert that a 2014 nationwide memorandum of understanding (“MOU”),1491 entered into 
by auto manufacturers, aftermarket parts manufacturers, and independent repair shops, 
broadly authorizes diagnosis and repair activities without the need for circumvention.
1492 
Proponents, however, argue that this industry arrangement is too narrow to mitigate the 
adverse impact of TPMs on vehicle owners.1493 For instance, proponents note that the 
MOU regime leaves out many vehicles:  the MOU encompasses only certain model 
years;1494 not all manufacturers of automobiles are party to the MOU;1495 and certain 
types of vehicles, such as mechanized agricultural vehicles, motorcycles and RVs, are not 
1487 See id. at 222:09-20 (Smith, Open Garages). Note that the transcript for the hearing refers to the 
window unit’s “cannibus.” This is a typo, and should instead read “CAN bus,” which is the network by 
which vehicle ECUs communicate with each other. See John Deere Class 21 Opp’n at 23; Tr. at 15:12-21 
(May 19, 2015) (Miller). 
1488 IPTC USC Class 21 Supp. at 12-13 (“Without an exemption, farmers must often send their machines to 
far-away dealerships, or wait for a technician to travel to their farm to perform diagnostics and repairs— 
even for minor problems such as a blown fuse.”). 
1489 See, e.g., EFF Class 21 Supp. at 16-23; EFF Class 21 Reply at 12-20; IPTC USC Class 21 Supp. at 12­
18; IPTC USC Class 21 Reply at 10-11. 
1490 See, e.g., EFF Class 21 Supp. at 16-17. 
1491 See Auto Alliance Class 21 Opp’n at Exhibit A. 
1492 See id. at 12-16. 
1493 See, e.g., EFF Class 21 Reply at 17-18; IPTC USC Class 21 Reply at 11-12. 
1494 EFF Class 21 Reply at 17 (“The MoU excludes roughly half of motorized land vehicles now operating 
in the United States.”); see also id. (noting that certain obligations of the MOU need not be implemented 
until January 2, 2019, “after the three-year period covered by this rulemaking”). 
1495 IPTC USC Class 21 Reply at 12; EFF Class 21 Reply at 17. 
225
 

[PAGE 230]
     
    
   
 
   
  
   
 
  
      
   
  
   
   
 
 
  
 
    
 
 
   
 
  
   
                 
    
        
      
       
  
               
                
            
            
   
                
   
      
         
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
covered by the MOU.1496 In addition, proponents observe that the MOU focuses on 
enabling diagnosis and repair, but does not generally enable vehicle owners to engage in 
vehicle modification.1497 
d. Argument Under Statutory Factors 
Proponents maintain that the statutory factors set forth in section 1201(a)(1) 
support their request.  Concerning the first statutory factor, Class 21 proponents argue 
that the availability of copyrighted works will not be harmed by granting the 
exemption.
1498 They assert that the exemption will not “diminish the[] production of 
vehicle software.”1499 Proponents also maintain that the proposed exemption will 
increase access to copyrighted works, because the computer programs on ECUs currently 
in the marketplace are not available for vehicle owners to “‘use’ in the copyright sense of 
conduct that implicates the rights enumerated in Section 106.”1500 Proponents also 
believe that the information made accessible via the proposed exemption will lead to the 
creation of additional copyrighted works that explain the operation of car software, such 
as the Car Hacker’ s Handbook, an online manual that provides information about vehicle 
computer systems.1501 
Regarding the second factor, the availability for use of works for nonprofit 
archival, preservation, and educational purposes, proponent IPTC USC concedes that it is 
unaware of “any potential uses that would fall under this factor.”
1502 EFF, however, 
maintains that the proposed exemption will increase public knowledge of the computer 
programs in ECUs by allowing vehicle owners to participate in educational activities, 
such as tinkering and exchanging information about those programs.1503 Additionally, 
EFF asserts that the exemption would facilitate archival use of computer programs on 
ECUs, in the form of software backups, which they describe as a routine and advisable 
step in the process of lawful diagnosis and repair, or modification.
1504 
1496 See, e.g., EFF Class 21 Reply at 17; IPTC USC Class 21 Reply at 12; see also Tr. at 228:25-229:01 
(May 19, 2015) (Lightsey, GM).
 
1497 See, e.g., IPTC USC Class 21 Reply at 12.
 
1498 EFF Class 21 Supp. at 23.
 
1499 EFF Class 21 Reply at 20.
 
1500 Id. 
1501 See EFF Class 21 Supp. at 23 (“Craig Smith, author of the 2014 Car Hacker’ s Handbook, reported that 
the Handbook was downloaded 300,000 times in the first two weeks it was available.”). The Car Hacker’ s 
Handbook offers information about how to analyze the computer systems inside vehicles and determine 
whether there are security weaknesses. Craig Smith , 2014 CAR HACKER ’S HANDBOOK (2014), available 
at http://opengarages.org/handbook. 
1502 See IPTC USC Class 24 Supp. at 19-20 (“We have not investigated any potential uses that would fall 
under this factor.”). 
1503 EFF Class 21 Supp. at 23-24. 
1504 See, e.g., EFF Class 21 Reply at 11-12. 
226
 

[PAGE 231]
     
    
   
 
     
   
   
  
   
   
  
   
  
    
   
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
     
  
    
     
 
 
        
             
              
         
 
     
    
         
        
                  
        
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
With respect to the third factor, the impact that the prohibition on circumvention 
has on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship or research, while some 
proponents fail to offer any evidence on this point,1505 EFF maintains that vehicle owners’ 
fear of incurring liability under section 1201(a)(1)’s prohibition on circumvention 
negatively impacts speech in relation to each of the activities listed under this factor.1506 
It also argues that an exemption would enhance the ability to produce new copyrighted 
works, such as the Car Hacker’ s Handbook.1507 
Regarding factor four, the effect of circumvention on the market for or value of 
copyrighted works, proponents argue that the market value of computer programs used in 
ECUs would not be harmed by the proposed exemption at all.  Proponents urge that 
because “the copyrighted work is sold to end-users along with an entire vehicle,” simply 
allowing users to access or modify the copy of the work in their own vehicle has no effect 
on the market for the software.1508 Proponents further assert that the proposed exemption 
will not negatively impact the sales or production of computer programs used in ECUs, 
because auto manufacturers will still be able to sell vehicles at “substantially the same 
price,” and the exemption will primarily drive the development of aftermarket software 
products.1509 
Proponents offered little input on the fifth statutory factor, which concerns such 
other factors as the Librarian considers appropriate.  As discussed below, however, 
opponents rely heavily on this provision to raise potential public safety, security, and 
environmental concerns with respect to the proposed exemption.  Proponents respond by 
urging that such concerns are purely speculative and, in any event, unrelated to the 
copyright concerns that underlie section 1201.1510 They maintain that these concerns are 
better addressed via laws designed specifically for those purposes, rather than being 
swept up in the blanket prohibition embodied in section 1201.1511 Moreover, in response 
to the specific concern about whether purchasers of used vehicles would be able to detect 
whether a previous owner had made changes to the ECU, EFF argued that it would be 
possible to detect such changes.
1512 
1505 See, e.g., IPTC USC Class 21 Supp. at 20.
 
1506 EFF Class 21 Supp. at 24 (“The legal cloud resulting from the prohibition on circumvention reduces
 
participation in research, scholarship and teaching on vehicle functionality, repair, and modification, as well
 
as critiquing, commenting, and reporting on the functionality of manufacturer software and potential
 
alternatives.”).
 
1507 Id. at 23-24.
 
1508 Id. at 11, 25.
 
1509 IPTC USC Class 21 Supp. at 20.
 
1510 IPTC USC Class 21 Reply at 14.
 
1511 See, e.g., id. at 14-15; EFF Class 21 Reply at 18-21; Tr. at 189:24-190:14 (May 19, 2015) (Walsh, EFF).
 
1512 EFF Class 21 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2-4.
 
227
 

[PAGE 232]
     
    
  
 
    
      
  
  
  
   
   
 
     
     
 
    
     
  
 
     
     
  
    
             
                   
             
           
                 
         
               
                 
       
                 
     
           
           
     
       
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
2. Opposition 
The Office received comments in opposition to the proposed exemption from 
Association of Equipment Manufacturers (“AEM”), Association of Global Automakers 
(“Global Automakers”), Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers (“Auto Alliance”), Eaton 
Corporation, General Motors (“GM”), John Deere, and Motor & Equipment 
Manufacturers Association (“MEMA”).
1513 
a. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Opponents challenge the view that the diagnosis, repair, or modification activities 
that would be covered by the Class 21 exemption qualify as noninfringing.1514 
Opponents first dispute the claim that the proposed activities are fair uses under 
section 107.1515 Under the first fair use factor, opponents argue that consideration of the 
purpose and character of the use weighs against a fair use finding.1516 Several opponents 
contend that proponents’ proposed uses would require accessing and altering computer 
programs on ECUs so that they perform the identical function as they previously did, 
albeit with different parameters or values, and that such uses are not transformative.
1517 
GM also notes that the exemption is not limited to allowing the creation of interoperable 
tools.1518 John Deere, meanwhile, contends that the exemption would allow proponents 
to modify ECUs to undermine or reverse the purposes for which the computer programs 
were intended by enabling and encouraging noncompliance with environmental 
regulations and that such a use is of a purpose and character that should be disfavored 
under section 107.1519 And, while Global Automakers concedes that the exempted 
activity would involve altering automotive functions, it maintains that such use is not the 
sort of transformative use that is contemplated by the first fair use factor.1520 
1513 AEM Opp’n; Global Automakers Class 21 Opp’n; Auto Alliance Class 21 Opp’n; Eaton Corp. Opp’n; 
GM Class 21 Opp’n; John Deere Class 21 Opp’n; MEMA Class 21 Reply. The Register notes that MEMA 
filed its comments in the reply phase of the written comment period, which had been designated as 
allowing proponents and neutral commenters to respond to points made by the opposition. The Register 
will exercise her discretion to consider MEMA’s comments in reply, while at the same time being mindful 
that proponents did not have an opportunity to file written comments in response to MEMA. 
1514 See, e.g., Auto Alliance Class 21 Opp’n at 4-11; John Deere Class 21 Opp’n at 4-9. 
1515 See, e.g., Global Automakers Class 21 Opp’n at 4-5; Auto Alliance Class 21 Opp’n at 8-11; GM Class 
21 Opp’n at 14-18; John Deere Class 21 Opp’n at 6-9. 
1516 See, e.g., Global Automakers Class 21 Opp’n at 4-5; Auto Alliance Class 21 Opp’n at 7-8; GM Class 21 
Opp’n at 14-16; John Deere Class 21 Opp’n at 6-7. 
1517 GM Class 21 Opp’n at 14-16; Auto Alliance Class 21 Opp’n at 8. 
1518 GM Class 21 Opp’n at 14-15; Auto Alliance Class 21 Opp’n at 8. 
1519 John Deere Class 21 Opp’n at 6-7. 
1520 Global Automakers Class 21 Opp’n at 4. 
228
 

[PAGE 233]
     
    
  
  
    
  
  
   
   
    
  
     
   
    
  
   
     
    
     
 
   
    
 
 
    
                 
       
             
  
                
 
    
  
                    
       
    
                    
       
        
                
     
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
In opponents’ view, the second fair use factor, the nature of the copyrighted work, 
also favors a finding that the proposed uses do not qualify as fair use.1521 John Deere and 
Auto Alliance recognize that ECU software is functional in nature.1522 Additionally, they 
note that the Register has previously concluded that computer programs used to operate 
devices like smartphones are functional works.1523 Nonetheless, John Deere and Auto 
Alliance urge that the Register should reconsider this position, or at least distinguish 
between the computer programs on ECUs and those on the smartphones in prior 
rulemakings.1524 For its part, GM asserts that the computer programs at issue are “highly 
creative” and “expressive,” noting the time and resources devoted to their 
development.1525 It urges that while elements of such programs are functional, the works 
are nonetheless deserving of protection.1526 
With respect to the third fair use factor, directed to the amount and substantiality 
of the portion used, opponents uniformly maintain that the proposed uses require copying 
the bulk, if not the entirety, of the copyrighted work.1527 Additionally, they observe that 
the essence or essential part of the work will remain in the modified copy.1528 Therefore, 
they urge that the third factor strongly indicates that the proposed uses are not fair.1529 
Turning to the fourth factor, regarding the impact on the market for or value of the 
work, Auto Alliance admits that there is no separate market for the computer programs at 
issue aside from the market for the vehicle in which they are embedded.1530 Auto 
Alliance and other opponents nonetheless maintain that vehicle values may be adversely 
affected indirectly.
1531 Opponents argue that if the exemption is granted, vehicles are 
likely to become out of compliance with regulatory standards in areas such as fuel 
economy, emissions control, and safety, which could negatively impact the ability to 
resell a car, or a subsequent purchaser’s ability to meet state registration requirements.
1532 
1521 See, e.g., Auto Alliance Class 21 Opp’n at 8; John Deere Class 21 Opp’n at 7-8; GM Class 21 Opp’n at 
16; Global Automakers Class 21 Opp’n at 5. 
1522 Auto Alliance Class 21 Opp’n at 8; John Deere Class 21 Opp’n at 7-8. 
1523 Id. 
1524 Auto Alliance Class 21 Opp’n at 8 (citing 2012 Recommendation at 73); John Deere Class 21 Opp’n at
 
7-8.
 
1525 GM Class 21 Opp’n at 16.
 
1526 Id. 
1527 See, e.g., Auto Alliance Class 21 Opp’n at 9; John Deere Class 21 Opp’n at 8; GM Class 21 Opp’n at 
17; Global Automakers Class 21 Opp’n at 5. 
1528 See, e.g., id. 
1529 See, e.g., Auto Alliance Class 21 Opp’n at 9; John Deere Class 21 Opp’n at 9; GM Class 21 Opp’n at
 
17; Global Automakers Class 21 Opp’n at 5.
 
1530 Auto Alliance Class 21 Opp’n at 9.
 
1531 See, e.g., id. at 9-10; John Deere Class 21 Opp’n at 9; GM Class 21 Opp’n at 17-18; Global
 
Automakers Class 21 Opp’n at 5. 
229
 

[PAGE 234]
     
    
 
 
   
 
     
    
 
   
 
    
  
 
  
   
    
 
 
  
  
    
    
  
  
    
                   
  
     
                 
   
                 
       
         
   
        
                
            
      
   
     
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
John Deere also asserts that the activity covered under the exemption could erode the 
public’s trust in the safety and security of vehicles, thereby diminishing demand for new 
vehicles.1533 
In addition, opponents assert that the proposed uses do not fall within section 
117.1534 Opponents suggest that proponents have failed to demonstrate that vehicle 
owners are the owners of the computer programs on ECUs or that the broad set of uses 
covered by the proposed exemption all fall within the narrow exceptions specified in 
section 117.1535 They note that proponents cite the same two cases considered in the 
2012 Recommendation, Krause and Vernor, in which the Register observed the uncertain 
state of the law regarding ownership of software.1536 Relying chiefly on the license 
agreements for entertainment and telematics software identified by proponents in their 
opening comments, opponents assert that proponents have failed to demonstrate that 
vehicle owners own the software that controls the vehicle ECUs under the test set forth in 
either case.1537 However, opponents conceded at the public hearing that there were no 
written license agreements covering other types of ECUs in automobiles.1538 Neither 
opponents nor proponents offered any evidence of ECU license agreements for 
agricultural equipment. 
Finally, opponents challenge proponents’ proposition that making copies of 
computer programs on ECUs is an essential step in the utilization of the computer 
program in conjunction with a machine.1539 In opponents’ view, proponents cannot 
demonstrate that diagnosis, repair and modification activities will be limited merely to 
adding new features and capabilities to the software in the manner contemplated by 
Krause.
1540 Similarly, they challenge the notion that the proposed copying will fit within 
the archival purposes exception of section 117(a)(2).1541 
1532 See, e.g., Auto Alliance Class 21 Opp’n at 9-10; John Deere Class 21 Opp’n at 9; GM Class 21 Opp’n 
at 17-18.
 
1533 John Deere Class 21 Opp’n at 9.
 
1534 See, e.g., Auto Alliance Class 21 Opp’n at 6-7; GM Class 21 Opp’n at 9-14; Global Automakers Class
 
21 Opp’n at 5-6.
 
1535 See, e.g., Auto Alliance Class 21 Opp’n at 6-7; GM Class 21 Opp’n at 9-14; Global Automakers Class 
21 Opp’n at 5-6; John Deere Class 21 Opp’n at 5-6.
 
1536 GM Class 21 Opp’n at 11-12 (citing Krause, 402 F.3d at 124; Vernor, 621 F.3d at 1110-11; 2010 
Recommendation at 126).
 
1537 Id. (citing EFF Class 21 Supp. at 13-14). 
1538 Tr. at 276:18-24 (May 19, 2015) (Lightsey, GM) (“I think it would be very difficult, if not impossible,
 
to have license agreements covering the myriad of ECU’s that are contained in the vehicle.”).
 
1539 GM Class 21 Opp’n at 12-13 (citing 17 U.S.C. § 117(a)(1)).
 
1540 Id. at 13.
 
1541 Id. at 13-14 (citing 17 U.S.C. § 117(a)(2)).
 
230
 

[PAGE 235]
     
    
  
     
   
 
    
  
 
    
  
  
 
  
  
  
    
 
   
  
                
  
    
    
          
               
               
          
          
           
           
            
                
         
          
             
                
              
          
   
             
          
          
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
b. Asserted Adverse Effects 
Opponents dispute that TPMs have a substantial adverse impact on the ability of 
vehicle owners to engage in lawful diagnosis, repair or modification of their vehicles.1542 
They assert that there is no need to circumvent as vehicle owners have alternative options 
that permit diagnosis and repair of their vehicles.1543 While opponents do not focus on 
the modification element of the exemption, GM maintains that proponents have not 
demonstrated that a significant number of individuals are interested in accessing the 
software controlling a vehicle’s ECUs for the purposes of modification.1544 
To support their position, opponents reference a nationwide MOU entered into in 
January 2014 by major organizations representing automobile manufacturers, after 
market providers and auto repair services, including opponents Auto Alliance and Global 
Automakers.
1545 Opponents note that the MOU includes a “Right to Repair” 
commitment requiring the signing manufacturers and aftermarket service providers to 
make all diagnostic repair tools available to vehicle owners and independent repair 
facilities for all vehicles for model years 2002 forward.1546 The Right to Repair 
commitment also includes requirements relating to tool standardization for vehicles 
starting with 2018 model year vehicles.
1547 Opponents maintain that, with few 
exceptions,1548 this commitment guarantees independent vehicle repair facilities, and 
1542 See, e.g., Auto Alliance Class 21 Opp’n at 11-16; GM Class 21 Opp’n at 18-20; John Deere Class 21 
Opp’n at 10-12. 
1543 See, e.g., id. 
1544 GM Class 21 Opp’n at 19. 
1545 Auto Alliance Class 21 Opp’n at 12-16, App. A (MOU). 
1546 Id. at 13, App. A (MOU & R2R Agreement) (Section 2(a) of the R2R Agreement states, “for Model 
Year 2002 motor vehicles and thereafter, a manufacturer of motor vehicles sold in United States shall make 
available for purchase by owners of motor vehicles manufactured by such manufacturer and by 
independent repair facilities the same diagnostic and repair information, including repair technical updates, 
that such manufacturer makes available to its dealers through the manufacturer’s internet-based diagnostic 
and repair information system or other electronically accessible manufacturer’s repair information system. 
All content in any such manufacturer’s repair information system shall be made available to owners and to 
independent repair facilities in the same form and manner and to the same extent as is made available to 
dealers utilizing such diagnostic and repair information system. Each manufacturer shall provide access to 
such manufacturer’s diagnostic and repair information system for purchase by owners and independent 
repair facilities on a daily, monthly and yearly subscription basis and upon fair and reasonable terms.”). 
1547Id. at 13; see id. at App. A (R2R Agreement) (providing that “[c]ommencing in Model Year 2018, except 
as provided in subsection (2)(e), manufacturers of motor vehicles sold in the United States shall provide 
access to their onboard diagnostic and repair information system . . . using an off-the-shelf personal 
computer” and a non-proprietary vehicle interface). 
1548 See, e.g., id. at 14-16 (conceding instances in which owners of older vehicles, such as a 1987 Cadillac, 
would not be covered by the MOU, and an instance in which Subaru refused to provide an independent 
repair shop with the computer program for a low tire pressure sensor). 
231
 

[PAGE 236]
     
    
   
    
  
  
    
   
    
   
    
 
   
   
 
  
 
  
     
   
  
   
 
  
 
   
     
         
       
          
         
            
       
       
    
       
          
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
individual vehicle owners who wish to patronize such facilities, access to the information 
necessary to engage in the desired diagnostic and repair activities.1549 
c. Argument Under Statutory Factors 
With respect to section 1201(a)(1)’s statutory factors, opponents assert that the 
first factor, concerning the availability for use of copyrighted works, is not substantially 
impacted by the current prohibition on circumvention.
1550 They assert that granting the 
proposed exemption would not substantially advance the availability for use of the 
copyrighted works because numerous alternatives to circumvention exist for the proposed 
activities.1551 
Opponents devote little time to the second factor, but generally maintain that the 
proposed exemption is wholly unrelated to the availability for use of works for nonprofit 
archival, preservation, and educational purposes.
1552 Similarly, with respect to the third 
factor, opponents assert that the proposed exemption would not impact criticism, 
comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship or research.1553 
Regarding the fourth statutory factor, opponents maintain that the effect of the 
exemption on the market for or value of copyrighted works would generally be 
negative,1554 asserting that the exemption would erode public confidence in the safety and 
security of vehicles.1555 GM in particular suggests that the exemption would create 
public concern about U.S. efficacy in regulating vehicles, and uncertainty as to whether a 
subsequent purchaser could trust a vehicle’s ECU system since it may have been 
modified by a prior owner.
1556 As a result, according to opponents, granting the 
exemption could lead to a diminishment in the value of the vehicles and their associated 
software.  
Opponents also raise specific concerns regarding entertainment and telematics 
system ECUs.  GM notes that “[v]ehicle entertainment systems can include non-software 
copyrighted content, such as videogames, music and movies, as well as other digital 
content.”1557 In the case of telematics, opponents note that GM’s OnStar and other 
telematics systems typically require an ongoing subscription.1558 Auto Alliance explains 
1549 See, e.g., id. at 13-16; GM Class 21 Opp’n at 19-20.
 
1550 GM Class 21 Opp’n at 21; John Deere Class 21 Opp’n at 11-12.
 
1551 GM Class 21 Opp’n at 21; John Deere Class 21 Opp’n at 10-12.
 
1552 GM Class 21 Opp’n at 13, 21-22; John Deere Class 21 Opp’n at 12-13.
 
1553 GM Class 21 Opp’n at 22; John Deere Class 21 Opp’n at 13.
 
1554 GM Class 21 Opp’n at 22-23; John Deere Class 21 Opp’n at 13.
 
1555 GM Class 21 Opp’n at 23; John Deere Class 21 Opp’n at 13.
 
1556 GM Class 21 Opp’n at 23.
 
1557 GM Class 21 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1.
 
1558 See, e.g., Tr. at 279:06-17 (May 19, 2015) (Charlesworth, USCO; Lightsey, GM).
 
232
 

[PAGE 237]
     
    
  
     
   
 
 
  
 
  
    
  
   
    
  
  
   
   
   
 
  
 
   
 
         
             
            
               
               
                
               
     
            
             
              
               
                 
     
    
      
      
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
that “removing the prohibition on circumvention of access controls on vehicle software 
could enable unauthorized access to [such] value added services without any payment, or 
could allow [unauthorized] access to premium content.”1559 
Opponents rest much of their argument against the exemption on the fifth 
statutory factor, which permits consideration of “such other factors as the Librarian 
considers appropriate.”1560 They assert that the proposed exemption would negatively 
impact vehicle safety, energy policy (including fuel efficiency), the environment 
(including air pollution and the emission of greenhouse gas pollutants), personal security 
(including cybersecurity), and consumer reliance on the integrity of vehicle design and 
operation.
1561 Additionally, through a letter offered at the hearing by Auto Alliance, the 
National Network to End Domestic Violence expressed its concern that the proposed 
exemptions would make it easier for violent partners and predators to monitor, stalk, and 
harm victims through access to what is now protected internal automobile systems and 
technology.1562 Opponents also argue that both state and federal regulatory regimes are 
designed to prevent many of the activities that would fall within the exemption.  In 
particular, they point out that commercial providers are prohibited from knowingly 
modifying vehicles to take them out of compliance with emissions and safety 
standards.
1563 
Opponents acknowledge that it is difficult to quantify the potential negative 
impacts on the existing regulatory regime.1564 They also recognize that not all of the 
activities allowed under the exemption would necessarily have deleterious effects on 
compliance with regulatory standards.
1565 They assert, however, that negative impacts 
would appear to be an inescapable consequence of allowing unrestricted modification of 
vehicle ECUs.1566 Additionally, they suggest that if the Librarian were to create an 
exemption to allow circumvention of what are now legally protected TPMs, the public 
1559 Auto Alliance Class 21 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1. 
1560 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(v); see also, e.g., GM Class 21 Opp’n at 23-24; Global Automakers Class 21 
Opp’n at 6-8; John Deere Class 21 Opp’n at 14-15; Auto Alliance Class 21 Opp’n at 16-21. 
1561 See, e.g., GM Class 21 Opp’n at 23-24; Global Automakers Class 21 Opp’n at 6-8; John Deere Class 21 
Opp’n at 14-15; Auto Alliance Class 21 Opp’n at 16-21; Tr. at 27:15-28:20 (May 19, 2015) (Lightsey, GM). 
1562 Letter from Cindy Southworth, Exec. Vice President and Founder of the Safety Net Tech. Project at 
Nat’l Network to End Domestic Violence to Jacqueline C. Charlesworth, Gen. Counsel and Assoc. Register 
of Copyrights, USCO, at 1 (May 18, 2015). 
1563 Auto Alliance Class 21 Opp’n at 16-17 (citing 42 U.S.C. § 7522(a)(3) (knowingly removing or 
rendering inoperative after delivery to the purchaser “any device or element of design” installed in or on a 
motor vehicle in compliance with emissions standards regulations is prohibited); 49 U.S.C. § 30122(b) 
(providing that “motor vehicle repair business[es] [as well as dealers] may not knowingly make inoperative 
any part of a device or element of design installed on or in a motor vehicle or motor vehicle equipment in 
compliance with an applicable motor vehicle safety standard”)). 
1564 See, e.g., id. 
1565 See, e.g., id. at 18-19. 
1566 See, e.g., id. at 19. 
233
 

[PAGE 238]
     
    
  
     
   
 
    
   
   
   
   
  
    
      
  
  
  
   
  
   
  
 
    
    
 
  
   
  
   
 
   
      
   
             
         
  
           
              
  
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
will perceive the exemption as a government endorsement of unrestricted modification of 
vehicles, notwithstanding any other laws or regulations that might prohibit those 
activities.1567 Opponents also suggest that the proposed exemption could raise product 
liability issues because the exemption would make it difficult to determine whether 
modifications to ECUs were contributing factors in accidents.1568 In addition, opponents 
urge that “software manipulation in a vehicle is typically undetectable by most 
consumers” and that a downstream purchaser of a used automobile would not know 
whether any software modifications had been made.1569 
Finally, opponents recognize that the non-copyright factors that they identify have 
not played a significant role in the Register’s consideration of proposed exemptions in 
prior rulemakings.1570 But, they urge that the instant exemption is different because of its 
potential to impact the highly regulated automotive sector directly.1571 
3. Discussion 
a. Noninfringing Uses 
The Register concludes that the overall record supports proponents’ claim that 
reproducing and altering the computer programs on ECUs for purposes of facilitating 
diagnosis, repair and modification of vehicles may constitute a noninfringing activity as a 
matter of fair use and/or under the exception set forth in section 117. 
i. Fair Use 
Regarding the first factor of fair use, the record establishes that the purpose and 
character of the proposed uses tend to support a finding of fair use because at least some 
of the proposed uses of ECU computer programs are likely to be transformative. These 
uses include copying the work to create new applications and/or tools that can 
interoperate with ECU software and facilitate functionalities such as diagnosis, 
modification and repair.
1572 Such uses may also extend to modification of ECU computer 
programs to “interoperate” with different auto parts.1573 
While it is often a negative factor in the fair use analysis, a finding of fair use is 
not necessarily precluded when the new use coincides generally with the original use of a 
work.  In the course of recommending an exemption for the “jailbreaking” of 
1567 See, e.g., id. at 17.
 
1568 Id. at 20.
 
1569 GM Class 21 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2; see also GM Class 21 Opp’n at 6-7.
 
1570 Auto Alliance Class 21 Opp’n at 16, 20-21.
 
1571 Id. 
1572 See, e.g., EFF Class 21 Supp. at 8. 
1573 Cf. 2010 Recommendation at 93-94 (noting that uses that enable interoperability are favored under the 
first factor). 
234
 

[PAGE 239]
     
    
  
 
    
 
 
 
     
   
  
  
   
    
  
   
      
 
   
 
  
     
  
   
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
   
                
          
               
  
        
               
  
    
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
smartphones, for example, the Register previously concluded that the first factor may 
favor fair use where “the purpose and character of the use is noncommercial and 
personal” and facilitates the intended use of smartphones by their owners.1574 Here, 
similarly, the proposed uses for diagnosis and repair would presumably enhance the 
intended use of ECU computer programs. 
At the same time, the record supports distinguishing ECUs that are chiefly 
designed to operate vehicle entertainment and telematics systems. Access controls on 
entertainment system ECUs not only preserve the integrity of the ECU itself, but also 
protect the content that is played through the entertainment system.  Telematics systems, 
too, rely on TPMs to protect proprietary offerings.  Opponents’ concerns of unauthorized 
access to the content made available through such systems were not effectively rebutted 
by proponents.  The record is sparse concerning noninfringing uses that would be 
facilitated by allowing circumvention of the TPMs protecting these systems.
1575 The 
focus of proponents’ request was instead on ECUs used to control vehicle functions like 
ignition, gear shifting, and engine power.1576 Thus, the Register finds that, on the current 
record, the first factor is generally favorable to proponents, except with respect to ECU 
computer programs that are primarily designed to support vehicle entertainment and 
telematics systems. 
Concerning the second factor, the nature of the work, opponents generally 
recognize the Register’s established position that computer programs such as those 
contained in ECUs are essentially functional works used to operate a device.
1577 
Although opponents urge the Register to treat vehicle software differently, the Register is 
unable to discern a meaningful difference between computer programs used to operate a 
vehicle and those used to operate a phone.1578 Vehicle software is at least as functional as 
a phone’s operating system, in that it is used to support operational and mechanical 
processes.  Contrary to opponents’ view, vehicle software is not especially “expressive;” 
it is not meant to be consumed as a creative work. The Register therefore concludes that 
the second fair use factor favors a finding of fair use. 
In addressing the third factor, which considers the amount of the work used, 
proponents concede that in most cases the proposed uses would involve reproduction of 
copyrighted computer programs in their entirety, and there is nothing in the record to 
1574 2012 Recommendation at 74. 
1575 In response to post-hearing questions, EFF states that “[i]t is important that the vehicle software of 
telemetry and entertainment systems be accessible under the proposed exemption.” EFF Class 21 PostHearing Resp. at 1. But EFF fails to offer specific noninfringing uses that would be facilitated by 
extending the exemption. 
1576 See, e.g., EFF Class 21 Supp. at 2. 
1577 See, e.g., Auto Alliance Class 21 Opp’n at 8 (citing 2012 Recommendation at 73); John Deere Class 21 
Opp’n at 7-8. 
1578 See 2012 Recommendation at 73. 
235
 

[PAGE 240]
     
    
  
   
   
   
 
  
  
   
  
  
 
  
 
   
    
 
  
   
    
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
   
 
             
                  
             
               
          
          
                
       
       
            
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
suggest otherwise.1579 As EFF observes, however, courts have been willing to permit 
extensive copying of the original work where it is necessary to accomplish a 
transformative purpose.1580 Thus, while the third factor arguably disfavors a fair use 
finding, the weight to be given to it under the circumstances is slight.  
Factor four, regarding the effect on the market for or value of the copyrighted 
work, is concerned with market substitution and includes evaluating “not only the extent 
of market harm caused by the particular actions of the [user], but also whether 
unrestricted and widespread conduct of the sort engaged in by the [proponent of fair use] 
. . . would result in a substantially adverse impact on the potential market.”1581 
Proponents persuasively establish that computer programs on the majority of ECUs are 
only meaningful in connection with the vehicle, that the copies are generally sold only 
with the vehicle, and that the consumer pays for those copies when purchasing the 
vehicle.  Indeed, some of the opponents themselves recognize that “there is no separate 
market for the computer programs and other works at issue here aside from the vehicle in 
which they are embedded.”
1582 Proponents have thus established that there is not a 
significant independent market for ECU computer programs that can be harmed.1583 
Opponents, however, point to the potential negative impact on the public’s trust in 
the safety and security of vehicles in which the computer programs exist,1584 and John 
Deere goes on to assert a consequential depressive effect on the secondary market for 
automobiles.
1585 But the Register finds opponents’ concerns regarding reputational harms 
due to modification and repair activities to be unsupported and speculative.  Vehicle 
owners have long repaired and modified their automobiles and farm equipment— 
adjusting brakes and enhancing suspensions, for example—including before the advent of 
computerized vehicle systems.  It is thus not readily apparent these activities would cause 
unusual or undue harm.  Moreover, opponents fail to identify actual instances in which 
repairs or modifications involving ECU software have affected resale values.  Nor do 
opponents explain how modified ECU computer programs in existing vehicles would 
adversely impact the market for ECU computer programs in new vehicles offered by a 
manufacturer.  In sum, at least on the record in this proceeding, opponents have failed to 
establish market harm. 
1579 See, e.g., IPTC USC Class 21 Supp. at 12; EFF Class 21 Supp. at 10.
 
1580 EFF Class 21 Supp. at 10; see also HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 98 (“For some purposes, it may be necessary
 
to copy the entire copyrighted work, in which case Factor Three does not weigh against a finding of fair
 
use.”); Kelly v. Arriba Soft Corp., 336 F.3d 811, 820-21 (9th Cir. 2003) (holding that the third fair use factor
 
did not weigh against copier when entire-work copying was reasonably necessary).
 
1581 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 590 (internal quotations omitted).
 
1582 IPTC USC Class 21 Reply at 10 (citing Auto Alliance Class 21 Supp. at 9).
 
1583 EFF Class 21 Supp. at 11.
 
1584 GM Class 21 Opp’n at 23; John Deere Class 21 Opp’n at 13.
 
1585 See, e.g., John Deere Class 21 Opp’n at 13; GM Class 21 Opp’n at 17-18.
 
236
 

[PAGE 241]
     
    
  
  
 
   
  
   
   
    
  
 
   
 
   
  
     
   
    
  
  
 
  
     
   
  
  
  
 
 
   
        
               
             
    
   
   
   
    
  
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
On balance, the fair use analysis suggests that—with the exception of computer 
programs on ECUs that are primarily designed to operate vehicle entertainment and 
telematics systems—many of the proposed uses of ECU computer programs to facilitate 
diagnosis, repair and modification of vehicles, including agricultural machinery, are 
likely noninfringing under section 107. 
ii. Section 117 
Class 21 proponents argue that making copies and adaptations of vehicle 
computer programs is an essential step in the process of diagnosis, repair and 
modification and qualifies as a noninfringing use under section 117.
1586 Section 117 
requires consideration of two questions in this context:  whether a vehicle owner is also 
an owner of an embedded ECU computer program, and whether creating a new copy or 
adaptation of that program is an “essential step” in the utilization of the program with the 
vehicle. 
In past rulemaking proceedings, the Register has reviewed case law governing the 
determination of ownership of a copy of a computer program for purposes of section 117 
when formal title is lacking and/or a license or agreement imposes restrictions on the use 
of the computer program, and has concluded that the application of the law may be 
unclear in some contexts.
1587 The Register has observed that while Vernor v. Autodesk, 
Inc.1588 and Krause v. Titleserv, Inc.1589 may provide “useful guideposts,” they are 
“controlling precedent in only two circuits and are inconsistent in their approach.”1590 
In Krause, the Second Circuit held that formal title was not necessary to 
demonstrate ownership under section 117 and that courts should look to a range of factors 
to determine whether a party “exercises sufficient incidents of ownership over a copy of 
the program to be sensibly considered the owner of the copy.”
1591 These factors include: 
(1) whether substantial consideration was paid for the copy; (2) whether the copy was 
created for the sole benefit of the purchaser; (3) whether the copy was customized to 
serve the purchaser’s use; (4) whether the copy was stored on property owned by the 
purchaser; (5) whether the creator reserved the right to repossess the copy; (6) whether 
the creator agreed that the purchaser had the right to possess and use the programs 
forever regardless of whether the relationship between the parties terminated; and (7) 
whether the purchaser was free to discard or destroy the copy anytime it wished.
1592 By 
1586 See, e.g., EFF Class 21 Supp. at 13.
 
1587 See 2010 Recommendation at 90, 129 (“[T]he law relating to who is the owner of a copy of a computer
 
program under [s]ection 117 is in flux.”); 2012 Recommendation at 92 (“The Register concludes that the
 
state of the law remains unclear.”).
 
1588 621 F.3d 1102.
 
1589 402 F.3d 119.
 
1590 2012 Recommendation at 92.
 
1591 Krause, 402 F.3d at 124.
 
1592 Id. 
237
 

[PAGE 242]
     
    
   
    
   
     
   
  
  
 
  
 
   
 
   
     
   
    
 
     
    
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
  
   
              
      
                
              
              
              
                
 
                      
       
  
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
contrast, in Vernor, the Ninth Circuit held that “a software user is a licensee rather than an 
owner of a copy where the copyright owner (1) specifies that the user is granted a license; 
(2) significantly restricts the user’s ability to transfer the software; and (3) imposes 
notable use restrictions.”
1593 These tests remain the two dominant approaches to the 
question of whether computer programs are owned or licensed by the user. 
Under either test, the record here supports the conclusion that in many cases 
vehicle owners own the ECU computer programs. The record includes a few license 
agreements that address a narrow selection of ECUs designed for telematics or 
entertainment purposes. These types of systems co ntrol or contain copyrighted content, 
such as music or other creative works, beyond the computer programs that are the focus 
of the proposed exemption.
1594 Beyond these few license agreements—which, under 
relevant case law, are not definitive—opponents offered little evidence to support the 
notion that copies of computer programs on vehicles are merely licensed to the vehicle 
owner.1595 Opponents point to no significant explicit restrictions on owners’ use or resale 
of ECU computer programs.1596 Thus, based on the record, at least some vehicle owners 
would seem to qualify as “owners” of ECU software, at least with respect to computer 
programs that that are not chiefly designed to operate vehicle entertainment or telematics 
systems. 
The record further establishes that reproduction and alteration of ECU computer 
programs are very often an “essential step” in the process of vehicle diagnosis, repair and 
modification.1597 In order to understand the functioning of a computer program, one 
must often make a copy to use in conjunction with a “machine” such as a diagnostic tool 
or general-purpose computer, on which the programs will be analyzed.  The proposed 
uses also appear consistent with one of the purposes of section 117 as reflected in the 
Final Report of the National Commission on New Technological Uses of Copyrighted 
Works (“CONTU”)—namely, “the right to add features to the program that were not 
present at the time of rightful acquisition.”
1598 This purpose is echoed in Krause, which 
held that section 117 encompasses not only modifications to computer programs that are 
1593 Vernor, 621 F.3d at 1111. 
1594 See, e.g., EFF Class 21 Supp. at 13-14; Tr. at 277:13-23 (May 19, 2015) (Walsh, EFF). 
1595 Tr. at 183:02-12 (May 19, 2015) (Walsh, EFF). 
1596 See, e.g., EFF Class 21 Reply at 9-10 (“The purchaser may dispose of the vehicle along with the ECUs 
inside whenever the purchaser wishes. Vehicle manufacturers generally do not retain the right to repossess 
vehicle ECUs from their purchasers. Aside from a small number of narrow end user license agreements 
pertaining to media and telematics systems, there is no evidence in the record that manufacturers restrict the 
vehicle owner’s ability to transfer the firmware or impose notable restrictions upon the user of the 
firmware.”). 
1597 See, e.g., EFF Class 21 Supp. at 15; EFF Class 21 Reply at 10; IPTC USC Class 21 Reply at 7. 
1598 CONTU, FINAL REPORT OF THE NATIONAL COMMISSION ON NEW TECHNOLOGICAL USES OF 
COPYRIGHTED WORKS at 13 (1978). 
238
 

[PAGE 243]
     
    
 
 
 
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
   
   
  
  
  
  
     
    
   
     
 
     
 
    
         
              
    
           
             
      
              
 
          
      
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
“strictly necessary to keep the programs functioning,” but also those that are “designed to 
improve their functionality.”1599 
Additionally, proponents have established that the creation of backup copies of 
ECU computer programs to protect against destruction or damage may well be covered 
by the provision allowing the creation of copies for archival purposes.1600 Based on the 
record submitted, it is therefore likely that many of the proposed uses of ECU software 
qualify as protected uses under section 117.  
b. Adverse Effects 
Both proponents and opponents agree that a significant number of vehicle 
manufacturers employ TPMs to control access to ECU computer programs.  Proponents 
present a compelling case to establish that in many instances, these TPMs have a 
substantial adverse impact on the ability of vehicle owners to engage in diagnosis, repair 
or modification of their vehicles.
1601 Although some repair and diagnostic activities can 
be conducted through the use of manufacturer-licensed tools or services, proponents 
provide evidence demonstrating that those alternatives may be less accessible and/or 
substantially more costly.  In the case of farm equipment in particular, proponent iFixit 
submitted evidence that the current prohibition sometimes requires farmers to wait a 
significant period of time for repairs by an authorized technician, impeding their 
productivity.  Moreover, the record shows that manufacturer-licensed tools and services 
may not facilitate all modifications of vehicles; for example, the record indicates that 
manufacturer-licensed tools will only allow modifications within manufacturer-defined 
calibrations, and may not allow for certain modifications such as changes to the axle 
bearing.
1602 Additionally, the record indicates that manufacturer-licensed tools may not 
identify the underlying cause of a needed repair, such as in the example of the faulty 
communications system in the power window unit.1603 Opponents focus much of their 
commentary on illicit modifications, such as disabling of emissions controls.  While as 
discussed at some length below, this is certainly a concern, it must be remembered that 
many modifications of vehicles—not to mention diagnostic tests and repairs—are 
perfectly lawful. 
1599 Krause, 402 F.3d at 126. 
1600 See, e.g., EFF Class 21 Reply at 11-12. 
1601 EFF Class 21 Supp. at 17 (citing Jonathan Welsh, Is the Dealer Better Than an Independent Mechanic?, 
WALL ST. J. (May 17, 2010), http://blogs.wsj.com/drivers-seat/2010/05/17/is-the-dealer-better-than-an­
independent-mechanic (discussing study showing that consumers can save an average of about $300 a year, 
or 25% of their maintenance and repair bills, by going to an independent repair shop) and Where to Repair? 
Dealer or Independent, CAR TALK, http://www.cartalk.com/content/where-repair-dealer-or-independent 
(last visited Oct. 7, 2015) (finding that dealers charged 15% more than independent repair shops for the 
same repairs)). 
1602 Tr. at 218:02-13 (May 19, 2015) (Damle, USCO; Douglas, Auto Alliance). 
1603 Id. at 222:09-20 (Smith, Open Garages). 
239
 

[PAGE 244]
     
    
 
  
 
    
   
   
 
   
  
 
  
  
  
    
 
    
    
   
    
  
 
  
  
 
 
   
      
 
  
                
          
             
          
         
                
     
       
     
         
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Opponents suggest that any adverse effects stemming from the prohibition on 
circumvention are mitigated by the nationwide MOU that is intended to facilitate access 
to authorized tools and information needed to engage in diagnostic and repair 
activities.
1604 While it is an encouraging development, the record nonetheless suggests 
that the MOU cannot fully address the cited adverse impacts.1605 Among other things, 
proponents convincingly explain that the MOU does not apply to a significant portion of 
the vehicles that would be covered by the proposed exemption, including pre-2002 
models and mechanized agricultural vehicles.
1606 
In light of this record, the Register concludes that TPMs protecting computer 
programs on ECUs have a substantial adverse impact on the ability of vehicle owners to 
engage in lawful diagnosis, repair and modification of their vehicles.  
c. Statutory Factors 
The Register finds that the first factor, concerning the availability for use of 
copyrighted works,1607 is neutral. While pro ponents assert that allowing circumvention 
will allow greater “use” of the works to which the TPMs at issue apply, this logic is 
circular in that the same could presumably be said of any work sought to be accessed for 
a particular use. The more salient co nsideration is whether the exemption will lead to 
greater availability of copyrighted works in the marketplace.  Here, the record indicates 
that the use of ECU software is tied to vehicle ownership; there is no evidence that the 
purchase of vehicles would be impacted by the exemption.  Moreover, as opponents 
observe, the works in question are already available for use because drivers rely upon 
them to operate their vehicles.
1608 
Turning to the second factor, the availability for use of works for nonprofit 
archival, preservation, and educational purposes,1609 the Register finds that this factor 
likewise is not especially relevant to this exemption.  Although proponents state that users 
will make personal backup copies in the course of engaging in diagnosis, repair or 
modification,1610 it is not apparent that this is the sort of “archival” use that the factor is 
aimed at protecting.  Rather, as used in the context of section 1201(a)(1), the term 
“archival,” which is modified by “nonprofit” and appears in conjunction with 
1604 See, e.g., Auto Alliance Opp’n at 12-15, Exhibit A (MOU and Right to Repair Agreement), Exhibit B 
(Dorgan Letter); GM Class 21 Opp’n at 19 (referring to MOU); Tr. at 213:21-214:09, 215:03-216:20 (May 
19, 2015) (Damle, USCO; Douglas, Auto Alliance) (discussing MOU, Right to Repair Agreement, Dorgan
 
Letter, California Air Resources Board and Environmental Protection Agency regulations).
 
1605 See, e.g., EFF Class 21 Reply at 17-18.
 
1606 See, e.g., id.; IPTC USC Class 21 Reply at 12; Tr. at 228:25-229:01 (May 19, 2015) (Lightsey, GM).
 
1607 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(i).
 
1608 Tr. at 213:18-214:14 (May 19, 2015) (Douglas, Auto Alliance).
 
1609 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(ii).
 
1610 See, e.g., EFF Class 21 Reply at 11-12.
 
240
 

[PAGE 245]
     
    
   
   
 
     
 
   
   
     
  
 
   
   
  
   
   
 
     
   
 
   
   
  
 
  
  
        
      
     
        
          
         
     
               
              
              
      
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
“preservation[] and educational purposes,” is better understood as referring to librarytype “archives” akin to those covered in section 108.1611 
With respect to the third factor, proponents have established that the exemption 
may to some degree enhance criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship 
and research.  Specifically, they convincingly explain that granting the exemption will 
enable efforts to educate the public about vehicle software systems and related matters, as 
in the case of the Car Hacker’ s Handbook.
1612 Thus, this factor weighs somewhat in 
favor of the exemption. 
Regarding the fourth statutory factor—the impact of the proposed exemption on 
the market for or value of copyrighted works1613—the record is somewhat mixed. As 
noted above, proponents persuasively established that the market for vehicle computer 
programs does not exist apart from the market for the vehicles themselves; there was no 
evidence presented to demonstrate that circumvention would undermine the market for 
vehicles.  Moreover, based on the record, opponents’ claims of negative impacts on the 
public’s trust in the safety and security of vehicles appear to be wholly speculative.
1614 
At the same time, for the reasons set forth in the fair use analysis above, the record does 
support distinguishing ECU computer programs that control entertainment and telematics 
systems from those that control other operations in the vehicle; there is some evidence to 
suggest that circumvention of access controls on entertainment and telematics ECUs 
could result in a diminution in the value of copyrighted works if those systems could no 
longer reliably protect the content made available through them.
1615 In sum, the Register 
concludes that this statutory factor favors the proponents except perhaps with respect to 
computer programs on ECUs that are chiefly designed to operate telematics or 
entertainment systems. 
Finally, the statute also permits the Librarian to consider “such other factors” as 
may be appropriate.
1616 As opponents note, the proposed exemption raises potentially 
serious policy concerns.  The list of issues includes vehicle safety, energy policy 
(including fuel efficiency), the environment (including air pollution and emission of 
greenhouse gas pollutants), personal security (including cybersecurity), and consumer 
reliance on the integrity of vehicle design and operation.
1617 An additional concern 
1611 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(ii); see also id. § 108.
 
1612 EFF Class 21 Supp. at 23.
 
1613 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(iv).
 
1614 John Deere Class 21 Opp’n at 9; GM Class 21 Opp’n at 17-18.
 
1615 See, e.g., Tr. at 268:12-271:16 (May 19, 2015) (Charlesworth, USCO; Walsh, EFF; Ruwe, USCO; 
Damle, USCO; Nabel, IPTC USC; Weins, iFixit; Metalitz, Auto Alliance).
 
1616 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(v).
 
1617 See, e.g., GM Class 21 Opp’n at 23-24; Global Automakers Class 21 Opp’n at 6-8; John Deere Class 21 
Opp’n at 14-24; Auto Alliance Class 21 Opp’n at 16-21; Tr. at 27:15-28:20 (May 19, 2015) (Lightsey, GM); 
see also Tr. at 18:12-20 (May 19, 2015) (Miller) (describing his research on methods hackers can use to
 
remotely control vehicles via the internet).
 
241
 

[PAGE 246]
     
    
      
  
   
  
 
  
  
   
    
  
     
  
   
 
   
   
 
            
             
          
             
            
           
        
          
    
             
             
             
              
               
            
           
               
       
            
            
              
               
               
           
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
subject to debate in the record was whether purchasers of used vehicles would be able to 
identify and assess modifications to vehicle software made by a previous owner.1618 
As opponents note, these sorts of safety and environmental concerns have not 
played a significant role in the Register’s consideration of proposed exemptions in prior 
rulemakings.1619 And proponents also point out with some force that such issues are 
relatively remote from the copyright interests that are at the heart of section 1201— 
namely, the ability to protect, disseminate and enjoy creative works in the digital age.1620 
At the same time, opponents correctly note that prior exemptions did not have the 
potential for the same type of direct impact on such a highly regulated sector as the 
automotive industry.1621 Opponents emphasize that auto manufacturers are obligated to 
comply with a host of federal and state safety and environmental mandates, and that the 
use of TPMs has played a role in effectuating compliance.1622 
In view of the significant public policy issues falling within the expertise and 
authority of other government agencies, and the concerns expressed by various 
commenting parties, the Copyright Office took steps to advise the Department of 
Transportation (“DOT”) and the Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) of the 
pending rulemaking.
1623 DOT and EPA submitted letters to the Office commenting on 
the proposed exemption, which are included in the record of this proceeding.1624 And, 
although the Office had not specifically notified it of the pending proceeding, the 
1618 Compare EFF Class 21 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2-4 (proposing that manufacturers publish “checksums” 
for original ECU software to allow repair shops to confirm that no changes were made), with Auto Alliance 
Class 21 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1-2 (arguing that publishing checksums for every ECU software version 
would be a “massive undertaking” and would be “for naught” because a “moderately sophisticated hacker 
could determine the correct checksum and then simply hardcode the ECU to report that checksum value”). 
1619 See, e.g., Auto Alliance Class 21 Opp’n at 16, 20-21. 
1620 See, e.g., IPTC USC Class 21 Reply at 14. 
1621 See, e.g., Auto Alliance Class 21 Opp’n at 16. 
1622 See, e.g., id. 
1623 Letter from Jacqueline C. Charlesworth, Gen. Counsel and Assoc. Register of Copyrights, USCO to 
Kathryn B. Thomson, Gen. Counsel, DOT, and Stephen P. Wood, Acting Chief Counsel, Nat’l Highway 
Traffic Safety Admin. (May 12, 2015); Letter from Jacqueline C. Charlesworth, Gen. Counsel and Assoc. 
Register of Copyrights, USCO, to Avi S. Garbow, Gen. Counsel, EPA (May 12, 2015). 
1624 Letter from Geoff Cooper, Assistant Gen. Counsel, EPA, to Jacqueline C. Charlesworth, Gen. Counsel 
and Assoc. Register of Copyrights, USCO (July 17, 2015) (“EPA Letter”); Letter from Kathryn B. 
Thomson, Gen. Counsel, DOT, to Jacqueline C. Charlesworth, Gen. Counsel and Assoc. Register of 
Copyrights, USCO (September 9, 2015) (“DOT Letter”). The letters to and from the agencies are available 
at http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/USCO-letters. Consideration of these agency responses is appropriate 
because the matter of other agencies’ potential concerns with respect to this exemption was raised by 
commenting parties and has been part of the record since the filing of opposition comments on March 27, 
2015. See, e.g., John Deere Class 21 Opp’n at 20-23. These concerns were also raised at the public 
hearings. Tr. at 56:05-57:16 (May 19, 2015) (Charlesworth, USCO; Lightsey, GM). Proponent s thus had 
the opportunity to address these concerns both in their reply comments and at the public hearings, and the 
record reflects significant public input on these issues in this class. 
242
 

[PAGE 247]
     
    
      
   
  
 
  
  
      
 
 
      
    
 
  
      
 
  
  
   
     
 
  
 
    
  
   
    
  
    
              
            
     
     
  
  
  
  
      
    
  
  
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
California Air Resources Board (“California ARB”) submitted a letter as well.1625 As 
explained below, DOT, EPA, and California ARB all expressed significant reservations 
about the proposed exemption. NTIA, however, fully supported adoption of the proposed 
exemption.1626 
In its letter, DOT noted that permitting individuals to modify vehicle software 
could create safety and cybersecurity risks, which would be contrary to the purposes of 
the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act (“NTMVSA”).1627 DOT further 
observed that vehicle modifications could create significant safety risks not only to the 
operators of modified vehicles, but also to occupants of other cars, as well as to 
pedestrians and cyclists.1628 DOT noted that the NTMVSA contains prohibitions against 
certain types of tampering, namely with vehicle components that are regulated by the 
Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (“FMVSS”).1629 At the same time, DOT 
explained that many safety-critical functions may not be directly regulated by FMVSS 
and that tampering with computer programs that control those unregulated functions 
would not violate the NTMVSA.
1630 Finally, DOT noted that the NTMVSA prohibitions 
apply narrowly to motor vehicle manufacturers, distributors, dealers and repair 
businesses, but not to other persons.1631 
EPA’s submission urged the Register to decline to recommend the proposed 
exemption, expressing concern that granting the exemption “would enable actions that 
could slow or reverse gains under the Clean Air Act.”1632 EPA explained that the Clean 
Air Act (“CAA”) and its implementing regulations “are responsible for a significant 
reduction in harmful emissions from motor vehicles,” and that “[c]omputer programs 
installed on motor vehicles, controlling engine operations and minimizing emissions 
under a variety of conditions, have been critical to achieving the reduction.”
1633 It 
observed that its own enforcement activities indicate that “the majority of modifications 
to engine software are being performed to increase power and/or boost fuel economy.”
1634 
According to EPA, “[t]hese kinds of modifications will often increase emissions from a 
vehicle engine, which would violate section 203(a) of the CAA, commonly known as the 
‘tampering prohibition.’”1635 In addition, EPA expressed concern that the exemptions 
1625 Letter from Alberto Ayala, Deputy Exec. Officer, California ARB, to Jacqueline C. Charlesworth, Gen.
 
Counsel and Assoc. Register of Copyrights, USCO (July 21, 2015) (“California ARB Letter”).
 
1626 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C).
 
1627 DOT Letter at 2.
 
1628 Id. 
1629 Id. 
1630 Id. 
1631 Id. 
1632 EPA Letter at 1-2. 
1633 Id. at 2. 
1634 Id. 
1635 Id. 
243
 

[PAGE 248]
     
    
   
   
 
    
 
   
 
     
    
 
    
   
 
  
 
 
    
  
     
 
  
  
 
   
  
    
  
                     
            
             
           
                    
                     
 
  
   
    
    
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
would “hinder its ability to enforce the tampering prohibition.”1636 EPA explained that 
the agency “has taken enforcement action against third-party vendors who sell or install 
equipment that can ‘bypass, defeat, or render inoperative’ software designed to enable 
vehicles to comply with CAA regulations.”1637 EPA thus concluded that it “can curb this 
practice more effectively if circumventing TPMs remains prohibited under the 
DMCA.”
1638 
California ARB echoed several of the same concerns with the Class 21 
exemption.1639 It indicated that in its estimation, the proposed exemption would not 
further the goal of improving fuel efficiency or vehicle performance, but would instead 
negatively impact emissions.1640 It added that the proposed activity could undermine 
existing emissions control programs across the United States, as such programs will 
increasingly rely on TPMs.1641 California ARB also expressed doubt as to whether an 
exemption is necessary for the proposed maintenance and repair activities.1642 
Taking into account the issues raised by opponents, as well as the views of the 
agencies most closely associated with the regulation of motor vehicles, the Register is 
persuaded that on balance, the fifth statutory factor presents serious “other factors” that 
weigh against an exemption. 
Accordingly, of the statutory factors set forth in section 1201(a)(1) that the 
Librarian and the Register are to consider, the Register finds that an analysis of the first 
four factors shows them to be neutral or to favor an exemption, while the final factor 
weighs against lifting the ban on circumvention.  
4. NTIA Comments 
NTIA, like the Register, concludes that “proponents have shown that the intended 
use of computer programs embedded in vehicles is likely to be noninfringing under fair 
use principles as well as Section 117” and that an exemption “would enable the 
longstanding practices that auto enthusiasts and mechanics engage in to modify their 
1636 Id. at 3. 
1637 Id. 
1638 Id. The Register further notes that to the extent EPA or another federal or state agency itself seeks to 
investigate—or appoint agents to investigate —alleged violations of the law, that agency should be able to 
rely on the permanent exception set forth in section 1201(e) for law enforcement activities, which allows 
“lawfully authorized investigative, protective, information security, or intelligence activity of an officer, 
agent or employee of the United States, a State, or a political subdivision of a State, or a person acting 
pursuant to a contract with the United States, a State, or a political subdivision of a State.” 17 U.S.C. § 
1201(e). 
1639 See generally California ARB Letter. 
1640Id. at 2-3. 
1641 Id. at 3-5. 
1642 Id. at 4. 
244
 

[PAGE 249]
     
    
   
     
 
  
   
  
  
    
   
 
  
  
    
  
  
   
    
 
 
 
   
  
     
 
                
             
              
              
   
  
   
         
     
    
   
   
    
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
vehicles to continue.”1643 At the same time, NTIA acknowledges that “some regulatory 
agencies” have “express[ed] concerns that modifications and repairs could cause vehicles 
to fall out of regulatory compliance with emission standards.”1644 NTIA also makes note 
of the potential safety and security issues highlighted by opponents, “including the ability 
to bypass the locks on video displays when the user is actively driving, illegal odometer 
tapping, the ability to bypass anti-theft systems, disabling the brakes, and falsifying 
speedometer readings.”
1645 
Ultimately, however, NTIA concludes that the “non-copyright concerns” raised by 
opponents and other agencies are not a reason to deny the exemption.1646 NTIA 
acknowledges that the fifth statutory factor in section 1201(a)(1)(C) broadly permits the 
Librarian to consider “such other factors as the Librarian considers appropriate.”
1647 
NTIA also acknowledges that non-copyright concerns have been relevant to proposed 
exemptions in past rulemakings, highlighting in particular the competition and 
telecommunications policies supporting past cellphone unlocking exemptions.
1648 
Nevertheless, NTIA urges that the “deliberative process [in this rulemaking] should not 
deviate too far afield from copyright policy concerns.”1649 
Accordingly, while NTIA stresses that it is “sympathetic” to the safety and 
environmental concerns raised by opponents and other federal agencies, it expresses the 
“belie[f] that the appropriate regulatory authorities will continue to ensure compliance 
with federal and state laws that control safety features and emission.”
1650 It also proposes 
“including a provision in the exemption explicitly stating that it does not preclude 
liability under other applicable laws.”1651 
While finding the safety and environmental concerns an insufficient basis to deny 
the exemption outright, NTIA acknowledges that the Register “may understandably be 
apprehensive about recommending exemptions that could inadvertently implicate [such] 
issues.”
1652 NTIA thus recognizes that “[o]ne possible way forward may be to delay the 
date upon which such an exemption would become effective to allow the relevant 
1643 NTIA Letter at 54. Unlike the Register, NTIA does not separately analyze entertainment and telematics 
ECUs. Id. at 52-58. In addition, while NTIA’s proposed regulatory language provides that circumvention 
will be permitted when conducted “at the request of the owner,” it does not address whether such a 
provision is consistent with the anti-trafficking provisions set forth in section 1201(a)(2) and (b). Id. at 58. 
1644 Id. at 57. 
1645 Id. 
1646 Id. at 58.
 
1647 Id. at 4 (citing 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(v)).
 
1648 Id. at 3-4 & n.2.
 
1649 Id. at 4. 
1650 Id. at 57. 
1651 Id. at 58. 
1652 Id. at 5. 
245
 

[PAGE 250]
     
    
  
   
    
  
 
  
   
 
  
    
  
 
   
   
   
   
 
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
   
    
     
              
              
           
        
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
stakeholders in other policy spheres to prepare for the exemption’s effective date.”1653 
While expressing doubt about whether “such a delay would be helpful,” NTIA 
nonetheless notes this as a possible solution and, should it factor into the Register’s 
recommendation, “urges the Copyright Office to keep any delay as short as 
practicable.”1654 
As discussed below, the Register agrees that an exemption should be granted, but 
that the serious safety and environmental concerns raised by other agencies must be 
accommodated by allowing a twelve-month period before it becomes effective. 
5. Conclusion and Recommendation 
Class 21 proponents have demonstrated that owners of personal automobiles, 
commercial motor vehicles, and agricultural machinery are adversely impacted in their 
ability to diagnose, repair and modify their vehicles as a result of TPMs that protect the 
copyrighted computer programs on the ECUs that control the functioning of the vehicles.  
They have also established that many of the uses in which the users seek to engage are 
likely to be noninfringing.  Additionally, two of the five statutory factors tend to favor the 
proponents, two are neutral, and one weighs against the exemption.  The Administration 
appears to have disparate views concerning the desirability of an exemption:  while NTIA 
is in favor of an exemption, DOT and EPA (along with California ARB) have expressed 
serious reservations.  Faced with a mixed record and sharply conflicting policy choices 
that are outside the purview of copyright, the Register recommends that an exemption be 
granted, but with careful limitations. 
First, the recommended exemption excludes ECUs that are chiefly designed to 
operate entertainment and telematics systems. As explained above, proponents’ request is 
largely focused on the computer programs on ECUs that control the vehicle’s mechanical 
operation, not entertainment systems used to consume copyrighted content or telematics 
services that offer proprietary subscription services. There was insufficient evidence in 
the record to support a need for circumvention of the TPMs on these ECUs, especially 
when balanced against concerns about unauthorized access to the services and content 
they protect. 
Second, the proposed exemption would allow circumvention not only by a vehicle 
owner, but also “on behalf of” the owner.
1655 While the Register is sympathetic to the 
practical issues that may arise if vehicle owners do not have the knowledge or ability to 
circumvent TPMs themselves, the phrase “on behalf of” may implicate the antitrafficking provisions set forth in section 1201(a)(2) and (b).
1656 Section 1201(a)(1) 
1653 Id. 
1654 Id. 
1655 See EFF Vehicle Software Repair Pet. at 1; NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,869. 
1656 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(2), (b). The anti-trafficking rules set forth in section 1201(a)(2) and (b) generally 
prohibit the manufacture and provision of technologies, products or services— or “part[s] thereof”—that are 
“primarily” designed for purposes of circumvention. Id. 
246
 

[PAGE 251]
     
    
   
  
 
   
    
   
  
    
 
 
 
   
 
     
  
  
 
  
  
 
   
    
 
   
   
    
    
           
               
           
        
                
          
             
      
                 
             
                  
        
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
grants the Librarian of Congress the authority to adopt exemptions that apply to the 
prohibition on circumvention of technological measures that control access to 
copyrighted works, but does not grant authority to adopt exemptions that permit 
trafficking in circumvention tools or services.
1657 This limitation was expressly 
acknowledged by proponent EFF in connection with another class being considered in 
this proceeding; in its filing for Class 22, EFF correctly observed that “[t]o the extent 
that disclosure of information or release of circumvention tools constitute trafficking 
under other provisions of Section 1201, any exemption the Librarian grants cannot reach 
those activities.”
1658 
A similar issue was present in the exemption for the unlocking of cellphones, 
which the Librarian granted in a manner consistent with section 1201(a)(1), expressly 
allowing only circumvention initiated by the owners of computer programs on the 
phones.
1659 In order to broaden the exemption to allow circumvention “by another person 
at the direction of the owner,” Congress intervened, passing the Unlocking Consumer 
Choice and Wireless Competition Act (“Unlocking Act”).1660 The fact that Congress felt 
compelled to take this action in connection with unlocking indicates that Congress 
believed it was necessary to amend the law to permit circumvention “at the direction of” 
an owner.  Significantly, the Unlocking Act applies only in the context of exemptions that 
permit unlocking of cellphones and other wireless devices,
1661 and proponents do not 
argue otherwise. 
As noted, some consumers may find it challenging to circumvent TPMs 
protecting the computer programs that control the functioning of their vehicles 
themselves.  Congress could find such concerns worthy of the same type of specific 
accommodation provided in the Unlocking Act.  At present, however, neither section 
1201 nor the Unlocking Act authorizes the Librarian of Congress to adopt exemptions 
that would allow circumvention to be performed by third parties on behalf of those who 
are actually entitled to an exemption.  The Register therefore must decline to recommend 
that the exemption extend to circumvention “on behalf of” the vehicle owner.1662 
1657 Moreover, section 1201(a)(1)(E) expressly provides that determinations made in the triennial 
rulemaking proceeding may not “be used as a defense in any action to enforce any provision of this title 
other than [section 1201(a)(1)].” Id. § 1201(a)(1)(E); NOI, 79 Fed. Reg. at 55,688 n.2. 
1658 EFF Class 22 Supp. at 15 (citing 2010 Recommendation at 170-71). 
1659 2012 Final Rule, 77 Fed. Reg. at 65,264-66. The 2010 cell phone unlocking exemption also had a
 
similar limitation. See 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,830-32.
 
1660 Unlocking Act, Pub. L. No. 113-144, § 2(c), 128 Stat. 1751, 1751-52 (2014).
 
1661 S. REP. NO. 113-212, at 6-7 (2014).
 
1662 As discussed above, the record indicates that it is likely that, under relevant precedent, the vehicle
 
owner would also be considered the owner of at least the non-entertainment and non-telematics ECU
 
software in the vehicle.  Moreover, even if the vehicle owner is not the owner of the software, such a use by
 
a vehicle owner is likely to be fair.
 
247
 

[PAGE 252]
     
    
   
 
  
 
    
    
  
 
  
  
  
   
  
 
   
     
   
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
            
            
             
                
           
             
                 
               
                
 
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Third, the recommended exemption accounts for the serious policy concerns 
raised regarding potential safety and environmental impacts of an exemption.  To be sure, 
as proponents urge, this rulemaking is principally focused on the copyright concerns 
implicated by any proposed exemption, and on that front, proponents have established the 
case for an exemption. At the same time, section 1201(a)(1) calls for consideration of 
“such other factors as the Librarian considers appropriate,” and, while acknowledging 
NTIA’s views, the Register believes it would be inappropriate simply to disregard other 
agencies’ concerns regarding the possible negative impacts of the exemption on their 
respective regulatory and enforcement efforts. 
Accordingly, the Register recommends two further refinements to the exemption 
to account for these legitimate safety and environmental concerns. The exemption should 
state explicitly that the diagnosis, repair or modification to be facilitated by the act of 
circumvention not violate any other law, including regulations promulgated by DOT or 
EPA.  Thus, circumvention to achieve an illicit purpose—for example, to tamper with 
emissions controls in violation of applicable law—would not be permitted under the 
exemption.  
The Register also recommends a delay of twelve months before the exemption 
goes into effect to allow other agencies with expertise in vehicle safety, environmental 
issues, and other relevant areas an opportunity to consider and react to the new rule.  In 
keeping with the views of NTIA, the Register believes that a twelve-month delay is the 
shortest period that will reasonably permit other agencies to consider appropriate 
action.
1663 
Therefore, the Register recommends that the Librarian designate the following 
class: 
Computer programs that are contained in and control the functioning 
of a motorized land vehicle such as a personal automobile, 
commercial motor vehicle or mechanized agricultural vehicle, except 
for computer programs primarily designed for the control of 
telematics or entertainment systems for such vehicle, when 
circumvention is a necessary step undertaken by the authorized owner 
of the vehicle to allow the diagnosis, repair or lawful modification of a 
1663 The Register understands the Librarian to have the discretion necessary to phase in an exemption as 
required to address concerns in the record. Section 1201 allows the Librarian to deny exemptions outright, 
including based on the assessment of “such other factors as [he] considers appropriate” under the fifth 
statutory factor of section 1201(a)(1). See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1). Thus, the Librarian has the discretion to 
deny the proposed exemption at issue here, based on the substantial safety and environmental concerns 
presented in the record, with the understanding that it could be reconsidered in the next triennial 
proceeding. The Register, however, does not find outright denial to be necessary in this case. The Register 
understands the power to deny an exemption to carry with it the ability to designate a period of time before 
it becomes effective in lieu of denying the exemption entirely in order to address legitimate concerns in the 
record. 
248
 

[PAGE 253]
     
    
  
    
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
vehicle function; and where such circumvention does not constitute a 
violation of applicable law, including without limitation regulations 
promulgated by the Department of Transportation or the 
Environmental Protection Agency; and provided, however, that such 
circumvention is initiated no earlier than 12 months after the effective 
date of this regulation. 
249
 

[PAGE 254]
     
    
   
     
     
   
 
   
  
    
      
 
  
    
  
 
 
 
  
  
   
          
             
    
         
             
   
             
           
        
              
              
         
      
               
             
             
            
             
                
                 
               
 
 
                                                 
 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
J. Proposed Classes To Permit Research of Software Flaws, Proposed Class 
25:  Software – Security Research; Proposed Class 22: Vehicle Software – 
Security and Safety Research; Proposed Class 27A:  Medical Device 
Software – Security and Safety Research 
1. Proposals 
The Office received a number of petitions for proposed exemptions to permit 
circumvention of TPMs for the purposes of conducting good-faith testing for and the 
identification, disclosure and correction of malfunctions, security flaws, and 
vulnerabilities in computer programs.
1664 The Office uses the shorthand term “security 
research” to refer to these various activities. Although that term is sometimes used to 
refer narrowly to research into software flaws that render a system or device vulnerable to 
unauthorized access by third parties,1665 the Office uses the term “security research” here 
in its broader sense also to include research into software flaws that cause a system or 
device to malfunction but do not necessarily involve such unauthorized access.  The 
Office has grouped these security-related petitions into three proposed classes, as 
described below. 
First, the Office received two submissions seeking an exemption to permit goodfaith research into malfunctions, security flaws, or vulnerabilities in software installed on 
all types of systems and devices:  one from Professor Matthew D. Green (“Green”),
1666 
and the other from a group of academic security researchers comprising Professors 
Steven M. Bellovin, Matt Blaze, Edward W. Felten, J. Alex Halderman, and Nadia 
Heninger (“Bellovin et al.”).1667 The NPRM described the proposed class as follows: 
1664 The Register notes that throughout this Recommendation, the terms “firmware” and “software” are 
variously used, although both are “computer programs” within the meaning of the Copyright Act. See 17 
U.S.C. § 101 (definition of “computer program”). 
1665 See, e.g., Security and Privacy, CARNEGIE MELLON UNIV., http://www.csd.cs.cmu.edu/research/areas/ 
security (last visited Oct. 7, 2015); About UC Berkeley Security, UNIV. OF CAL. BERKLEY, 
http://security.cs.berkeley.edu (last visited Oct. 7, 2015). 
1666 Professor Green’s proposed regulatory language reads as follows: “Computer programs and software, a 
subcategory of literary works, accessible on personal computers and personal devices and protected by 
technological protection measures (‘TPMs’) that control access to lawfully obtained works when 
circumvention is accomplished for the purposes of good faith testing, investigating, or correcting security 
flaws and vulnerabilities, commentary, criticism, scholarship, or teaching.” Green Pet. at 2. Professor 
Green was represented throughout the rulemaking proceeding by the Samuelson-Glushko Technology Law 
& Policy Clinic at Colorado Law. 
1667 Bellovin et al.’s proposed regulatory language reads as follows: “Literary works, including computer 
programs and databases, protected by access control mechanisms that potentially expose the public to risk 
of harm due to malfunction, security flaws or vulnerabilities when (a) circumvention is accomplished for 
the purposes of good faith testing for, investigating, or correcting such malfunction, security flaws or 
vulnerabilities in a technological protection measure or the underlying work it protects; OR (b) 
circumvention was part of the testing or investigation into a malfunction, security flaw or vulnerability that 
resulted in the public dissemination of security research when (1) a copyright holder fails to comply with 
the standards set forth in ISO 29147 and 30111; or (2) the finder of the malfunction, security flaw or 
250
 

[PAGE 255]
     
    
   
 
 
  
  
     
   
   
    
    
   
  
 
 
 
   
 
   
             
           
                
                  
                 
   
      
        
            
  
   
  
     
     
     
     
       
              
      
           
            
                 
               
   
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Proposed Class 25: This proposed class would allow researchers to 
circumvent access controls in relation to computer programs, databases, 
and devices for purposes of good-faith testing, identifying, disclosing, and 
fixing of malfunctions, security flaws, or vulnerabilities.
1668 
In addition to Green and Bellovin et al., comments supporting this class were filed by 
several other security researchers,
1669 the Internet Association,1670 Verified V oting 
Foundation (“VVF”),1671 the U.S. Public Policy Council of the Association for 
Computing Machinery (“USACM”),1672 Free Software Foundation (“FSF”),1673 Center 
for Democracy & Technology (“CDT”),1674 New America’s Open Technology Institute 
(“OTI”),1675 Rapid7,1676 Catherine Gellis and the Digital Age Defense project 
(“Gellis/Digital Age Defense”),1677 and over 1500 individual commenters.1678 One party, 
SAE Vehicle Electrical System Security Committee (“SAE VESS”), submitted a neutral 
comment, along with an offer to assist the Copyright Office by providing and sharing its 
technical expertise.1679 
Second, the Electronic Frontier Foundation (“EFF”) filed a petition seeking an 
exemption to allow the circumvention of TPMs on computer programs that are embedded 
in motorized land vehicles for purposes of researching the security or safety of that 
vehicle.
1680 EFF’s petition explained that such security and safety research could involve 
vulnerability reports the malfunction, security flaw or vulnerability to the copyright holder by providing the 
information set forth in Form A* in advance of or concurrently with public dissemination of the security 
research.” Bellovin et al. Pet. at 1. Professor Andrea M atwyshyn, representing the interests of security 
researchers and in her capacity as a law professor at Princeton University, later joined Bellovin et al. in 
their support for the Class 25 exemption, appearing as a witness at the public hearings and submitting a 
joint response to post-hearing questions. 
1668 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,870. 
1669 Gavin Andersen et al. Supp.; Ian Brown et al. Supp.; Jay Radcliffe Supp.; Mark Stanislav Supp.; 
Salvatore J. Stolfo Supp.; Brandon Perry Reply; Bruce Schneier Class 25 Reply.
 
1670 Internet Association Supp.
 
1671 VVF Supp.
 
1672 USACM Supp.
 
1673 FSF Class 25 Supp.
 
1674 CDT Supp.; CDT Reply.
 
1675 OTI Class 25 Reply.
 
1676 Rapid7 Class 25 Reply.
 
1677 Gellis/Digital Age Defense Class 25 Supp.
 
1678 Digital Right to Repair Class 25 Supp. (1546 individuals); Brian M. Rice Supp.
 
1679 SAE VESS Class 25 Supp.
 
1680 EFF’s proposed regulatory language reads as follows: “Lawfully-obtained computer programs that
 
control or are intended to control the functioning of a motorized land vehicle, including firmware and
 
firmware updates, where circumvention is undertaken by or on behalf of the lawful owner of such a vehicle
 
for the purpose of researching the security or safety of such vehicles.” EFF Vehicle Software Security Pet.
 
at 1.
 
251
 

[PAGE 256]
     
    
   
   
   
  
 
 
 
  
      
 
   
  
    
  
  
 
   
   
 
   
 
   
    
    
     
       
                 
            
               
              
           
        
                 
               
             
           
              
          
         
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
uncovering errors in software that could cause the car to malfunction or make it 
vulnerable to remote attacks.1681 The NPRM described the proposed class as follows: 
Proposed Class 22: This proposed class would allow circumvention of 
TPMs protecting computer programs that control the functioning of a 
motorized land vehicle for the purpose of researching the security or 
safety of such vehicles.  Under the exemption as proposed, circumvention 
would be allowed when undertaken by or on behalf of the lawful owner of 
the vehicle. 
In addition to EFF, comments supporting this class were filed by Professor Green,
1682 
FSF,1683 Gellis/Digital Age Defense,1684 and over 1800 individual commenters.1685 Two 
parties, SAE International Dedicated Short Range Communication Standards Committee 
(“SAE DSRC”) and SAE VESS, submitted neutral comments, along with offers to assist 
the Copyright Office by providing and sharing their technical expertise.1686 
Third, the Medical Device Research Coalition (“MDRC”), a group of patients and 
researchers, filed a petition seeking an exemption to allow the circumvention of TPMs on 
computer programs on medical devices and their corresponding monitoring systems.  
MDRC’s petition covered two proposed uses—allowing research into software flaws that 
adversely affect the safety, security and efficacy of medical devices, and allowing a 
patient to access the information generated by his or her own device.
1687 The Office 
originally categorized the petition into a single class, described as follows:1688 
Proposed Class 27: This proposed class would allow circumvention of 
TPMs protecting computer programs in medical devices designed for 
attachment to or implantation in patients and in their corresponding 
monitoring devices, as well as the outputs generated through those 
1681 Id. at 2. 
1682 Green Class 22 Supp. 
1683 FSF Class 22 Supp. 
1684 Gellis/Digital Age Defense Class 22 Supp. 
1685 Digital Right to Repair Class 22 Supp. (1816 individuals); Schneier Class 22 Reply; Donna Eno Class 
22 Reply; George Sawyer Class 22 Reply; Louis Wesler Class 22 Reply. 
1686 SAE DSRC Class 22 Supp.; SAE VESS Class 22 Supp.; SAE VESS Class 22 Reply. 
1687 MDRC’s proposed regulatory language reads as follows: “Computer programs, in the form of firmware 
or software, including the outputs generated by those programs, that are contained within or generated by 
medical devices and their corresponding monitoring systems, when such devices are designed for 
attachment to or implantation in patients, and where such circumvention is at the direction of a patient 
seeking access to information generated by his or her own device or at the direction of those conducting 
research into the safety, security, and effectiveness of such devices.” MDRC Pet. at 1-2. 
1688 The Office, however, did ask for comment on “[w]hether the exemption should distinguish among 
different users (researchers, patients, healthcare providers at the direction of the device-user patient, etc.) 
and/or the proposed use (examining output of devices, research into safety, security, and effectiveness of 
devices, etc.).” NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,871. 
252
 

[PAGE 257]
     
    
  
   
  
   
 
  
 
  
     
   
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
   
  
     
     
         
           
     
     
       
                
               
       
     
             
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
programs.  As proposed, the exemption would be limited to cases where 
circumvention is at the direction of a patient seeking access to information 
generated by his or her own device, or at the direction of those conducting 
research into the safety, security, and effectiveness of such devices. The 
proposal would cover devices such as pacemakers, implantable 
cardioverter defibrillators, insulin pumps, and continuous glucose 
monitors. 
In addition to MDRC, comments supporting this class were filed by Professor Green,
1689 
Jay Freeman,1690 Public Knowledge,1691 FSF,1692 OTI,1693 Gellis/Digital Age Defense,1694 
and over 1600 individual commenters.1695 
Based on the record as it developed in the course of the proceeding, the Register 
came to the conclusion that Proposed Class 27 should be divided into Proposed Class 
27A (Security and Safety Research) and Proposed Class 27B (Patient Data) so that the 
two distinct purposes can be separately addressed in the Recommendation.  The 
discussion here will focus only on Proposed Class 27A, concerning research into 
software flaws in medical devices, the analysis of which largely parallels that in Proposed 
Classes 22 and 25.  Proposed Class 27B, which would permit circumvention to allow 
patient access to information generated by his or her own device, is discussed separately 
below. 
Additionally, as the above makes clear, all three security-related proposals are at 
some level aimed at allowing security researchers to find flaws in software.  Indeed, as 
one commenter noted, the general software security research exemption in Proposed 
Class 25 would appear to be broad enough to swallow the more specific exemptions for 
vehicle software security research in Proposed Class 22 and medical device software 
security research in Proposed Class 27A.
1696 Given this relationship among the proposed 
classes, the Register concludes that it is appropriate to consolidate the analysis for these 
three classes. 
The Register further notes that the proposals to some extent referenced 
circumvention of TPMs protecting “databases.”1697 Databases, however, are distinct 
1689 Green Class 27 Supp.
 
1690 Freeman Class 27 Supp.; Freeman Class 27 Reply.
 
1691 Public Knowledge Class 27 Supp.; Public Knowledge Class 27 Reply.
 
1692 FSF Class 27 Supp.
 
1693 OTI Class 27 Reply.
 
1694 Gellis/Digital Age Defense Class 27 Supp.
 
1695 Digital Right to Repair Class 27 Supp. (1659 individuals); Schneier Class 27 Reply; Don Lowery Class
 
27 Reply; Gregory Borodiansky Class 27 Reply; Henry Feldman Class 27 Reply; Patrick Ferguson Class
 
27 Reply; Michael Weinberg Class 27 Reply.
 
1696 Green Class 22 Supp. at 1.
 
1697 Bellovin et al. Pet. at 1; Green Class 25 Supp. at 4.
 
253
 

[PAGE 258]
     
    
  
   
 
  
    
  
   
   
    
   
    
    
  
   
  
 
    
    
   
   
    
   
 
   
             
                 
         
           
            
    
                      
 
      
    
               
                       
      
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
from computer programs,1698 and proponents presented no evidence in the course of the 
proceeding that demonstrated a need to access databases for purposes of security 
research.  Accordingly, the discussion below excludes databases from consideration. 
a. Background 
The proponents of the software security exemptions observe as a general matter 
that software is pervasive in modern machines and devices. They note that software 
operates the personal computers we use every day, it is the basis of the internet, and it 
controls increasingly computerized and internet-connected devices such as vehicles, 
home appliances and medical devices.
1699 In the case of motorized vehicles, computers 
within the vehicles called electronic control units (“ECUs”) monitor and control a variety 
of vehicle functions.
1700 Similarly, medical devices increasingly employ computers to 
control and monitor their functions.1701 The proponents maintain that the security of 
software and the devices that execute software is of critical importance because security 
flaws pose potentially serious threats, including physical injury and death, property 
damage, and financial harm.
1702 Proponents identify a wide variety of TPMs that restrict 
access to computer software for the proposed uses, including challenge-response 
mechanisms, dongles, code obfuscation, runtime checks, encryption, and disabled access 
ports on the circuitry itself.
1703 
Proponents assert that the various types of TPMs and the prohibition against 
circumvention are having, and will continue to have, an adverse impact on the ability to 
pursue good-faith research to identify and correct malfunctions, security flaws, and 
vulnerabilities in computer programs. Although many software developers and device 
manufacturers conduct their own security research—and som etimes authorize third 
parties to do the same—the exemptions here are principally aimed at allowing 
“independent” security researchers who do not have such authorization to engage in the 
same research without risk of violating the anticircumvention provision of section 
1201(a)(1).  As discussed below, proponents claim that the permanent statutory 
exemptions to section 1201(a)(1)’s prohibition—directed to reverse engineering in 
1698 See 17 U.S.C. § 101 (defining “computer program” as “a set of statements or instructions to be used 
directly or indirectly in a computer in order to bring about a certain result”); U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE , 
COMPENDIUM OF U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE PRACTICES § 727.1 (3d ed. 2014) (“For purposes of copyright 
registration, a ‘database’ is defined as a compilation of digital information comprised of data, information, 
abstracts, images, maps, music, sound recordings, video, other digitized material, or references to a 
particular subject or subjects.”). 
1699 See, e.g., Bellovin et al. Pet. at 2; Green Class 25 Supp. at 4; EFF Class 22 Pet. at 2-3; MDRC Pet. at 1­
2.
 
1700 EFF Class 22 Supp. at 2.
 
1701 MDRC Supp. at 2.
 
1702 See, e.g., Bellovin et al. Pet. at 2; Green Class 25 Supp. at 3-5.
 
1703 See, e.g., Green Class 25 Pet. at 2-3; Green Class 25 Supp. at 5-11; Bellovin et al. Pet. at 5; EFF Class
 
22 Supp. at 4-6; MDRC Supp. at 7-9. 
254
 

[PAGE 259]
     
    
 
    
   
  
 
 
  
  
     
 
  
   
 
 
   
 
 
  
   
  
    
  
 
     
 
 
  
   
 
 
   
       
       
      
                      
        
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
section 1201(f), encryption research in section 1201(g), and security testing in section 
1201(j)—do not provide sufficient assurance that the research activities in which they 
seek to engage will be considered exempt.  They therefore seek broader and more flexible 
exemptions to cover their activities. 
In the 2006 anticircumvention exemption proceeding, the Librarian granted a 
limited exemption for good-faith security research into copy-protected sound recordings 
on compact discs.
1704 And in the 2010 proceeding, the Librarian granted an exemption 
for good-faith security research on TPMs protecting video games accessible on personal 
computers.1705 The current proposals are significantly broader in scope than what was 
considered or granted in these prior proceedings. 
b. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Proponents of all three software security research classes assert that accessing and 
reproducing computer programs for purposes of facilitating good-faith testing for and the 
identification, disclosure and correction of malfunctions, security flaws and 
vulnerabilities of computer programs are likely to be noninfringing fair uses under 
section 107.  
In supporting the exemption for vehicle software security research in Proposed 
Class 22, EFF also invokes section 117 of the Copyright Act, which permits owners of 
copies of copyrighted computer programs to reproduce and adapt them for certain 
1706purposes. 
i. Fair Use 
1) Proposed Class 25:  Software – Security Research 
Class 25 proponents argue that good-faith security research is a noninfringing use 
because it comprises activities that “either do not constitute copyright infringement or are 
paradigmatic fair uses.”1707 Proponents identify the following activities as good-faith 
security research:  good-faith testing for, investigation of, and discovery of software 
flaws and vulnerabilities that implicate privacy, security, and safety concerns; alerting 
consumers and companies to the existence of such flaws and vulnerabilities; teaching 
students and providing them with hands-on experience investigating real systems and 
devices; publicizing scientific findings related to the investigation of software flaws and 
vulnerabilities through academic publications, conference presentations, and other 
discussions of software and device security; and applying research discoveries to correct 
1704 2006 Final Rule, 71 Fed. Reg. at 68,477.
 
1705 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,832-33.
 
1706 EFF Class 22 Supp. at 12-16.
 
1707 See, e.g., Green Pet. at 3; Green Class 25 Supp. at 11; Green Class 25 Reply at 6; see also Bellovin et
 
al. Pet. at 2; CDT Reply at 4. 
255
 

[PAGE 260]
     
    
   
 
   
 
   
  
   
 
     
 
 
    
   
   
 
  
 
 
                    
                      
                    
           
   
                  
                 
                 
                  
                
                
        
          
           
         
       
               
  
         
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
vulnerabilities and create better functioning and more secure software.1708 Proponents 
urge that unlike the 2006 and 2010 exemptions that were limited to vulnerabilities caused 
by access controls themselves, the currently requested exemption should cover all 
software that might contain vulnerabilities—not just access controls—because “the 
landscape of security vulnerabilities has changed” to encompass both vulnerabilities in 
TPMs themselves as well as in underlying computer programs.
1709 
Proponents point to a variety of devices and computer code that would be the 
focus of their research. By and large, these examples involve software and devices used 
by individual consumers.  For example, proponents note potential issues with internet­
enabled consumer goods, such as webcams and microphones on computers, internet­
connected smoke alarms, carbon monoxide detectors, and security cameras.
1710 At the 
public hearing, one proponent highlighted a flaw in a Wi-Fi-enabled voicemail device 
designed for children that could allow hackers to access information stored on the device 
and leave their own messages.1711 Proponents cite research on automobiles that has 
revealed vulnerabilities in remote unlocking functions and wireless tire pressure 
monitoring systems.1712 Proponents also express the desire to research voting machines 
to find flaws in the underlying code and in the encryption protecting it, which could 
potentially allow alteration of votes.
1713 Although, in their petition, Bellovin et al. also 
mention the possibility of researching “computer code that controls nuclear power plants, 
smartgrids, and industrial control systems” as well as “the computer code in air traffic 
1708 Bellovin et al. Pet. at 2; Green Class 25 Supp. at 11-14; see also Bellovin et al. Supp. at 4; USACM 
Supp. at 1; Stolfo Supp. at 1; VVF Supp. at 1; FSF Class 25 Supp. at 1; Internet Association Supp. at 1; 
Radcliffe Supp. at 1; Stanislav Supp. at 1; OTI Class 25 Reply at 5; Rapid7 Reply at 1; Tr. at 10:14-17 
(May 26, 2015) (Green); Tr. at 31:15-23 (May 26, 2015) (Reid on behalf of Green); Tr. at 49:06-10 (May 
26, 2015) (Bellovin). 
1709 Green Class 25 Reply at 11; see also CDT Reply at 4-6 (asserting that security research is a 
noninfringing fair use regardless of whether it is on a TPM or a work protected by that TPM). 
1710 Bellovin et al. Supp. at 9; Green Class 25 Supp. at 11-12. Class 25 proponents also refer in passing to 
medical devices in some of their submissions. See, e.g., Bellovin et al. Pet. at 3 (asserting that adverse 
effects, such as death or physical harm, can result from malfunctions, security flaws, or vulnerabilities in 
“medical devices and machines including radiation machines”); CDT Reply at App. A at 3 (noting that 
researchers have found flaws in “pharmaceutical drug compounders, automated external defibrillators, 
ventilators, drug infusion pumps, and implantable medical devices”). Class 27A, however, specifically 
addresses partially or wholly implanted medical devices, and Class 25 proponents did not provide any 
specific evidence supporting a need to circumvent non-implanted medical devices. 
1711 Tr. at 41:03-08 (May 26, 2015) (Stanislav, Rapid7). 
1712 Bellovin et al. Supp. at 4-7; Tr. at 164:20-24 (May 26, 2015) (Moy, OTI); Tr. at 194:02-05 (May 26, 
2015) (Bellovin). 
1713 VVF Supp. at 1; Tr. at 72:11-20 (May 26, 2015) (Blaze). 
256
 

[PAGE 261]
     
    
   
   
  
   
    
 
     
   
 
    
  
 
    
 
  
  
    
  
    
 
     
       
              
          
       
         
     
   
             
                
         
      
               
                 
             
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
control systems, train systems and traffic lights,”1714 their later submissions do not focus 
on these activities and instead highlight consumer-oriented software and products.1715 
Proponents contend that security research does not constitute copyright 
infringement because, as Green states, “[t]he vast majority of computer security research 
. . . simply involves accessing functional, non-copyrighted elements of the works,” such 
as a computer program’s object code.
1716 Green further asserts that “in most security 
research, nothing is reproduced, distributed, or adapted” and that at most, there is 
“incidental reproduction, distribution, or adaptation . . . ancillary to the research.”1717 
Even where there is more than de minimis reproduction, distribution, or 
adaptation, proponents argue such security research is “universally likely to be a noninfringing fair use.”
1718 Proponents assert that the first factor, the purpose and character 
of the use, weighs strongly in favor of fair use because the purposes of security 
research—specifically, investigating and discovering security flaws, documenting and 
disclosing security flaws to companies and the public, and allowing students to 
investigate software in classroom labs—all fall within the “paradigmatic fair uses” listed 
in section 107’s preamble.  They contend that security research is transformative since it 
“accomplishes a wholly different purpose than that served by the original work.”
1719 
According to proponents, the second factor, the nature of the copyrighted work, 
also weighs in favor of fair use because security research is focused on computer 
programs, which are “more factual and functional than they are creative” and “embody 
many functional design elements that copyright law does not protect.”
1720 As for the 
third factor, the amount and substantiality of the use, proponents contend that it carries 
little weight because security researchers “often utilize few or none of a piece of 
software’s copyrighted elements,” and even when such elements are used, it is in a way 
that is “merely incidental to the goal of the research.”
1721 They also note that publication 
1714 Bellovin et al. Pet. at 2.
 
1715 See Bellovin et al. Supp. at 9-10 (mentioning research into security vulnerabilities in “popular
 
consumer programs,” “cars,” “Internet of Things products” such as smoke alarms and carbon monoxide 
detectors, “surveillance cameras,” “card payment systems, and mobile payment platforms,” “‘smart’ locks,
 
safes and vaults and alarm systems,” “electronic voting systems,” and “medical devices”).
 
1716 Green Class 25 Supp. at 14.
 
1717 Id. at 15.
 
1718 Id.; see also Green Class 25 Reply at 8; CDT Reply at 4.
 
1719 CDT Reply at 4; see also Green Class 25 Supp. at 15-16; Green Class 25 Reply at 8.
 
1720 Green Class 25 Supp. at 16; see also CDT Reply at 4-5 (quoting 2010 Recommendation at 184-85);
 
Green Class 25 Reply at 8.
 
1721 Green Class 25 Supp. at 16-17; see also CDT Reply at 5 (asserting that “the reproduction of the
 
expressive elements of a protected work in security research results is likely to be small, limited to the part
 
of the software that makes the system vulnerable to cyberattack”); Green Class 25 Reply at 8.
 
257
 

[PAGE 262]
     
    
   
   
   
  
  
  
   
   
 
   
   
   
  
  
   
  
   
  
   
   
  
               
     
  
                        
              
                    
            
              
     
              
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
of such research utilizes little of the original work and does so in a way that is 
transformative.1722 
Finally, proponents argue that the fourth factor, the effect on the potential market 
for or value of the work, weighs in favor of fair use as well because security research 
“will not usurp the market for any original works subject to said research,” particularly 
because good-faith security researchers have to lawfully obtain a copy of the work in 
order to conduct security research on the work.  Proponents further assert that any 
economic or reputational harm resulting from the disclosure of security flaws or 
vulnerabilities is not a relevant consideration and, in any event, is “likely [to] be avoided 
through coordinated disclosure with the company.” 
1723 Finally, they point out that when 
research fails to discover vulnerabilities and instead confirms the security of the work, 
this will only enhance the work’s value.1724 
Proponents also argue that previously granted exemptions in 2006 and 2010 that 
were relevant to security research “demonstrate the widespread understanding that good 
faith security research is a non-infringing use.”1725 Although, as noted above, they do not 
seek to rely on any of the permanent security-related exemptions in section 1201, 
proponents nonetheless assert that “Congress has implicitly recognized security research 
as a non-infringing use by codifying statutory support for reverse engineering, encryption 
research, and security testing in Section 1201(f), (g), and (j).” According to proponents, 
those subsections would be “meaningless if the underlying acts of reverse engineering, 
encryption research, and security testing were treated as copyright infringement.”
1726 
Bellovin et al. further assert that section 1201(i), which allows individuals to circumvent 
TPMs that collect personally identifying information,1727 also demonstrates security 
research to be a noninfringing use because it shows that “Congress specifically 
contemplated and sought to protect the public from malfunctioning, flawed or vulnerable 
code that harms consumers.”1728 
1722 Id. 
1723 Green Class 25 Supp. at 17; CDT Reply at 5-6 (quoting 2010 Recommendation at 186); see also Green 
Class 25 Reply at 9. 
1724 Id. 
1725 Green Class 25 Reply at 7; see also Bellovin et al. Supp. at 4-5; Bellovin et al. Pet. at 2; CDT Supp. at 2 
(citing 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,833); CDT Reply at 4, 6 (finding that security research, 
regardless of whether it is on a TPM or a work protected by that TPM, is a noninfringing fair use because 
“[t]he Copyright Office has . . . concluded that such research is fair use”). 
1726 Green Class 25 Reply at 7; see also Bellovin et al. Supp. at 4. 
1727 17 U.S.C. § 1201(i). 
1728 Bellovin et al. Supp. at 5; see also Tr. at 70:04-21 (May 26, 2015) (Matwyshyn). 
258
 

[PAGE 263]
     
    
      
 
   
 
    
  
  
  
     
    
    
 
       
   
   
   
 
    
   
    
   
    
 
 
      
  
  
  
    
             
                
     
           
    
    
 
 
                                                 
	 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
2)	 Proposed Class 22: Vehicle Software – Security and Safety 
Research 
Class 22 proponents note that the ECUs of modern motorized land vehicles (a 
category that includes personal automobiles, commercial vehicles, and farm equipment) 
control a wide array of critical functions including ignition, braking, and engine 
power.1729 Proponent EFF thus states that “[f]or vehicles to remain safe and secure, it is 
essential that users be able to study the software that controls vehicular computers” so 
that “[i]ndependent researchers can discover programming errors that endanger 
passengers.”
1730 For instance, EFF notes that such errors led to an “unintended 
acceleration defect that caused a fatal accident.”1731 It explains that “[i]ndependent 
researchers have also found errors that would allow a remote attacker to take control of a 
vehicle’s functions, and have written a patch to resolve the vulnerability.”1732 
Proponents assert that their proposed research activities constitute noninfringing 
fair use. For purposes of the first fair use factor, EFF maintains that the proposed uses of 
vehicle software for research and scholarship “are purposes that are explicitly called out 
in Section 107 as supporting a finding of fair use.”1733 EFF contends that security 
research serves new and transformative purposes.1734 It further asserts that case law 
demonstrates that uses enabling “greater access to information,” such as copying software 
in order to understand and analyze its functions, are fair uses.
1735 EFF also notes that the 
Register found in 2010 that “good faith research constitutes fair use” and recommended 
an exemption allowing security research for video games, arguing that the proposed 
exemption is “comparable” to the 2010 exemption.1736 EFF explains that security 
researchers are more interested in the functional aspects rather than the creative, 
copyrightable elements of vehicle software since vulnerabilities and errors lie in a code’s 
functionality.1737 It further asserts that security research has socially beneficial purposes 
that weigh “heavily in favor of fair use” because the research results in public scrutiny 
that incentivizes manufacturers to more carefully program vehicles and fix known 
flaws.
1738 
1729 EFF Class 22 Supp. at 2. 
1730 Id. 
1731 Id. 
1732 Id. 
1733 Id. at 7. 
1734 Id. at 7-11 (citing Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 579 (1994)). 
1735 See id. at 7-8 (citing Sega Enters. Ltd. v. Accolade, Inc., 977 F.2d 1510, 1522-23 (9th Cir. 1992)); EFF
 
Class 22 Reply at 4-5.
 
1736 EFF Class 22 Supp. at 8 (quoting 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,834).
 
1737 Id. at 8-9.
 
1738 Id. at 9-10.
 
259
 

[PAGE 264]
     
    
 
  
   
 
 
  
       
  
 
    
      
   
  
   
  
  
      
     
   
 
     
 
 
 
                
 
  
  
                    
             
   
              
             
       
       
       
   
 
 
                                                 
	 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Turning to the second fair use factor, EFF states that the nature of the computer 
programs on vehicle ECUs weighs heavily in favor of fair use because the code contains 
“‘unprotected aspects that cannot be examined without copying.’”1739 EFF also asserts 
that “[t]he primary significance, and nature, of vehicle firmware is functional, strongly 
favoring fair use.”1740 
With regard to the third factor, the amount of the copyrighted work used, EFF 
recognizes that the entire work may be used.1741 But it explains that this does not 
preclude a finding of fair use.  EFF observes that the relevant analysis includes a 
consideration of whether the quantity and value of the materials used are reasonable in 
relation to the purpose of the copying.
1742 EFF asserts that in the case of vehicle security 
and safety research, copying of computer programs on ECUs will be limited to that which 
is reasonable and for a legitimate purpose.1743 
Finally, EFF asserts that the fourth factor, the effect on the market for or value of 
the copyrighted work, also favors fair use.1744 EFF notes that there is no market for 
computer programs on ECUs apart from the sale of vehicles themselves, and so the uses 
encompassed by the proposed exemption, by definition, cannot substitute for sales of the 
vehicle software.1745 EFF also maintains that the relevant harm for consideration is the 
harm to the market for the copyrighted works themselves, not harms resulting from noncopyright issues, such as concerns that allowing researchers to investigate software flaws 
could raise public safety issues, or adversely affect vehicles’ compliance with safety or 
emissions regulations.
1746 EFF thus rejects as inapposite opponents’ claims regarding 
market effects resulting from such “non-copyright issues.”1747 
3)	 Proposed Class 27A: Medical Device Software – Security 
and Safety Research 
Class 27A proponents seek to access the computer code of medical devices and 
corresponding monitoring systems and “use this information to analyze the safety and 
1739 See, e.g., id. at 10 (quoting Sony Computer Entm’t, Inc. v. Connectix Corp., 203 F.3d 596, 603 (9th Cir. 
2000)). 
1740 Id. 
1741 Id. 
1742 Id. (citing Campbell, 510 U.S. at 586-87); EFF Class 22 Reply at 7 (citing Kelly v. Arriba Soft Corp., 
336 F.3d 811, 820-21 (9th Cir. 2002) and Mattel, Inc. v. Walking Mountain Prod., 353 F.3d 792, 803 n.8 
(9th Cir. 2003)). 
1743 EFF Class 22 Supp. at 10-11; EFF Class 22 Reply at 7. 
1744 See, e.g., EFF Class 22 Supp. at 11 (again likening the proposed exemption to the 2010 video game
 
exemption); EFF Class 22 Reply at 7-8.
 
1745 EFF Class 22 Supp. at 11.
 
1746 EFF Class 22 Reply at 7-8.
 
1747 Id. 
260
 

[PAGE 265]
     
    
   
 
 
    
 
  
  
 
   
   
  
    
   
 
   
   
 
   
    
                  
            
      
            
         
                
             
            
               
    
          
     
    
      
                 
             
  
              
           
              
    
         
                 
                 
             
 
 
                                                 
 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
performance of these devices.”1748 MDRC explains that by “medical devices,” it means, 
specifically, “devices that are physically implanted in whole or in part to the body and are 
used as part of the delivery of therapy and medical care to a patient,” including 
pacemakers, ICDs, insulin pumps, and continuous glucose monitors.
1749 While in its 
petition MDRC also referred to “devices [that] are designed for attachment” as well as 
implantation in patients,
1750 MDRC’s subsequent filings and the remainder of the record 
demonstrate that the proposed exemption is not intended to encompass attached devices 
that are neither wholly nor partially implanted, and MDRC specifically excludes 
“consumer health devices, such as digital pedometers and other devices that gather data 
and report their results directly to the patient.”
1751 The term “[c]orresponding monitoring 
systems,” in turn, refers to devices such as handheld receivers or monitoring base stations 
that wirelessly receive data from medical devices, and in some cases further relay that 
data to a centralized monitoring facility or to the physician.
1752 As used herein, then, the 
term “corresponding” or “personal” monitoring system means a portable or home 
monitoring system rather than a monitoring system that resides at a centralized facility or 
with a health care provider.
1753 
Proponents assert that under the four-factor fair use analysis, independent 
researchers are entitled to research medical device software for flaws that affect the 
safety, security, or effectiveness of those devices.
1754 As an overarching point, MDRC 
1748 MDRC Supp. at 2. 
1749 Id. Pacemakers and ICDs are wholly implanted within the body, usually in the chest or the abdomen. 
See Daniel Halperin et al., Security and Privacy for Implantable Medical Devices, 7 IEEE: PERV ASIVE 
COMPUTING 30, 32 (2008), https://spqr.eecs.umich.edu/papers/b1kohFINAL2.pdf (cited in MDRC Supp. at 
2 n.4); NAT’L HEART, LUNG, AND BLOOD INST., What Is an Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillator?, NAT’L 
INST. OF HEALTH, http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/health-topics/topics/icd (last visited Oct. 7, 2015) (cited 
in MDRC Supp. at App. C at ¶ 5 n.12). Insulin pumps, which consist of needles and tubing attached to the 
body that deliver insulin doses, and continuous glucose monitors, which consist of sensors placed under the 
skin, are only partially implanted, and can be described as temporary, as they often require replacement 
after a set period of days. See Jerome Radcliffe, Hacking Medical Devices for Fun and Insulin: Breaking 
the Human SCADA System, B
LACK HAT (2011), https://media.blackhat.com/bh-us-11/Radcliffe/BH_US_ 
11_Radcliffe_Hacking_Medical_Devices_WP .pdf (cited in MDRC Supp. at 10 n.62); Tr. at 8:10-19 (May 
29, 2015) (West, MDRC). 
1750 MDRC Pet. at 1. 
1751 MDRC Supp. at 2 n.4. 
1752 Id. at 5, 7-8, App. C; see also Tr. at 8:10-19 (May 29, 2015) (West, MDRC); Tr. at 53:10-14 (May 29, 
2015) (Sellars, MDRC); Sherwin Siy, Copyright Law and My Mother’ s Heart, PUBLIC KNOWLEDGE (Jan. 
20, 2015), https://www.publicknowledge.org/news-blog/blogs/copyright-law-and-my-mothers-heart (cited 
in MDRC Supp. at 11 n.68) (noting that data from a pacemaker and emergency defibrillator “are stored on 
the device itself,” then “transferred to the base station, and then later transmitted to a monitoring company,” 
which will notify the doctor of any pertinent information, or that alternatively data can be retrieved through 
direct interrogations by a doctor). 
1753 See MDRC Supp. at App. C; Tr. at 48:02-09 (May 29, 2015) (Sellars, MDRC). 
1754 See, e.g., MDRC Supp. at 10-14; MDRC Reply at 20-22; Public Knowledge Class 27 Reply at 3; Public 
Knowledge Class 27 Supp. at 2. For the purposes of the Class 27A analysis conducted herein, the term 
“medical devices” refers to networked computerized medical devices that may employ computer programs. 
261
 

[PAGE 266]
     
    
    
  
 
 
    
   
   
    
  
    
  
 
  
      
    
  
     
  
 
  
  
  
     
    
            
    
    
               
               
           
      
    
        
       
          
        
        
   
   
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
observes with respect to security issues that “[t]o the extent that researchers . . . implicate 
[the exclusive rights of copyright owners], it is usually in the context of short quotations 
from the code or data outputs of a device included in a final report analyzing the device, 
or through the creation of intermediate, in-house copies of the code or outputs while the 
researcher is in the process of analyzing the work.”
1755 With respect to any such interim 
copies of medical device computer programs, proponents contend that these constitute 
fair use.1756 Concerning the use of quoted segments of computer programs, MDRC 
contends under the first factor that independent researchers’ use of such segments in 
publications detailing their findings is for a transformative purpose, because it “adds to 
the original with a new meaning or message.”
1757 MDRC also contends that publication 
of research findings “is also often . . . done for non-commercial, educational purposes, 
often at academic institutions.”
1758 
As for the second fair use factor, MDRC asserts that the nature of the work 
weighs in favor of fair use, because the medical device computer programs at issue are 
highly utilitarian.
1759 Turning to the third fair use factor, MDRC maintains that the 
relatively small amount of medical device code that is used by independent researchers in 
publications of their findings weighs in favor of fair use, because the computer program 
“can be tens of thousands of lines long, and has no identifiable ‘heart.’”1760 Even where 
interim copies of the whole work need to be made, MDRC points to case law holding that 
making such copies “to access the unprotectable functional elements of software is a fair 
use.”1761 MDRC also stresses that independent security researchers make interim copies 
for a transformative purpose, namely, “producing analysis into the safety and 
effectiveness of devices” and not to “develop[] complementary or rival software.”1762 
MDRC contends the fourth fair use factor, the effect of the use on the potential 
market for or value of the work, also weighs in favor of using medical device code in 
published findings.1763 Specifically, it asserts that independent researchers’ excerpting of 
The copyrighted work is generally referred to as “medical device software.” The terms medical device
 
“users” and “patients” are also used interchangeably.
 
1755 MDRC Supp. at 11.
 
1756 Id. at 13-15; Public Knowledge Class 27 Supp. at 2. Public Knowledge alternatively suggests, without
 
offering specific factual support, that the copies fail to meet the statutory definition of a “reproduction” as
 
de minimis copies. Public Knowledge Class 27 Supp. at 2.
 
1757 MDRC Supp. at 11-12 (citing Campbell, 510 U.S. at 579).
 
1758 Id. at 11.
 
1759 Id. at 12 (citing Connectix, 203 F.3d at 603).
 
1760 Id. (citing Medical Device Software Validation, MATHWORKS, http://www.mathworks.com/solutions
 
/medical-devices/medical-software-validation.html (last visited Oct. 7, 2015) and Harper & Row
 
Publishers, Inc. v. Nation Enters., 471 U.S. 539, 565 (1985)).
 
1761 Id. at 13 (citing Connectix, 203 F.3d at 608.
 
1762 Id. at 14.
 
1763 Id. at 12-13.
 
262
 

[PAGE 267]
     
    
  
      
   
   
  
  
      
 
     
    
  
    
 
 
   
    
   
  
    
  
 
   
            
   
               
           
 
     
    
     
              
      
              
            
           
             
     
 
 
                                                 
	 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
medical device code in such a context does not usurp market demand for the medical 
device itself.1764 Similarly, it argues that the making of interim copies made in the 
process of conducting research “could not possibly supplant the need for an original 
device in a patient.”1765 Moreover, MDRC asserts that any market harm resulting from 
such uses “would only be due to the effectiveness of its criticism, which is not considered 
cognizable harm under the fourth factor.”
1766 
ii. Section 117 
1)	 Proposed Class 22: Vehicle Software – Security and Safety 
Research 
With regard to Class 22, in addition to relying on fair use, EFF asserts that, 
vehicle owners’ access, reproduction or alteration of vehicle computer programs for 
security research is a noninfringing use under section 117.  That provision allows the 
owner of a copy of a computer program to make or authorize the making of another copy 
or adaptation of that program “as an essential step in the utilization of the computer 
program in conjunction with a machine and that [] is used in no other manner.”1767 
A key consideration with respect to the application of section 117 is who owns the 
computer program in question.  EFF argues that under either of the two leading cases on 
software ownership—Krause v. Titleserv, Inc. 1768 and Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc.1769—it is 
the owner of the vehicle who owns the copy of the computer programs on an ECU 
embedded in the owner’s vehicle.1770 EFF states that most vehicle ECUs are transferred 
as part of the vehicle with no explicit agreement governing title to the copies of the ECU 
computer 
programs.1771 EFF noted during the initial round of comments that it was able 
to identify only a few license agreements pertaining to ECUs, and that these addressed 
vehicle telematics systems
1772 or entertainment systems; it did not locate any concerning 
more general vehicle functions.1773 And, during the reply phase, EFF noted that 
1764 Id. at 12 (citing Cariou v. Prince, 714 F.3d 694, 708-09 (2d Cir. 2013)).
 
1765 Id. at 14.
 
1766 Id. at 12 (citing New Era Publ’ns Int’l v. Carol Publ’g Grp., 904 F.2d 152, 160 (2d Cir. 1990); 
Wojnarowicz v. Am. Family Ass’n, 745 F. Supp. 130, 145-46 (S.D.N.Y . 1990); 2012 Recommendation at
 
73).
 
1767 17 U.S.C. § 117(a).
 
1768 402 F.3d 119 (2d Cir. 2005).
 
1769 621 F.3d 1102 (9th Cir. 2010).
 
1770 See, e.g., EFF Class 22 Supp. at 12-15; EFF Class 22 Reply at 8-10.
 
1771 EFF Class 22 Supp. at 13.
 
1772 Telematics systems are vehicle systems that combine global positioning satellite tracking and other
 
wireless communications to identify the location of vehicles for a variety of purposes such as automatic
 
roadside assistance. See id. at 14.
 
1773 Id. at 13-14 (citing end-user license agreements for GM OnStar, Pioneer AppRadioLIVE, Ford Sync,
 
Toyota Safety Connect, and Mercedes-Benz mbrace).
 
263
 

[PAGE 268]
     
    
 
       
   
    
  
   
  
   
 
  
   
  
   
    
   
   
      
   
  
   
   
   
 
   
        
              
       
     
      
      
         
       
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
opponents had failed to offer any additional evidence that the copies of computer 
programs on ECUs are licensed rather than sold to vehicle purchasers.1774 
EFF further maintains that even if written license terms exist, under relevant 
precedent, a vehicle owner may still own the copy of computer programs on an ECU in 
his or her car.  EFF further asserts that under Krause and Vernor, possessing title to a 
software copy is not an “absolute prerequisite” to section 117(a) protection.1775 Rather, a 
party who exercises sufficient incidents of ownership over a copy of the program can be 
considered the owner of it.
1776 EFF claims that such incidents of ownership exist for 
vehicle purchasers, noting that vehicle owners are understood to have the right to 
indefinitely use, possess, resell, discard or destroy their vehicles, including the embedded 
ECUs, without any material restriction from the manufacturer.1777 
EFF additionally asserts that making copies or adaptations of ECU computer 
programs for the desired uses is “an essential step in the utilization of the computer 
program in conjunction with a machine and that [the copy or adaptation] is used in no 
other manner,” as required to invoke section 117.
1778 Although EFF concedes that 
making such copies and adaptations may not be essential to using the vehicle as intended 
by the manufacturer, relying upon Krause, it stresses that section 117 allows the making 
of such copies and adaptations for the purpose of adding new features and capabilities, 
which could include the testing of bug fixes.
1779 Additionally, EFF maintains that the 
creation of a backup copy to protect against destruction of or damage to the ECU 
software in the process of vehicle software security research is covered by the archival 
purposes exception set forth in section 117(a)(2), which permits the making of “a new 
copy or adaptation . . . for archival purposes only” so long as “all archival copies are 
destroyed in the event that continued possession of the computer program should cease to 
be rightful.”
1780 EFF notes that such backup copies “serve as a reference when 
modifications or experimentations are performed” and can be used to restore the ECU to 
its original state after completing research on the vehicle.1781 
1774 EFF Class 22 Reply at 9-10.
 
1775 EFF Class 22 Supp. at 12-14 (citing Krause, 402 F.3d at 124 and Vernor, 621 F.3d at 1110-11).
 
1776 EFF Class 22 Reply at 9.
 
1777 Id. at 9-10.
 
1778 EFF Class 22 Supp. at 15.
 
1779 Id. (citing Krause, 402 F.3d at 127).
 
1780 Id. at 15-16; EFF Class 22 Reply at 10-11.
 
1781 EFF Class 22 Reply at 10-11.
 
264
 

[PAGE 269]
     
    
  
    
   
 
  
 
 
 
    
 
   
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
   
 
     
 
 
   
                  
                     
              
            
                
              
            
      
  
  
              
        
                   
   
     
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
c. Asserted Adverse Effects 
i. Proposed Class 25:  Software – Security Research 
Class 25 proponents argue that an exemption is necessary because section 
1201(a)(1) has “significant chilling effects on good faith security research” in that it can 
potentially expose security researchers to significant civil and criminal liability.1782 
Green highlights one example in which a copyright owner, the Secure Digital Music 
Initiative, publicly challenged security researchers from Princeton, Rice, and Xerox to 
find vulnerabilities in technologies protecting digital music, then subsequently sent letters 
threatening to bring lawsuits against those who succeeded in removing the protections 
and intended to present their results at an academic conference.
1783 Green provides a 
second example where researchers discovered vulnerabilities in “the Texas Instruments’ 
Data Storage Tag[], which uses sensors to track information.”1784 According to Green, 
“Texas Instruments contacted officials at the researchers’ universities in an attempt to 
block disclosure,” although he acknowledges that “[t]hese attempts were ultimately 
unsuccessful.”
1785 Proponents also contend that foreign security researchers, such as 
those from Russia and the United Kingdom, have been deterred from working in and 
traveling to the United States “for fear of prosecution under the anti-circumvention 
provision.”
1786 
Supporters of Proposed Class 25 comment that the DMCA gives the “bad-guy” 
researchers an advantage because it chills “good-guy” researchers who are focused on 
making the public safer.1787 CDT asserts that the DMCA’s anticircumvention rule 
“discourages both academic institutions and government entities from funding critical 
security research.”
1788 Proponents also argue that the prohibition on circumvention has 
resulted in lower-quality research, because researchers alter the subject matter and 
methodology of the intended research to avoid violating section 1201(a)(1).  Bellovin et 
al. explain that this loss of security research has harmed “not only our own national 
1782 Green Class 25 Supp. at 17-18; see also CDT Supp. at 3; Radcliffe Class 25 Supp. at 1; Rice Class 25 
Supp. at 1; Stanislav Class 25 Supp. at 1; USACM Supp. at 1; Green Class 25 Reply at 4; Tr. at 20:08-23 
(May 26, 2015) (Green); Tr. at 38:01-20 (May 26, 2015) (Sayler on behalf of Green); Tr. at 40:24-42:04 
(May 26, 2015) (Stanislav, Rapid7); Tr. at 71:01-08 (May 26, 2015) (Matwyshyn). As explained by Green, 
researchers can face civil damages “up to $2,500 per act of circumvention” and criminal penalties of “up to 
$500,000, up to 5 years in prison, or both,” and any subsequent violation can result in “a fine of up to $1 
million, 10 years in prison, or both.” Green Class 25 Supp. at 18. 
1783 Green Class 25 Supp. at 18. 
1784 Id. 
1785 Id. 
1786 Id. at 19; see also Brown et al. Class 25 Supp. at 1 (contending that the prohibition on circumvention 
“significantly damages international collaboration in computer security research”). 
1787 Radcliffe Supp. at 1; see also Schneier Class 25 Reply at 2; OTI Class 25 Reply at 2-5; Tr. at 96:10­
97:07 (May 26, 2015) (Moy, OTI). 
1788 CDT Reply at 6. 
265
 

[PAGE 270]
     
    
   
   
 
   
  
   
  
    
  
    
   
    
   
   
  
   
   
 
   
  
  
  
     
 
   
                     
                 
                     
            
          
             
          
      
   
     
       
    
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
security but also the security of other countries,” as well as consumer safety, by impeding 
the diagnosis and mitigation of defects in consumer products.1789 Bellovin et al. also 
argue that the lack of an exemption interferes with educational initiatives relating to 
security research.1790 
Proponents also reject opponents’ argument, described in greater detail below, that 
an exemption is unnecessary because software companies and system and device 
manufacturers work with outside security researchers in authorized settings.  Proponents 
assert that such efforts are often not productive because the authorizing company may 
decide not to disclose or resolve any discovered vulnerabilities.
1791 Bellovin et al. further 
express concerns that arrangements between companies and security researchers may 
give the companies the right to block or delay publication or other disclosure of 
vulnerabilities, thereby chilling security researchers’ desire to enter into such 
arrangements.
1792 For example, Professor Bellovin testified at the public hearing that his 
university’s ethics policies prohibit him from “accept[ing] a grant that gives the funding 
agency or some outside party the right to block publication.”1793 CDT worries that 
relying on agreements between companies and researchers does not provide “protection 
for independent or ‘accidental’ researchers who discover a vulnerability but have no 
means to disclose it without potentially subjecting themselves to liability under Section 
1201.”
1794 
As noted above, proponents’ evidence focused largely on the adverse effects 
flowing from the inability to research software and devices that are intended for use by 
individual consumers. They cite as examples internet -connected consumer devices such 
as webcams, smoke alarms, alarm systems, security cameras, card payment systems and 
mobile payment platforms used by individual consumers.1795 They also point to voting 
machines, which have previously been found to have “serious exploitable vulnerabilities 
. . . that could be used to undetectably alter the outcome of an election.”
1796 Proponents 
did not specifically address how the prohibition on circumvention is adversely affecting 
security research into computer programs that control non-consumer-facing systems such 
as those used to operate nuclear power plants, smartgrids, industrial enterprises, air traffic 
1789 Bellovin et al. Supp. at 7; see also Brown et al. Class 25 Supp. at 1 (asserting that the prohibition on
 
circumvention “materially harms matters of national security in both the US and UK”); FSF Class 25 Supp.
 
at 1; Stolfo Class 25 Supp. at 1 (stating that the DMCA has caused Stolfo to “alter and, in my opinion,
 
methodologically weaken the proposals that I have submitted to government funding agencies in response
 
to their calls for security research”); USACM Supp. at 1.
 
1790 Bellovin et al. Class 25 Supp. at 7; see also Stolfo Supp. at 1.
 
1791 CDT Reply at 7-8; see also Schneier Class 25 at 1-2.
 
1792 Tr. at 204:21-205:09 (May 26, 2015) (Bellovin).
 
1793 Id. at 159:06-160:22 (Bellovin).
 
1794 CDT Reply at 8.
 
1795 Bellovin et al. Supp. at 9-10.
 
1796 Id. at 2-3.
 
266
 

[PAGE 271]
     
    
  
  
    
 
    
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
    
 
   
  
   
   
       
                  
       
                 
               
             
                 
  
      
     
    
   
      
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
control functions, train systems, or traffic lights,1797 or explain why that research could 
not or should not be conducted under the authorization of the relevant system owner.  
While Class 25 proponents acknowledge that section 1201 contains a number of 
potentially relevant permanent exemptions—section 1201(f) for reverse engineering, 
section 1201(g) for encryption research, and section 1201(j) for security testing—they 
nevertheless claim these exemptions are inadequate because they have “overly narrow 
scopes, restrictions on research, restrictions on dissemination of information, 
authorization requirements, reliance on multifactor tests, and other infirmities” and lack 
the clarity and breadth necessary to facilitate researchers’ desired activities.1798 Green 
notes that the Register recommended a security research exemption for copy-protection 
controls on compact discs in 2006, and one for TPM-protected video games in 2010, 
where the applicability of section 1201’s permanent exemptions was inadequate and 
needed to be supplemented to better facilitate important research.
1799 
The reverse engineering exemption in section 1201(f) permits circumvention for 
the purpose of identifying and analyzing elements of computer programs necessary to 
achieve interoperability and allow development of circumvention methods to enable such 
analysis and the interoperability of independently created computer programs.
1800 
According to Green, that provision does not obviate the need for the proposed exemption 
here because “not all vital security research has the ‘sole purpose’ of improving 
interoperability,” as required under 1201(f).1801 Green notes that research may have other 
purposes as well, such as exposing security flaws, incentivizing repair of flaws, and 
teaching students how to conduct security research.1802 
The encryption research exemption in section 1201(g) is intended to allow for the 
research of and advancement of encryption technologies.  Green argues that this 
provision is also insufficient.
1803 For example, section 1201(g) is limited to the purposes 
of advancing the state of knowledge in the field of encryption technology or assisting in 
the development of encryption products.1804 Proponents note that security research does 
1797 See Bellovin et al. Pet. at 2. 
1798 Green Class 25 Supp. at 19; see also CDT Supp. at 3-4; Green Class 25 Reply at 9; Tr. at 14:16-25, 
17:13-19 (May 26, 2015) (Reid on behalf of Green). 
1799 Green Class 25 Reply at 9-10; Tr. at 15:22-16:10 (Reid on behalf of Green). Proponents argue that 
while the permanent exemptions do reflect Congress’s intent to allow security testing, the fact that targeted 
exemptions have been previously granted in the realm of security research demonstrates the need for a 
targeted exemption here. Green Class 25 Reply at 10 -11; see also Tr. at 113:11-23 (May 26, 2015) 
(Stallman, CDT). 
1800 17 U.S.C. § 1201(f). 
1801 Green Class 25 Supp. at 19-20. 
1802 Id. 
1803 Id. at 20-21. 
1804 17 U.S.C. § 1201(g). 
267
 

[PAGE 272]
     
    
    
   
 
  
      
   
    
   
   
 
      
    
  
  
   
  
   
  
 
    
  
   
    
  
  
  
     
             
          
     
          
    
     
     
     
             
         
     
                 
          
      
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
not always involve encryption technologies.1805 For instance, Bellovin et al. list a 
number of categories of security flaws, only some of which involve encryption.1806 
Moreover, the 1201(g) exemption requires researchers to attempt to obtain authorization 
from copyright holders;1807 proponents assert that in some cases copyright owners who 
learn about planned research attempt to squash it by threatening spurious legal action.1808 
Green also contends that section 1201(g) requires the evaluation of a multifactor statutory 
test that is restrictive, somewhat vague in its application to both professional and amateur 
security researchers, and difficult to apply ex ante.
1809 
The security testing exemption in section 1201(j) authorizes accessing a computer 
system or network for the purpose of testing, investigating, or correcting flaws or 
vulnerabilities.1810 Proponents assert that this provision is restrictive and is difficult to 
apply.1811 Proponents contend that the language requiring that testing be of “a computer, 
computer system, or computer network” makes it unclear whether the exemption applies 
when a researcher “is not seeking to gain access to ‘a computer, computer system, or 
computer network,’” but is attempting to research flaws in software.
1812 Section 1201(j) 
also requires that the testing be “with the authorization of the owner or operator of such 
computer, computer system, or computer network.”1813 Proponents contend that it may 
be difficult to know who “the owner or operator” of a system is, particularly when testing 
software that is used in a range of devices, and that, in any event, authorization can be 
unreasonably withheld.1814 CDT further observes that 1201(j) does not make provision 
for the “accidental researcher,” a person who simply discovers a vulnerability while in 
the midst of “wholly separate research.”1815 
Proponents also complain that the multifactor test set forth in section 1201(j) is 
difficult to apply ex ante and has requirements that are not practical for security 
researchers.  For example, while the multifactor test requires consideration of whether the 
activity is “solely for the benefit of a computer’s owner or operator,” some research may 
1805 Green Class 25 Supp. at 20.
 
1806 Bellovin et al. Supp. at 5 (listing, for example, “[p]assive interception of communication,” “[c]ode
 
injection through mechanisms such as buffer/heap/stack overflows,” and “[r]ootkits” as well as
 
“[w]eaknesses in . . . cryptographic practices”).
 
1807 17 U.S.C. § 1201(g)(2)(C) (requiring the person to have “made a good faith effort to obtain 
authorization before the circumvention”).
 
1808 Green Class 25 Supp. at 20.
 
1809 Id. at 21.
 
1810 17 U.S.C. § 1201(j).
 
1811 Green Class 25 Supp. at 21-22; CDT Supp. at 3-4; CDT Reply at 8.
 
1812 Green Class 25 Supp. at 21 (citing 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,832-33).
 
1813 17 U.S.C. § 1201(j)(1).
 
1814 Green Class 25 Supp. at 21-22; CDT Supp. at 3-4; CDT Reply at 8; Tr. at 101:03-12 (May 26, 2015)
 
(Stallman, CDT); Tr. at 117:04-22 (May 26, 2015) (Reid on behalf of Green).
 
1815 Tr. at 107:07-25 (May 26, 2015) (Stallman, CDT).
 
268
 

[PAGE 273]
     
    
   
 
   
    
     
 
  
   
  
   
   
  
  
 
      
  
  
  
   
   
               
                
             
            
       
           
             
            
              
              
            
     
       
                  
              
      
                  
         
              
                
            
 
 
                                                 
	 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
result in “outcomes that . . . benefit the public” rather than the owner or operator.1816 
CDT also argues that the requirement in 1201(j) that an act of circumvention not violate 
“applicable law other than this section” only “imports ambiguities” from other statutes, 
including the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (“CFAA”).
1817 The CFAA is expressly 
referenced in section 1201(j)1818 and, as most relevant here, prohibits the act of 
intentionally accessing a “protected” computer (defined as any federal computer, bank 
computer, or computer connected to the internet) without authorization to obtain 
information, commit fraud or theft, or damage the computer.
1819 
Proponents assert that there are no reasonable alternatives to circumvention that 
exist for security research because “all instances of the software or device under 
investigation are protected by TPMs.”1820 In addition, they claim that “software 
developers and copyright holders lack adequate incentives to conduct the necessary 
security research themselves” and may instead attempt to conceal security 
vulnerabilities.
1821 
ii.	 Proposed Class 22: Vehicle Software – Security and Safety 
Research 
Regarding Class 22, EFF posits that it is essential for independent researchers “to 
study the software that controls vehicular computers” in order to ensure public safety and 
security.1822 EFF asserts that manufacturers’ efforts are insufficient on their own to 
address the security and safety concerns posed by vehicle software.1823 EFF observes 
1816 Green Class 25 Supp. at 22; see also CDT Reply at 9 (asserting that “with the proliferation of softwareenabled or networked devices, the person whose property, safety, or privacy is protected by the lock may 
not be able to authorize testing it”); Tr. at 14:25-15:12 (May 26, 2015) (Reid on behalf of Green). 
1817 See CDT Reply at 8-9; Tr. at 121:18-122:24 (May 26, 2015). 
1818 17 U.S.C. § 1201(j). 
1819 18 U.S.C. § 1030. Proponents also complain about ambiguities in other potentially relevant statutes, 
including the Wiretap Act, which generally prohibits the interception, use, or disclosure of electronic 
communications (Id. §§ 2510 et seq.), the Stored Communications Act, which regulates the disclosure of 
communications held by internet service providers (Id. §§ 2701 et seq.), and the Pen Registers and Trap and 
Trace Devices statute, which regulates law enforcement use of devices that record the calls made or 
received by a phone (Id. §§ 3121 et seq.). See CDT Reply at 8-9. 
1820 Green Class 25 Supp. at 22. 
1821 Id.; Bellovin et al. Supp. at 6. 
1822 See, e.g., EFF Class 22 Supp. at 2; see also id. at 16 (“The research contemplated by the proposed 
[C]lass provides a critical public service by identifying potential programming errors that compromise the 
security and safety of motor vehicles.”). 
1823 See EFF Class 22 Reply at 14 (stating that a report issued by Senator Markey on auto security 
concluded that manufacturers’ implementation of vehicle software raises consumer security and privacy 
concerns); see also Schneier Class 22 Reply at 2 (“Manufacturers have pointed out that they sometimes 
work with select, authorized researchers from outside the company to audit their code vulnerabilities. This 
kind of limited access is not sufficient to provide for secure systems.”). 
269
 

[PAGE 274]
     
    
  
 
   
   
  
     
    
  
   
    
   
   
 
   
   
  
       
             
    
         
       
                    
          
      
         
          
                
          
              
              
     
               
       
          
                  
          
 
                      
                   
              
              
         
      
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
that vehicle recalls based on vehicle software bugs are common,1824 and cites one 
instance where “a vehicle manufacturer was found liable for the death of a driver as a 
result of a software error” after independent researchers identified the error.1825 
Proponents further assert that vehicle software is susceptible to malicious attacks1826 and 
cite instances where independent researchers have identified and helped manufacturers 
resolve security vulnerabilities in vehicle software.
1827 
Although there has thus been some independent research to identify and resolve 
potentially dangerous vehicle software bugs, proponents maintain that without the 
prohibition on circumvention, there would be even more.
1828 For instance, Charlie 
Miller, a vehicle security researcher, testified that he is aware of “other researchers that 
are very interested in this field” but “will not pursue [it] . . . because they are afraid of the 
legal problems they would have” under section 1201.
1829 Proponents also claim that 
“important information [has been] left out of publications about security research such as 
the identi[t]y of devices and cars being investigated.”
1830 Proponents assert that the 
prohibition’s chilling of independent research deprives consumers of the ability to make 
informed purchasing decisions based on manufacturers’ implementation of vehicle 
1824 See EFF Class 22 Supp. at 17. 
1825 Id. at 18 (citing Michael Dunn, Toyota’ s Killer Firmware: Bad Design and Its Consequences, EDN 
NETWORK (Oct. 28, 2013), http://www.edn.com/design/automotive/4423428/2/Toyota-s-killer-firmware-­
Bad-design-and-its-consequences and Michael Barr, Bookout v. Toyota: 2005 Camry L4 Software Analysis 
5, http://www.sddt.com/files/BARR-SLIDES.pdf (last visited Oct. 7, 2015)). 
1826 See, e.g., EFF Class 22 Reply at 11-12; Green Class 22 Supp. at 1 (citing Stephen Checkoway et al., 
Comprehensive Experimental Analysis of Automotive Attack Surfaces, USENIX Security, 2011, available at 
https://www.usenix.org/legacy/events/sec11/tech/full_papers/Checkoway.pdf and Charlie Miller & Chris 
Valasek, A Survey of Remote Automotive Attack Surfaces, Black Hat, 2014, available at http://illmatics. 
com/remote%20attack%20surfaces.pdf). Though not part of the record in this proceeding, the Register 
notes that following the public hearings, there were public reports of security researchers’ ability to hack 
into certain Fiat Chrysler manufactured vehicles via the Uconnect internet-connection computer feature, 
allowing the hacker to remotely control several essential vehicle functions, including steering, brakes, and 
transmission. See, e.g., Andy Greenberg, Hackers Remotely Kill a Jeep on the Highway— With Me in It, 
W
IRED (July 21, 2015), http://www.wired.com/2015/07/hackers-remotely-kill-jeep-highway. 
1827 EFF Class 22 Reply at 15 (citing Seth Rosenblatt, Chinese Hackers Take Command of Tesla Model S, 
CNET (July 17, 2014), http://www.cnet.com/news/chinese-hackers-take-command-of-tesla-model-s). In 
one example, independent researchers identified and helped resolve a vehicle software error that allowed 
“an attacker to wirelessly unlock a car’s doors.” EFF Class 22 Supp. at 16 (citing Martyn Williams, BMW 
Cars Found Vulnerable in ‘Connected Drive’ Hack, PC WORLD (Jan. 30, 2015), http://www.pcworld.com/ 
article/2878437/bmw-cars-found-vulnerable-in-connected-drive-hack.html). 
1828 EFF Class 22 Supp. at 18; see also id. at App. B (Statement of Charlie Miller) (“I live in constant fear 
that the DMCA will be used as a tool by the manufacturers to stop this safety critical research from 
continuing. I worry that in an effort to stop bad publicity and prevent their customers from getting scared, 
they will leverage the DMCA against us and the effect will be that everyone’s vehicle will be less safe.”). 
1829 Tr. at 45:08-13 (May 19, 2015) (Charlesworth, USCO; Miller). 
1830 Id. at 9:06-10 (Walsh, EFF). 
270
 

[PAGE 275]
     
    
    
  
  
 
   
   
 
  
   
    
  
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
             
                 
          
   
                     
               
       
           
                  
      
               
             
              
         
          
              
              
            
                  
              
       
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
software.1831 Proponents thus claim that granting the proposed exemption will “save 
lives” by enabling independent researchers to identify potentially dangerous vehicle 
software bugs sooner, and by increasing auto manufacturers’ accountability.1832 
EFF argues that the permanent statutory exemptions under section 1201 are 
inadequate and “likely to apply only in a narrow subset of scenarios.”1833 EFF contends 
that section 1201(f)’s reverse engineering exemption may not apply to security research 
for vehicle software because such research may not meet the requirement of being 
undertaken for the “sole” purpose of achieving interoperability.1834 Similarly, proponents 
maintain section 1201(g)’s encryption research exemption is too narrow to effectively 
shield independent security researchers from liability under the anticircumvention 
provisions because security researchers may not be confronted with encryption when 
examining the security of vehicle ECUs in the first place, and because the multifactor test 
imposed by that provision imposes unreasonable burdens.
1835 EFF further asserts that the 
security testing exemption of section 1201(j) is too narrow to apply to independent 
security researchers who wish to publish their findings in order to advance the state of 
knowledge in the field, because in that case the information derived from the research 
would not be used “solely to promote the security of the owner and operator of the 
vehicle.”
1836 In proponents’ view, the uncertainty as to the applicability of these several 
statutory exceptions to various types of security research for vehicle software discourages 
such research, constituting “a substantial adverse impact that necessitates an 
exemption.”
1837 
1831 EFF Class 22 Supp. at 16; Schneier Class 22 Reply at 2 (“When researchers are not free to disclose 
their findings, companies are free to ignore them . . . . If we expect the market to motivate manufacturers to 
design secure products, there must be consumer-advocate testing and evaluation so that users can make 
intelligent buying decisions.”). 
1832 See, e.g., EFF Class 22 Supp. at 18-20; EFF Class 22 Reply at 15; Schneier Class 22 Reply at 1 (“In 
fact, obscurity leads to insecurity. When manufacturers are allowed to bar independent researchers from 
evaluating their products, they can get away with producing shoddy products.”). 
1833 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(A); EFF Class 22 Supp. at 19. 
1834 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(f)(1)-(4); EFF Class 22 Supp. at 19 (citing Universal City Studios, Inc. v. 
Reimerdes, 111 F. Supp. 2d 294, 320 (S.D.N.Y 2001)). 
1835 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(g)(2); EFF Class 22 Supp. at 20-21; see also EFF Class 22 Supp. at 21 
(“[Independent security researchers] may not to provide the copyright owner with notice of their findings 
[as required by section 1201(g)(3)(C)], depending on whether they think the copyright owner will act 
receptively or negatively.”); Schneier Class 22 Reply at 2. 
1836 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(j)(3)(A) (“In determining whether a person qualifies for the exemption under 
paragraph (2), the factors to be considered shall include (A) whether the information derived from the 
security testing was used solely to promote the security of the owner or operator of such computer, 
computer system or computer network . . .”); EFF Class 22 Supp. at 22. 
1837 EFF Class 22 Supp. at 22; see also Schneier Class 22 Reply at 2 (“I know many security researchers 
who have refrained from conducting important security research because they fear the DMCA. All future 
research is harmed by this chilling effect.”). 
271
 

[PAGE 276]
     
    
    
 
  
     
    
    
 
  
   
 
    
     
  
  
     
   
  
 
  
   
      
    
               
           
             
     
 
     
            
              
    
        
               
              
             
 
             
        
         
            
   
        
 
 
                                                 
 
	 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
iii.	 Proposed Class 27A: Medical Device Software – Security and 
Safety Research 
Regarding Class 27A, MDRC contends that independent security research is 
critical to the safety and security of millions of Americans who rely on the software used 
in implanted medical devices.1838 According to MDRC, “[c]omputerized medical devices 
can fail in many ways, including through programming errors, incorrect calibration, and 
exposure to malicious intrusions, as well as physical or medical errors.”1839 It observes 
that hundreds of deaths have occurred as a result of software-related errors in medical 
devices,1840 and a significant percentage of medical device recalls involve software 
errors.1841 In its view, independent research on medical device software “effectively 
addresses these problems” by “analyzing the design flaws and vulnerabilities of medical 
devices.”
1842 MDRC also contends device manufacturers’ current research efforts do not 
sufficiently address the safety and security threats posed by medical device software.1843 
MDRC notes that most earlier research on medical device software has not 
implicated anticircumvention law at all because medical devices have not typically 
employed TPMs.1844 But manufacturers are increasingly using TPMs to protect medical 
device software for various reasons.1845 In particular, proponents note that recent 
guidance issued by the Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) recommends that 
manufacturers impose TPMs to protect device security and patient privacy, such as by 
limiting access to data through passwords, code authentication, and encryption of 
wireless communications.
1846 Proponents assert that those recommendations are likely to 
1838 MDRC Supp. at 2, 18. 
1839 Id. at 2. 
1840 Id. at 2, 18 (citing Homa Alemzadeh et al., Analysis of Safety-Critical Computer Failures in Medical 
Devices, 11 IEEE SECURITY & PRIV ACY 14, 22 (2013) (“Alemzadeh et al.”). 
1841 Id. at 18 (citing FDR CTR. FOR DEVICES AND RADIOLOGICAL HEALTH: 510(K) WORKING GROUP, 
PRELIMINARY REPORT AND RECOMMENDATIONS (2010), available at http://www.fda.gov/ 
downloads/AboutFDA/CentersOffices/CDRH/CDRHReports/UCM220784.pdf). 
1842 See id. at 3, App. B. 
1843 Id. at 20 (“There is great incentive for the medical device manufacturers to deter independent discovery 
of vulnerabilities, because there is such a profound economic disincentive for manufacturers to have these 
vulnerabilities come to light.”). 
1844 See id. at 3, 19-20; MDRC Reply at 2-3. 
1845 See, e.g., MDRC Supp. at 2 (citing Alemzadeh et al. at 14, 22) (attributing manufacturers’ 
implementation of TPMs in medical device software to increased use in recent years); id. (citing David 
Talbot, Computer Viruses Are “Rampant” on Medical Devices in Hospitals, MIT TECH REV. (Oct. 17, 
2012), http://www.technologyreview.com/news/429616/computerviruses-are-rampant-on-medical-devices­
in-hospitals) (stating manufacturers’ implementation of TPMs in medical device software is due to 
concerns raised by scholars that devices are vulnerable to malicious hacking). 
1846 Id. at 7, 9 (citing FDA, CONTENT OF PREMARKET SUBMISSION FOR MANAGEMENT OF CYBERSECURITY 
IN MEDICAL DEVICES: G UIDANCE FOR INDUSTRY AND FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION STAFF 4 (Oct. 2, 
2014), available at http://www.fda.gov/downloads/medicaldevices/deviceregylationandguidance/guidance 
documents/ucm356190.pdf (“FDA PREMARKET SUBMISSION GUIDANCE”) and FDA, RADIO FREQUENCY 
272
 

[PAGE 277]
     
    
 
  
 
     
   
  
   
 
 
  
  
   
   
    
  
 
 
  
    
 
   
   
  
  
  
   
 
  
 
      
      
    
                     
     
        
         
     
             
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
be adopted by the medical device industry and lead to an increase in the application of 
TPMs; they explain that “[g]uidance documents like these, while not legally binding, are 
the usual means by which the FDA indicates its preferences when examining devices, and 
entities regulated by the FDA routinely treat these guidelines as rules in order to assure 
expediency in FDA approvals.”1847 MDRC thus predicts that legitimate independent 
research will be chilled as more and more medical devices become subject to section 
1201(a)(1).1848 
In supporting the requested exemption, Public Knowledge opines that the 
permanent statutory exemptions to section 1201’s anticircumvention provision are 
insufficient because “[t]he uncertainty around the various specifics of the statutory 
exemptions can restrict the activities of researchers and patients in a number of ways that 
stymie useful work.”1849 
d. Argument Under Statutory Factors 
i. Proposed Class 25:  Software – Security Research 
Proponents maintain that the statutory factors set forth in 1201(a)(1) support a 
broad exemption for software security research. 
On the availability for use of copyrighted works, Class 25 proponents assert that 
as a result of the DMCA prohibition, “security researchers are creating fewer publications 
relating to information security research.”1850 Green argues as well that with the 
requested exemption, researchers would be able to render software and the devices it 
controls “more useful and more valuable.”1851 Bellovin et al. contend that with an 
exemption in place that allowed public disclosure, “[m]ore copyrighted works would be 
created, and the work would be of even higher caliber,” such as “new, stronger access 
controls” created in response to the discovery of vulnerabilities in previous access 
controls, more products that “compete on the basis of software security,” and consumer 
safety reports and articles about vulnerabilities.
1852 
Regarding the second factor, Class 25 proponents assert that an exemption would 
increase the availability for use of works for nonprofit educational purposes because 
section 1201(a)(1)’s prohibition, and the accompanying risk of liability, “forces 
WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY IN MEDICAL DEVICES: GUIDANCE FOR INDUSTRY AND FOOD AND DRUG 
ADMINISTRATION STAFF 10-11 (Aug. 14, 2013)). 
1847 Id. at 9.
 
1848 See id. at 20; see also, e.g., Schneier Class 27 Reply at 2; Green Class 27 Supp. at 1; Public Knowledge
 
Class 27 Reply at 5.
 
1849 Public Knowledge Class 27 Supp. at 7.
 
1850 See, e.g., Bellovin et al. Supp. at 8.
 
1851 Green Class 25 Supp. at 22-23.
 
1852 Bellovin et al. Supp. at 8; Bellovin et al. Reply at 5-7.
 
273
 

[PAGE 278]
     
    
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
   
  
   
 
  
   
  
 
   
   
  
   
 
 
               
             
            
             
        
                   
    
             
    
             
                 
              
          
                
             
         
     
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
researchers to limit student involvement and can push risk-averse universities from such 
research,” as well as interfere with “research approval and funding.”1853 
On the third factor, Class 25 proponents assert that the prohibition has had a 
negative impact on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship and 
research by chilling security researchers from engaging in good-faith security research, 
“hindering the security of critical information infrastructure,”1854 “damaging classroom 
teaching of future generations of students about the mechanics of computer security,”1855 
and allowing companies to use copyright law “to limit criticism, comment or news 
reporting about . . . insecurities.”1856 Bellovin et al. argue that an exemption would, by 
contrast, stimulate the above activities, such as by allowing “for secondary analysis and 
critique by the press to arise regarding security of consumer products.”
1857 
On the fourth factor, Class 25 proponents contend that an exemption will not 
harm the market for or value of copyrighted works,1858 but instead would have a “positive 
net effect on the market for software and devices,” as any negative impact on the market 
would “result only from the exposure of inherent shortcomings in the works 
themselves.”
1859 Furthermore, Green asserts that “coordinated disclosure guidelines” for 
research findings would help “reduce the risk of market impacts by allowing companies 
time to address vulnerabilities before they are made public,” creating a greater incentive 
to secure and repair software, thus increasing its quality and value, and the safety and 
security of consumers.1860 
Proponents also raise, under the fifth statutory factor, a number of other 
considerations that they believe weigh in favor of an exemption.  Proponents argue that if 
an exemption is granted, security researchers in academic, government and corporate 
settings will be better poised to address consumer safety issues by exposing 
1853 Green Class 25 Supp. at 23; see also Bellovin et al. Supp. at 8 (contending that “information security 
education efforts are actively hampered [by the prohibition] on all levels of the educational system”); Tr. at 
160:18-22 (May 26, 2015) (Bellovin) (“I cannot do grant-funded research that, with a contract, gives 
somebody else the right, precisely to preserve academic freedom and also to protect me and my students 
under the export laws.”); Tr. at 75:05-76:12 (May 26, 2015) (Blaze). 
1854 Green Class 25 Supp. at 23; see also Bellovin et al. Supp. at 8; Stanislav Supp. at 1; Perry Reply at 1. 
1855 Stolfo Supp. at 1. 
1856 CDT Reply at 9-10; see also Tr. at 38:01-07 (May 26, 2015) (Sayler on behalf of Green); Tr. at 204:21­
205:04 (May 26, 2015) (Bellovin).
 
1857 Bellovin et al. Supp. at 8; Bellovin et al. Reply at 11.
 
1858 Brown et al. Supp. at 1 (arguing that “no negative repercussions will arise with respect to the safety or 
security of software from granting this exemption”); see also Internet Association Supp. at 1; Rapid7 Supp. 
at 1; Stolfo Supp. at 1; VVF Supp. at 1. 
1859 Green Class 25 Supp. at 24; see also Bellovin et al. Reply at 11 (contending that “[t]he market for and 
value of copyrighted works that researchers have found to be well-coded will significantly increase if this 
exemption is granted”); Tr. at 45:06-15 (May 26, 2015) (Stanislav, Rapid7). 
1860 Green Class 25 Supp. at 24. 
274
 

[PAGE 279]
     
    
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
    
  
    
    
     
 
   
 
    
 
 
   
    
                  
           
               
                   
       
      
               
                 
               
                
           
         
       
              
    
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
vulnerabilities in the face of evolving cybersecurity risks and “defend[ing] national and 
international security interests, critical infrastructure, and the economies of both the 
United States and its trusted allies” as well as “corporate intellectual property assets . . . 
[and] the data of the consumers.”
1861 Bellovin et al. contend that, without an exemption, 
“the market fails to incorporate accurate information regarding quality of security in 
products” and subsequently “undervalues companies that invest in security and 
overvalues those that do not.”
1862 In addition, OTI notes that an exemption is necessary 
because the Federal Trade Commission and many state governments require vendors to 
keep personal information secure, and these governmental entities sometimes rely on the 
work of independent security researchers to identify noncompliant vendors.
1863 
Responding to a point made by a number of opponents, described in greater detail 
below, proponents argue that the section 1201 rulemaking proceeding is not the 
appropriate forum to address non-copyright issues relating to security research, such as 
concerns that security researchers could violate other laws or regulations.1864 Bellovin et 
al. assert that if an exemption were granted, “copyright holders [would still] retain all 
non-DMCA recourse options against security researchers and all regulatory obligations 
under every other legal regime,” such as recourse under the CFAA and regulations 
promulgated by other agencies such as FDA.
1865 Accordingly, proponents argue that any 
exemption should not incorporate laws unrelated to copyright, such as the CFAA, the 
Clean Air Act (“CAA”), trade secret law, or other laws and regulations, as other 
administrative and law enforcement agencies are better equipped to address and enforce 
those laws and regulations and incorporating such laws into the proposed exemption 
could create more uncertainty.
1866 
A significant issue raised with respect to all of the proposed research classes is the 
extent to which any exemption should incorporate a requirement that flaws uncovered by 
security researchers be disclosed to the software developer and/or product manufacturer 
before being communicated to the public at large. As discussed in greater depth below, 
1861 Brown et al. Supp. at 1; Internet Association Supp. at 1; see also Bellovin et al. Supp. at 9 (contending 
that an exemption “would enable security research into products particularly designed for children,” such as 
insulin pumps for child diabetics); Andersen et al. Supp. at 1; Green Class 25 Supp. at 25; Rapid7 Supp. at 
1; Stolfo Supp. at 1; VVF Supp. at 1; Tr. at 38:25-39:04 (May 26, 2015) (Sayler on behalf of Green). 
1862 Bellovin et al. Supp. at 8. 
1863 Tr. at 98:18-100:09 (May 26, 2015) (Moy, OTI). 
1864 Green Class 25 Reply at 2, 5 (contending that “[t]o whatever extent concerns over automotive and 
medical software are legitimate, the triennial review is not the appropriate forum in which to address the 
contours of automotive and medical policy”); OTI Class 25 Reply at 6 (noting that “the fact that this 
proceeding has veered into such areas that Congress never intended is as good a proof as any that the 
DMCA’s anti-circumvention provisions are having a worrisomely overbroad impact far beyond the scope of 
copyright law”); Tr. at 145:19-146:05 (May 26, 2015) (Reid on behalf of Green). 
1865 Bellovin et al. Reply at 8-9. 
1866 CDT Post-Hearing Resp. at 4-5; see also Green Post-Hearing Resp. at 5; Matwyshyn et al. PostHearing Resp. at 6. 
275
 

[PAGE 280]
     
    
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
    
  
   
  
     
 
     
  
   
   
  
   
    
   
           
           
         
       
                    
             
          
                
            
   
                
                
            
                
              
                
         
              
           
              
 
 
                                                 
 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
opponents argue that if the Register recommends an exemption for software security 
research, she should also recommend an express disclosure requirement, so that the 
software developer or product manufacturer has sufficient time to correct any flaw before 
its existence becomes more widely disseminated and thus more susceptible to 
exploitation by malicious actors.  
Some proponents argue that there should be no disclosure requirement attached to 
any proposed exemption, finding it to be unnecessary in light of the fact that good-faith 
security researchers already follow various best-practice disclosure guidelines and 
standards.
1867 Proponents assert that if researchers are not allowed the discretion to 
disclose their findings as they see fit, companies may feel free to ignore the existence of 
the identified flaws.1868 Proponents also argue that the Copyright Office is not the 
appropriate body, nor the section 1201 rulemaking the appropriate forum, to address the 
complex and controversial issue of reasonable vulnerability disclosure practices.
1869 
These proponents further argue that security research and disclosure of such research is 
protected by the First Amendment.1870 They thus contend that creating a requirement to 
first disclose vulnerabilities to copyright owners and/or product manufacturers would 
raise significant concerns under the First Amendment as it “would constitute a restriction 
on protected speech.”
1871 
Other proponents argue that a disclosure standard may be appropriate, but that any 
such standard should be flexible.  In their view, disclosure before publication or other 
public disclosure must be dealt with on a “case-by-case basis” since, in some cases, “it 
may be more prudent to warn the public immediately” than to wait for a manufacturer 
1872response. 
1867 CDT Post-Hearing Resp. at 2-3 (citing “published guidelines [that] offer best practices for disclosing 
security vulnerabilities in a variety of situations,” including ones produced by the Internet Engineering Task 
Force and the CERT Division of the Software Engineering Institute). 
1868 Schneier Class 25 Reply at 1. 
1869 See, e.g., Green Class 25 Reply at 12 (arguing that “[i]t is beyond the scope of this proceeding to 
consider, much less address, the serious ramifications of disclosure policy”); CDT Reply at 10 (asserting 
that neither the Office nor rightsholders should “dictate when research should be conducted or disclosed”). 
1870 Green Class 25 Supp. at 25; see also Green Class 25 Reply at 15; CDT Post-Hearing Resp. at 3; Green 
Post-Hearing Resp. at 2-3; Matwyshyn et al. Post-Hearing Resp. at 3-4; Tr. at 85:08-22 (May 26, 2015) 
(Reid on behalf of Green). 
1871 Green Post-Hearing Resp. at 2. In particular, Green argues that “[a] regulation preventing researchers 
from publicly disclosing a vulnerability until a certain period of time after they disclose the same 
vulnerability” to the vendor “would constitute a restriction on protected speech.” Id. (citing Universal City 
Studios v. Corley, 273 F.3d 429, 447 (2d Cir. 2001)). Green also argues that any restriction in the content of 
what researchers publish would “aim directly at the content of protected speech,” and so “must be the least 
restrictive means of achieving a compelling interest to pass First Amendment muster.” Id. (citing Sable 
Commc’ns of Cal., Inc. v. FCC, 492 U.S. 115, 126 (1989)). 
1872 Tr. at 80:04-20 (May 26, 2015) (Blaze); see also id. at 80:22-82:06 (Green); CDT Post-Hearing Resp. at 
1-3; Green Post-Hearing Resp. at 3-5 (arguing that any disclosure requirement should adopt “a flexible 
approach that ensures that any uncertainty about the propriety of any public disclosure errs in favor of 
276
 

[PAGE 281]
     
    
  
  
 
 
    
     
   
    
   
   
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
   
   
 
     
   
     
     
           
            
               
          
            
     
     
        
       
  
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
A number of proponents propose that the Librarian look to the international 
vulnerability disclosure standards promulgated by the International Organization for 
Standardization (“ISO”) for guidance because they “provide[] a floor of corporate 
conduct” and “embody security practices already implemented by responsible corporate 
entities . . . , creat[ing] a logical balance between information security and intellectual 
property protection in the private sector.”
1873 In response to opponents’ objection that the 
ISO standards are proprietary and not publicly available, Bellovin et al. offered 
“reasonable vulnerability management practices” that they claim mirror the ISO 
standards and would facilitate appropriate disclosure.1874 
For its part, CDT urges the Office to refrain from using section 1201(j) as a model 
for any disclosure requirements in the proposed exemption because, as noted above, 
proponents contend that section 1201(j) is ambiguous and may practically foreclose 
certain security research.
1875 
Of particular concern is that whether an act of circumvention is considered 
permissible under section 1201(j) depends upon the weighing of a number of factors 
rather than a bright-line rule. To assess whether circumvention was legitimate, section 
1201(j) calls for consideration of “whether the information derived from the security 
testing was used solely to promote the security of the owner or operator of such 
computer, computer system or computer network, or shared directly with the developer of 
such computer, computer system, or computer network” and “whether the information 
derived from the security testing was used or maintained in a manner that does not 
facilitate infringement under this title or a violation of applicable law other than this 
section, including a violation of privacy or breach of security.” 
1876 
Finally, proponents responded to a concern raised by BSA | The Software Alliance 
(“BSA”)1877 and the Office regarding the appropriateness of security research being 
performed on a “live” or “active” system, such as medical devices in use by patients or 
vehicles in use on public roads.1878 The issue was pointedly addressed in the hearings, in 
part due to news reports suggesting that a security researcher had conducted unauthorized 
research on an in-flight commercial airliner.1879 In response to the Office’s questioning, 
there appeared to be universal agreement among proponents that testing of “live systems” 
allowing the researcher to proceed”); Matwyshyn et al. Post-Hearing Resp. at 2-3 (referencing vulnerability 
management practices related to disclosure); Bellovin et al. Reply at 1-2 (same).
 
1873 Brown et al. Supp. at 1 (citing ISO 29147 and ISO 30111); see also Internet Association Supp. at 1;
 
Bellovin et al. Supp. at 10; Stolfo Supp. at 1.
 
1874 Bellovin et al. Reply at 1-2; see also Tr. at 57:24-61:20 (Matwyshyn).
 
1875 CDT Post-Hearing Resp. at 3-4.
 
1876 17 U.S.C. § 1201(j)(3).
 
1877 BSA Class 25 Opp’n at 2, 5.
 
1878 Tr. at 137:19-138:25 (May 26, 2015) (Charlesworth, USCO).
 
1879 Id. 
277
 

[PAGE 282]
     
    
  
 
  
  
      
 
    
  
      
 
   
   
   
  
   
   
  
    
  
 
   
               
           
       
     
               
       
            
             
               
         
          
          
        
                
            
               
     
 
 
                                                 
	 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
is inappropriate and is not an activity they seek to have covered by the requested 
exemption.1880 As Professor Green stressed in a post-hearing submission, “researchers 
performing their duties in good faith never conduct research on live systems actively 
protecting critical infrastructure, medical devices while implanted in patients, or vehicles 
while in use for nonresearch purposes.”1881 
ii.	 Proposed Class 22: Vehicle Software – Security and Safety 
Research 
Regarding the first statutory consideration, EFF asserts that the proposed 
exemption in Class 22 will increase, rather than limit, the availability of copyrighted 
works for public use.
1882 In EFF’s view, copyrighted vehicle software is not fully 
available for “use” in the absence of an exemption.1883 EFF maintains that the proposed 
exemption would increase the public’s ability to use such works by allowing individuals 
to access the software for security research purposes.1884 EFF further asserts that 
additional copyrighted works, such as software patches and publications, would be made 
available based upon the research facilitated by the proposed exemption.
1885 
EFF asserts that the second factor weighs in favor of the proposed exemption 
because security research for vehicle software is fundamentally educational in nature.1886 
In EFF’s view, absent an exemption, there is virtually no way to “engage in nonprofit 
archival, preservation, and educational uses of vehicle software subject to technological 
restrictions.”
1887 Accordingly, EFF maintains that the proposed exemption will broaden 
the public’s ability to engage in those uses of copyrighted works.1888 
With respect to the third factor, EFF asserts that “[r]esearch is obviously at the 
core of the proposed exemption, and the adverse effects of prohibition demonstrate that 
1880 See, e.g., id. at 150:16-29 (Blaze) (“[L]et me add my voice to the chorus that condemns tampering with 
live safety, critical systems. I think nobody—nobody advocates that here.”); id. at 139:03-08, 141:15-20,
 
23-25 (Green); id. at 144:02-06 (Reid on behalf of Green).
 
1881 Green Post-Hearing Resp. at 1 n.3.
 
1882 See, e.g., EFF Class 22 Supp. at 22; EFF Class 22 Reply at 17.
 
1883 EFF Class 22 Reply at 17-18.
 
1884 EFF Class 22 Supp. at 22-23; EFF Class 22 Reply at 17-18.
 
1885 See EFF Class 22 Supp. at 23 (“Craig Smith, author of the 2014 Car Hacker’ s Handbook, reported that
 
the Handbook was downloaded 300,000 times in the first two weeks it was available. Software patches
 
also depend on access, including patches to fix serious vulnerabilities. Numerous tools designed to analyze
 
and manipulate firmware also depend on the ability to access software and reverse engineer it.”).
 
1886 See, e.g., id.; EFF Class 22 Reply at 18.
 
1887 EFF Class 22 Reply at 18.
 
1888 See, e.g., EFF Class 22 Supp. at 23 (“In addition, it will be possible to archive and preserve firmware
 
on general-purpose storage media, without expensive and unreliable storage of ECU hardware removed 
from a vehicle.”); EFF Class 22 Reply at 18 (stating the proposed exemption would facilitate conducting
 
educational security research at universities).
 
278
 

[PAGE 283]
     
    
  
  
 
   
   
   
    
   
   
 
  
 
  
  
  
   
  
  
   
 
  
   
    
    
    
  
  
       
                
              
            
             
        
    
     
      
  
            
       
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
the factor weighs in favor of an exemption.”1889 More specifically, proponents contend 
that the threat of liability hampers legitimate security research efforts for vehicle 
software, and also prevents reporting, criticism and commentary on security 
vulnerabilities in vehicle software.
1890 
As for the fourth factor, EFF asserts that the market for vehicle software will not 
suffer any harm cognizable under copyright law, because “[c]opyright law only 
recognizes economic harm where a proposed use usurps the demand for the original.”1891 
EFF maintains that “[n]either copyright law nor good public policy protects a 
manufacturer’s interests in not fixing product defects” once they are revealed due to an 
increase in vehicle software security research.1892 EFF also submits that the proposed 
exemption will actually increase the value of copyrighted works, because greater 
involvement in vehicle software security research will increase the software’s value by 
improving overall vehicle safety and security.
1893 
With respect to the fifth factor, addressing such other factors as the Librarian 
considers appropriate, EFF asserts that “[t]he Librarian should grant an exemption that 
does not depend on a vehicle owner’s status as an owner or licensee of [vehicle computer 
programs].”
1894 EFF also contends that “the exemption should permit circumvention 
done with the permission of the owner of a vehicle by a third party.”1895 According to 
EFF, such an exemption would not violate the anti-trafficking provisions of section 
1201(a)(2) because security research for vehicle software “does not fall under any of the 
three categories of forbidden conduct identified in 1201(a)(2)(A) through (C),” namely, 
offering technologies or services that are “primarily designed or produced for the purpose 
of circumventing” a TPM, that have “only limited commercially significant purpose or 
use other than to circumvent” a TPM, or are “marketed . . . for use in circumventing” 
TPMs.
1896 In response to comments made by opponents, EFF also asserts existing tort 
and criminal laws are more aptly suited than the anticircumvention provisions to 
safeguard the public against malicious attacks on vehicle software.1897 EFF also contends 
that opponents’ concerns that vehicle security research will cause vehicles to be out of 
compliance with fuel economy, emissions, and safety standards are overstated or 
1889 EFF Class 22 Reply at 19.
 
1890 See, e.g., Schneier Class 22 Reply (“I know of many security researchers who have refrained from
 
conducting important security research because they fear the DMCA. I know of even more security
 
research where the results are not being published because the researchers fear the DMCA.”); EFF Class 22
 
Supp. at 23; EFF Class 22 Reply at 19; Green Class 22 Supp. at 1.
 
1891 EFF Class 22 Reply at 19.
 
1892 Id. (emphasis in original).
 
1893 Id. at 20.
 
1894 EFF Class 22 Supp. at 24.
 
1895 Id. 
1896 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(2)(A)-(C); EFF Class 22 Supp. at 24-25. 
1897 EFF Class 22 Reply at 19. 
279
 

[PAGE 284]
     
    
    
 
 
 
    
 
   
   
   
  
   
  
 
    
  
    
   
 
    
      
   
   
    
   
                   
               
   
    
   
                
       
              
  
    
     
    
  
 
 
                                                 
	 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
mischaracterize the nature of such research.1898 EFF adds that “opponents’ claims 
regarding the risk posed by modification of vehicle software and the difficulty of 
detecting modified software are overblown at the very least,” as “tamper-evident flags 
and software checksums are simple measures to detect software changes.”1899 
iii.	 Proposed Class 27A: Medical Device Software – Security and 
Safety Research 
Concerning the first statutory factor, MDRC asserts that the proposed exemption 
in Class 27A would benefit rather than harm the availability for use of copyrighted 
works.1900 According to MDRC, given that patients use medical device software 
regardless of whether TPMs are in place, the proposed exemption would only increase 
the public’s ability to use copyrighted works by allowing independent researchers to 
access medical device software for research purposes.1901 MDRC also suggests that new 
copyrighted works will be published as a result of information made available under the 
proposed exemption.1902 
MDRC maintains that the second factor weighs in favor of the proposed 
exemption, because independent research of medical device software can be undertaken 
for educational purposes.
1903 In support of this claim, MDRC offers that “there are now 
numerous conferences and other gatherings between independent researchers and 
manufacturers, including those convened by the FDA and universities.”
1904 In MDRC’s 
view, the use of medical device software for nonprofit educational purposes “is entirely 
unavailable for a device employing a TPM unless this exemption is granted.”1905 
With respect to the third factor, MDRC asserts that “the improvement of 
scholarship and research around the safety of medical devices, both in general and as 
applied to particular patients, is the essence of the exemption requested here.”1906 
Accordingly, MDRC maintains that the proposed exemption “will lead to advances in the 
medical research field.”1907 It further suggests that the proposed exemption should 
1898 Id. (“At the outset, it is worth noting that the vast majority of the activities contemplated within the
 
proposed class do not involve the operation of modified vehicles on public roadways . . . .”).
 
1899 Id. at 21.
 
1900 MDRC Supp. at 23.
 
1901 Id. at 23-24.
 
1902 See, e.g., id. at 11-13, 20 (stating the proposed exemption will facilitate the publication of articles based
 
on findings of medical device software researchers).
 
1903 See, e.g., MDRC Reply at 16 (stating independent research of medical device software occurs at state 
university-affiliated research centers).
 
1904 Id. at 6.
 
1905 MDRC Supp. at 24. 
1906 Id. 
1907 Id. 
280
 

[PAGE 285]
     
    
   
     
  
  
 
 
    
 
      
   
 
 
 
   
  
    
   
  
   
 
     
  
 
   
                
               
                  
                 
             
            
         
  
  
  
         
         
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
“allow for the owners and operators of medical devices to solicit the help of others in 
conducting this research.”1908 According to proponents, the current threat of liability 
resulting from section 1201’s prohibition on circumvention hinders legitimate research 
efforts and suppresses researchers’ efforts to publicly disclose their findings through 
criticism, commentary, scholarship and reporting.1909 
Regarding the fourth factor, MDRC cites to the Register’s conclusion in the 2006 
rulemaking that “research into and correction of security flaws in access controls 
ultimately will have a positive impact on the market for or value of copyrighted 
works.”1910 MDRC argues by analogy that the independent research on medical device 
software that would be facilitated by the proposed exemption “can only improve the 
market for these devices.”
1911 MDRC further asserts that as this research continues, “the 
public will become more confident in the safety of these devices, and thus increase 
demand in the market.”1912 Moreover, the market value for the work will not be harmed 
in a copyright law sense because “[c]onducting this research does not usurp the demand 
for the original devices, as no copy that is made in the process of developing this research 
could ever replace the need for a medical device.”
1913 
Proponents do not expressly discuss the fifth factor, allowing consideration of 
such other factors as the Librarian deems appropriate, although they maintain that failing 
to grant the proposed exemption may contravene the President’s cybersecurity policy as 
well as FDA’s policy for medical devices, which seeks to increase the timeliness and 
quality of information regarding cyber threats.
1914 
Proponents also maintain that the safety and security concerns raised by 
opponents are overstated, and that the evidence suggests that software programming 
errors—rather than attacks by wrongdoers—pose the greater thr eat to medical device 
users. They note that “the concept that insecure systems can overcome their 
shortcomings by keeping security-related details secret” has been widely rejected by 
scholars and government agencies.1915 
1908 Id. at 21. 
1909 See, e.g., id. at 20 (“Given the presence of TPMs on some of these devices, [independent researcher 
Jerome Radcliffe] sought counsel to analyze whether his research would present a risk under the DMCA. 
Ultimately, he was forced to limit his inquiry to the portions of the devices that were not protected by the 
TPM . . . . In another context, legal ambiguity and the lack of clear exemptions lead a major technology 
publisher to cancel release of a significant computer science book on hardware reverse engineering.”); 
Schneier Class 27 Reply at 2; Green Class 27 Supp. at 1. 
1910 MDRC Supp. at 25 (citing 2006 Recommendation at 64). 
1911 Id. 
1912 Id. 
1913 Id. 
1914 See id. at 18; MDRC Reply at 7, 18-20
 
1915 See MDRC Supp. 22-23; Schneier Class 27 Supp. at 1.
 
281
 

[PAGE 286]
     
    
   
   
  
 
  
 
 
    
 
  
     
 
   
 
  
 
  
  
 
    
   
    
  
          
            
         
           
                    
       
                 
             
  
            
  
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Finally, proponents make clear that their request is not intended to extend to 
security research on individual devices that are used, or intended to be used, on or for 
patients during or after the security research.1916 
2. Opposition 
The Office received comments in opposition to the general software security 
research exemption in Class 25 from AdvaMed, Auto Alliance, BSA, General Motors 
(“GM”), Intellectual Property Owners Association (“IPO”), LifeScience Alley, Medical 
Device Innovation Safety and Security Consortium (“MDISS”), and Software 
Information Industry Association (“SIIA”).
1917 
The vehicle software security research exemption in Class 22 was opposed by 
Association of Global Automakers (“Global Automakers”), Auto Alliance, GM, John 
Deere, and Motor & Equipment Manufacturers Association (“MEMA”).1918 
The medical device software security exemption in Class 27A was opposed by 
AdvaMed, IPO, Jay Schulman, LifeScience Alley, and National Association of 
Manufacturers (“NAM”).
1919 
As indicated above, the proposed general software security research exemption 
represented by Class 25 is broad enough to swallow the more specific exemptions for 
vehicle software security research in Class 22 and medical device software security 
research in Class 27A.  Much of the substantive opposition to the general software 
security research exemption in Class 25 came from parties whose core interests pertain to 
vehicles and medical devices. As such, some of the opposition analysis in Class 25 is 
repeated in Classes 22 and 27A.  Nonetheless, to maintain consistency with the approach 
taken with respect to the proponents’ arguments, the Register separately addresses the 
opposition arguments made in each class. 
1916 See Tr. at 34:14-24 (May 29, 2015) (Sellars, MDRC; Charlesworth, USCO). 
1917 AdvaMed Class 25 Opp’n; Auto Alliance Class 25 Opp’n; BSA Class 25 Opp’n; GM Class 25 Opp’n; 
IPO Class 25 Opp’n; LifeScience Alley 25 Opp’n; MDISS Opp’n; SIIA Class 25 Opp’n. 
1918 Auto Alliance Class 22 Opp’n; Global Automakers Class 22 Opp’n; John Deere Class 22 Opp’n; 
MEMA Class 22 Reply. The Register notes that MEMA filed its comments in the reply phase of the written 
comment period, which had been designated as allowing proponents and neutral commenters to respond to 
points made by the opposition. The Register will exercise her discretion to consider MEMA’s comments in 
reply, while at the same time being mindful that proponents did not have an opportunity to file written 
comments in response to MEMA. 
1919 AdvaMed Class 27 Opp’n; IPO Class 27 Opp’n; Schulman Opp’n; LifeScience Alley Class 27 Opp’n; 
NAM Opp’n. 
282
 

[PAGE 287]
     
    
  
  
    
  
  
    
  
   
  
  
 
  
      
   
   
  
 
     
 
  
  
  
   
 
   
   
 
     
  
  
       
                   
               
      
     
    
    
   
   
    
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
a. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
i. Fair Use 
1) Proposed Class 25:  Software – Security Research 
Opponents argue that Class 25 proponents have failed to establish that the uses 
sought under the general proposed exemption for software security research are 
noninfringing.1920 While BSA did not offer an analysis under the fair use factors, it 
contends that “proponents seek to engage in such a wide variety of activities that it is 
impossible to assess whether all of these activities qualify as non-infringing.”
1921 While 
AdvaMed likewise declines to analyze the claim that the proposed uses under Class 25 
would be noninfringing, it suggests that they would not be, asserting that “[a]llowing 
circumvention activities [that] would lead to exposure of medical device source code” 
would exceed any license terms attached to the sale of the devices, and would result in 
the loss of “intellectual property.”1922 AdvaMed also urges that “allowing access to and 
reverse engineering of source code would likely increase the number of knock-off 
products, because once the source code is obtained it could easily be transmitted to 
anyone in the world or posted on the Internet.”
1923 
Opponent GM does address the fair use factors, arguing that proponents’ fair use 
analysis is flawed.1924 For the first factor, GM contends that the purpose and character of 
the use should disfavor a finding of fair use, because “the dissemination of highly 
sensitive information about how a car’s ECUs or TPMs operate increases the potential 
risk that even individuals with benign intent might access and modify their vehicle 
software in such a manner that increases, rather than minimizes security and safety 
challenges.”
1925 GM asserts that the second factor also weighs against fair use because 
vehicle software “is a highly creative work designed by specialized engineers” and 
because the “mere existence of certain functional elements does not obviate the need to 
protect the expressive aspects also encompassed in the work.”
1926 GM contends that the 
third factor weighs against a finding of fair use because proponents “seek to copy an 
entire work.”
1927 GM argues that the fourth factor also weighs against a finding of fair 
use because the uses sought by proponents would “directly and negatively” affect the 
value of the copyrighted works by allowing “individuals to access, analyze, modify and 
1920 See, e.g., GM Class 25 Opp’n at 9. 
1921 BSA Class 25 Opp’n at 4. However, BSA explains that it would be comfortable with an exemption 
narrowly tailored to “specific types of access controls that [are] creating security vulnerabilities.” Tr. at 
136:02-23 (May 26, 2015) (Troncoso, BSA; Charlesworth, USCO). 
1922 AdvaMed Class 25 Opp’n at 3-4. 
1923 Id. at 6. 
1924 GM Class 25 Opp’n at 9-12. 
1925 Id. at 10. 
1926 Id. at 10-11. 
1927 Id. at 11. 
283
 

[PAGE 288]
     
    
  
 
 
      
 
 
   
    
    
   
    
 
   
    
  
  
    
   
 
  
     
   
  
    
   
    
            
  
            
  
               
             
          
    
      
               
      
  
                
   
           
 
 
                                                 
	 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
then publish code for vehicle software,” which “risks increasing, not diminishing vehicle 
safety and security challenges.”1928 
2)	 Proposed Class 22: Vehicle Software – Security and Safety 
Research 
Class 22 opponents similarly challenge the view that vehicle security and safety 
research activities constitute noninfringing fair use.1929 Under the first fair use factor, 
opponents argue that consideration of the purpose and character of the use weighs against 
a fair use finding.1930 Several opponents find fault in particular with proponents’ 
assertion that security research serves the public interest and contend that allowing 
disclosure of sensitive information would instead adversely affect safety, security and the 
regulatory landscape.1931 John Deere additionally asserts that the exemption would 
enable and encourage noncompliance with environmental regulations, and that such a use 
is of a purpose and character that should be disfavored under section 107.1932 
In opponents’ view, the second fair use factor, the nature of the copyrighted work, 
also favors a finding that the proposed uses do not qualify as fair use.1933 John Deere 
recognizes that the computer programs on ECUs are functional in nature, but notes that 
they also contain certain creative elements.1934 John Deere further contends that the 
TPMs for vehicle software are not only used to protect against infringement of creative 
software programs, but also “highly-expressive” works such as music, television content, 
and movies that are played via in-vehicle entertainment systems.
1935 GM also asserts that 
the computer programs at issue are highly creative and expressive, noting the time and 
resources devoted to their development.1936 It thus urges that while elements of such 
computer programs are functional in nature, that does not obviate the need to protect the 
programs’ creative expression.1937 
1928 Id. at 11-12. 
1929 See, e.g., Global Automakers Class 22 Opp’n at 4-6; GM Class 22 Opp’n at 11-13; John Deere Class 22 
Opp’n at 5-8. 
1930 See, e.g., Global Automakers Class 22 Opp’n at 4-5; GM Class 22 Opp’n at 11; John Deere Class 22 
Opp’n at 6. 
1931 GM Class 22 Opp’n at 11; see also Global Automakers Class 22 Opp’n at 4-5 (noting that “the 
proposed exemption does not even clarify whether the proposed uses seek to improve the security and 
safety of automobiles, meaning even those that intentionally seek to impede safety and security would 
qualify”) (emphasis in original). 
1932 John Deere Class 22 Opp’n at 6 . 
1933 See, e.g., id. at 7; GM Class 22 Opp’n at 11-12; Global Automakers Class 22 Opp’n at 5. 
1934 John Deere Class 22 Opp’n at 7. 
1935 Id. 
1936 GM Class 22 Opp’n at 12; see also Global Automakers Class 22 Opp’n at 5; Tr. at 61:01-09 (May 19, 
2015) (Lightsey, GM). 
1937 GM Class 22 Opp’n at 12; see also Global Automakers Class 22 Opp’n at 5. 
284
 

[PAGE 289]
     
    
  
  
   
    
     
 
   
   
 
  
  
    
  
     
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
   
 
   
   
  
     
    
   
               
  
     
    
                
  
           
      
       
        
    
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
With respect to the third fair use factor, addressing the amount and substantiality 
of the uses, opponents uniformly maintain that the proposed uses require copying of the 
bulk, if not the entirety, of the computer programs.1938 Additionally, they observe that 
the essential part of the work will remain in the modified copy.1939 Therefore, they 
conclude that the third factor strongly indicates that the proposed uses are not fair.1940 
Turning to the fourth factor, regarding the impact on the market for or value of the 
work, opponents assert that vehicle values may be adversely affected by an 
exemption.
1941 Opponents argue that if the exemption is granted, vehicles are likely to 
become out of compliance with regulatory standards in areas such as fuel economy, 
emissions control, and safety, which they assert could negatively impact the ability to 
resell the car, or a subsequent purchaser’s ability to meet state vehicle registration 
requirements.
1942 John Deere also asserts that the activity covered under the exemption 
could erode the public’s trust in the safety and security of vehicles, thereby diminishing 
demand for new vehicles.
1943 Global Automakers further contends that an exemption 
would damage and disrupt safety and security research programs in which automobile 
manufacturers currently engage with vetted third parties, such as universities, hospitals 
and other research institutions.
1944 
Auto Alliance takes a different tack in criticizing proponents’ fair use argument, 
asserting that it “fails because it is based on a false premise about prior exemptions” 
granted by the Librarian.1945 Auto Alliance argues that the 2006 and 2010 exemptions on 
which EFF relies to assert that the activities of security researchers constitute fair use are 
distinguishable from the proposed exemption because they “were limited to testing, 
investigating and correcting security flaws that were caused by access controls,” whereas 
the proposed exemption has no such limitation.1946 While Auto Alliance concedes that 
the Register concluded in previous rulemakings that there was uncertainty surrounding 
the applicability of section 1201(j) to the uses proposed in 2006 and 2010, Auto Alliance 
nonetheless contends that any questions posed by the Register in those rulemakings about 
the scope of section 1201(j) “are completely irrelevant” to the exemption proposed here 
because it does not involve vulnerabilities caused by access controls.  Thus, per Auto 
1938 See, e.g., John Deere Class 22 Opp’n at 8; GM Class 22 Opp’n at 12; Global Automakers Class 22
 
Opp’n at 5.
 
1939 See, e.g., id.
 
1940 See, e.g., id.
 
1941 See, e.g., John Deere Class 22 Opp’n at 8; GM Class 22 Opp’n at 13; Global Automakers Class 22 
Opp’n at 5-6.
 
1942 See, e.g., John Deere Class 22 Opp’n at 8; GM Class 22 Opp’n at 13.
 
1943 John Deere Class 22 Opp’n at 8.
 
1944 Global Automakers Class 22 Opp’n at 5-6.
 
1945 Auto Alliance Class 22 Opp’n at 6.
 
1946 Id. at 6-8.
 
285
 

[PAGE 290]
     
    
    
     
     
 
 
  
  
   
    
  
 
   
 
 
  
   
  
    
  
     
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
    
    
          
    
                
                  
                  
             
           
                 
        
              
 
 
                                                 
	 
	 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Alliance, a “de novo consideration” of security research and the applicability of section 
1201(j) is required in the current proceeding.1947 
3)	 Proposed Class 27A: Medical Device Software – S ecurity 
and Safety Research 
Class 27A opponents present only limited argument to counter proponents’ claim 
that security research conducted on medical device software constitutes a fair use. 
AdvaMed maintains that independent researchers’ use of medical device computer 
programs is for a commercial purpose, and so weighs against a finding of fair use.
1948 
Opponents do not offer analysis of the second fair use factor.  AdvaMed contends that the 
third fair use factor weighs against a finding of fair use because proponents seek to use an 
excessive amount of the work in the course of conducting their research.
1949 In relation 
to the fourth fair use factor, opponents do not expressly present evidence demonstrating 
that independent research on medical device software would cause market harm by 
supplanting demand for the original work, but they do maintain such research would 
negatively impact the market for medical device software in other ways, such as by 
“caus[ing] patients to decide against an appropriate [treatment] because of an increased 
fear of malicious use,” or by vitiating warranties on the devices.
1950 
ii. Section 117 
1)	 Proposed Class 22: Vehicle Software – Security and 
Safety Research 
As noted above, EFF invokes section 117 in supporting the exemption for vehicle 
software security research in Class 22.  Opponents suggest that proponents have failed to 
show that all of the proposed activities fall within the narrow categories of use permitted 
under section 117.
1951 Relying chiefly on the license agreements for entertainment and 
telematics software identified by proponents in their opening comments, they further 
assert that proponents have failed to demonstrate under applicable law that vehicle 
owners own the copy of the computer software that controls the vehicle’s ECUs.
1952 
They note that proponents rely on the same two cases considered in the 2012 
1947 Id. at 8-9. 
1948 AdvaMed Class 27 Opp’n at 5-6 (alleging that in the past proponents used public fear of software 
insecurities for personal profit). 
1949 Id. at 6 (“For this particular exemption, the researchers seek to use the entire portion of the copyrighted 
work . . . . Courts have typically required small portions of the copyrighted work to be used in order for the 
use to be considered a fair use. As a result, since the exemption has asked for the use of the entire 
copyrighted work, this prong points against the use being a fair use of the copyrighted work.”). 
1950 See Schulman Opp’n at 1; LifeScience Alley Class 25 Opp’n at 4-5. 
1951 See, e.g., Auto Alliance Class 22 Opp’n at 3-6; GM Class 22 Opp’n at 7-10; Global Automakers Class 
22 Opp’n at 6; John Deere Class 22 Opp’n at 4-5. 
1952 GM Class 22 Opp’n at 9 (citing EFF Class 22 Supp. at 13-14). 
286
 

[PAGE 291]
     
    
  
    
   
  
   
  
 
   
    
  
   
   
   
  
  
  
    
   
 
   
 
   
   
 
  
           
                
            
                  
      
              
           
          
              
      
                    
  
                
             
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Recommendation, Krause v. Titleserv, Inc. and Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc., in which the 
Register observed the uncertain state of the law regarding ownership of software.1953 As 
referenced above, however, opponents conceded at the public hearing for Class 21 that 
with the exception of the software controlling the entertainment and telematics systems, 
ECU software is not subject to written licensing agreements.1954 Opponents did not offer 
any evidence of ECU license agreements for agricultural equipment. 
Opponents also challenge proponents’ contention that making copies of computer 
programs on ECUs is an essential step in the utilization of the computer program in 
conjunction with a machine and that the copied computer programs are used in no other 
way.1955 In opponents’ view, proponents cannot demonstrate that security research 
activities would be limited to what is permitted under section 117, and they specifically 
note EFF’s concession that making copies of vehicle computer programs is “not essential 
to using the vehicle software for routine driving purposes.”
1956 They also dispute that the 
proposed copying would be for archival purposes as permitted under 
section 117(a)(2).1957 
b. Asserted Adverse Effects 
i. Proposed Class 25:  Software – Security Research 
Opponents argue that Class 25 proponents have not demonstrated that the 
prohibition on circumvention is having, or is likely to have, adverse effects on good-faith 
security research.  According to opponents, “proponents have failed to demonstrate that 
the prohibition . . . is impeding or chilling legitimate security research activities, 
including activities falling within the scope of section 1201(j) and other statutory 
exceptions to the prohibition.”
1958 
At the same time, IPO urges that “[i]n view of the vast array of products that 
could be accessed through the exemption, the public risk [of such research] is impossible 
1953 Id. at 8-9 (citing Krause, 402 F.3d at 124 and Vernor, 621 F.3d at 1110-11). 
1954 Tr. at 276:18-24 (May 19, 2015) (Lightsey, GM) (“I think it would be very difficult, if not impossible, 
to have license agreements covering the myriad of ECU’s that are contained in the vehicle.”). 
1955 GM Class 22 Opp’n at 10 (citing 17 U.S.C. § 117(a)(1)); see also Auto Alliance Class 22 Opp’n at 6; 
Global Automakers Class 22 Opp’n at 6. 
1956 GM Class 22 Opp’n at 10 (quoting EFF Class 22 Supp. at 15); see also Global Automakers Class 22 
Opp’n at 6 (Although EFF did not rely on 17 U.S.C. § 117(c), Global Automakers argues that the proposed 
use of research would not constitute acceptable “maintenance” or “repair” under that provision because it 
“limits ‘maintenance’ and ‘repair’ to those activities aimed at servicing or restoring the automobile to ‘work 
in accordance with its original specifications.’”). 
1957 GM Class 22 Opp’n at 10 (citing 17 U.S.C. § 117(a)(2)); see also Auto Alliance Class 22 Opp’n at 6 
(citing same). 
1958 Auto Alliance Class 25 Opp’n at 1 (citing Auto Alliance Class 22 Opp’n at 9-12); see also BSA Class 
25 Opp’n at 4; GM Class 25 Opp’n at 12-13; Tr. at 134:15-18 (May 26, 2015) (Lightsey, GM). 
287
 

[PAGE 292]
     
    
     
 
 
 
 
  
   
   
    
 
    
   
    
 
  
    
 
  
   
 
    
 
   
     
 
     
       
    
  
  
              
   
 
           
      
               
     
       
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
to quantify.”1959 BSA expressed particular concern that “proponents seek to circumvent 
access controls on software that is, for example, crucial to running indispensable 
programs—such as those associated with the operation of nuclear power plants, medical 
devices, and automobiles,” and asserts that “an exemption that lacks proper safeguards 
could be disastrous.”
1960 
GM argues that none of proponents’ examples of supposedly chilled research 
withstand scrutiny, noting that in the example proponents cite of researchers who 
received legal threats from Texas Instruments regarding their study of the Data Storage 
Tag, “the threat [of legal action] had no effect” on the research.
1961 Thus, in GM’s view, 
the alleged chilling effects are more hypothetical than “distinct, verifiable, and 
measureable.”
1962 GM also contends that proponents have not “demonstrated that a 
significant number of individuals are interested in accessing the software controlling a 
vehicle’s ECUs for the purposes of security research, but [are] hampered from doing 
so.”1963 GM also questions whether an exemption would lead to the public benefits 
claimed by proponents, given that at least as of July 2014, the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration (“NHTSA”) apparently “was not aware of any instances of 
consumer vehicle control systems having been hacked.”
1964 Similarly, with respect to 
medical devices specifically, opponents contend that proponents have provided no data 
that “demonstrates or suggests that allowing open access to protected code would in any 
way enhance safety or efficacy of [those] devices.”1965 
Opponents additionally maintain that there are alternatives to circumvention that 
mitigate any potential adverse effects.1966 In particular, they contend that there is a 
significant amount of independent security research conducted every day with the 
encouragement of the affected companies.1967 Opponents thus argue that obtaining 
authorization from the software developer or product manufacturer is a viable alternative 
to circumvention.
1968 For example, AdvaMed asserts that “[e]xisting [FDA] regulations 
[that] require manufacturers to monitor safe use of devices and take corrective action as 
1959 IPO Class 25 Opp’n at 1. 
1960 BSA Class 25 Opp’n at 2. 
1961 GM Class 25 Opp’n at 14. 
1962 Id. 
1963 Id. 
1964 Id. at 19 (quoting Jim Finkle, Hacking Experts Build Device To Protect Cars from Cyber Attacks,
 
REUTERS (July 23, 2014), http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/07/23/us-cybersecurity-autos­
idUSKBN0FR2FR20140723).
 
1965 AdvaMed Class 25 Opp’n at 8; see also MDISS Opp’n at 1.
 
1966 See AdvaMed Class 25 Opp’n at 8-9.
 
1967 BSA Class 25 Opp’n at 4; see also Tr. at 130:18-25 (May 26, 2015) (Troncoso, BSA); Tr. at 134:20­
135:09 (May 26, 2015) (Lightsey, GM). 
1968 See, e.g., GM Class 25 Opp’n at 13. 
288
 

[PAGE 293]
     
    
   
 
    
   
 
 
      
  
  
  
     
 
    
   
      
   
   
      
    
    
   
     
     
    
     
    
        
         
         
        
                  
             
               
           
             
               
                
                   
                 
 
 
                                                 
 
	 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
appropriate” already lead manufacturers to engage in security research.1969 LifeScience 
Alley further contends that “[a]ll major companies in the medical device community are 
participating with the guidance of the FDA to do research in this area.”1970 In the context 
of vehicles, GM emphasizes that car manufacturers “partner with third party researchers 
to identify and address security vulnerabilities,” allowing for public open participation 
where appropriate.1971 
ii.	 Proposed Class 22: Vehicle Software – Security and Safety 
Research 
Class 22 opponents challenge the claim that the prohibition on circumvention is 
having adverse effects.  GM notes that proponents “fail[] to identify any real-world 
occurrences where a car was stolen or attacked as a result of security vulnerabilities or 
that such an occurrence is likely to occur in the near future.”
1972 GM also stresses that 
proponents “failed to demonstrate substantial vehicle related injury as a result of the 
current prohibition, noting only one example.”1973 Opponents also contend that 
proponents “failed to demonstrate that [the prohibition] is impeding or ‘chilling’ any 
legitimate research—the main thrust of their argument about adverse effects.” 1974 For 
example, GM contends that EFF has only put forward “anecdotal evidence” of security 
researchers who are prevented from engaging in research,1975 and asserts that these 
“individual cases” are insufficient to meet the rulemaking standard.1976 Similarly, Auto 
Alliance asserts that “independent research into the safety and security of computer 
systems in motor vehicles appears to be a growth business, thriving and even attracting 
federal government support.”1977 Opponents further contend that there are many 
alternatives to circumvention for vehicle software security research.1978 In opponents’ 
1969 AdvaMed Class 25 Opp’n at 9.
 
1970 LifeScience Alley Class 25 Opp’n at 6.
 
1971 GM Class 25 Opp’n at 7-8.
 
1972 GM Class 22 Opp’n at 14.
 
1973 Id. at 15.
 
1974 Auto Alliance Class 22 Opp’n at 9.
 
1975 GM Class 22 Opp’n at 15; see also Auto Alliance Class 22 Opp’n at 11.
 
1976 GM Class 22 Opp’n at 15 (citing NOI, 79 Fed. Reg. at 55,690).
 
1977 Auto Alliance Class 22 Opp’n at 10-11.
 
1978 See, e.g., GM Class 22 Opp’n at 8 (“GM, and other car manufacturers, partner with third party
 
researchers to identify and address security vulnerabilities. In fact, it is quite common for automobile
 
manufacturers to contract with third party testers and researchers for work on various parts of the
 
vehicle.”); Auto Alliance Class 22 Opp’n at 11 (“[I]ndependent researchers have an important role to play
 
in flagging potential vulnerabilities, and [the auto industry] works with them in a number of fora to learn
 
about problems they have identified and devise solutions to them. Among these fora are the relevant
 
committees of SAE International . . . . Technical experts from auto manufacturers also participate in major
 
gatherings of ‘ethical hackers’ such as DEF Con and Black Hat. High levels of industry participation in the
 
annual SAE Battelle Cyber Auto Challenge . . . is further evidence of industry commitment to supporting
 
289
 

[PAGE 294]
     
    
 
      
   
      
 
  
    
  
   
  
  
   
  
  
 
  
 
   
 
   
 
    
    
  
    
           
    
            
      
  
           
         
       
        
     
     
              
    
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 
	 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
view, “[g]iven the availability of programs where manufacturers work with independent 
researchers to test their products . . . no substantial adverse impact occurs as a result of 
the default 1201 prohibition.”1979 
iii.	 Proposed Class 27A: Medical Device Software – Security and 
Safety Research 
Class 27A opponents contend that proponents “offer no evidence to support their 
assertions about the ‘risk of the DMCA chilling this form of medical research.’”1980 
According to opponents, “[a]t most the Proponents have inferred that manufacturers will 
expand their use of TPMs over the next three years.”
1981 In opponents’ view, such an 
inference does not meet the “highly specific, strong, and persuasive” evidence standard 
required to establish that future adverse harm will likely occur within the next three 
years.1982 Opponents also maintain that proponents’ evidence that independent 
researchers are currently being harmed by the prohibition on circumvention is either 
unverified, speculative, or “of the de minimis nature that does not meet the rulemaking 
standard.”1983 
AdvaMed further asserts the proposed exemption is unnecessary, because 
“[a]lternatives that do not require unauthorized circumvention” exist for medical device 
software security research.1984 AdvaMed contends that “medical device manufacturers 
have been and are presently engaged with technology companies and academic 
researchers to evaluate the security, safety, and efficacy of medical devices.”1985 In 
support of this assertion, opponents observe that one medical device manufacturer 
recently hired three security firms to research the vulnerabilities in a type of insulin pump 
it produced when it realized the pump was susceptible to attack.
1986 Opponents note that 
university-affiliated institutions also perform medical device software research with the 
permission of manufacturers.1987 They also highlight FDA’s recent sponsorship of a 
public “workshop among industry, academic, and government leaders entitled 
[alternate means of vehicle software security research].”); John Deere Class 22 Opp’n at 9; Global
 
Automakers Class 22 Opp’n at 7.
 
1979 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(A); GM Class 22 Opp’n at 14 (emphasis in original).
 
1980 NAM Opp’n at 5 (quoting MDRC Supp. at 20).
 
1981 Id. 
1982 NOI, 79 Fed. Reg. at 55,690 (quoting STAFF OF H. COMM. ON THE JUDICIARY, 105TH CONG., SECTION­
BY-SECTION ANALYSIS OF H.R. 2281 AS PASSED BY THE UNITED STATES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ON 
AUGUST 4, 1998, at 6 (Comm. Print 1998)). 
1983 NAM Opp’n at 4-5 (quoting MDRC Supp. at 20).
 
1984 AdvaMed Class 27 Opp’n at 7.
 
1985 Id. at 2.
 
1986 See, e.g., IPO Class 27 Opp’n at 2; NAM Opp’n at 6; AdvaMed Class 27 Opp’n at 3.
 
1987 See, e.g., id. 
290
 

[PAGE 295]
     
    
  
   
   
    
   
     
   
    
  
    
    
 
    
   
  
    
  
  
 
    
  
   
  
              
         
           
          
              
   
           
                
             
   
   
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
‘Collaborative Approaches for Medical Device and Healthcare Cybersecurity.’”1988 In 
light of these alternatives to independent research on medical device software, in 
opponents’ view, “[a]ny alleged research need is purely speculative.”1989 
c. Argument Under Statutory Factors 
i. Proposed Class 25:  Software – Security Research 
Class 25 opponents contend that the statutory factors do not support an 
exemption.  On the first factor, Class 25 opponents assert that “the current availability of 
legitimate and safe methods of conducting security research” demonstrates that the 
prohibition does not negatively affect the availability of copyrighted works, emphasizing 
that companies and manufacturers often voluntarily engage third-party researchers to find 
and fix software vulnerabilities.
1990 Opponents also contend that the second factor does 
not weigh in favor of granting an exemption because proponents have provided no 
evidence that the prohibition has prevented the use of protected software for education 
purposes, or that there are even a significant number of educational programs focused on 
teaching security research.
1991 Opponents argue that the third factor also does not weigh 
in favor of an exemption because proponents have failed to demonstrate on the record 
that the prohibition has adversely affected legitimate security research, commentary or 
educational activity.1992 
On the fourth factor, GM contends that granting an exemption would weaken the 
security of vehicle safety and emissions systems by allowing the dissemination of highly 
sensitive information “in an uncontrolled, public environment,” and thus would result in a 
decrease in the value of vehicle software by putting automobile manufacturers “in a 
position of having to change their security structure, or to consider reducing the 
availability of advanced systems, each time researchers publish confidential and highly 
sensitive information about the security structures in place.”
1993 GM also argues that 
having to focus on damage control after sensitive information is publicly disclosed will 
“detract from [manufacturers’] ability to focus on new and innovative software” and chill 
investment in developing new ECU software.
1994 
1988 IPO Class 27 Opp’n at 2; see also NAM Opp’n at 6; AdvaMed Class 27 Opp’n at 2-3.
 
1989 See, e.g., IPO Class 27 Opp’n at 1.
 
1990 GM Class 25 Opp’n at 15-16; see also Tr. at 130:10-25 (May 26, 2015) (Troncoso, BSA) (asserting that
 
BSA-member companies “are actively trying to incentivize [independent security research] by offering
 
rewards, either financial or reputational, to those who provide information about security vulnerabilities but
 
do so in a responsible manner”).
 
1991 GM Class 25 Opp’n at 16-17; see also Tr. at 134:15-135:06 (May 26, 2015) (Lightsey, GM). 
1992 See, e.g., GM Class 25 Opp’n at 17 (asserting that, despite the prohibition, articles and papers have
 
been published analyzing and criticizing security systems and potential vulnerabilities in those systems).
 
1993 Id. at 17-18.
 
1994 Id. at 18.
 
291
 

[PAGE 296]
     
    
 
   
  
 
  
  
 
    
    
   
  
 
  
   
   
   
 
   
   
  
 
  
   
 
   
 
   
   
  
   
                
                  
        
               
     
            
               
    
     
             
            
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Opponents offer various observations addressed to the fifth statutory factor, 
permitting the Librarian to consider other factors as appropriate. The overall thrust of 
their concerns is that the proposed exemption should be denied because the risk to public 
safety that would be created by granting the exemption outweighs the minimal benefits 
offered by unauthorized security research.  For instance, opponents argue that 
circumvention activities could result in medical device malfunctions that jeopardize 
safety, particularly in networked medical devices such as implants, and “profoundly 
change a device’s operation resulting in injury or death.”
1995 That argument to some 
degree assumes that medical devices subject to security research would be either in 
clinical use by patients or ultimately end up in the stream of commerce; as noted above, 
however, proponents acknowledged that the devices being researched should never be 
used in patients.  Opponents also assert that allowing circumvention without consent of 
the copyright owner would “encourage malicious actors to access . . . devices and their 
data without the consent” or knowledge of patients.
1996 
In addition, AdvaMed and other medical device companies assert that an 
exemption could result in greater products liability suits and increase manufacturers’ legal 
costs because “[a]llowing access to the source code in medical devices without consent 
and without following the manufacturer’s instructions could lead to attacks or misuse that 
cause medical devices to malfunction.”
1997 They also contend that allowing 
circumvention that exposes a device’s source code could “encourage[] theft of trade 
secrets and the infringement of patents since most source code is either patented or 
considered to be a trade secret,” devaluing innovation in devices and potentially leading 
to an increase in the number of knock-off products.
1998 According to AdvaMed, an 
exemption would “create a dangerous precedent likely to be followed by other countries 
that may see weakening of IP protection as potentially advantageous for indigenous 
industry focused on imitation rather than innovation.”1999 They also argue that an 
exemption would result in manufacturers, universities, and other copyright owners 
investing more of their finite resources into bolstering TPMs and less in “innovation that 
improves healthcare.”
2000 
In addition, opponents argue that an exemption would interfere with the 
regulatory authority of other federal agencies, as well as other federal and state laws and 
1995 AdvaMed Class 25 Opp’n at 3; see also LifeScience Alley Class 25 Opp’n at 4; Auto Alliance Class 25
 
Opp’n at 1 (citing Auto Alliance Class 22 Opp’n at 12-15) (asserting that there are “serious threats to safety
 
and security that recognition of the proposed exemption would create or exacerbate”).
 
1996 AdvaMed Class 25 Opp’n at 6; see also LifeScience Alley Class 25 Opp’n at 4, 6; Tr. at 125:01-05 
(May, 26 2015) (Troncoso, BSA).
 
1997 AdvaMed Class 25 Opp’n at 5; see also LifeScience Alley Class 25 Opp’n at 4.
 
1998 AdvaMed Class 25 Opp’n at 5-6; see also LifeScience Alley Class 25 Opp’n at 5; Tr. at 132:20-21 
(May 26, 2015) (Troncoso, BSA).
 
1999 AdvaMed Class 25 Opp’n at 9.
 
2000 Id. at 5; see also MDISS Opp’n at 1 (asserting that allowing circumvention “may adversely impact
 
innovation incentives for universities and companies that create this IP for patients”).
 
292
 

[PAGE 297]
     
    
  
   
 
  
 
     
  
    
  
 
    
  
   
   
 
  
  
  
 
   
  
 
     
   
 
 
     
              
    
           
                
                
               
              
          
   
     
   
     
    
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
regulations.  For instance, GM asserts that an exemption could have an “impact on the 
effectiveness of U.S. regulatory systems for maintaining vehicle safety or emissions if 
certain information regarding potential security vulnerabilities is publically disseminated 
and detailed”
2001 and argues that “circumvention of certain emissions-oriented TPMs, 
such as seed/key access control mechanisms, could be a violation of federal law,” 
including the CAA, which prohibits tampering with vehicles or vehicle engines, or the 
National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act, which prohibits introducing noncompliant vehicles into U.S. commerce.
2002 
Opponents similarly assert that allowing the “fixing” of medical devices without 
FDA or manufacturer permission would risk patient safety because it would “enable 
others to bypass proper regulatory controls;” they point to the fact that FDA, as the 
federal agency responsible for assuring the safety, efficacy and security of medical 
devices, “oversees the design and use of these products with great rigor, and often 
requires extensive clinical studies to establish safety and efficacy.”
2003 AdvaMed argues 
that allowing circumvention would “increase recall and reporting requirements to FDA,” 
potentially stifling investment in medical technology because manufacturers remain 
legally “responsible for the safety of their devices even after they have been entered into 
commerce and altered by a third party.”
2004 IPO similarly contends that allowing 
circumvention and disclosure of software flaws prior to FDA review and approval could 
put patients “at increased risk from bad faith attempts to modify devices during the period 
required to develop and obtain [FDA] approval for the change,” which can last as long as 
one to two years.2005 Citing concerns of patient privacy, MDISS emphasizes that “[i]t’s 
not clear that HIPAA [the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996] 
supports the access to [protected health information] proposed in this petition.”
2006 
AdvaMed likewise maintains that an exemption could “contravene federal and state 
privacy laws concerning the storage and transmission of protected health information”2007 
by potentially compromising such information through unauthorized access or through 
the exposure of source code and patient data to “inappropriate parties.”
2008 
2001 GM Class 25 Opp’n at 14; see also Tr. at 134:06-12 (May 26, 2015) (Lightsey, GM); GM Class 25
 
Post-Hearing Resp. at 2-3.
 
2002 GM Class 25 Opp’n at 6-7; see also GM Class 25 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2-3.
 
2003 AdvaMed Class 25 Opp’n at 3-5; see also IPO Class 25 Opp’n at 1 (noting that “no one should be
 
‘fixing’ medical devices or pacemaker applications without [FDA] review and approval . . . . [because t]he
 
risk of patient injury or death is high”); LifeScience Alley Class 25 Opp’n at 2-3.
 
2004 AdvaMed Class 25 Opp’n at 4; see also LifeScience Alley Class 25 Opp’n at 2 (arguing that “any
 
changes, however insignificant, made to a post market approved device must go through additional
 
screening by the FDA”).
 
2005 IPO Class 25 Opp’n at 2.
 
2006 MDISS Opp’n at 1.
 
2007 AdvaMed Class 25 Opp’n at 2.
 
2008 Id. at 3. 
293
 

[PAGE 298]
     
    
  
   
  
     
  
   
  
 
     
 
  
   
 
  
  
  
    
  
 
 
  
  
   
                
              
               
    
              
            
            
                
             
             
            
        
   
       
           
     
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
More generally, opponents argue that, to the extent the existing permanent 
exemptions in sections 1201(f), 1201(g), and 1201(j) are inadequate, the Copyright 
Office is not the appropriate agency and the 1201 rulemaking proceeding is not the 
appropriate forum in which to address the issue.2009 SIIA contends that “[t]o the extent 
the concerns raised here are legitimate and were not previously raised when [the 
permanent exemptions] were first enacted, it is for Congress, not the Copyright Office, to 
determine whether any or all of these three statutory exceptions should be modified.”
2010 
Opponents express concern about the potential breadth of the exemption,2011 and 
its lack of the reasonable constraints that Congress placed on good-faith security research 
in section 1201(j).2012 In addition, MDISS expresses concerns “about the ambiguity of 
the term ‘researcher’” in the proposed exemption, fearing that the exemption could be 
invoked by a broader range of persons than may be appropriate.
2013 Opponents also 
argue that the fact that the Librarian previously granted exemptions for security research 
in 2006 and 2010 should not compel the Librarian to also grant the exemption here, 
explaining that the 2006 and 2010 exemptions were more narrowly tailored and 
incorporated “aspects of section 1201(j) to preserve the spirit of Congress’ efforts to 
avoid exacerbating risks”
2014 by limiting the classes to “security testing of CDs and video 
games that included software where the software itself acted as a TPM and created 
security flaws and vulnerabilities.”2015 GM additionally argues that the previously 
granted exemptions are distinguishable because they “had no impact on safety systems, 
carefully crafted regulatory schemes, or the secure operation of important heavy 
equipment (like automobiles).”
2016 
As noted above, opponents also express grave concerns about the proper 
disclosure of vulnerabilities under any exemption.  BSA argues that initial disclosure to 
manufacturers and companies is the “norm,” even amongst independent security 
2009 SIIA Class 25 Opp’n at 1 (stating that “it is unnecessary and inappropriate for the Copyright Office to 
create an exemption for encryption research, security testing or reverse engineering in this triennial 
rulemaking process”); LifeScience Alley Class 25 Opp’n at 3; see also BSA Post-Hearing Resp. at 1. 
2010 SIIA Class 25 Opp’n at 1. 
2011 IPO Class 25 Opp’n at 1 (contending that because the proposed exemption includes a wide range of 
systems and devices, such as medical devices, car components, supervisory control and data acquisition 
systems, and other critical infrastructure, “the public risk is impossible to quantify”). 
2012 BSA Class 25 Opp’n at 2 (such as being “expressly limited to acts that do not constitute copyright 
infringement” or violation of other “closely related laws, such as the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act”); see 
also Tr. at 127:19-23 (May 26, 2015) (Troncoso, BSA) (arguing that “proponents are seeking an exemption 
that is both broader than existing statutory exemptions but which contain none of the important safeguards 
that Congress deemed important”); BSA Post-Hearing Resp. at 2-3. 
2013 MDISS Opp’n at 1. 
2014 BSA Class 25 Opp’n at 3. 
2015 GM Class 25 Opp’n at 19-20; see also Tr. at 136:03-11 (May 26, 2015) (Troncoso, BSA). 
2016 GM Class 25 Opp’n at 21. 
294
 

[PAGE 299]
     
    
     
 
     
  
    
  
     
  
   
   
  
   
    
  
   
   
  
   
    
       
  
            
           
              
                
              
                
  
                 
            
                 
         
         
               
        
       
     
           
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
researchers.2017 In that regard, BSA observes that in all the examples of independent 
security research relied upon by proponents, the research results were voluntarily 
disclosed to the companies before being publicly disclosed.2018 Opponents argue that if 
the exemption does not impose a disclosure standard, it will allow “researchers to make 
disclosures about vulnerabilities based upon the researcher’s sole judgment before the 
software developer or product manufacturer has had an opportunity to remedy the 
problem.”2019 Opponents argue that such an exemption would therefore “authorize the 
public disclosure of security vulnerabilities in ways that would expose the public to 
heightened security risks,” especially in the case of public disclosure of vulnerabilities 
“concurrent” with disclosure to the software developer or product manufacturer.
2020 GM 
further asserts that, in the case of vehicles, even a requirement of prior disclosure to the 
manufacturer “would create safety and security risks,” because “many vehicle owners do 
not participate in the fixes auto manufacturers already offer when recalls issue.”2021 In 
the context of medical devices, IPO has concerns with public disclosure in and of itself, 
arguing that patients who have implanted devices, such as implantable pacemakers, “will 
be placed at risk from public disclosure for the remaining lifetime of their implanted 
devices, which may be as much as 15 years.”
2022 
At the same time, opponents also appear opposed to the Office’s endorsement of 
specific disclosure practices, instead preferring an approach to disclosure that tracks 
section 1201(j), which prescribes a multifactor standard to assess disclosure in any given 
instance.2023 Opponents note the First Amendment concerns that could be implicated by 
2017 Tr. at 153:04-154:05 (May 26, 2015) (Troncoso, BSA). 
2018 Id. 
2019 Id. at 125:11-17 (Troncoso, BSA); see also id. at 135:10-16 (Lightsey, GM) (expressing concerns that 
“the ability for automobile manufacturers to control that research and to have the opportunity to fix 
vulnerabilities before they’re widely disclosed would be severely limited and could thus create safety 
concerns”); GM Class 25 Opp’n at 6 (asserting that allowing circumvention “increases access to, and as 
noted by Proponents, publication of sensitive information relating to the operation of ECUs which in turn 
increases the risks to safety and security and other systems that an owner trusts”); BSA Post-Hearing Resp. 
at 1. 
2020 BSA Class 25 Opp’n at 2 (pointing with concern to software “associated with the operation of nuclear 
power plants, medical devices, and automobiles”); see also id. at 5; Tr. at 128:23-129:07 (May 26, 2015) 
(Troncoso, BSA) (noting that “there is already a thriving market . . . in the black market for security 
research regarding zero day vulnerabilities”); Tr. at 125:21-126:01 (May 26, 2015) (Troncoso, BSA) 
(arguing that an exemption would “enable exploitation of vulnerabilities to engage in identity theft, 
financial fraud, and other serious threats to our nation’s critical infrastructure”); BSA Post-Hearing Resp. at 
1; GM Class 25 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1-2. 
2021 GM Class 25 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2. 
2022 IPO Class 25 Opp’n at 2. 
2023 17 U.S.C. § 1201(j)(3); see BSA Post-Hearing Resp. at 3. 
295
 

[PAGE 300]
     
    
   
  
      
 
   
  
  
   
   
 
   
   
   
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
             
                
        
             
          
         
     
              
          
            
           
         
              
 
        
            
                 
  
 
 
                                                 
	 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
any disclosure requirement, and the fact that the appropriate timing of disclosure to 
companies and manufacturers may differ based on the nature of the vulnerability.2024 
ii.	 Proposed Class 22: Vehicle S oftware – Security and Safety 
Research 
Regarding the first statutory factor, Class 22 opponents argue that the proposed 
exemption is unnecessary, and would not increase the availability of copyrighted works.  
Specifically, opponents argue vehicle software is already commercially available for use, 
subject to the conditions of applicable licenses or vehicle sales agreements.2025 
Opponents further assert that the prohibition will not decrease the availability of vehicle 
software for research purposes, because alternate means of examining vehicle software 
for security research are already in place without an exemption.
2026 
With respect to the second factor, opponents generally maintain that the proposed 
exemption by definition would not enhance the availability for use of works for nonprofit 
archival, preservation, and educational purposes.
2027 
Opponents present little argument regarding the third factor.  Opponents do not 
deny that the proposed exemption, focusing on security research for vehicle software, 
categorically falls under “research,” something to be examined under the third factor.2028 
But opponents argue that the proposed exemption would disrupt and undermine auto 
manufacturers’ own legitimate efforts to conduct security research into their vehicle 
software.2029 
Turning to the fourth factor, the effect of circumvention on the market for or value 
of the works, Auto Alliance argues that proponents “are wrong to assert that allowing 
unrestricted circumvention of access controls protecting [vehicle software] code will 
2024 BSA Post-Hearing Resp. at 3; Tr. at 131:08-132:01 (May 26, 2015) (Troncoso, BSA); GM Class 25 
Post-Hearing Resp. at 2. BSA also highlights that the U.S. government is currently addressing disclosure 
of vulnerability information with special focus on avoiding unintended consequences, pointing to the 
Administration’s contemplation of policy initiatives on the issue and the Department of Commerce’s 
consideration of export controls on tools used to hack and discover vulnerabilities. Tr. at 126:08-127:03 
(May 26, 2015) (Troncoso, BSA); see also BSA Post-Hearing Resp. at 1-2. 
2025 John Deere Class 22 Opp’n at 12. 
2026 GM Class 22 Opp’n at 16 (“With regard to software glitches ‘many companies pull in an external 
source code inspector to preemptively catch and remove the bugs.’ Manufacturers also contract with 
researchers. These arrangements can be open to public participation, such as with many standard setting 
organizations, or may be confidential, when sensitive information about TPMs and operation of ECUs is 
required for appropriate research or evaluation.”); Global Automakers Class 22 Opp’n at 5-6 
(“[A]utomobile manufacturers . . . are well under way with their own internal and external research 
programs.”). 
2027 John Deere Class 22 Opp’n at 12; GM Class 22 Opp’n. at 10. 
2028 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(iii); see, e.g., John Deere Class 22 Opp’n at 12-13. 
2029 See, e.g., John Deere Class 22 Opp’n at 12-13; Global Automakers Class 22 Opp’n at 7; GM Class 22 
Opp’n at 17. 
296
 

[PAGE 301]
     
    
     
  
 
   
  
 
  
  
    
  
   
  
 
  
 
    
   
   
    
  
 
               
      
  
    
                
           
           
            
     
                  
          
              
             
          
     
         
            
           
              
               
        
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
produce ‘no market harm cognizable by copyright law.’”2030 GM posits that “the value of 
the vehicle software will likely decrease as OEMs [original equipment manufacturers] are 
continually put in a position of having to change their security structure, or to consider 
reducing the availability of advanced systems, each time researchers publish confidential 
and highly sensitive information about the security structures in place.”
2031 GM further 
asserts that this devaluation of vehicle software resulting from the proposed exemption 
will have “chilling effects on OEMs’ investment in the development of new ECU 
software,”
2032 and the publication of sensitive security information will hamper 
manufacturers’ efforts to create innovative vehicle software.2033 GM also argues that the 
proposed exemption will depress the value of copyrighted works in used vehicles, 
because consumers in the secondary market will not know when vehicle software has 
been altered undesirably.
2034 
Regarding the fifth statutory factor, which permits consideration of such other 
factors as the Librarian deems appropriate, opponents argue that the proposed exemption 
threatens public safety, because publication of vehicle software research results could 
facilitate illegal activities.
2035 Opponents also urge that the proposed exemption will 
“greatly increase risks to the safety and security of every American motorist, passenger, 
and pedestrian,”
2036 because altering vehicle computer programs can unintentionally 
compromise critical safety systems.2037 Opponents additionally assert that the proposed 
exemption would facilitate noncompliance with industry safety standards and with 
federal environmental emissions regulations.
2038 Opponents contend that the proposed 
exemption contradicts Congress’s intent in enacting section 1201(j), which 
2030 Auto Alliance Class 22 Opp’n at 15 (citing EFF Class 22 Supp. at 23). 
2031 GM Class 22 Opp’n at 17. 
2032 Id. 
2033 Id. 
2034 John Deere Class 22 Opp’n at 8 (“Consumers looking to purchase a used car will be fearful that the 
previous owner could have tinkered with or hacked the vehicle in ways that could cause it to perform in 
unexpected ways, or, worse, have introduced viruses and malware into the vehicle’s systems.”); Global 
Automakers Class 22 Opp’n at 8 (“The proposed exemption . . . gambles with the value of used 
automobiles to downstream purchasers.”). 
2035 See, e.g., Auto Alliance Class 22 Opp’n at 14 (“EFF’s submission details a long list of reported 
vulnerabilities whose exploitation could directly threaten driver, passenger and public safety as well as 
privacy.”); Global Automakers Class 22 Opp’n at 2 (“The very real risk that ostensibly legitimate research 
unwillingly undermines vehicle security by serving as a guidebook to software vulnerabilities that enables 
or even accelerates illicit hacking and malicious modifications to automotive software weighs heavily 
against the proposed exemption.”). 
2036 Auto Alliance Class 22 Opp’n at 13. 
2037 Global Automakers Class 22 Opp’n at 4 (“Intentions aside, even well-meaning research and slight 
modifications in the name of security could cause entire systems to malfunction.”). 
2038 See, e.g., GM Class 22 at 5 (“[C]ircumvention of certain emissions-oriented TPMs, such as seed/key 
access control mechanisms could be a violation of federal law.”); John Deere Class 22 Opp’n at 18-22; 
Global Automakers Class 22 Opp’n at 6. 
297
 

[PAGE 302]
     
    
   
   
 
   
    
  
  
  
  
   
 
   
    
  
  
 
  
  
    
   
  
 
               
         
         
     
               
        
        
      
    
              
         
                
    
 
 
                                                 
	 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
“communicates a strong Congressional bias toward prudence and caution in disclosing 
[security research] results, lest the disclosure degrade the security of all current and future 
users of that system or network.”2039 In sum, opponents argue that “this proposal 
presents one of those circumstances . . . in which the balance of harms counsels 
rejection.”2040 
iii.	 Proposed Class 27A: Medical Device Software – S ecurity and 
Safety Research 
Concerning the first statutory factor, Class 27A opponents contend that the 
availability for use of medical device software for research purposes is not currently 
being impeded by the prohibition on circumvention.2041 According to NAM, 
“[m]anufacturers have both the incentive to ensure the security and stability of their 
products and demonstrated records of making their copyrighted computer programs 
available for research, analysis, and testing by qualified independent parties.”
2042 
Opponents present limited argument with respect to the second factor, although 
they suggest that the availability for use of medical device software for nonprofit 
educational purposes will not be hampered by the prohibition, because medical device 
software research is already taking place at public university-affiliated research 
institutions.
2043 
With respect to the third factor, opponents contend that the prohibition on 
circumvention does not negatively impact the public’s ability to use copyrighted works 
for teaching, scholarship, or research.
2044 To support this assertion, opponents reference 
research occurring at university-affiliated institutions, in the private sector, and through 
government-sponsored collaborations.2045 Opponents also maintain that the prohibition 
on circumvention is not currently hampering commentary, criticism, or reporting on 
medical devices.2046 
2039 Auto Alliance Class 22 Opp’n at 13; see also 17 U.S.C. § 1201(j).
 
2040 Auto Alliance Class 22 Opp’n. at 12.
 
2041 See, e.g., IPO Class 27 Opp’n at 1.
 
2042 NAM Opp’n at 3.
 
2043 See, e.g., LifeScience Alley Class 27 Opp’n at 3 (highlighting the University of Minnesota’s
 
Technological Leadership Institution Project); AdvaMed Class 27 Opp’n at 3 (noting the Archimedes
 
Institute at the University of Michigan focuses on medical device security).
 
2044 NAM Opp’n at 6.
 
2045 See, e.g., id.
 
2046 LifeScience Alley Class 27 Opp’n at 3 (stating collaborative research on the security of medical device
 
software conducted at the University of Minnesota’s Technological Leadership Institute in partnership with 
the National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence at the National Institute of Standards and Technology is to
 
include formal release for public comment).
 
298
 

[PAGE 303]
     
    
 
 
  
     
  
 
     
  
    
  
 
   
   
 
    
  
  
  
  
   
 
  
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
      
    
  
           
            
        
            
     
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
As for the fourth factor, opponents assert that the proposed exemption would 
harm the market for or value of medical device software, because any alterations to the 
computer programs made by independent researchers will nullify the device’s warranty 
and “may result in an increase in cost of the device.”2047 LifeScience Alley contends that 
unauthorized circumvention alone, absent changes to the medical device computer 
programs, “would be outside of the manufacture’s design, potentially voiding any 
warranty associated with the device.”
2048 LifeScience Alley maintains that circumvention 
conducted by independent researchers “could expose the manufacturer to unforeseeable 
liability.”
2049 Opponents also opine that the proposed exemption would harm the market 
for medical device software, because independent researchers “could jeopardize the 
security of implanted devices” in the course of conducting legitimate security 
research.2050 Finally, opponents contend that unauthorized circumvention and 
independent research conducted by unqualified device users may result in publicized 
device failures, thereby reducing market demand.
2051 
In terms of other factors that the Librarian should consider, LifeScience Alley 
asserts that the proposed exemption contravenes FDA’s recommended cybersecurity 
policy for medical device software; according to LifeScience Alley, FDA’s guidelines 
recommend that medical device manufacturers “limit access to the devices to trusted 
users only,” while the exemption would allow unauthorized access to devices.
2052 
Opponents observe that “[t]he FDA is charged with ensuring [medical devices] are safe 
and effective, and . . . the agency has taken a keen interest in cyber-security.”  They thus 
urge the Office to “solicit and consider the FDA’s views” in considering the proposed 
exemption.
2053 
3. Discussion 
Based on the entirety of the record and as set forth below, the Register concludes 
that proponents have demonstrated that good-faith testing for and the identification, 
disclosure and correction of malfunctions, security flaws and vulnerabilities in 
copyrighted computer programs have been hindered by TPMs that protect those 
programs.  The Register further concludes that the existing permanent exemptions in 
section 1201 do not cover the full range of proposed security research activities, many of 
which proponents have established are likely be noninfringing.  In addition, on the 
2047 See, e.g., id. at 5. 
2048 Id. at 4. 
2049 Id. 
2050 See, e.g., NAM Opp’n at 7-8; IPO Class 27 Opp’n at 1; AdvaMed Class 27 Opp’n at 7. 
2051 See e.g., NAM Opp’n at 7 (“[T]he proliferation of device failures could have the unintended 
consequence of deterring patients from utilizing these life-saving technologies.”). 
2052 LifeScience Alley Class 27 Opp’n at 2 (citing FDA PREMARKET SUBMISSION GUIDANCE). 
2053 IPO Class 27 Opp’n at 2-3. 
299
 

[PAGE 304]
     
    
 
 
  
  
   
  
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
   
   
   
  
    
  
  
  
                   
        
          
      
          
              
  
               
       
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
whole—though with important qualifications—the Register finds that the statutory 
factors set forth in section 1201(a)(1) tend to favor proponents. 
a. Noninfringing Uses 
As explained above, the three proposed security-related exemptions for general 
software security research, vehicle software security research, and medical device 
software security research are to some extent overlapping and have common legal 
underpinnings.  Given this relationship among the proposed classes, the Register 
concludes that it is appropriate to consolidate the analysis and recommendations for these 
three classes. 
The Register finds that the overall record supports proponents’ claim that 
accessing and reproducing computer programs for purposes of facilitating good-faith 
security research and identification of defects are likely to be fair uses of the programs 
under section 107.  With respect to the proposed exemption for vehicle software security 
research in Class 22, the Register additionally finds that these uses may qualify as 
noninfringing under section 117 as well, at least in some circumstances.  The Register 
notes that proponents did not raise section 117 in the other two security-related classes, 
and thus expresses no view on its applicability in those contexts. 
i. Fair Use 
Regarding the first fair use factor, the record establishes that the purpose and 
character of the proposed uses tend to support a finding of fair use.  Many of the 
proposed uses in the three security research classes are likely to be transformative, 
including copying the work to perform testing and research.
2054 In many cases the 
purpose of the use is to engage in academic inquiry.2055 The desired research activities 
may result in criticism or comment about the work and the devices in which it is 
incorporated, including potential flaws and vulnerabilities.
2056 As explained in the 
record, the goal of good-faith security research is “to educate the public . . . about these 
risks and how to mitigate them.”2057 Thus, in many cases, research activities may also 
extend to evaluating and describing how to fix flaws that have been discovered.2058 
Accordingly, good-faith security research encompasses several of the favored 
activities listed in the preamble of section 107.2059 As the Register stated in the 2010 
2054 See, e.g., Green Class 25 Supp. at 15-17; EFF Class 22 Supp. at 7; MDRC Class 27 Supp. at 13.
 
2055 Tr. at 47:02-09 (May 26, 2015) (Bellovin).
 
2056 See, e.g., id. at 74:09-15 (Blaze); id. at 47:02-09 (Bellovin).
 
2057 EFF Class 22 Supp. at 8.
 
2058 Green Class 25 Supp. at 11 (noting that “[a]pplying research discoveries to fix vulnerabilities or build
 
new, more secure software and devices” is “part of the overarching, holistic process of engaging in 
‘security research’”).
 
2059 17 U.S.C. § 107 (listing purposes of “criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching (including multiple
 
copies for classroom use), scholarship, or research”).
 
300
 

[PAGE 305]
     
    
 
   
   
  
 
 
  
  
   
 
   
 
  
      
   
   
 
   
    
    
  
 
  
   
  
   
               
       
        
               
              
            
        
    
               
       
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Recommendation regarding an exemption for good-faith security testing of video games, 
“socially productive, transformative uses performed solely for good faith testing, 
investigation . . . of security flaws or vulnerabilities weigh heavily in favor of fair use 
under the first factor.”2060 Therefore, the Register finds that, on the current record, the 
first factor is generally favorable to proponents. 
The second factor, the nature of the work, also favors proponents.  As explained 
above, the proposed classes focus on software embedded in or otherwise used in 
consumer-facing devices.  When a computer program is being used to operate a device, 
the work is likely to be largely functional in nature, as in the case of a cellphone’s 
operating system, software contained in a vehicle’s ECU, or software used to control a 
medical device.  On the facts presented here, for purposes of fair use, the computer 
programs at issue are likely to fall on the functional rather than creative end of the 
spectrum.
2061 
In addressing the third factor, which considers the amount of the work used, 
proponents concede that in most cases the proposed uses would involve reproduction of 
copyrighted computer 
programs in their entirety.2062 Courts have been willing to permit 
complete copying of the original work, however, where it is necessary to accomplish a 
transformative purpose.2063 Furthermore, where functional elements of a computer 
program cannot be investigated or assessed without some intermediate reproduction of 
the works, courts have held that the third factor is not of significant weight.
2064 And in 
prior rulemakings, the Register has found such copying to be consistent with fair use, for 
example, in granting exemptions for good-faith security research into compact discs 
during the 2006 proceeding, and for security research into video games during the 2010 
proceeding.2065 Thus, while the third factor arguably disfavors a fair use finding, the 
weight to be given to it under the circumstances is slight.  
Factor four is concerned with market impact, and evaluates “not only the extent of 
market harm caused by the particular actions of the [user], but also ‘whether unrestricted 
and widespread conduct of the sort engaged in by the [proponent of fair use] . . . would 
result in a substantially adverse impact on the potential market.’”
2066 Proponents 
persuasively establish that the desired security research will not usurp the market for any 
2060 2010 Recommendation at 184. 
2061 See Sega, 977 F.2d at 1524 (reaching a similar conclusion regarding reproductions of video games for
 
purposes of reverse engineering the code and enabling interoperability).
 
2062 See, e.g., EFF Class 22 Supp. at 10.
 
2063 Authors Guild, Inc. v. HathiTrust, 755 F.3d 87, 98 (2d Cir. 2014) (“For some purposes, it may be
 
necessary to copy the entire copyrighted work, in which case Factor Three does not weigh against a finding
 
of fair use.”); Kelly v. Arriba Soft, 336 F.3d at 820-21 (holding that the third fair use factor did not weigh 
against copier when entire-work copying was reasonably necessary).
 
2064 Sega, 977 F.2d at 1510.
 
2065 2006 Final Rule, 71 Fed. Reg. at 68,477; 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,832-33.
 
2066 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 590.
 
301
 

[PAGE 306]
     
    
   
     
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
   
 
  
  
   
  
 
  
  
   
 
 
    
             
               
                     
           
   
    
  
            
            
   
            
          
             
                
            
         
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
original works subject to that research, as they will be lawfully obtaining copies of those 
works for analysis.2067 Proponents also persuasively establish that any market harm 
resulting from independent researchers would be due to potential criticism resulting from 
the research, which is not considered a cognizable harm under the fourth factor.2068 As 
explained by the Supreme Court in Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., “there is no 
protectible derivative market for criticism.”2069 
The Register further finds that opponents’ arguably speculative concerns 
regarding reputational harms do not tip the scales in opponents’ favor.  Ultimately, the 
expressed reputational concerns largely amount to a desire to avoid negative publicity 
before a device manufacturer is able to address a discovered flaw. While such concerns 
may result in market harm, this type of reputational harm is not the concern of 
copyright.
2070 It is also worth noting that in some cases, the product manufacturer may 
benefit by making the product more reliable, and hence valuable, in response to a 
discovered flaw.  Thus, the Register finds that, on the current record, the fair use analysis 
under the fourth factor tends to favor proponents. 
Although in the context of Class 21, which concerns access to vehicle software 
for purposes of diagnosis, repair, and modification, the Register found that the fair use 
analysis did not support extending the exemption to computer programs that are chiefly 
designed to operate vehicle entertainment and telematics systems, a different conclusion 
is warranted here.  In Class 21, discussed above, proponents focused principally on the 
ability to circumvent TPMs on the ECUs that are used to operate the vehicle 
mechanically, and the record did not support the need to access the entertainment and 
telematics systems for purposes of vehicle diagnosis, repair, or modification.
2071 Here, in 
contrast, the record demonstrates a strong need to research the computer programs in 
entertainment and telematics systems; indeed, the evidence shows that previous research 
into those systems has uncovered flaws that can be used to affect a vehicle’s operation as 
a whole.
2072 Moreover, opponents’ concerns under Class 21 that access to entertainment 
2067 See, e.g., Green Class 25 Supp. at 17; CDT Reply at 5-6 (quoting 2010 Recommendation at 186); see 
also Green Class 25 Reply at 9; MDRC Supp. at 12 (citing Cariou v. Prince, 714 F.3d at 708-09). 
2068 See, e.g., EFF Class 22 Reply at 7-8; Green Class 25 Supp. at 17; MDRC Supp. at 12 (citing New Era v. 
Carol Publ’g, 904 F.2d at 160; Wojnarowicz v. Am. Family Ass’n, 745 F. Supp. at 145-46; 2012 
Recommendation at 73). 
2069 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 592. 
2070 Id. 
2071 See, e.g., EFF Class 21 Supp. at 6-7 (describing uses covered by the Class 21 exemption); Auto 
Alliance Class 21 Opp’n at 15 n.65 (noting that proponents’ submissions “make virtually no reference to 
[telematics] services”). 
2072 See Tr. at 16:11-23 (May 19, 2015) (Miller) (noting research showing “several vulnerabilities in [a] 
vehicle, for example, the Bluetooth stack and the cellular components—think OnStar, for example —that 
allowed them to inject . . . messages into a vulnerable vehicle anywhere in the country” and “remotely 
lock[] up the brakes on these vehicles or cause other safety critical [flaws]”). GM’s witness testified that 
“[v]ehicles’ ECUs are interconnected by a network that enable interaction between various systems and/or 
telematics equipped vehicles with various remote features.” Id. at 26:13-16 (Lightsey, GM). 
302
 

[PAGE 307]
     
    
 
   
  
    
 
  
  
 
  
      
 
 
     
     
  
   
 
   
 
   
    
  
  
       
         
              
 
         
                
            
     
     
   
   
 
 
                                                 
	 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
and telematics ECUs for purposes of repair and modification could also be exploited to 
gain unauthorized access to the content on entertainment systems or subscription 
telematics services are considerably less forceful in the security context.2073 Although 
Class 22 opponents argue that the exemption for security research could also be used to 
gain unauthorized access to creative content,2074 the nature and context of security 
research—as opposed to vehicle modification—would appear to create less of a risk that 
the exemption would be exploited for this type of unlawful purpose. 
On balance, the fair use analysis demonstrates that many of the proposed uses are 
likely to be socially productive and fair. 
ii. Section 117 
1)	 Proposed Class 22: Vehicle Software – Security and Safety 
Research 
In the context of the vehicle software security exemption in Class 22,2075 
proponents have also suggested that section 117 may apply because the making of copies 
and adaptations of computer 
programs is a required step in the security testing process.2076 
Section 117 requires consideration of two questions:  whether the person who possesses 
the machine or device is the owner of the embedded computer program, and whether 
creating a new copy or adaptation is an essential step in the utilization of the computer 
program with the machine.  
In past rulemaking proceedings, the Register has reviewed the relevant case law 
governing the determination of ownership of a software copy for purposes of section 117 
when formal title is lacking and/or a license or agreement imposes restrictions on the use 
of the computer program, and has concluded that the law is less than clear.2077 While the 
two leading precedents, Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc.2078 and Krause v. Titleserv, Inc.,2079 offer 
“useful guideposts,” these cases are “controlling precedent in only two circuits and are 
inconsistent in their approach.”
2080 
2073 See GM Class 21 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1-2.
 
2074 Auto Alliance Class 21 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1.
 
2075 In Classes 25 and 27A, the record did not include any meaningful analysis regarding the application of
 
section 117.
 
2076 See, e.g., EFF Class 22 Reply at 8-11.
 
2077 See 2010 Recommendation at 90 (noting that “the law relating to who is the owner of a copy of a
 
computer program under [s]ection 117 is in flux”); 2012 Recommendation at 92 (“The Register concludes
 
that the state of the law remains unclear.”).
 
2078 621 F.3d 1102.
 
2079 402 F.3d 119.
 
2080 2012 Recommendation at 92.
 
303
 

[PAGE 308]
     
    
 
  
   
 
  
    
     
  
 
    
   
  
     
  
     
     
    
   
    
  
 
   
   
   
  
 
    
  
     
      
         
      
 
 
                                                 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
In Krause, the Second Circuit held that formal title is not necessary to 
demonstrate ownership under section 117, and that courts should instead look to a variety 
of factors to determine “whether the party exercises sufficient incidents of ownership 
over a copy of the program to be sensibly considered the owner of the copy.”
2081 These 
factors include:  “(1) whether substantial consideration was paid for the copy; (2) whether 
the copy was created for the sole benefit of the purchaser; (3) whether the copy was 
customized to serve the purchaser’s use; (4) whether the copy was stored on property 
owned by the purchaser; (5) whether the creator reserved the right to repossess the copy; 
(6) whether the creator agreed that the purchaser had the right to possess and use the 
programs forever regardless of whether the relationship between the parties terminated; 
and (7) whether the purchaser was free to discard or destroy the copy anytime it 
wished.”
2082 By contrast, in Vernor, the Ninth Circuit held that “a software user is a 
licensee rather than an owner of a copy, where the copyright owner (1) specifies that the 
user is granted a license; (2) significantly restricts the user’s ability to transfer the 
software; and (3) imposes notable use restrictions.”
2083 These tests remain the two 
dominant approaches to the question of whether software is owned or licensed. 
But under either test, the record here supports the conclusion that vehicle owners 
may well own the ECU computer programs, with the possible exception of certain 
entertainment and telematics systems that are subject to written licenses. Beyond such 
discrete license agreements, opponents offered little evidence to support the notion that 
embedded vehicle software is licensed rather than owned by its users.2084 Opponents 
point to no restrictions on owners’ use or resale of the relevant computer programs when 
they transfer the vehicles that contain them.2085 Thus, based on the record, it appears that 
some portion of vehicle owners would qualify as “owners” of the relevant computer 
programs under applicable precedent, at least with regard to computer programs that are 
not chiefly designed to operate vehicle entertainment or telematics systems. 
The record further shows that reproduction and alteration of computer programs is 
often an “essential step” in the process of identifying potential flaws.
2086 In order to 
understand the functionality of a computer program, one may need to make a copy to use 
it in conjunction with a “machine,” such as a general-purpose computer, on which the 
2081 Krause, 402 F.3d at 124.
 
2082 Id.
 
2083 Vernor, 621 F.3d at 1111.
 
2084 Tr. at 183:02-12 (May 19, 2015) (Walsh, EFF).
 
2085 See, e.g., EFF Class 22 Reply at 9-10.
 
2086 See, e.g., id. at 10.
 
304
 

[PAGE 309]
     
    
   
 
 
  
      
    
  
  
 
    
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
   
   
   
 
    
 
      
                 
             
 
              
           
   
          
            
    
                       
     
                  
                  
             
         
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
program will be analyzed.2087 This would thus appear to meet the requirements of section 
117(a)(1).2088 
Additionally, proponents have established that the creation of backup copies of 
computer programs may be important for security research—whether to serve as a 
baseline for comparison during experiments, or to restore a vehicle ECU to its original 
state after research is completed. These activities may well be covered by the provision 
permitting creation of archival-purpose copies, addressed in section 117(a)(2).2089 Based 
on the record submitted, then, it is therefore likely that many of the security research uses 
proposed for owners of vehicles may qualify as protected uses under section 117.  
Last but not least, the Register notes that regardless of whether research 
technically qualifies as noninfringing under section 117, that provision highlights 
Congress’s general view of the importance of users’ ability to copy and adapt the 
computer programs they own to enhance their usefulness, and reinforces the conclusion 
that such uses here are likely to be fair.
2090 
b. Adverse Effects 
Based on the overall record in this proceeding, the Register concludes that TPMs 
protecting computer programs have a substantial adverse impact on good-faith testing for 
and the identification, disclosure and correction of malfunctions, security flaws and 
vulnerabilities in the protected computer programs.2091 
Proponents argue, and opponents do not dispute, that a significant number of 
product manufacturers employ TPMs on computer programs.2092 Proponents establish in 
the record that in many instances these TPMs have an adverse impact on the ability to 
engage in security research.
2093 Although opponents have shown that significant 
independent research is taking place through the cooperation of copyright owners and 
2087 See EFF Class 22 Supp. at 15. 
2088 See 17 U.S.C. § 117(a)(1) (requiring that the “a new copy or adaptation [be] created as an essential step 
in the utilization of the computer program in conjunction with a machine and that it [be] used in no other 
manner”). 
2089 See id. § 117(a)(2) (requiring that the “new copy or adaptation [be] for archival purposes only”). 
2090 See also id. § 1201(f) (permanent exemption from anticircumvention provisions of section 1201 for 
reverse engineering activities). 
2091 As noted above, although the proposals referenced databases in addition to computer programs, no 
evidence was presented demonstrating a need to access databases for purposes of security research, and the 
exemption does not extend to databases. 
2092 See, e.g., Green Class 25 Pet. at 2-3; Green Supp. at 5-11; Bellovin et al. Pet. at 5; EFF Class 22 Supp. 
at 4-6; MDRC Supp. at 7-9. 
2093 Green Class 25 Supp. at 17-18; see also CDT Supp. at 3; Radcliffe Supp. at 1; Rice Supp. at 1; 
Stanislav Supp. at 1; USACM Supp. at 1; Green Class 25 Reply at 4; Tr. at 20:08-23 (May 26, 2015) 
(Green); Tr. at 38:01-20 (May 26, 2015) (Sayler on behalf of Green); Tr. at 40:24-42:04 (May 26, 2015) 
(Stanislav, Rapid7); Tr. at 71:01-08 (May 26, 2015) (Matwyshyn). 
305
 

[PAGE 310]
     
    
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
   
  
   
  
   
   
 
  
  
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
               
     
       
                  
  
             
       
         
         
               
                   
 
 
                                                 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
manufacturers,2094 proponents convincingly argue that adverse effects persist despite the 
existence of authorized research.  For example, there is substantial evidence that the 
DMCA prohibition continues to discourage academic institutions and government entities 
from funding critical security research due to uncertainty about the legality of the 
circumvention that may be involved.
2095 Furthermore, the record establishes that there 
are significant shortcomings to pursuing research in concert with software developers and 
product manufacturers, who may have reason to delay publication of research results or 
prevent public disclosure of vulnerabilities.
2096 
The record reveals a variety of research projects across Classes 25, 22 and 27A 
that could implicate the circumvention prohibition in section 1201(a)(1) and thus be 
foreclosed absent an exemption.  As previously noted, however, these examples largely 
focused on consumer-oriented software and devices.  For example, Class 25 proponents 
seek to research the security of a growing number of internet-enabled consumer goods, 
such as webcams, smoke alarms, and security cameras. 2097 At the hearing, there was 
focus on a Wi-Fi-enabled voicemail device designed for children that was vulnerable to 
hacking by strangers.2098 Proponents also expressed the desire to research electronic 
voting machines to assess the potential for tampering.2099 
Proponents of Class 25 failed to explain, however, how the prohibition on 
circumvention is adversely affecting security research into computer programs that 
control critical components of the nation’s infrastructure, such as nuclear power plants, 
smartgrids, industrial control systems, air traffic control systems, train systems, and 
traffic lights.  Nor do proponents explain why research into critical systems is not being 
or could not be conducted with the authorization of the relevant copyright owner.  
Under Class 22, which focuses on vehicle software, the record also establishes 
that section 1201(a)(1) is likely to chill independent research, as some researchers appear 
not to be pursuing analysis of vehicle software out of fear of legal liability.
2100 The 
record further indicates that allowing more research could help automobile buyers make 
more informed purchasing decisions and encourage manufacturers to produce more 
secure software.
2101 
2094 BSA Class 25 Opp’n at 4; see also Tr. at 130:18-25 (May 26, 2015) (Troncoso, BSA); Tr. at 134:20­
135:09 (May 26, 2015) (Lightsey, GM).
 
2095 See, e.g., CDT Reply at 6-8.
 
2096 See, e.g., id. at 7-8; Schneier Class 25 Reply at 1-2; Tr. at 159:06-160:22, 204:21-205:09 (May 26,
 
2015) (Bellovin).
 
2097 Bellovin et al. Supp. at 9; Green Class 25 Supp. at 12.
 
2098 Tr. at 41:03-08 (May 26, 2015) (Stanislav, Rapid7).
 
2099 VVF Supp. at 1; Tr. at 72:11-20 (May 26, 2015) (Blaze).
 
2100 Tr. at 45:08-13 (May 19, 2015) (Charlesworth, USCO; Miller).
 
2101 EFF Class 22 Supp. at 16; Schneier Class 22 Reply at 2 (“When researchers are not free to disclose
 
their findings, companies are free to ignore them . . . . If we expect the market to motivate manufacturers to 
306
 

[PAGE 311]
     
    
  
    
    
    
    
 
  
   
    
   
   
  
   
 
   
  
    
   
   
   
  
 
          
   
        
              
            
         
            
              
                  
                  
               
              
 
    
     
      
        
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
A similar conclusion is warranted under Class 27A, covering research into 
medical device software. The record indicates that, in the past, independent security 
research on medical device software did not typically implicate anticircumvention law 
because medical devices did not typically employ TPMs.
2102 But there is clear evidence 
that this is changing as manufacturers begin to employ TPMs, especially in response to 
FDA guidance encouraging them to do so.  Accordingly, the record establishes that 
legitimate independent research could be impeded as medical devices become subject to 
section 1201(a)(1).
2103 
Additionally, proponents make a compelling case that the current permanent 
exemptions in section 1201, specifically section 1201(f) for reverse engineering, section 
1201(g) for encryption research, and section 1201(j) for security testing, are inadequate to 
accommodate their intended purposes.2104 
Section 1201(f) permits circumvention for the “sole purpose” of identifying and 
analyzing elements of computer programs necessary to achieve interoperability.2105 
Security research does not, however, always have as its sole purpose the enabling of 
computer program interoperability, and is often directed at other purposes, such as 
exposing and correcting security flaws.
2106 
Section 1201(g) addresses efforts to advance encryption technologies,2107 but the 
record establishes that security research does not always involve encryption technologies. 
Moreover, section 1201(g) requires researchers to attempt to obtain authorization from 
copyright holders, and this may not always be feasible.
2108 
The permanent exemption for security testing in section 1201(j) is closer to the 
subject of the exemptions requested in Classes 22, 25, and 27A, in that the provision is 
intended to permit “good faith testing, investigating, or correcting” of “security flaw[s] or 
design secure products, there must be consumer-advocate testing and evaluation so that users can make
 
intelligent buying decisions.”).
 
2102 MDRC Supp. at 3, 19-20; MDRC Reply at 2-3.
 
2103 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(A); MDRC Supp. at 20; see also, e.g., Schneier Class 27 Supp. at 2; Green 
Class 27 Supp. at 1; Public Knowledge Class 27 Reply at 5.
 
2104 Proponents also mention in passing that the permanent exemption embodied in section 1201(e) does not
 
meet their needs. Section 1201(e) allows “lawfully authorized investigative, protective, information
 
security, or intelligence activity of an officer, agent or employee of the United States, a State, or a political
 
subdivision of a State, or a person acting pursuant to a contract with the United States, a State, or a political
 
subdivision of a State.” 17 U.S.C. § 1201(e). This provision thus allows private security researchers to
 
conduct research for one of the listed purposes at the behest of the government through a contractual
 
arrangement, but does not extend to privately initiated research, which is the focus of Classes 25, 22 and
 
27A.
 
2105 Id. § 1201(f). 
2106 Green Class 25 Supp. at 19-20. 
2107 17 U.S.C. § 1201(g). 
2108 See, e.g., Green Class 25 Supp. at 20. 
307
 

[PAGE 312]
     
    
   
   
  
   
     
 
   
     
  
  
  
 
    
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
    
    
  
     
 
   
     
   
   
     
         
   
  
   
   
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
vulnerabilit[ies]” in computer systems.2109 The Register nonetheless agrees with 
proponents that this provision is inadequate for several reasons.  First, it is not entirely 
clear whether the exemption is intended to apply where a researcher is not seeking to gain 
access to “a computer, computer system, or computer network,” but instead to software 
that runs on a device such as an automobile or a medical device.2110 
As the Register framed similar concerns in 2006, the issue is whether the 
permanent exemption in 1201(j) is of “insufficient scope because it addresses accessing 
computers, not access to works, and . . . the proponents seek access to works.”2111 In 
addressing concerns regarding the scope of 1201(j) in 2006, the Register concluded: 
While there is a reasonable argument that its reference to “accessing a 
computer, computer system, or computer network solely for the purpose of 
good faith testing, investigating, or correcting a security flaw or 
vulnerability” would include the case where correcting the security flaw 
involves circumventing access controls on a computer that protect a sound 
recording or audiovisual work rather than the computer itself, it is not 
clear whether it extends to such conduct.  Because of the uncertainty 
whether § 1201(j) addresses the situation presented by this proposal [to 
conduct research on copy-protected compact discs], the Register cannot 
conclude that it is unnecessary to consider an exemption for the proposed 
class of works.
2112 
The Register reiterated this uncertainty in 2010, finding that the same question and 
conclusion were called for when the exemption sought access to video games.
2113 As the 
Register explained then, in enacting section 1201(j), Congress “appeared to be addressing 
firewalls and antivirus software that were used on computers, computer systems and 
networks to protect their respective contents,” and “wanted to encourage independent 
evaluation of such security systems.”2114 Given that understanding of Congress’s intent, 
the Register concluded that the proposed exemption for video games did not clearly fall 
within section 1201(j). Similarly, here, the Register finds that there is some uncertainty 
regarding whether section 1201(j) encompasses security research that is primarily 
focused on testing and identifying flaws in computer programs rather than security 
systems that protect computer systems. Although the security research encompassed by 
the proposed exemptions may take place on a computer, it may not necessarily involve 
accessing a computer as that term is used in section 1201(j).  
2109 17 U.S.C. § 1021(j).
 
2110 Green Class 25 Supp. at 21 (citing 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,832-33).
 
2111 2006 Recommendation at 59.
 
2112 Id. 
2113 2010 Recommendation at 200. 
2114 Id. at 196. 
308
 

[PAGE 313]
     
    
   
 
  
  
   
    
  
   
    
 
 
     
 
  
 
    
  
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
   
    
 
     
        
     
        
      
                   
      
               
          
           
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Second, section 1201(j) requires that security testing take place “with the 
authorization of the owner or operator of the computer, computer system, or computer 
network.”2115 In some cases, it may be difficult to identify the relevant owner, such as 
when the focus of the research is on general-purpose software that runs on a wide range 
of devices, or where the owner of software on a particular device is not known.2116 
Moreover, it may not be feasible to obtain authorization even where there is an 
identifiable owner. 
Finally, the Register notes that the multifactor standard in section 1201(j) may be 
difficult to apply to the proposed uses here.  These factors include whether the 
information derived from security testing was “used solely to promote the security of the 
owner or operator of [the] computer, computer system or computer network” or “shared 
directly with the developer of such computer, computer system, or computer 
network.”
2117 Such criteria would appear to be of uncertain application to at least some 
of the activities proposed here.  First, the security research sought would be aimed in part 
at advancing the state of knowledge in the field, and not “solely” aimed at promoting the 
security of the owner or operator of the computer, computer system, or computer network 
(assuming such an owner could be identified).
2118 Second, determining the relevant 
“developer” to whom information must be disclosed could be difficult if not impossible 
in some instances.2119 
The Register therefore concludes that, based on the current record, the permanent 
exemptions embodied in sections 1201(j), 1201(f) and 1201(g) do not appear 
unambiguously to permit the full range of legitimate security research that could be 
encompassed by the proposed exemption.2120 In light of this uncertainty, the Register 
proceeds to consider an exemption for the proposed uses.  This corresponds to the 
Register’s approach on the two earlier occasions when the Register concluded that 
section 1201’s permanent exemptions were inadequate to facilitate important security 
research, and thus needed to be supplemented with exemptions adopted as part of the 
triennial rulemaking proceeding.
2121 
Finally, although, as opponents note, the 2006 and 2010 exemptions were aimed 
at analyzing security flaws in TPMs themselves, the Register does not see a legal or 
logical reason why the exemption cannot be aimed at the copyrighted computer programs 
2115 17 U.S.C. § 1201(j)(1).
 
2116 See, e.g., Green Class 25 Supp. at 21-22.
 
2117 17 U.S.C. § 1201(j)(3)(A).
 
2118 See, e.g., Green Class 25 Supp. at 22
 
2119 See, e.g., id. at 21-22.
 
2120 See, e.g., id. at 19; see also CDT Supp. at 3-4; Green Class 25 Reply at 9; Tr. at 14:16-25, 17:13-19 
(May 26, 2015) (Reid on behalf of Green).
 
2121 2006 Final Rule, 71 Fed. Reg. at 68,477 (granting an exemption for good-faith security research into
 
sound recordings on compact discs); 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,832-33 (granting an exemption 
for good-faith security research on video games accessible on personal computers).
 
309
 

[PAGE 314]
     
    
    
  
  
 
   
      
    
    
 
 
   
 
   
  
  
 
  
 
   
   
   
 
   
  
    
     
                
                
               
      
     
              
             
               
             
         
              
         
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
protected by a TPM. There is no such restriction contained in the language or legislative 
history of the DMCA, and section 1201(j) would arguably enable such research—albeit 
subject to the limitations of that section. 
c. Statutory Factors 
Turning to the statutory factors set forth in section 1201(a)(1), the Register finds 
that the first factor, concerning the availability for use of copyrighted works, slightly 
favors proponents.
2122 While proponents assert that allowing circumvention will permit 
greater “use” of the TPM-protected works at issue by virtue of the ability to circumvent, 
this would seem to prove too much, as presumably the same could be said of any 
requested exemption.  The more salient consideration is whether there will be greater 
availability of copyrighted works in general if an exemption is granted.  In this regard, 
the Register notes that opponents have not established that an exemption would have a 
negative impact on the availability of copyrighted works.  On the other hand, proponents 
persuasively establish that an exemption could increase the availability of works based on 
security research, such as scholarly articles and presentations, as well as new computer 
programs aimed at rectifying discovered flaws.
2123 Therefore, this factor weighs 
somewhat in favor of the exemption. 
Turning to the second factor, the availability for use of works for nonprofit 
archival, preservation and educational purposes,2124 the Register finds that an exemption 
for good-faith security research is likely to increase the use of works in educational 
settings. The record indicates that the current prohibition plays a negative role in 
universities’ willingness to engage in and fund security research, and may limit student 
involvement in academic research projects.2125 
With respect to the third factor, proponents have established that the exemption 
will enhance criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship and research. As 
noted with respect to the second factor, the record indicates that teaching and scholarship 
2122 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(i). 
2123 See, e.g., Bellovin et al. Supp. at 8; EFF Class 22 Supp. at 23 (citing to the scholarly papers and 
presentations that are created and published as a result of the ability to engage in good-faith security 
testing); MDRC Supp. at 11-13, 20 (stating the proposed exemption will facilitate the publication of articles 
based on findings of medical device software researchers). 
2124 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(ii). 
2125 See, e.g., Green Class 25 Supp. at 23; see also Bellovin et al. Supp. at 8 (contending that “information 
security education efforts are actively hampered [by the prohibition] on all levels of the educational 
system”); Tr. at 160:18-22 (May 26, 2015) (Bellovin) (“I cannot do grant-funded research that, with a 
contract, gives somebody else the right, precisely to preserve academic freedom and also to protect me and 
my students under the export laws.”); Tr. at 75:05-76:12 (May 26, 2015) (Blaze); MDRC Supp. at 24 
(noting that the use of medical device software for nonprofit educational purposes “is entirely unavailable 
for a device employing a TPM unless this exemption is granted”). 
310
 

[PAGE 315]
     
    
    
  
     
   
 
   
   
  
  
   
 
    
   
   
  
   
     
      
  
   
 
   
  
      
  
   
     
                  
          
                  
               
        
             
     
    
   
   
       
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
would be enhanced by the proposed exemption.2126 Additionally, the record establishes 
that research is at the core of the proposed exemption; adopting such an exemption would 
thus serve to promote research.2127 Finally, the record suggests that the exemption could 
enhance media attention to, and reporting on, software security issues.2128 Thus, this 
factor weighs strongly in favor of the exemption. 
Regarding the fourth statutory factor,2129 the Register determines that the effect of 
the exemption on the market for or value of copyrighted works would generally not be 
adverse.  Although opponents assert that granting the exemption could erode the public’s 
confidence in the safety and security of products that are found to be flawed, this is not a 
harm that the Register is comfortable crediting in this context.  Such an adverse effect is 
not truly a copyright concern; it is more fairly traceable to the existence of security 
defects in computer 
programs rather than security researchers’ access to those programs. 
Moreover, it can also be argued that knowledge of and ability to correct such flaws will in 
fact enhance the value of the software and products at issue. The Register thus finds this 
statutory factor to be neutral or, at most, to weigh marginally in favor of an exemption.  
Finally, the statute also allows the Librarian to consider “such other factors” as 
may be appropriate.
2130 This “catchall” provision has played a significant role in the 
discussion and review of all the security research classes. To begin with, the Register 
notes that regulating disclosure of vulnerabilities may implicate First Amendment 
concerns.  Proponents point to the Second Circuit’s decision in Universal City Studios, 
Inc. v. Corley, which addressed some of the relevant constitutional principles, albeit in the 
context of a case arising under an anti-trafficking provision of section 1201 that rejected a 
First Amendment challenge to an injunction prohibiting disclosure of a decryption 
program.
2131 Corley explained that content-neutral speech regulations “must serve a 
substantial governmental interest, the interest must be unrelated to the suppression of free 
expression, and the incidental restriction on speech must not burden substantially more 
speech than is necessary to further that interest.”
2132 GM, the only opponent in the 
instant proceeding to address the free speech issue, agrees that “any disclosure standard 
could raise First Amendment issues,” although it suggests that “the protection afforded by 
the First Amendment to security vulnerabilities is limited.”2133 Although the Register 
2126 See, e.g., Green Class 25 Supp. at 23; see also Bellovin et al. Supp. at 8; Tr. at 160:18-22 (May 26, 
2015) (Bellovin); Tr. at 75:05-76:12 (May 26, 2015) (Blaze); MDRC Supp. at 24.
 
2127 See, e.g., EFF Class 22 Reply at 19; Schneier Class 22 Reply (offering that many security researchers
 
refrain from conducting important security research because of fear of DMCA liability); EFF Class 22
 
Reply at 19; Green Class 22 Supp. at 1; EFF Class 22 Supp. at 23; MDRC Supp. at 24.
 
2128 Bellovin et al. Supp. at 8; Bellovin et al. Reply at 11.
 
2129 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(iv).
 
2130 Id. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(v).
 
2131 273 F.3d at 453-58.
 
2132 Id. at 454.
 
2133 GM Class 25 Post-Hearing Letter at 2.
 
311
 

[PAGE 316]
     
    
  
   
 
    
   
   
  
 
     
 
     
    
    
  
 
 
 
                   
               
           
           
          
 
       
             
    
           
      
                    
                
          
             
              
           
              
            
                 
          
             
         
    
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
does not opine on the extent to which First Amendment principles might cabin 
government efforts to adopt vulnerability disclosure standards, constitutional free speech 
principles are at least arguably relevant to any consideration of such standards here. 
Opponents correctly observe that a security research exemption implicates 
significant health and safety considerations.2134 These include automobile safety,2135 
environmental impacts,2136 issues of patient health and privacy,2137 personal security,2138 
and consumer reliance on the integrity of product design and operation.2139 Opponents 
posit scenarios of bad actors invoking the exemption to do harm to persons or property, or 
to profit from their discoveries by threatening manufacturers with public disclosure in an 
irresponsible fashion.
2140 Opponents also point to the fact that many who make and 
market consumer products, including motor vehicles and medical devices, must comply 
with a host of federal and state regulatory mandates, and that the use of TPMs has played 
a role in ensuring such compliance.2141 They further note that access to vehicle software 
could compromise safety- and emissions-based compliance regimes.2142 These concerns 
cannot be easily dismissed.  In light of the significant public policy issues that fall within 
the expertise and authority of other government agencies, and as suggested by some of 
the commenting parties, the Copyright Office advised the Department of Transportation 
(“DOT”), the Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) and FDA of the pendency of 
2134 See, e.g., AdvaMed Class 25 Opp’n at 22; Auto Alliance Class 25 Opp’n at 1 (citing Auto Alliance 
Class 22 Opp’n at 12-15) (asserting that there are “serious threats to safety and security that recognition of 
the proposed exemption would create or exacerbate”); GM Class 25 Opp’n at 18 (asserting that an 
exemption could make “it easier for both ill willed wrongdoers and unknowing hobbyists and the like to 
access a vehicle’s software and compromise safety and regulatory compliance systems validated by the 
automaker”). 
2135 See, e.g., GM Class 25 Opp’n at 21. 
2136 See, e.g., id. at 14; see also Tr. at 134:06-12 (May 26, 2015) (Lightsey, GM); GM Class 25 PostHearing Resp. at 2-3.
 
2137 See, e.g., AdvaMed Class 25 Opp’n at 5; see also LifeScience Alley Class 25 Opp’n at 4.
 
2138 See, e.g., AdvaMed Class 25 Opp’n at 2-3. 
2139 See, e.g., id.; Auto Alliance Class 25 Opp’n at 1 (citing Auto Alliance Class 22 Opp’n at 12-15); GM 
Class 25 Opp’n at 18; LifeScience Alley Class 25 Opp’n at 4-6; MDISS Opp’n at 1; Tr. at 134:06-12 (May 
26, 2015) (Lightsey, GM); Tr. at 132:20-21 (May 26, 2015) (Troncoso, BSA). 
2140 See, e.g., Tr. at 125:11-17 (May 26, 2015) (Troncoso, BSA); see also id. at 135:10-16 (Lightsey, GM) 
(expressing concerns that “the ability for automobile manufacturers to control that research and to have the 
opportunity to fix vulnerabilities before they’re widely disclosed would be severely limited and could thus 
create safety concerns”); GM Class 25 Opp’n at 6 (asserting that allowing circumvention “increases access 
to, and as noted by Proponents, publication of sensitive information relating to the operation of ECUs 
which in turn increases the risks to safety and security and other systems that an owner trusts”); BSA PostHearing Resp. at 1; GM Class 25 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2. 
2141 See, e.g., AdvaMed Class 25 Opp’n at 2; GM Class 25 Opp’n at 14; IPO Class 25 Opp’n at 1; MDISS 
Opp’n at 1; Tr. at 134:06-12 (May 26, 2015) (Lightsey, GM). 
2142 GM Class 25 Opp’n at 17-18. 
312
 

[PAGE 317]
     
    
  
  
   
 
 
     
   
 
  
  
   
  
  
   
   
 
   
     
             
             
              
             
            
         
  
               
            
               
                
              
         
            
             
              
                
             
            
     
     
     
   
  
      
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
this proceeding, so that these agencies could provide input if they wished.2143 The Office 
received letters from DOT, EPA, and FDA, all of which expressed significant 
reservations about the proposed exemptions.2144 As discussed below, however, NTIA, 
which has an express statutory role in this rulemaking,2145supported adoption of a broad 
security research exemption. 
In its letter addressing Proposed Class 22, DOT noted concerns over the nature 
and timing of the potential public disclosure of security research.2146 While DOT 
recognized that enabling publication of good-faith research offers the potential benefit of 
promoting collaboration in identifying security vulnerabilities or other problems, it 
expressed concern that there could be circumstances in which security researchers might 
not fully appreciate the potential safety ramifications of their acts of circumvention or the 
logistical limitations associated with potential remedial actions.
2147 DOT also expressed 
that its concerns could be potentially addressed by appropriate limitations on disclosures 
of security research findings or by the provision of adequate time for responsive actions 
to be formulated and executed before broader disclosures are made.
2148 
In its communication, EPA urged the Office to decline to recommend the 
proposed exemption in Proposed Class 22 for vehicle software security research, 
expressing concern that granting this exemption “would enable actions that could slow or 
reverse gains under the Clean Air Act.”
2149 In addition, EPA expressed concern that the 
2143 Letter from Jacqueline C. Charlesworth, Gen. Counsel and Assoc. Register of Copyrights, USCO, to 
Kathryn B. Thomson, Gen. Counsel, DOT, and Stephen P. Wood, Acting Chief Counsel, Nat’l Highway 
Traffic Safety Admin. (May 12, 2015); Letter from Jacqueline C. Charlesworth, Gen. Counsel and Assoc. 
Register of Copyrights, USCO, to Avi S. Garbow, Gen. Counsel, EPA (May 12, 2015); Letter from 
Jacqueline C. Charlesworth, Gen. Counsel and Assoc. Register of Copyrights, USCO, to Elizabeth H. 
Dickinson, Chief Counsel, FDA (May 12, 2015), all available at http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/USCO­
letters. 
2144 Letter from Geoff Cooper, Assistant Gen., EPA, to Jacqueline C. Charlesworth, Gen. Counsel and 
Assoc. Register of Copyrights, USCO (July 17, 2015) (“EPA Letter”); Letter from Bakul Patel, Assoc. Dir. 
for Digital Health, Ctr. for Devices and Radiological Health, FDA, to Jacqueline C. Charlesworth, Gen. 
Counsel and Assoc. Register of Copyrights, USCO (Aug. 18, 2015) (“FDA Letter”); Letter from Kathryn 
B. Thomson, Gen. Counsel, DOT, to Jacqueline C. Charlesworth, Gen. Counsel and Assoc. Register of 
Copyrights, USCO (Sept. 9, 2015) (“DOT Letter”), all available at http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/USCO­
letters. Consideration of these agency responses is appropriate because the matter of other agencies’ 
potential concerns with respect to this exemption was raised by commenting parties and has been part of 
the record since the filing of opposition comments on March 27, 2015. See, e.g., AdvaMed Class 25 Opp’n 
at 3. These concerns were also raised at the public hearings. See, e.g., Tr. at 56:05-57:16 (May 19, 2015) 
(Charlesworth, USCO; Lightsey, GM). Proponents thus had the opportunity to address the concerns both in 
their reply comments and at the public hearings, and the record reflects significant public input on these 
issues in these classes. 
2145 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 
2146 DOT Letter at 2-3. 
2147 Id. 
2148 Id. 
2149 EPA Letter at 1-2. 
313
 

[PAGE 318]
     
    
   
  
  
   
 
 
   
   
 
  
 
   
   
  
   
  
   
  
    
 
  
  
   
 
    
                     
            
             
           
                    
                     
 
     
  
                      
         
  
     
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
exemption would “hinder its ability to enforce the tampering prohibition” of the CAA.  
EPA explained that the agency “has taken enforcement action against third-party vendors 
who sell or install equipment that can ‘bypass, defeat, or render inoperative’ software 
designed to enable vehicles to comply with the [CAA] regulations.”2150 EPA therefore 
concluded that it “can curb this practice more effectively if circumventing TPMs remains 
prohibited under the DMCA.”2151 
FDA expressed concerns about the proposed exemptions in Class 27A, for 
medical device software security research, and in Class 25, for general software security 
research.
2152 FDA emphasized that, even if these exemptions are granted, FDA would 
retain regulatory jurisdiction over medical devices and the entities that manufacture those 
devices.  At the same time, it noted that granting an exemption could “potentially create 
regulatory confusion for FDA, medical device manufacturers, and third party software 
developers that choose to modify medical devices.”
2153 (Some of the concerns raised by 
FDA were more directly relevant to Proposed Class 27B, which is aimed at permitting 
patient access to information generated by the patient’s device, and are further addressed 
below in that context.) 
With respect to both Proposed Classes 25 and 27A, FDA expressed strong 
concern that the exemption, as proposed, “does not seem to make a distinction between 
bench top testing of device security and testing of a device in clinical use (i.e., an implant 
in an actual patient, a device in a hospital, etc.).”
2154 It emphasized that “[t]hese latter 
situations carry greater risk to patients and public health and may present challenges to 
FDA with respect to devices that have been manipulated.”2155 It thus “recommend[e]d 
that any final rule make a distinction between bench top testing of devices . . . and testing 
of devices during clinical use.”2156 
Moreover, FDA noted as a general matter that it had issued regulatory guidance in 
the area of security testing in which it recommended that “manufacturers consider 
cybersecurity risks as part of the design and development of a medical device, and submit 
2150 Id. at 3. 
2151 Id. The Register further notes that to the extent EPA or another federal or state agency itself seeks to 
investigate—or appoint agents to investigate —alleged violations of the law, that agency should be able to 
rely on the permanent exception set forth in section 1201(e) for law enforcement activities, which allows 
“lawfully authorized investigative, protective, information security, or intelligence activity of an officer, 
agent or employee of the United States, a State, or a political subdivision of a State, or a person acting 
pursuant to a contract with the United States, a State, or a political subdivision of a State.” 17 U.S.C. § 
1201(e). 
2152 FDA Letter at 1. 
2153 Id. 
2154 Bench top testing refers to testing “where the unit tested is not in clinical use and will not be in clinical
 
use in the future.” Id. at 4.
 
2155 Id.
 
2156 Id. at 4, 5. 
314
 

[PAGE 319]
     
    
     
    
   
  
     
 
   
 
  
 
   
     
     
  
  
 
  
   
  
 
       
    
   
   
  
  
  
   
  
    
  
     
   
   
   
   
   
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
documentation to the FDA about the risks identified and controls in place to mitigate 
those risks.”2157 While acknowledging that “there could be risks and benefits of enabling 
‘good-faith’ research for the purpose of identifying, disclosing, and fixing malfunctions, 
security flaws, or vulnerabilities,” FDA explained that “a risk to opening technology in 
this way is the difficulty for regulators and others to distinguish ‘good-faith’ research 
efforts from malevolent third-party actors.” In addition, FDA expressed worry that “this 
exemption may cause confusion for stakeholders that have been advised through FDA 
guidance to put appropriate cybersecurity controls in place to prevent third parties from 
manipulating the software of the device.”
2158 
On this record, the Register is persuaded that, under the fifth statutory factor 
allowing for consideration of additional matters as appropriate, the significant issues 
raised by opponents concerning public safety and regulatory compliance, as amplified by 
regulatory agencies with a direct interest in these matters, are unfavorable to the proposed 
exemption.  Despite the fact that the other statutory factors largely favor proponents, the 
Register must take seriously these additional substantial concerns. 
4. NTIA Comments 
Like the Register, NTIA concludes that “good faith security researchers and 
academics are currently being deterred from engaging in noninfringing activities due to 
the threat of litigation under section 1201,”
2159 and that the permanent exemptions in 
sections 1201(f), 1201(g), and 1201(j) are “not sufficient to obviate the need for a broad 
good faith security exemption.”2160 NTIA accordingly supports a broad security research 
exemption in Class 25 for all “computer programs . . . regardless of the device on which 
they are run.” 
2161 NTIA explains that this exemption would also “serve to exempt the 
security research activities contemplated in Classes 22 and 27 (directed at vehicles and 
networked medical devices, respectively).”
2162 NTIA also recommends that the 
exemption state explicitly that it “does not obviate the need to comply with other 
applicable laws and regulations,”2163 in recognition of the fact that “an exemption would 
not preclude liability under laws such as the CFAA.”2164 And, as discussed above in 
Class 21, NTIA acknowledges that, in light of the safety and security concerns that might 
be implicated by the exemption, the Register might find it appropriate to “delay the date 
upon which . . . an exemption would become effective to allow the relevant stakeholders 
2157 Id. at 4. 
2158 Id. 
2159 NTIA Letter at 72.
 
2160 Id. at 76.
 
2161 Id. at 89.
 
2162 Id. at 88.
 
2163 Id. at 89.
 
2164 Id. at 72.
 
315
 

[PAGE 320]
     
    
   
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
    
  
 
  
   
 
 
  
     
      
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
   
   
  
  
    
  
          
             
               
     
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
in other policy spheres to prepare for the exemption’s effective date.”2165 NTIA stresses, 
however, that any such delay should be “as short as practicable.”2166 
As explained below, the Register agrees with NTIA that the Librarian should 
grant the exemptions for good-faith security research in Proposed Classes 25, 22 and 
27A, although with certain limitations based on the rulemaking record.  The Register also 
recommends that other interested agencies be afforded a window of time to prepare for 
the new rule. 
5. Conclusion and Recommendation 
The policy concerns reflected in the three security research proposals represented 
by Proposed Classes 25, 22, and 27A, and in the forceful responses thereto, are 
substantial ones that are more properly debated in the halls of Congress—or at least the 
halls of other federal agencies.  Especially in light of near-daily reports of major security 
breaches in both government and private-sector computer systems, the importance of 
good-faith security research to identify and address software flaws and malfunctions 
probably cannot be overstated.  At the same time, it is apparent that there is much to be 
weighed in determining the best path forward.  
The rules that should govern such research hardly seem the province of copyright, 
since the considerations of how safely to encourage such investigation are fairly far afield 
from copyright’s core purpose of promoting the creation and dissemination of creative 
works.  Rather, the rules that should govern are best considered by those responsible for 
our national security and for regulating the consumer products and services at issue. That 
said, it is inescapable that the anticircumvention prohibition in section 1201(a)(1) plays a 
role in the debate.  Indeed, Congress recognized as much in enacting section 1201 when 
it included a standing exemption for security testing in section 1201(j).  But while 
Congress clearly foresaw the need to facilitate good-faith security research, it is less clear 
that the exemption has been as effective as it needs to be.  Proponents of the securityrelated exemptions have put forth a convincing case in this proceeding that section 
1201(j) does not provide enough certainty to ensure that certain types of legitimate 
research are able to move forward.
2167 
Significantly, the views within the Administration itself appear to be sharply 
divided on the issues surrounding security research and the wisdom of granting an 
exemption for this purpose, with NTIA favoring a broad exemption, EPA opposing an 
exemption, and DOT and FDA expressing notable reservations.  Given the disagreement 
2165 Id. at 5. 
2166 Id. 
2167 The Register’ s Perspective on Copyright Review: Hearing Before the H. Comm. on the Judiciary, 
114th Cong. 28-30 (2015) (statement of Maria A. Pallante, Register of Copyrights and Dir., USCO) (The 
Register observed the limited nature of the security testing exemption in section 1201(j) and supported 
congressional review of the problem.). 
316
 

[PAGE 321]
     
    
 
 
 
  
    
   
  
 
  
  
   
    
      
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
              
             
              
        
           
             
                
               
              
          
          
          
              
                  
 
 
                                                 
 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
among these other agencies, the Register recommends that the Librarian exercise a 
degree of caution in adopting an exemption. 
After consideration of the entire record, and as described in more detail below, the 
Register concludes that the Librarian would be best advised to adopt an exemption that, 
while building upon Congress’s intent in section 1201(j), will also serve to mitigate 
certain statutory constraints on the conduct of good-faith security research. This 
exemption should encompass the types of software that were the focus of the record in 
this proceeding, namely computer programs contained in devices and machines primarily 
designed for use by individual consumers, motorized land vehicles, implanted medical 
devices and their corresponding home monitoring systems, and voting machines.  The 
record does not support the open-ended exemption urged by Class 25 proponents, 
encompassing all computer programs on all systems and devices, including highly 
sensitive systems such as nuclear power plants and air traffic control systems. As 
Congress made clear in enacting section 1201, the “‘particular class of copyrighted 
works’ [is intended to] be a narrow and focused subset of the broad categories of works 
. . . identified in section 102 of the Copyright Act.”
2168 Accordingly, as in past 
rulemakings, the Register must craft an exemption based on the evidentiary showing of 
adverse effects.
2169 Here, as discussed above, proponents’ arguments in Class 25 focused 
largely on consumer-oriented software and products.  No showing was made to justify 
access to other types of software or systems or explain how such an exemption would 
work.  Accordingly, the exemption is limited in that respect.
2170 
The recommended exemption accounts for several other concerns as well.  First, 
the exemption must allow some room for other interested agencies to weigh in on this 
national debate.  Opponents and other federal agencies have raised serious public health 
and safety concerns regarding the acts of circumvention being proposed.  Even as limited 
by the Register, the recommended exemption is broad enough to cover any number of 
highly regulated products.  Accordingly, to give other parts of the government an 
opportunity to respond, as a general matter the exemption should not go into effect until 
twelve months after the effective date of the new regulation.
2171 The Register concludes 
2168 H.R. REP. NO. 105-551, pt. 2, at 38 (1998) (emphasis added). 
2169 See, e.g., 2010 Recommendation at 16 (explaining that “[t]he records in [the 2010] and prior 
rulemaking proceedings have demonstrated that in many cases, [an initial] subset of a category of works 
should be further tailored in accordance with the evidence in the record”). 
2170 Proponents raised the possibility that certain software may be used both on consumer devices and on 
industrial ones. See Tr. at 114:11-115:05 (May 26, 2015) (Stallman, CDT; Damle, USCO) (“[M]any of 
those systems that we think of as critical infrastructure oftentimes depend on the same type of security 
that's running applications and services that we think of as noncritical infrastructure.”). In that 
circumstance, security research into such software would be permitted where it is conducted on a consumer 
device, but not when it is conducted on an industrial one. 
2171 The Register understands the Librarian to have the discretion to phase in an exemption as required to 
address concerns in the record. Section 1201 allows the Librarian to deny exemptions outright, including 
based on the assessment of “such other factors as [he] considers appropriate” under the fifth statutory factor 
of section 1201(a)(1). See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1). Thus, the Librarian has the discretion to deny the 
317
 

[PAGE 322]
     
    
 
     
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
   
  
 
  
   
   
  
   
  
   
   
 
  
   
 
    
 
      
 
          
             
                
               
          
               
    
      
          
     
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
however, that such a delay is not warranted with respect to voting machines, as there is 
no record of public safety concerns with respect to these devices. Accordingly, especially 
in light of the upcoming presidential election, in the case of voting machines, the Register 
recommends immediate implementation. 
Second, in light of the concerns raised by opponents, as well as DOT, EPA, and 
FDA, about the potential for any exemption to undermine other legal or regulatory 
mandates, any actions taken under the exemption will need to be compliant with all 
applicable laws and regulations.  Accordingly, the Register recommends, consistent with 
the congressionally enacted exemption in section 1201(j), that the exemption require 
explicitly that the covered security research be lawful, including with respect to the 
CFAA. 
Third, the Register takes seriously the concern expressed by other agencies that 
acts of security testing not put members of the public at risk.  On this record, there 
appeared to be some consensus as to common-sense limitations on the exemption to 
avoid that risk.  In the context of a general security research exemption, there appeared to 
be universal agreement among proponents that testing in “live” conditions—such as cars 
being driven on public roads—is wholly inappropriate.
2172 The Register thus 
recommends that the exemption provide that security research must be conducted in a 
controlled setting designed to avoid harm to individuals or the public.  FDA also 
expressed specific concern about security testing of medical devices that are being used, 
or could be used, by patients, and recommended generally excluding such testing from 
the exemption.2173 The Register agrees, and consequently recommends that the 
exemption for medical devices be specifically limited to devices that are not and will not 
be used by or for patients.  
Fourth, as discussed above, a significant point of contention involves the proper 
disclosure of security research findings.  It is apparent that the interests of the 
manufacturer and the public may both be affected by the nature and timing of disclosure 
of software flaws.2174 Indeed, Congress included disclosure to the developer as one of 
the factors to be considered in determining a person’s eligibility for the security testing 
exemption in section 1201(j).
2175 The Register similarly favors responsible disclosure of 
security flaws.  But the Register also appreciates that appropriate disclosure standards are 
proposed exemption at issue here, based on the substantial safety and environmental concerns presented in 
the record, with the understanding that it could be reconsidered in the next triennial proceeding. The 
Register, however, does not find outright denial to be necessary in this case. The Register understands the 
power to deny an exemption to carry with it the ability to designate a period of time before it becomes 
effective in lieu of denying the exemption entirely in order to address legitimate concerns in the record. 
2172 See, e.g., Tr. at 150:16-20 (May 26, 2015) (Blaze); id. at 139:03-08, 141:15-20, 23-25 (Green); id. at 
144:02-06 (Reid on behalf of Green). 
2173 FDA Letter at 5. 
2174 See, e.g., GM Class 25 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2. 
2175 17 U.S.C. § 1201(j)(3). 
318
 

[PAGE 323]
     
    
 
 
 
   
 
   
  
  
 
 
   
  
    
 
 
  
 
 
  
   
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
	 
	 
	 
	 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
a divisive topic among security researchers and for the affected industries.  Furthermore, 
the Register acknowledges that definitive disclosure requirements might implicate First 
Amendment concerns.  In this arena, copyright law does not provide an answer; rather, 
other legal regimes, regulatory authority and industry norms should come to bear.  
Accordingly, rather than attempt to break new ground regarding disclosure requirements, 
the Register recommends that the exemption simply reflect what the Register understands 
to be the basic intent of section 1201(j), by specifying that the research activities and 
information derived therefrom primarily promote the security of the types of devices 
containing the computer programs on which the research is conducted, or those who use 
those devices.  Bad-faith activities, including irresponsible disclosure, would thus cause 
the research to fall outside of the exemption. 
Finally, the Register notes that in the interest of adhering to Congress’s basic 
purpose in section 1201(j), where appropriate, the recommended exemption tracks 
Congress’s language rather than the alternative formulations suggested by proponents. 
Accordingly, the Register recommends that the Librarian designate the following 
class: 
(i)	 Computer programs, where the circumvention is undertaken on a 
lawfully acquired device or machine on which the computer 
program operates solely for the purpose of good-faith security 
research and does not violate any applicable law, including 
without limitation the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986, as 
amended and codified in title 18, United States Code; and 
provided, however, that, except as to voting machines, such 
circumvention is initiated no earlier than 12 months after the 
effective date of this regulation, and the device or machine is one 
of the following: 
(A)	 A device or machine primarily designed for use by 
individual consumers (including voting machines); 
(B)	 A motorized land vehicle; or 
(C)	 A medical device designed for whole or partial 
implantation in patients or a corresponding personal 
monitoring system, that is not and will not be used by 
patients or for patient care. 
(ii) For purposes of this exemption, “good-faith security research” 
means accessing a computer program solely for purposes of goodfaith testing, investigation and/or correction of a security flaw or 
vulnerability, where such activity is carried out in a controlled 
environment designed to avoid any harm to individuals or the 
public, and where the information derived from the activity is 
used primarily to promote the security or safety of the class of 
319
 

[PAGE 324]
     
    
    
 
  
  
 
 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
devices or machines on which the computer program operates, or 
those who use such devices or machines, and is not used or 
maintained in a manner that facilitates copyright infringement. 
320
 

[PAGE 325]
     
    
      
 
  
 
  
   
   
  
    
  
  
     
   
  
  
   
 
   
 
   
    
   
  
 
     
   
  
   
           
              
              
                  
              
           
               
           
          
             
  
 
 
                                                 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
K. Proposed Class 23: Abandoned Software – Video Games Requiring Server 
Communication 
1. Proposal 
Many modern video games—which may be played on a personal computer 
(“PC”) or a dedicated gaming console—require a network connection to a remote server 
operated by the game’s developer to enable core functionalities, such as gameplay.  First, 
before some games can be played at all, including in single-player mode, the game must 
connect to an “authentication server” to verify that the game is a legitimate copy.  This 
connection or “check” may be made once, at initial installation, or periodically 
throughout gameplay.  Second, some games require a connection to a “matchmaking 
server” to enable users to play the game with other people over the internet in multiplayer 
mode.  A matchmaking server connects computers at remote locations together to play a 
game at the same time, and may also allow access to “downloadable content, 
leaderboards, badges, chat, and other social features.”
2176 In the case of a game that relies 
on an authentication server, the game may be rendered entirely unplayable if the server 
connection is lost.  In the case of a matchmaking server, only multiplayer play over the 
internet would be disabled; in most cases, the game would still be playable in singleplayer mode, or with multiple players through a local area network connection. 
Proposed Class 23 would allow circumvention of access controls on video games 
that require communication with a server to allow for continued gameplay or multiplayer 
play over the internet after the game’s developer (or publisher or authorized service 
provider) has ceased supporting server communications for the game.2177 The Electronic 
Frontier Foundation (“EFF”) and Kendra Albert, a student at Harvard Law School, jointly 
filed a petition seeking an exemption to enable those who have lawfully acquired copies 
of video games to gain access to games when authentication or matchmaking servers 
have been permanently taken offline.2178 The NPRM described the class as follows: 
Proposed Class 23: This proposed class would allow circumvention of 
TPMs on lawfully acquired video games consisting of communication 
with a developer-operated server for the purpose of either authentication 
or to enable multiplayer matchmaking, where developer support for those 
2176 The Entertainment Software Association (“ESA”) Class 23 Opp’n at 8.
 
2177 See generally the Electronic Frontier Foundation & Kendra Albert (“EFF/Albert”) Class 23 Supp. at 2­
5. Opponents object to referring to this class as “abandoned” software, noting that the copyright owners 
have not “abandoned” their rights in the software. ESA Class 23 Opp’n at 5. To clarify, the Register’s use 
of “abandonment” in this context refers only to withdrawal of support for servers that are necessary for 
certain aspects of gameplay, not any rights related to the video game. 
2178 EFF/Albert’s proposed regulatory language reads as follows: “Literary works in the form of computer 
programs, where circumvention is undertaken for the purpose of restoring access to single-player or 
multiplayer video gaming on consoles, personal computers or personal handheld gaming devices when the 
developer and its agents have ceased to support such gaming.” EF F/Albert Pet. at 1; see also EFF/Albert 
Supp. at 1. 
321
 

[PAGE 326]
     
    
 
  
 
  
   
  
    
  
 
  
    
   
   
   
     
  
    
      
       
                 
                
                 
              
              
               
             
                  
             
                 
     
                   
      
         
      
       
            
       
          
               
              
              
 
 
                                                 
 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
server communications has ended.  This exception would not apply to 
video games whose audiovisual content is primarily stored on the 
developer’s server, such as massive multiplayer online role-playing 
2179games. 
In addition to EFF/Albert, comments supporting the proposed exemption were filed by 
Free Software Foundation (“FSF”), eBay, Inc. (“eBay”), the Preservation and 
Reformatting Section of the Association for Library Collections and Technical Services 
(“PARS”), Catherine Gellis and the Digital Age Defense project (“Gellis/Digital Age 
Defense”),
2180 and over 1230 individuals.2181 
The EFF/Albert proposal focused in particular on two specific users and uses:  (1) 
people who wish to continue to play physical or downloaded copies of video games they 
have lawfully acquired (referred to herein as “gamers”); and (2) libraries, archives and 
museums that seek to preserve individual video games and make them available for 
research and study (referred to as “preservationists”).2182 In terms of making video 
games available for research and study, proponents seem mainly to contemplate playable 
games in an archival or exhibition setting, rather than distribution to or off-site access by 
members of the public.2183 The proposal describes the scope of the exemption as 
extending to video games that “run on personal computers, game consoles, or handheld 
gaming devices.”2184 Even though the proposal references only the video games 
2179 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,869. 
2180 Gellis/Digital Age Defense Class 23 Supp. 
2181 EFF/Albert Supp.; FSF Class 23 Supp.; eBay Class 23 Reply; PARS Reply; Digital Right to Repair 
Class 23 Supp. (1145 individuals); Digital Right to Repair Class 23 Reply (74 individuals); Mike Battilana 
Class 23 Supp.; Christian Clark Class 23 Reply; Juan Pablo Zapata Díaz Class 23 Reply; Fatih Gencer 
Class 23 Reply; Robert Heltzel Reply; Michael Horton Class 23 Reply; Philip John Reply; David 
Labovitch Reply; James O’Neill Reply; Alex Santa Maria Reply; Anthony Valunas Reply. 
2182 EFF/Albert Pet. at 2; see also EFF/Albert Supp. at 8; Tr. at 197:25-198:06 (May 20, 2015) (Stoltz, EFF) 
(asserting that “the goal of preservation is to preserve every aspect of the original experience of playing a 
game, to provide really the maximum amount of data and experiential data for the future, whether that is a 
museum exhibit for academics or whatever use coming down the road”). PARS also seeks to include 
educational institutions in the exemption, but does not provide any basis for including them. See PARS 
Reply at 2. 
2183 See, e.g., EFF/Albert Supp. at 8 & n.52 (citing Paola Antonelli, Video Games: 12 in the Collection, for 
Starters, MOMA INSIDE/OUT (Nov. 29, 2012) http://www.moma.org/explore/inside_out/2012/11/29/ 
video-games-14-in-the-collection-for-starters (“Antonelli”)); id. at 8 & n.53 (citing Video and Other 
Electronic Game Collections, THE STRONG: NATIONAL MUSEUM OF PLAY, http://www.museumofplay 
.org/collections/video-and-other-electronic-game-collections (last visited Oct. 7, 2015) (“Video and Other 
Electronic Game Collections”)); id. at 8 & n.54 (citing About Us, THE MUSEUM OF ART AND DIGITAL 
ENTERTAINMENT: OAKLAND’S VIDEOGAME MUSEUM, http://themade.org/what-are-we (last visited Oct. 7, 
2015) (“MUSEUM OF ART AND DIGITAL ENTERTAINMENT: ABOUT US”)); PARS Reply at 2. 
2184 EFF/Albert Pet. at 2; see also EFF/Albert Supp. at 2. While proponents provide specific evidence 
related to console-based and PC video games, they provide little to no evidence on handheld games. See 
EFF/Albert Supp. at 6 (arguing that “[c]onsole games are often hit the hardest by server shutdowns,” but 
322
 

[PAGE 327]
     
    
 
    
 
  
   
   
  
 
   
   
   
      
   
  
   
 
  
   
   
             
 
     
    
    
              
                 
   
        
  
           
            
               
    
               
             
             
   
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
themselves, as the record developed, it became clear that the exemption might to some 
extent also implicate jailbreaking of video game consoles, a matter which is further 
discussed below.  
EFF/Albert limit the proposed exemption to “lawfully acquired” video games,2185 
alternately described as games that users “lawfully own”2186 or have “purchased.”2187 
From proponents’ descriptions of the activities they wish to undertake, it appears that 
proponents are referring to users who lawfully possess a physical or downloaded copy of 
a game, and not merely the right to access or play a game through a subscription or by 
other means.
2188 
EFF/Albert further qualify the requested exemption in two significant ways.  
First, they exclude from the request video games that feature “persistent worlds,” or 
games where a user accesses “a hosted world that remains static and intact when players 
have signed off.”2189 For example, the proposed exemption would exclude massively 
multiplayer online roleplaying games such as World of Warcraft or EVE Online.2190 
EFF/Albert explain that these “[p]ersistent worlds require ‘robust servers designed to host 
hundreds, if not thousands of simultaneous players,’ and cannot generally be re-created 
after a shutdown without the cooperation of the game’s developer.”2191 
Second, EFF/Albert propose that for purposes of the proposed exemption, the 
condition that developer support for an authentication or matchmaking server has ended 
can be met in one of two ways:  either the developer affirmatively announces that the 
game is no longer supported, or the gameplay or multiplayer server is not accessible by 
players for at least six months.2192 
also that “much of the activity surrounding restoration of play for abandoned games has occurred for PC
 
games”).
 
2185 EFF/Albert Supp. at 1.
 
2186 Id. at 8.
 
2187 Id. at 2.
 
2188 See, e.g., EFF/Albert Reply at 4 (stating that the exemption is limited to “[l]awful [p]ossessors” of
 
games); EFF/Albert Supp. at App. (Statement of Alex Handy and Statement of John Doe); eBay Class 23
 
Reply at 2.
 
2189 EFF/Albert Supp. at 2, App. (Statement of Alex Handy). 
2190 Id. 
2191 Id. Acknowledging opponents’ concern that some persistent world games store copyrighted content 
locally, EFF/Albert ultimately proposed that “persistent world games” be defined as those that “can[not] be 
restored after server shutdown without making new, permanent copies of any original audiovisual content.” 
EFF/Albert Reply at 4. 
2192 EFF/Albert Supp. at 3. In cases where such games are subsequently re -released, EFF/Albert contend 
that the publisher or new rightsholder is likely to restore functionality through the application of new or 
updated access controls, and concede that the exemption would not allow circumvention of these access 
controls. Id. 
323
 

[PAGE 328]
     
    
    
   
   
    
 
     
   
  
  
  
    
  
 
    
 
 
       
   
  
   
          
        
        
              
             
              
               
              
                   
        
             
      
          
        
           
     
                    
               
 
 
                                                 
 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
a. Background 
According to proponents, requiring that a video game communicate with a thirdparty server before enabling play, as well as the specific server protocols or cryptographic 
verification used in that process, can constitute TPMs subject to section 1201’s 
prohibition on circumvention.2193 Proponents describe several methods of circumventing 
these TPMs.  For authentication servers, they explain that video game software can be 
modified to remove the requirement that the game check in with the authentication server 
as a condition for gameplay.2194 Alternatively, the authentication server can be emulated 
by reverse engineering the communications that the game expects to receive from the 
2195server. 
For matchmaking servers, proponents assert that circumvention generally 
involves establishing a replacement matchmaking server and coordinating with users who 
wish to continue multiplayer play so that they can modify copies of the game software to 
allow them to connect to the replacement server.
2196 Enabling multiplayer play once the 
game developer has terminated server support may also require replicating or creating 
new protocols to communicate with the game, and distributing the new protocols 
(including a new IP address) to gamers at different locations.
2197 EFF/Albert concede 
that modification of game software for such purposes may result in the creation of “a 
derivative work, in the form of a new version of the game that will play without a server 
authentication check or one that connects to new matchmaking servers.”
2198 
As explained below, opponents argue that proponents understate the nature of the 
TPMs at issue because enabling continued play for many games would “require 
circumvention of a much broader array of video game and device-based access controls” 
that could include “jailbreaking” of video game consoles.
2199 EFF/Albert respond, 
2193 Id. at 4 (specifically referencing SSL certificates and age-checking). 
2194 Id. at 1-2; Battilana Supp. at 3. 
2195 Battilana Supp. at 3; EFF/Albert Pet. at 4. 
2196 EFF/Albert Supp. at 4-5. As described by EFF, circumvention to engage in multiplayer play “involves 
watching network packets as they travel over the network, essentially testing a simulated server 
communication with one copy of the game and to see to what signals the game responds to and then writing 
and as an original work a server that can generate those communications. And those communications at the 
simplest are going to be ‘you are allowed to run’ and at the more complex level, they are ‘Kendra and 
Cathy are online right now and would like to play, here are the messages that will initiate your playing 
against each other.’” Tr. at 200:16-201:02 (May 20, 2015) (Stoltz, EFF). 
2197 See EFF/Albert Supp. at 4-6; Mr.Game20, Toorcon: San Diego (2014) – Cyber Necromancy: Reverse 
Engineering Dead Protocols, YOUTUBE (Oct. 30, 2014), https://www.youtube.com/watch?v= 
K4dyyLpMkQk (cited in EFF/Albert Supp. at 4 n.18); Tr. at 201:17-202:06 (May 20, 2015) (Albert) 
(describing various circumvention methods to continue multiplayer gaming, including changing a game’s 
IP address so that gamers can connect to a new server). 
2198 EFF/Albert Supp. at 6. 
2199 ESA Class 23 Opp’n at 8; see also id. at 3 (“[T]here is no such thing as specific access controls that 
check ‘authentication servers’ and ‘matchmaking servers’ for video games . . . . Many of these access 
324
 

[PAGE 329]
     
    
    
    
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
    
     
 
 
 
  
    
  
     
  
   
             
            
             
    
     
    
           
            
            
         
             
               
                
                    
             
                  
               
  
               
              
               
   
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
however, that these broader access controls are specific to “modern consoles,” and do not 
apply to PC-based games or older consoles.2200 According to EFF/Albert, on older 
consoles, the TPMs for authentication and matchmaking operate separately from other 
TPMs that control gameplay, meaning that the modifications that would be required to 
restore the game to functionality under the proposed exemption “[would] not permit the 
playing of unauthorized copies of games.”2201 For newer consoles, EFF/Albert 
acknowledge that jailbreaking the console could be required to continue playing certain 
games, depending upon how a particular game is coded.2202 
At the hearing, proponents indicated that the exemption they are seeking does not 
need to include jailbreaking of consoles by gamers.2203 For preservation uses, however, 
EFF asserts that console jailbreaking should be part of the exemption.2204 While it is not 
entirely clear why proponents draw a distinction between the needs of gamers and 
preservationists in this regard, as discussed below, the distinction is significant in 
evaluating the proposed exemption. 
b. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
The Register notes that at the public hearing for this class, several witnesses 
delivered impassioned and moving explanations of the cultural, historical and educational 
significance of video games.
2205 These witnesses testified in particular to the personal 
and social loss when such games are taken off the market and are no longer available for 
play.  EFF/Albert urge that the continued ability to play games that are no longer 
supported, as well as preservation and exhibition of those games, constitute noninfringing 
controls serve a protective function that is far broader than ‘authentication’ or ‘matchmaking.’”). 
“Jailbreaking” describes the process by which a console owner circumvents the TPMs on a video game 
console in order to install a different operating system or run software and games that are not vendorapproved. See 2012 Recommendation at 26. 
2200 EFF/Albert Reply at 5-6. 
2201 Id. at 5. 
2202 Tr. at 173:22-174:03 (May 20, 2015) (Damle, USCO; Albert) (identifying a game on a newer console 
that would require jailbreaking the console for continued play); id. at 202:25-203:08 (Albert) (asserting that 
older consoles do not require jailbreaking for continued play, but noting that newer generation consoles 
may require jailbreaking, “depend[ing] on how the game is coded”). 
2203 Id. at 203:11-204:03 (Damle, USCO; Charlesworth, USCO; Albert) (“MR. DAMLE: If hypothetically 
we were to say you could make changes to the game, you could set up your own server but you can’t touch 
the console, would that basically solve your concerns? You can’t jailbreak a console. MS. ALBERT: Yes, 
jailbreaking a console is a different case. MS. CHARLESWORTH: So just to be clear, you thin k there is a 
solution that would solve your problem that would not require us to allow jailbreaking of consoles. MS. 
ALBERT: Yes . . . . I think that there are many games in which you can change the multiplayer or change 
the authentication without jailbreaking the console . . . . [J]ailbreaking the console is a separate 1201 
issue.”). 
2204 Id. at 254:25-255:03 (Stoltz, EFF) (“I want to emphasize that we are asking for an exemption that 
would cover the preservation of games on consoles that would . . . require in some sense jailbreaking.”). 
2205 See, e.g., id. at 164:10-165:21 (Diamante, Museum of Art and Digital Entertainment); id. at 175:08­
176:08 (Albert); id. at 180:25-184:04 (Gholami, Azentium). 
325
 

[PAGE 330]
     
    
  
     
 
  
 
    
   
 
 
   
   
    
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
     
 
 
    
 
                  
               
              
              
              
     
     
      
     
  
  
  
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
fair uses under section 107, and that each of the four fair use factors supports this 
view.2206 Proponents assert no basis other than fair use to establish that the activities in 
question are noninfringing. 
On the first fair use factor, EFF/Albert contend that the purpose and character of 
the use weighs in favor of a finding of fair use because enabling lawful copies of the 
game to interoperate with new servers is “a favored purpose under copyright law” and 
because “modifying a lawful, personal copy is noncommercial.”2207 In their analysis, 
EFF/Albert rely upon two Ninth Circuit cases, Sega Enterprises Ltd. v. Accolade, Inc.2208 
and Sony Computer Entertainment, Inc. v. Connectix Corporation,2209 noting that both 
cases held that reverse engineering of video games for the purpose of determining the 
requirements for interoperability is a noninfringing fair use.2210 
Second, EFF/Albert argue that the nature of the copyrighted work also weighs in 
favor of fair use because “[m]odifying a game to re-enable its functionality using a new 
server, or by disabling a server requirement, involves changing only functional aspects of 
the software, not expressive elements such as graphics or audio.”
2211 Moreover, 
EFF/Albert assert that “[p]urely functional software code intended to inhibit 
interoperability carries only a thin copyright interest, which is overcome by the need to 
modify it to achieve interoperability.”
2212 
Third, regarding the amount and substantiality of the work used, EFF/Albert 
concede that the amount of video game code that is used “may vary;” nonetheless, they 
assert that any copying and modification required to restore functionality is “the 
minimum needed in order to allow the game to be playable” and “a very small portion of 
the overall software.”2213 They therefore maintain that this factor supports a finding of 
fair use. 
Fourth, EFF/Albert assert that the fourth factor, the effect on the market for or 
value of the copyrighted work, also weighs in favor of fair use because “[c]ircumventing 
server authentication or running new multiplayer servers does not harm the market for an 
abandoned game and may in fact increase its value to forward-looking consumers who 
2206 EFF/Albert Supp. at 6-8. The factors to be considered in a fair use analysis include: “(1) the purpose 
and character of the use, including whether such use is of a commercial nature or is for nonprofit 
educational purposes; (2) the nature of the copyrighted work; (3) the amount and substantiality of the 
portion used in relation to the copyrighted work as a whole; and (4) the effect of the use upon the potential 
market for or value of the copyrighted work.” See 17 U.S.C. § 107. 
2207 EFF/Albert Supp. at 7. 
2208 977 F.2d 1510 (9th Cir. 1992). 
2209 203 F.3d 596 (9th Cir. 2000). 
2210 EFF/Albert Supp. at 7. 
2211 Id. 
2212 Id. 
2213 Id. 
326
 

[PAGE 331]
     
    
    
   
  
 
  
   
   
 
   
 
   
 
  
    
 
   
  
   
  
   
    
 
  
    
     
             
     
 
      
   
    
     
  
               
               
          
                
            
 
 
                                                 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
value the long-term playability of a game.”2214 Further, they acknowledge that while 
some modern games require jailbreaking of consoles in order to connect to a remote 
server, games played on older consoles do not, and that consequently allowing 
circumvention for these games on older consoles would not trigger opponents’ concerns 
over jailbreaking.
2215 
c. Asserted Adverse Effects 
EFF/Albert claim that both gamers and preservationists are adversely affected by 
the prohibition on the circumvention of TPMs restricting use of video games for which 
developers have ended server support.  EFF/Albert urge that video games are a “vital part 
of American cultural heritage and creativity”2216 and that when authentication or 
matchmaking servers are shut down, the effects are severe both for gaming communities, 
who lose access to works that may hold significant meaning for them, as well as 
preservationists, who are thwarted in their efforts to preserve video games and make them 
available for study.
2217 
EFF/Albert explain that gamers’ interest in an exemption is “to be able to 
continue to play games they have lawfully purchased.”2218 They also claim that “absent 
circumvention to restore access, server shutdowns degrade or destroy the value of a 
consumer’s investment in a game.”2219 
With respect to preservationists, EFF/Albert assert that section 1201(a)(1) deters 
efforts at archiving and preserving video games, which in turn impedes research efforts 
into the medium.  In their view, “[v]ideo games are cultural artifacts worthy of study.”2220 
They explain that “[s]tudying older games creates a critical discourse and literature, 
[which are] key to understanding the current medium.”
2221 
EFF/Albert provide statements of video game preservationists and scholars 
highlighting the need to preserve video games for future research and study.2222 In 
2214 Id. at 7-8.
 
2215 Tr. at 173:22-24 (May 20, 2015) (Albert).
 
2216 EFF/Albert Supp. at 8 (citing Joseph Bernstein, Meet the Men Trying To Immortalize Video Games,
 
BUZZFEED NEWS (Oct. 27, 2014), http://www.buzzfeed.com/josephbernstein/meet-the-men-trying-to­
immortalize-video-games#.akGjX0xAj).
 
2217 See Tr. at 175:08-176:04 (May 20, 2015) (Albert).
 
2218 EFF/Albert Supp. at 10.
 
2219 EFF/Albert Reply. at 12.
 
2220 EFF/Albert Supp. at 9.
 
2221 Id. 
2222 Id. at App. (Statement of Jason Scott, Internet Archive) (“The Internet Archive is interested in 
continuing to digitize and make available games to the public. However, as we come up to more current 
operating systems, and more modern examples, authentication servers start becoming part of the picture 
. . . . In order to continue to preserve and archive these games as they start to rely on authentication servers, 
we will need to deactivate the server authentication mechanism.”); id. at App. (Statement of T.L. Taylor, 
327
 

[PAGE 332]
     
    
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
   
    
 
    
    
  
  
     
  
   
              
         
        
      
           
            
         
          
      
     
       
   
              
             
              
      
             
     
     
               
            
              
      
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
particular, EFF/Albert cite a report of the Preserving Virtual Worlds project, sponsored in 
part by the Library of Congress, which states that “the Digital Millennium Copyright 
Act’s prohibition on defeating technological protection measures makes it impossible for 
a library to create a preservation copy of games employing DRM [digital rights 
management] and anti-copying measures.”2223 In some cases, preservationists may see a 
need to circumvent video game console software in order to enable a console-based game 
to be playable and thus accessible.2224 EFF/Albert add that “players and amateur 
collectors” can aid in preservation efforts, performing “a significant amount of the 
legwork involved in saving [the games].”2225 EFF/Albert also assert that adverse impacts 
are likely to increase as video games increasingly employ online DRM technologies.2226 
Further, proponents reject various alternatives to circumvention, concluding that 
they are not “viable,” “feasible” or “effective.”2227 Offering an example where licensing 
costs were allegedly prohibitive,2228 EFF/Albert assert that obtaining a license from 
copyright owners is “not feasible for informal player communities who simply want to 
continue playing games they already own.”2229 On the other hand, Albert concedes that, 
in some cases, users “would gladly pay huge amounts of money to be able to play these 
games online again.”2230 Albert also asserts that licensing is not a realistic option because 
“finding all rightsholders can be difficult or impossible” due to a growing number of 
orphan works in the video game industry.2231 EFF/Albert believe that even if licensing 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology) (“The ability to explore old games, including seeing how a 
multiplayer function actually worked, is an incredibly valuable pedagogical tool.”). 
2223 Id. at 13 (quoting JEROME MCDONOUGH, ET AL., PRESERVING VIRTUAL WORLDS FINAL REPORT 6 
(2010), available at https://www.ideals.illinois.edu/handle/2142/17097 (“PRESERVING VIRTUAL WORLDS 
REPORT”)). The Preserving Virtual Worlds project was a research venture of four universities and Linden 
Lab, supported by the Library of Congress’s National Digital Information Infrastructure for Preservation 
Program, investigating issues concerning the preservation of video games and interactive fiction through a 
series of case studies. PRESERVING VIRTUAL WORLDS REPORT at 5. 
2224 Tr. at 255:01-03 (May 20, 2015) (Stoltz, EFF). 
2225 EFF/Albert Supp. at 9. 
2226 Id. at 10-11; EFF/Albert Reply at 9. 
2227 EFF/Albert Supp. at 12. 
2228 Tr. at 260:17-261:05 (May 20, 2015) (Charlesworth, USCO; Albert) (Albert stating that she is aware of
 
an example of “someone who approached a video game company and couldn’t afford a license,” but
 
explaining that she cannot provide details “because they asked me not to say who it was because they were 
concerned about the confidentiality of the information”).
 
2229 EFF/Albert Supp. at 12; see also Tr. at 259:12-260:04 (Albert) (stating that “prohibitive amounts of
 
money” are required to “go through the licensing route”).
 
2230 Tr. at 175:15-17 (May 20, 2015) (Albert).
 
2231 EFF/Albert Supp. at 12. An ‘‘orphan work’’ is an original work of authorship for which a good-faith,
 
prospective user cannot readily identify and/or locate the copyright owner in a situation where permission 
from the copyright owner is necessary as a matter of law. U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, REPORT ON ORPHAN 
WORKS 1 (2006), available at http://www.copyright.gov/orphan/orphan-report.pdf.
 
328
 

[PAGE 333]
     
    
    
     
 
 
    
 
  
 
 
    
 
  
   
   
 
   
    
  
   
 
  
 
 
  
   
  
 
   
   
    
   
    
         
   
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
were feasible, it “cannot be considered an alternative to an exercise of fair use,” which 
“does not require permission from the rightsholder.”2232 
EFF/Albert also reject the use of video-capture technology to memorialize video 
games by recording gameplay footage and “other non-play alternatives,” contending that 
they “do[] not replicate the experience of actually playing the game, and [are] of much 
less value to scholars, not to mention to players who have lawfully purchased a game and 
wish to continue to play.”
2233 
d. Argument Under Statutory Factors 
While EFF/Albert contend that the statutory factors set forth in section 1201(a)(1) 
support an exemption for both gamers and preservationists, they emphasize in particular 
that preservation “is exactly the type of behavior that this exemption process is meant to 
protect.”
2234 
With respect to the first factor, concerning the availability for use of copyrighted 
works, EFF/Albert assert that by definition “server shutdowns . . . have a significant 
impact on the availability for use of many games.”2235 
As for the second statutory factor, regarding nonprofit archival, preservation, and 
educational purposes, EFF/Albert urge that these purposes will be hindered without an 
exemption.  EFF/Albert claim that “[r]emoval of authentication mechanisms and 
restoration of multiplayer functionality to legally purchased games . . . assists the 
archiving and preservation of cultural works.”
2236 Here again, EFF/Albert rely on the 
Preserving Virtual Worlds report and its opinion that the DMCA’s prohibition on 
circumvention prevents libraries from creating preservation copies “of games employing 
DRM and anti-copying measures.”2237 
Considering the third factor, which addresses the impact of the prohibition on 
criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, and research, EFF/Albert 
claim that scholars and teachers must “access older works” and “replicate the experience 
of originally playing the game” to teach game design or theories behind game 
construction.2238 
For the fourth factor, the effect of circumvention on the market for or value of 
copyrighted works, EFF/Albert argue that an exemption would not harm the market 
2232 EFF/Albert Supp. at 12.
 
2233 Id. at 12-13.
 
2234 Id. at 11.
 
2235 Id. at 12.
 
2236 Id. at 11.
 
2237 Id. at 13 (citing PRESERVING VIRTUAL WORLDS REPORT at 6).
 
2238 Id. at 13-14.
 
329
 

[PAGE 334]
     
    
  
   
  
    
   
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
    
  
  
 
  
    
 
 
  
   
   
    
 
 
   
                
        
     
   
      
   
             
      
       
    
     
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
because “[f]or most games where developers have discontinued support, there is no 
longer a significant market.”2239 They additionally claim that newer games—including 
“sequels” to discontinued games—are typically quite different from the older titles and 
are not comparable market substitutes.2240 EFF/Albert contend that an exemption would 
actually benefit the market for games “by protecting [a] consumer’s investment” in a 
video game, which will increase its initial value.2241 Supporting party eBay concurs, 
adding that the value of video games “plummets without justification if those games can 
no longer be used because of digital access controls that serve no copyright purpose.”2242 
EFF/Albert do not identify any additional considerations to be weighed under the 
fifth factor.  But, in responding to opponents’ concerns, which are further described 
below, EFF/Albert argue that concerns over diminishment of brand value, safety and 
privacy, or diminishment of sales of new games within the same franchise (e.g., new 
“Super Mario Brothers” games) have “no bearing” in this proceeding and are more 
properly the subject of the trademark, contract, or competition laws.
2243 
2. Opposition 
Class 23 is opposed by ESA and Joint Creators.2244 ESA points out that the video 
game industry is “one of the fastest growing sectors in the U.S. economy” and has 
generated over $21 billion in revenue in 2013.2245 ESA also observes that video games 
can frequently cost over $50 million to develop, with some costing over $100 million.2246 
They argue that an exemption would threaten this investment in innovation and economic 
growth. 
As an overarching matter, ESA argues that the scope of the class, as proposed, 
“affects an overly broad range of devices and platforms” and that “granting the request 
would be incompatible with congressional intent that exemptions be afforded only in the 
most ‘exceptional’ cases.”
2247 ESA further contends that proponents’ understanding of 
the technology and access controls at issue is inaccurate.  According to ESA, “to 
eliminate authentication checks and enable the video game to be played on a video game 
console or other device connected to a third-party multiplayer game server . . . would 
2239 Id. at 14; but see Tr. at 175:15-17 (May 20, 2015) (Albert) (Gamers “would gladly pay huge amounts of
 
money to be able to play these games online again.”).
 
2240 EFF/Albert Supp. at 14-15.
 
2241 Id. at 14.
 
2242 eBay Class 23 Reply at 1.
 
2243 EFF/Albert Reply at 15-16.
 
2244 The trade groups represented by Joint Creators are ESA, the Motion Picture Association of America,
 
Inc., and the Recording Industry Association of America.
 
2245 ESA Class 23 Opp’n at 1-2.
 
2246 Id. at 2.
 
2247 Id. at 5, 7. 
330
 

[PAGE 335]
     
    
 
  
   
  
   
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
 
   
 
  
     
  
  
   
    
 
 
   
                  
               
        
    
             
         
     
                   
               
       
     
       
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
require circumvention of a much broader array of video game and device-based access 
controls” and “would, in effect, eviscerate virtually all forms of access protection used to 
prevent video game piracy.”2248 ESA also takes issue with the proposed exclusion of 
games that feature “persistent worlds,” asserting that proponents created a “false 
distinction” that “does not correspond to how video games are distributed in practice.”2249 
Contrary to EFF/Albert’s assumption that the content of such games is stored remotely, 
ESA states that “[m]ost of the content for the ‘persistent world’ games that EFF[/Albert] 
mentions, including World of Warcraft, is actually stored locally to improve the gameplay 
experience.”2250 
a. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Class 23 opponents believe proponents have not met their burden to show that 
circumvention will facilitate noninfringing uses.  First, for preservationist uses, 
opponents argue that the proposed class as written will be used by some to shield 
infringing conduct.
2251 ESA concedes that preservation, research, and study “sometimes 
are permitted as fair uses” and did not directly challenge proponents’ claim that some 
proposed preservation activities would be noninfringing.2252 But ESA argues that the 
proposed exemption is principally aimed at “enabl[ing] continued single- and multiplayer gameplay” with only “indirect benefits for video game preservation, research, and 
study.”2253 ESA argues that the proposed class as written will lead to infringing conduct 
because, even if expressly limited to preservation uses, “organizations and individuals . . . 
likely would try to use the guise of ‘preservation’ or ‘research’ to make [video games] 
available for free to the public to play online purely for entertainment purposes [and] 
regardless of whether they ever purchased a lawful copy of the video game.”
2254 Joint 
Creators agree, stating that “[a]lthough EFF tries to couch the proposed exemption as one 
that benefits scholars, researchers and preservationists, it is clear that EFF’s primary goal 
is to legitimize game, console, and server hacking for the purpose of enabling casual use 
of entertaining, copyrighted video games across a wide swath of platforms and 
devices.”
2255 
2248 Id. at 8; see also id. at 3 (“[T]here is no such thing as specific access controls that check ‘authentication 
servers’ and ‘matchmaking servers’ for video games . . . . Many of these access controls serve a protective 
function that is far broader than ‘authentication’ or ‘matchmaking.’”). 
2249 Id. at 7. 
2250 Id. As noted above, EFF/Albert subsequently clarified that they only needed to hack consoles for
 
preservation uses. Tr. at 204:01-03 (May 20, 2015) (Albert); id. at 255:01-03 (Stoltz, EFF).
 
2251 ESA Class 23 Opp’n at 12-13.
 
2252 Id. at 12; see also Tr. at 212:20-22 (May 20, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators) (“I am not sure that all of
 
the types of preservation that [proponents are] discussing would ultimately be lawful . . . .”).
 
2253 ESA Class 23 Opp’n at 10-11 (emphasis added).
 
2254 Id. at 12-13 (emphasis omitted).
 
2255 Joint Creators Class 23 Opp’n at 5.
 
331
 

[PAGE 336]
     
    
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
    
    
   
  
 
     
    
 
   
  
  
     
  
   
  
   
 
   
   
   
     
       
              
     
  
   
           
     
   
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Next, Class 23 opponents disagree that continued gameplay uses are likely to be 
noninfringing under section 107.  First, reviewing the purpose and character of the use, 
opponents explain that the proposed use is commercial and not transformative, because 
“[t]here is abundant evidence that one of the primary reasons many users seek to hack the 
video game access controls is not to create new and different works, but to avoid paying 
the customary cost of existing works and devices.”
2256 As Joint Creators put it, “the 
purpose of EFF’s [creation of] derivative works is to replicate exactly the same 
entertainment experience that the games were initially designed to enable while multiplayer functionality continues to be offered.”2257 Opponents distinguish the Sega and 
Connectix cases cited by proponents, pointing out that, unlike in those cases, users of the 
exemption would not be “develop[ing] new, expressive works of authorship.”2258 
Under the second fair use factor, opponents argue that the nature of the work does 
not support fair use, because video games are highly expressive and “entitled to the 
greatest protection.” 
2259 Moreover, circumventing the TPMs at issue “necessarily 
enables and is almost always coupled with” piracy.2260 Under the third factor, ESA 
asserts that the amount and substantiality of the portion used is not reasonable, as 
depending on the device and TPM, the amount of the work copied “could potentially be 
virtually all of the code for the copyrighted video game.”2261 
ESA focuses much of its argument on the fourth fair use factor, regarding the 
effect on the market for or potential value of the copyrighted works.  ESA notes that 
“video game publishers routinely re-introduce video games that otherwise would be 
deemed ‘abandoned’ under the proposed exemption” and claims that an exemption for 
gamers would harm that potential market.2262 In addition, it explains that “many video 
game publishers improve on prior versions to develop new video games within a 
franchise,” and that granting the exemption could cannibalize sales of such new 
releases.
2263 Finally, it claims that if hacked games performed poorly or chat functions 
were unmoderated, this would diminish the value of the game publishers’ brands.2264 
ESA raises particular concerns about the application of this exemption to consolebased games and the impact on the market for such games.  It states that allowing 
circumvention to access a video game on a console necessarily “requires hacking of the 
2256 ESA Class 23 Opp’n at 13.
 
2257 Joint Creators Class 23 Opp’n at 3.
 
2258 ESA Class 23 Opp’n at 13; Joint Creators Class 23 Opp’n at 4.
 
2259 ESA Class 23 Opp’n at 14.
 
2260 Id. 
2261 Id. at 15.
 
2262 Id. at 16; see also Joint Creators Class 23 Opp’n at 4.
 
2263 ESA Class 23 Opp’n at 16.
 
2264 Id. at 16-17.
 
332
 

[PAGE 337]
     
    
   
  
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
      
  
 
  
  
 
    
  
    
      
      
  
                  
                 
             
     
      
   
              
            
         
                  
            
    
               
                 
   
                
                
          
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
video game console as well.”2265 If a console is hacked, opponents claim, it will not only 
play the “abandoned” games that would fall under this class, but could also be used to 
play any pirated video game or make infringing copies of other copyrighted content.2266 
Indeed, ESA provides specific evidence establishing a link between hacking consoles and 
piracy of copyrighted works.2267 Pointing to the Librarian’s decision in the prior 
rulemaking to deny an exemption to permit jailbreaking of video game consoles, 
opponents assert that granting this exemption would lead to hacked consoles that “could 
no longer serve as a secure method for the development and distribution of legitimate 
content,” including non-video game content such as movies.
2268 If such secure 
distribution platforms are hacked, opponents claim, “publishers will be less likely to 
make their content available and there will be less legitimate content available.”2269 
b. Asserted Adverse Effects 
Class 23 opponents believe there are sufficient marketplace alternatives to 
mitigate or eliminate any adverse effects when server support for a video game ends. 
Opponents maintain that when video game servers are taken offline, the “vast majority” 
of games can continue to be played in single-player mode, and users can still enjoy 
multiplayer modes by using a local area network.
2270 Opponents also contest 
EFF/Albert’s position that users are entitled to continued game play, contending that 
online services such as multiplayer game play are separate services that are not included 
in the purchase price of video games.2271 In a post-hearing letter, ESA stated that, 
whether at the point of sale or within the game packaging, consumers have “clear and 
prominent notice that server support for a game may someday be discontinued.”2272 ESA 
also submitted specific examples of games that continued to be sold after support for 
2265 Id. at 16; see also Tr. at 215:07-16 (May 20, 2015) (Frankel, ESA) (noting that “[i]t may be that very
 
early generation consoles did not have to be hacked for [circumvention], but it is the case that more recent
 
ones have” and that “all but the very first Xbox would have to be hacked”).
 
2266 ESA Class 23 Opp’n at 16.
 
2267 Id. at 4-5, 21, Exhibit A.
 
2268 Id. at 15.
 
2269 Id.; see also Joint Creators Class 23 Opp’n at 2 (“This proposed class of works should be rejected
 
because circumvention related to videogame consoles inevitably increases piracy and is detrimental to the 
secure and trustworthy innovative platforms that videogame publishers and consumers demand.”). 
2270 ESA Class 23 Opp’n at 17. A local area network connects different computers in a localized area, such 
as at a home, office, or school, whereas a wide area network, such as the internet, connects computers 
running at distant locations. 
2271 Joint Creators Class 23 Opp’n at 5 (“[O]nline network services are generally entirely distinct services 
for which the user must register, and often pay, separately, and are not included in the purchase of the video 
game.”). 
2272 ESA Class 23 Post-Hearing Resp. at 3. For example, the publisher Electronic Arts (“EA”) provides a 
notice on website product pages and packaging for all of its games that states “EA MAY RETIRE ONLINE 
FEATURES AFTER 30 DAYS NOTICE POSTED ON www.ea.com/1/service-updates.” Id. 
333
 

[PAGE 338]
     
    
  
 
  
    
  
    
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
   
    
  
  
 
 
  
   
   
   
  
 
               
         
          
   
   
   
   
                
             
          
   
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
multiplayer gameplay had already ended, with clear notice on the packaging of that 
fact.2273 
ESA asserts that non-play options, such as screen capture of gameplay, are viable 
alternatives to circumvention for preservation purposes.2274 It concedes that such a 
solution may be “non-optimal,” but points out that exemptions are only for exceptional 
cases.2275 ESA argues that proponents have failed to demonstrate a need for 
circumvention for archival purposes now or in the next three years.  ESA further explains 
that it, along with its member companies, has partnered with institutions that have 
sponsored “multiple museum exhibitions and educational initiatives related to video 
games,” including the Smithsonian Institution, further demonstrating a lack of adverse 
effects.
2276 
c. Argument Under Statutory Factors 
Class 23 opponents assert that the statutory factors enumerated in section 
1201(a)(1) counsel against an exemption.  In considering these factors, opponents stress 
their belief that, like the proposed exemption for jailbreaking video game consoles in 
Class 19, an exemption for this class would encourage or enable piracy of both video 
games and other copyrighted works played on circumvented devices.
2277 In support of 
this view, ESA submitted documentary evidence, including several screenshots of 
websites dedicated to jailbreaking popular consoles, showing that many of those who 
wish to jailbreak a console intend to play pirated video games.
2278 
Considering the first statutory factor, the availability for use of copyrighted 
works, opponents point to the “tremendous positive impact” that the DMCA-protected 
access controls have had “on the availability of copyrighted materials through personal 
computers, video game consoles, smartphones, and mobile devices.”
2279 ESA argues that 
granting the proposed exemption “could disrupt the incentive of platform providers and 
copyright holders to continue making this copyrighted content available to the public,” 
and that copyright owners “may choose to distribute only lower cost content, terminate 
innovative network services, digital add-ons, and multi-player functionality, or in some 
2273 ESA Class 23 Opp’n at 11, Exhibit C (citing stickers placed on game packaging that read “Online 
features, including Nintendo Wi-Fi Connection, no longer available” on Pokémon White Version 2 for the 
Nintendo DS and Mario Kart Wii for the Nintendo Wii). 
2274 Id. at 17-18. 
2275 Id. at 19. 
2276 Id. at 18. 
2277 Id. at 20. 
2278 Id. at Exhibit A. ESA reiterates its view that for console-based games, the console itself would need to 
be hacked, explaining that “one hundred percent of video game consoles that play pirated games are 
hacked . . . .” Id. at 21 (emphasis in original). 
2279 Id. at 20. 
334
 

[PAGE 339]
     
    
   
     
    
  
 
   
  
  
    
   
  
   
  
  
 
  
    
  
  
 
 
   
   
 
  
  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
     
   
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
cases, not agree to permit distribution of their content at all.”2280 According to ESA, 
because the access controls at issue encourage the availability of works, this “positive 
impact far outweighs any minimal adverse impact.”2281 
Regarding the second factor, ESA claims that “[p]roponents failed to provide a 
single example where a specific video game was unavailable” for nonprofit archival, 
preservation, or educational uses, and that there are many alternatives for such uses.
2282 
Similarly, ESA believes that under the third statutory factor, proponents have not offered 
any “specific evidence” of a substantial adverse effect related to criticism, comment, 
news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research.
2283 ESA notes that it and its members 
have already “participated in and supported multiple museum exhibitions and educational 
initiatives related to video games,” rendering an exemption for such purposes 
2284unnecessary. 
For the fourth factor, ESA repeats its concern that an exemption would encourage 
piracy through the use of altered video game consoles which, in turn, would diminish the 
market for and value of copyrighted works.
2285 
Finally, opponents suggest that the fifth factor counsels against granting an 
exemption.  Opponents argue that allowing circumvention would interfere with their 
ability to manage and control their brands.  They explain that unauthorized third party 
servers could provide a lower-quality gaming experience that could be slow, buggy, and 
vulnerable to safety and privacy threats.2286 ESA also asserts that if an exemption were 
granted, “users would wrongly believe that they can traffic in circumvention tools to hack 
their video games or engage in wholesale reproduction and distribution of the video game 
software.”
2287 
3. Discussion 
The Register notes that all parties in this class seem to appreciate the enormous 
value of video games to our culture and economy.  Proponents make a strong case for the 
personal impact that games have had on their lives, as well as their desire to continue 
using these games and share gaming experiences with others.  But while the Register 
recognizes the significant interest of gaming communities in this proposed class, 
proponents still bear the burden of meeting the statutory criteria for an exemption. 
2280 Id. at 20-21. 
2281 Id. at 20. 
2282 Id. at 21. 
2283 Id. at 22. 
2284 Id. at 18. 
2285 Id. at 22. 
2286 Id. at 22-23. 
2287 Id. at 22. 
335
 

[PAGE 340]
     
    
 
 
 
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
  
 
   
    
   
    
   
   
     
   
     
           
     
   
              
              
               
                   
                  
             
      
      
           
             
   
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
As explained above, in making their case for an exemption, proponents address 
two different groups of users:  gamers who wish to continue to play video games they 
own, and preservationists who want to make the games available for research and study.  
The evidence for these uses was collected as part of a single class, and some of the 
evidentiary record is relevant to both concerns. At the same time, it is now clear that the 
legal analysis differs for the two uses.  For that reason, the Register treats the uses 
separately in the discussion below. 
The Register observes that proponents rely on fair use as the basis for the 
proposed exemption and do not invoke section 117, either for gamers or in relation to the 
requested preservation uses.  Section 117 permits the owner of a copy of a computer 
program to copy or adapt that program when the copy or adaptation is created as an 
“essential step” in the utilization of the program in conjunction with a machine and is 
used in no other manner.
2288 A threshold question, then, with respect to the applicability 
of section 117 is whether the software under consideration is owned or licensed by the 
user.  In some situations where a user enjoys various incidents of ownership—such as the 
ability to transfer or destroy the software without permission—the user may be 
considered the owner of software for purposes of section 117 notwithstanding purported 
license terms.
2289 The two leading precedents on this question—Krause v. Titleserv, 
Inc.2290 and Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc.2291—propose different tests to ascertain whether 
software is owned as opposed to licensed.2292 While acknowledging these tests as “useful 
guideposts,” the Register has previously concluded that the state of the law in this area is 
somewhat uncertain.
2293 
Assuming that in some cases the owners of a video game might also be 
considered the owners of the software on that copy, it seems that section 117 could be 
relevant to some of activities in which proponents seek to engage.  More generally, 
section 117 evinces Congress’s understanding that reverse engineering and the pursuit of 
interoperability are favored activities under the law.2294 Because proponents declined to 
2288 17 U.S.C. § 117(a). 
2289 See Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc., 621 F.3d 1102, 1111 (9th Cir. 2010). 
2290 402 F.3d 119 (2d Cir. 2005). 
2291 621 F.3d 1102. 
2292 In Krause, the Second Circuit held that formal title was not necessary to demonstrate ownership under 
section 117, but courts should look to a variety of factors to determine “whether the party exercises 
sufficient incidents of ownership over a copy of the program to be sensibly considered the owner of the 
copy.” Krause, 402 F.3d at 124. By contrast, in Vernor, the Ninth Circuit held that “a software user is a 
licensee rather than an owner of a copy, where the copyright owner (1) specifies that the user is granted a 
license; (2) significantly restricts the user’s ability to transfer the software; and (3) imposes notable use 
restrictions.” Vernor, 621 F.3d at 1111. 
2293 See, e.g., 2012 Recommendation at 92. 
2294 See COMMISSION ON NEW TECHNOLOGICAL USES, FINAL REPORT 13 (1978) (noting that “a right to 
make those changes necessary to enable the use for which [the computer program] was both sold and 
purchased should be provided”). 
336
 

[PAGE 341]
     
    
   
 
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
   
 
  
 
  
   
   
  
  
 
 
  
                
               
                   
          
               
            
                
        
              
            
        
  
              
     
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
put forth section 117 as a legal justification for the exemption, however, the Register 
analyzes only fair use.2295 
a. Noninfringing Uses 
i. Continued Play 
The Register concludes that, in the case of lawfully acquired PC and consolebased video games, the overall record supports proponents’ claim that copying and 
modifying game software to allow for continued play after server support ends are likely 
to be noninfringing fair uses.  As discussed below, however, due to piracy concerns, the 
record does not support extending the exemption to any jailbreaking of consoles.  Further, 
although EFF/Albert also requested the ability to circumvent TPMs on games designed 
for handheld devices,
2296 no record was developed concerning such games, and the 
Register therefore concludes that there is no factual or legal basis to include such games 
or devices in the exemption.  
In reviewing the statutory factors, the Register notes that, as discussed above, the 
proposed exemption contemplates circumvention of self-contained copies of lawfully 
acquired games in physical or downloaded formats rather than games that involve shared 
content hosted by third parties (such as persistent world games) or are accessed via 
subscription, and that these are critical assumptions in the fair use analysis. The 
Register’s analysis is also limited to games that are rendered wholly unplayable due to 
the lack of an authentication mechanism; because, for reasons discussed below, the 
Register finds that proponents have not satisfied their burden with respect to a need for an 
exemption for continued online multiplayer play, such functionality is not considered in 
the Register’s fair use analysis. 
With respect to the first statutory factor, the purpose and character of the use, 
opponents make a valid point that the proposed uses are not transformative, in that 
proponents simply want to engage in the same use of the copyrighted work as before— 
namely, the playing of video games, whether on PCs or gaming consoles.  On a related 
2295 Likewise, no party analyzes the applicability of section 1201(f), which permits certain acts of reverse 
engineering as an exception to the prohibition on circumvention. But the Register note s that the provision 
would not likely protect all of the activities at issue here, and consequently does not obviate the need for an 
exemption. While the proposed exemption is directed at providing for the continued play and preservation 
of video games, section 1201(f)(1) is limited to circumvention solely for the identification and analysis of 
program elements necessary for interoperability, and does not address circumvention after that analysis has 
been performed. See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(f)(1). Accordingl y, as the Register previously concluded in the 
context of considering an exemption for jailbreaking of smartphones in 2010 and of video game consoles in 
2012, when an exemption is sought to permit anyone to circumvent a TPM—and “not just those who 
[perform] ‘identification and analysis’ of programmatic elements”—it creates “significant doubt” as to 
whether section 1201(f) would apply.  2012 Recommendation at 45 n.212 (citing 2010 Recommendation at 
94-95 & n.318). 
2296 EFF/Albert Pet. at 1 (requesting an exemption for “consoles, personal computers or personal handheld 
gaming devices” (emphasis added)). 
337
 

[PAGE 342]
     
    
  
 
    
  
    
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
    
  
  
   
 
 
 
  
    
  
  
  
    
   
 
  
 
  
     
      
   
                 
               
                   
 
       
       
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
note, opponents offer the argument that the Sega and Connectix cases are distinguishable 
from this situation, because those cases involved intermediate copying to create new 
expressive works, whereas here proponents simply wish to play existing games.2297 
As the Register has opined in prior triennial rulemakings, however, “a use need 
not be transformative . . . to be a fair use.”2298 For example, in the course of 
recommending an exemption for “jailbreaking” of smartphones in 2012, the Register 
explained that the first factor may favor fair use where “the purpose and character of the 
use is noncommercial and personal” and facilitates functionality.2299 Here, where gamers 
wish to modify a copy of video game software they have lawfully acquired simply to 
allow its continued personal use on their own computers—akin to the adaptation 
exception embodied in section 117—the first factor tends to support a finding of fair use.   
Concerning the second factor, the nature of the copyrighted work, the Register 
agrees with opponents that video games are highly expressive and thus at the core of 
copyright’s protective purposes.  At the same time, the copying and modifications at issue 
are necessary to allow continued legitimate use of the work, and as EFF/Albert note, 
those modifications only change the “functional aspects of the software, not expressive 
elements such as graphics or audio.”
2300 When the proposed use is understood in that 
light, the second factor does not necessarily negate a finding of fair use.  
As for the third fair use factor, the amount and substantiality of the work used, the 
record indicates that only a small amount of the video game software code needs to be 
modified, though the modification process may require the creation of a complete, albeit 
temporary, copy of the video game software.2301 In prior rulemakings, the Register has 
considered an analogous scenario in the context of smartphone jailbreaking to enable 
interoperability and concluded that the third factor “arguably disfavors a fair use finding” 
but that “the weight to be given to [the third factor] under the circumstances is slight.”
2302 
The same conclusion is warranted here. 
The fourth factor considers the effect on the potential market for or value of the 
copyrighted work.  As noted, with respect to gamers who wish to continue to play games 
for which server support has ended, the proposed exemption applies only where the 
market for the particular version of that game has been essentially vacated by copyright 
owners.  Certainly opponents are correct in asserting their rights to reintroduce games in 
2297 ESA Class 23 Opp’n at 13.
 
2298 2012 Recommendation at 72 (quoting 2010 Recommendation at 95).
 
2299 Id. at 74.
 
2300 EFF/Albert Supp. at 7; see also EFF/Albert Reply at 10-11 (“[T]he software that is modified in the
 
process of circumvention is access controls in game firmware. This is software that does not render video 
or audio content, nor define the physics, rules, or storyline of a game. It is entirely functional rather than 
expressive.”)
 
2301 See EFF/Albert Reply at 11.
 
2302 2010 Recommendation at 97; see also 2012 Recommendation at 73.
 
338
 

[PAGE 343]
     
    
    
 
 
    
  
    
     
    
   
 
  
   
  
 
   
   
   
    
  
 
     
 
 
  
         
           
                
     
              
             
                
           
            
              
         
          
            
              
   
                
         
                  
     
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
the future; however, this fact alone is not dispositive.  Not all such games will be 
reintroduced, and in the few examples provided by opponents, the games were 
remastered and did not always include the same functionality as the discontinued 
versions.
2303 Moreover, the record does not establish that gamers who are so strongly 
connected to a discontinued game that they will seek alternative means to continue to 
play it will not purchase a reissue if one becomes available.
2304 The Register 
acknowledges the importance of preserving future markets and investments, but in this 
instance, the evidence presented by opponents concerning potential markets for 
discontinued versions of games was scant. As such, on the present record, the Register 
concludes that opponents have failed to demonstrate that the market for reissued games 
would be materially impacted by the proposed exemption. 
Class 23 opponents make a stronger case that granting the exemption would cause 
market harm to the extent it would include jailbreaking of video game consoles by 
individual users.  As explained above, for purposes of the requested exemption as it 
would apply to gamers, proponents disclaimed a need to circumvent console software in 
addition to the game itself.
2305 In light of the importance of the issue, however, the 
Register addresses the console question. 
Opponents’ concerns are directed to the role of consoles as a secure distribution 
platform for video games and other copyrighted works.  While the Register finds that 
circumventing discontinued console-based video games themselves, as well as PC games, 
is unlikely to harm the market for or value of those copyrighted works, the same does not 
hold true for the value of the gaming consoles on which they are played.2306 Based on the 
record (and as discussed in more depth with respect to the proposed exemption to allow 
console jailbreaking in Proposed Class 19), jailbroken consoles are strongly linked to 
piracy of video games.2307 As noted above, a jailbroken console can be used to play 
2303 See ESA Class 23 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1-3. 
2304 See Tr. at 175:15-17 (May 20, 2015) (Albert) (noting that gamers “would gladly pay huge amounts of 
money to be able to play these games online again”). It seems also plausible that these gamers would buy 
updated versions of the game. 
2305 In part this appears to be due to the fact that the exemption focuses on older games, which the record 
indicates have separate TPMs for authentication and matchmaking purposes that do not affect console play. 
See, e.g., id. at 204:25-205:13 (Stoltz, EFF) (“[M]y understanding is it’s much more common that it is the 
norm with older consoles like the PlayStation 2 that the preservation work can be accomplished without 
essentially removing all of the anti-piracy features of the console.”). 
2306 As noted above, EFF/Albert assert that some older game consoles would not necessarily need to be 
jailbroken to engage in the circumvention contemplated by the proposed exemption. See id. at 173:22­
174:03 (Damle, USCO; Albert); id. at 202:25-203:08 (Albert). Though proponents seek an exemption that 
would allow jailbreaking of consoles when necessary for preservation purposes, the record indicates they 
are not seeking to authorize console jailbreaking by gamers. See id. at 255:01-03 (Stoltz, EFF); id. at 
203:18-204:03 (Charlesworth, USCO; Albert). 
2307 ESA Class 23 Opp’n at Exhibit A; see also Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 590 
(1994) (market harm requires considering “whether unrestricted and widespread conduct of the sort 
engaged in by the [proponent of fair use] . . . would result in a substantially adverse impact on the potential 
market” (citations omitted)); 2012 Recommendation at 42-43. 
339
 

[PAGE 344]
     
    
  
 
   
  
   
 
 
  
   
  
   
    
     
  
   
 
   
    
     
    
  
              
              
                  
             
       
     
       
            
             
             
              
            
                    
         
               
           
             
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
illegitimately acquired games and not just “abandoned” games.  Moreover, jailbreaking 
of console software weakens the efficacy and value of that software as a distribution 
platform.2308 The Register therefore concludes that any exemption that would extend to 
modification of console computer code by individual consumers is likely to cause market 
harm to the console platform software as well as the non-discontinued games distributed 
for that platform, and is therefore unlikely to be a fair use.   
In sum, because factors two and three are less salient considerations in this 
context, the fair use analysis tends to favor proponents’ desire to engage in continued 
personal gameplay, except with respect to console jailbreaking activities. 
ii. Preservation 
The Register next considers whether engaging in circumvention activities to 
maintain video games in playable condition and make them available for research and 
study is likely to be a fair use under section 107.
2309 In so doing, the Register notes that 
Class 23 opponents agree with proponents that preservation, research and study 
“sometimes are permitted as fair uses.”2310 Indeed, the record demonstrates that ESA and 
its members actively support research and preservation efforts.2311 
The consensus evaporates, however, when considering the types of activities and 
actors properly considered as engaging in “preservation.” Proponents take a broad view 
in which preservation activities overlap with a mere opportunity for continued play, with 
EFF’s representative explaining, “I don’t think there is a strong line of demarcation” 
between preservationists and “someone who [] wants to keep playing the game.”
2312 At 
the public hearing, EFF and Albert sidestepped attempts to more clearly define the 
contours of the requested preservation activities,
2313 while ESA observed that “[a]s 
2308 ESA Class 23 Opp’n at 9; Joint Creators Class 23 Opp’n at 2. 
2309 As explained above, proponents do not cite section 117 as a basis for granting an exemption, although 
the Register notes that section 117 permits the owner of a computer program to make a copy for archival 
purposes. 17 U.S.C. § 117(a)(2). But as with continued play, the record does not establish whether 
preservationists are likely to be considered “owners” under section 117. 
2310 ESA Class 23 Opp’n at 12. 
2311 Tr. at 234:07-235:17 (May 20, 2015) (Frankel, ESA). 
2312 Id. at 241:15-21 (Stoltz, EFF; Charlesworth, USCO); see also id. at 232:25-233:02 (Albert) (“I would 
like to think that [gamers who congregate online for purposes of continued play] are preserving at the same 
time that they are playing multiplayer online.”); EFF/Albert Supp. at 9; Tr. at 240:18-241:02 (May 20, 
2015) (Stoltz) (“I want to emphasize this synergy between volunteer efforts by passionate fans and players 
and professional researchers, archivists and librarians, because the very important work of preservation and 
archival depends . . . on the volunteer efforts of people who know a game best and who commit many hours 
of unpaid labor to restoring it and, of course, preserving the physical media.”). 
2313 Tr. at 241:15-242:08 (May 20, 2015) (Stoltz, EFF; Charlesworth, USCO) (explaining that EFF does not 
“think there is a strong line of demarcation [between preservationists and gamers] because there [is] a 
synergy,” in that the efforts of individual gamers supplement the activities of preservationists). 
340
 

[PAGE 345]
     
    
   
    
 
  
    
  
    
    
   
  
 
     
 
  
   
   
  
  
  
   
   
   
   
    
  
   
        
          
         
          
          
                 
        
                
          
          
            
      
     
    
    
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
defined by proponents here, preservation is equivalent to being able to play by those who 
wish and that is not normally what we mean by preservation.”2314 
The Register finds that proponents have not offered persuasive legal support for 
the proposition that anyone who seeks to continue playing a video game should be treated 
as a de facto preservationist. For example, proponents’ view would seemingly blur the 
concept of preservation with a general exemption for the creation of backup copies, 
which the Register has repeatedly declined to recommend in the “space-shifting” 
context.
2315 In copyright law, preservation uses are treated differently from general, allpurpose uses.2316 The task remains, then, to determine whether the record here supports a 
narrower category of preservation-related uses that are likely to be noninfringing. 
Though it does not address the full range of preservation-related activities 
advocated by proponents, section 108 of the Copyright Act, which exempts certain 
activities of libraries and archives, is helpful to this inquiry.  Section 108 permits certain 
reproductions of copyrighted works for purposes of preservation and replacement, and 
when a format has become obsolete, thus highlighting Congress’s recognition of 
preservation as an important social activity.
2317 But this recognition is balanced with 
specific limitations on the making of such reproductions, reflecting Congress’s 
acknowledgment of copyright owners’ concern over unrestricted copying under the guise 
of preservation.2318 Moreover, section 108 applies only to libraries and archives with 
collections that are either open to the public or “available not only to researchers 
affiliated with the library or archives or with the institution of which it is a part, but also 
to other persons doing research in a specialized field.”2319 And while section 108 permits 
limited distribution of copies to other libraries and archives, such copies are not to be 
made available to the public in digital formats “outside the premises of the library or 
archives.”2320 In addition, a library or archives seeking to avail itself of section 108 must 
not make a reproduction of a copyrighted work for “any purpose of direct or indirect 
commercial advantage.”2321 Finally, section 108 addresses only the rights of reproduction 
2314 Id. at 243:18-22 (Frankel, ESA); see ESA Class 23 Opp’n at 12-13.
 
2315 See Tr. at 244:05-09 (May 20, 2015) (Tonsager, ESA); 2012 Recommendation at 157-66.  As discussed
 
above in connection with Classes 8 and 10, in this rulemaking, the Register again declines to recommend 
exemptions for purposes of creating backup copies of audiovisual works and e-books.
 
2316 Tr. at 252:08-10 (May 20, 2015) (Charlesworth, USCO); see also 17 U.S.C. § 108.
 
2317 See 17 U.S.C. § 108; H.R. REP. NO. 94-1476, at 74-75 (1976), reprinted in 1976 U.S.C.C.A.N. 5659,
 
5688-89; see also Preservation and Reuse of Copyrighted Works: Hearing Before the Subcomm. on Courts,
 
Intellectual Prop., and the Internet of the H. Comm. on the Judiciary, 113th Cong. 2 (2014) (statement of
 
Jerrold Nadler, Ranking Member, Subcomm. on Courts, Intellectual Prop., and the Internet) (noting that
 
“[r]ecognizing the unique public service mission served by libraries and archives, Congress first enacted
 
section 108 in 1976, allowing these entities a limited exemption for preservation”).
 
2318 See H.R. REP. NO. 94-1476, at 75.
 
2319 17 U.S.C. § 108(a)(2).
 
2320 Id. § 108(b)-(c).
 
2321 Id. § 108(a)(1).
 
341
 

[PAGE 346]
     
    
 
    
   
    
   
 
    
   
   
 
   
 
 
    
      
     
  
        
  
     
   
                   
                
              
                 
      
             
                  
      
                
               
      
            
              
              
             
            
      
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
and distribution in the context of preservation-related activities, and does not authorize or 
except the public performance or display of copyrighted works, except for certain works 
in their last twenty years of copyright protection.2322 
The Register finds that section 108 provides useful and important guidance as to 
Congress’s intent regarding the nature and scope of legitimate preservation activities, and 
hence the types of uses that are most likely to qualify as fair in this area.2323 Section 108 
suggests that such activities should be carried out by a preservation-oriented institution— 
a library or archives—and, as noted, must not be for direct or indirect commercial 
gain.2324 While section 108 is limited to libraries and archives, the record here reflects 
that museums engage in similar efforts to preserve video games.  In light of their similar 
preservation mission in this context, the Register sees no reason to exclude museums 
from the reach of the proposed exemption.2325 
The Register also narrows her consideration of fair use to reproductions and 
modifications of video game and console software made for the purpose of preserving 
games in playable condition to enable research and study.  Although proponents also seek 
the ability to modify video games and consoles so they can be exhibited to the public in 
playable form—undoubtedly an appealing prospect for many—it is important to 
recognize that these additional uses also implicate the exclusive section 106 rights of 
public performance and display.
2326 The performance and display of a video game for 
visitors in a public space is a markedly different activity than efforts to preserve or study 
the game in a dedicated archival or research setting.  Neither proponents nor opponents in 
this proceeding addressed legal questions relating to the performance or display of video 
games in museum galleries or similar public venues.  Nor did proponents provide factual 
detail as to the particulars of the exhibitions being proposed.  For example, would 
visitors’ interactions with the games be limited in some way, or would visitors be 
permitted to play games for extended periods of time? 
2322 See generally id. § 108. There are other provisions that may come into play but were not discussed in 
this proceeding. Sections 109 and 110 of the Copyright Act set forth certain exceptions for the display, and 
the display and public performance of copyrighted works, respectively, but they do not specifically address 
the preservation uses at issue here. See id. § 109(c) (permitting public display of certain works); id. § 110 
(permitting certain public performances and displays of works). 
2323 While articulating express exceptions for the activities of libraries and archives, section 108 also 
preserves fair use. Id. § 108(f)(4) (“Noting in this section . . . in any way affects the right of fair use under 
section 107 . . . .”). 
2324 See id. § 108(a)-(c); see also H.R. REP. NO. 94-1476, at 74 (stating that “[u]nder this provision, a purely 
commercial enterprise could not establish a collection of copyrighted works, call itself a library or archives, 
and engage in for-profit reproduction and distribution of photocopies”). 
2325 See EFF/Albert Supp. at 8-9 (referencing efforts by the Strong Museum of Play); id. at App. 1-3 
(Statement of Alex Handy, The Museum of Art and Digital Entertainment); Antonelli (cited in EFF/Albert 
Supp. at 8 n.52); Video and Other Electronic Game Collections (cited in EFF/Albert Supp. at 8 n.53); 
MUSEUM OF ART AND DIGITAL ENTERTAINMENT: ABOUT US (cited in EFF/Albert Supp. at 8 n.54); PARS 
Reply at 2 (describing two exhibitions of modified video games that were displayed on-site). 
2326 17 U.S.C. § 106(4), (5). 
342
 

[PAGE 347]
     
    
   
  
    
    
  
   
  
 
    
    
      
    
 
     
      
  
 
   
   
    
    
 
   
    
      
  
     
    
              
                     
                
 
             
            
           
              
       
             
              
               
      
                   
            
    
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
As explained above, the party seeking the exemption has the burden of supporting 
its request with evidence and legal argument. Although they did not raise it, proponen ts 
might have referenced section 109(c) of the Copyright Act, which permits owners of 
lawfully made copies of works to display them publicly without permission of the 
copyright owner, “either directly or by the projection of no more than one image at a 
time, to viewers present at the place where the copy is located.”2327 While section 109(c) 
would seemingly cover the display of a video game in a museum or other public setting, 
it does not address the right of public performance, which would also be implicated, as 
video games render visual images and accompanying sounds.2328 There is no express 
exception in the Copyright Act that would appear to address the performance aspects of 
the exhibition uses at issue here.2329 The Register expresses no opinion on whether the 
exhibition activities proposed by proponents, insofar as they constitute public 
performances, would or could constitute fair or otherwise noninfringing uses of video 
games or associated console software. The Register merely concludes that the lack of 
any legal or evidentiary record on this issue precludes such a finding.2330 More broadly, 
the lack of a sufficient record requires that the proposed exhibition uses be excluded from 
the fair use analysis. 
Keeping the above in mind, consideration of the individual fair use factors 
supports a conclusion that the reproduction and modification of functional aspects of 
video game and console software to enable noncommercial preservation and research 
activities at qualified institutions are likely to be fair uses.  First, the purpose and 
character of the use—preservation of a video game in playable form for research and 
study—are favored purposes under section 107. 2331 For the second factor, the nature of 
the copyrighted work, the works at issue include highly expressive elements, but the 
focus of the copying is on functional aspects of those works. For the same reasons as 
explained above in connection with gamers’ desire to engage in continued play of 
discontinued works, this factor does not weigh heavily against fair use. For the third 
2327 Id. § 109(c). 
2328 Under section 101 of the Copyright Act, to “perform” a work means “to recite, render, play, dance, or 
act it, either directly or by means of any device or process or, in the case of a motion picture or other 
audiovisual work, to show its images in any sequence or to make the sounds accompanying it audible.” Id. 
§ 101. 
2329 See generally id. §§ 109, 110. Section 109(e) provides an exception to the performance and display 
rights for “electronic audiovisual game[s] intended for use in coin-operated equipment,” but this would not 
seem to apply to the non-arcade uses proponents are requesting. As explained above, proponents failed to 
provide details concerning the exhibition activities they proposed; at no point did they suggest the use of 
coin-operated machinery in connection with these activities. 
2330 These may be appropriate issues for consideration in a future rulemaking proceeding. In addition to 
addressing fair use under section 107, a legal analysis of the proposed exhibition uses might also consider 
the potential relevance of sections 109 and 110 of the Copyright Act, which set forth certain exceptions to 
the rights of public performance and display. 
2331 See id. § 107 (“[T]he fair use of a copyrighted work . . . for purposes such as criticism, comment, news 
reporting, teaching (including multiple copies for classroom use), scholarship, or research, is not an 
infringement of copyright.”). 
343
 

[PAGE 348]
     
    
 
  
     
   
   
 
 
 
  
     
  
  
 
  
    
 
  
   
    
   
  
    
 
 
 
  
     
  
  
   
 
      
               
           
              
                
  
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
factor, the amount and substantiality of the work used, as also explained above, even 
though the entire work may be copied and used in modified form, because these uses are 
aimed at the functional rather than the expressive aspects of the work, this factor also 
carries little weight. 
With respect to the fourth fair use factor, allowing circumvention by appropriate 
entities solely for noncommercial preservation and research purposes—without 
distribution to or offsite access by members of the public, consistent with section 108— 
would not appear to carry a significant risk to the market.  Opponents have made no 
showing of market harm resulting from existing efforts of libraries, archives or museums 
to preserve video games.  Indeed, the record demonstrates that video game developers 
have in fact cooperated with various institutions to facilitate these activities.
2332 
Although they did not specify why, proponents appear to view the ability to 
jailbreak video game consoles as more critical for preservationists—perhaps this is to 
ensure that efforts to preserve games played on more modern consoles are not 
impeded.
2333 As explained above, opponents point to a strong connection between 
console jailbreaking and video game piracy. As also discussed above, the Register credits 
this concern and recommends against allowing console jailbreaking by gamers generally.  
The Register nonetheless observes that in the case of preservation activities, libraries, 
archives and museums are a far more confined class than gamers at large, and the 
proposed uses would be limited to on-site activities in a controlled environment. The risk 
of piracy would therefore appear to be greatly diminished in the preservation context. 
Indeed, the record does not reflect any instances of piracy attributable to video game 
preservation activities. Accordingly, the Register concludes that in the case of video 
games that have lost outside server support and cannot be accessed for any type of play, 
the fourth factor weighs in favor of permitting continued access and gameplay of PC and 
console-based games, as well as copying and modification of console software to the 
extent necessary to activate an unsupported console game. 
On the whole, looking primarily to the first and fourth factors, the Register finds 
that the fair use analysis tends to favor proponents in relation to the preservation uses.
2334 
b. Adverse Effects 
i. Continued Play 
To support the claim of adverse effects for gamers, proponents make various 
claims related to consumers’ expectations regarding video games they purchase.  For 
2332 See ESA Class 23 Opp’n at 18 (referencing ESA partnership with Smithsonian). 
2333 See Tr. at 204:20-23 (Stolz, EFF) (noting that “it is probably more common on the current generation of 
consoles that restoring the game to functionality will require jailbreaking of the console”). 
2334 Again, for the reasons discussed below, because the Register finds that proponents have not satisfied 
their burden with respect to a need for an exemption, this fair use finding does not extend to online 
multiplayer play. 
344
 

[PAGE 349]
     
    
    
  
 
 
   
   
 
    
  
  
  
    
  
  
   
   
    
  
   
 
 
   
 
     
             
               
    
              
               
                   
 
                
            
               
             
           
       
              
             
                 
           
  
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
example, EFF/Albert state that “server shutdowns degrade or destroy the value of a 
consumer’s investment in a game.”2335 With respect to authentication processes, as 
explained above, the record suggests that some games require a connection to an external 
server—sometimes on an ongoing basis—for all types of play, including single-player 
play.2336 When a server shutdown blocks even single-player play, consumers lose access 
to the work they have purchased.2337 Thus, to the extent the prohibition on circumvention 
prevents modification of the game to allow any type of continued play, the record here 
supports the conclusion that the prohibition adversely affects gamers.   
A different conclusion is warranted for multiplayer matchmaking servers.  The 
ability to engage in online multiplayer play is a functionality that extends beyond the 
game or TPM itself.  Unlike an authentication check, matchmaking functionality involves 
not just the operation of a TPM, but also the service of connecting one player to other 
players over the internet (as well as sometimes providing downloadable content, 
leaderboards, badges, chat, and other social features).2338 If a matchmaking service is 
discontinued, the loss of online multiplayer play through that service is not caused by the 
TPM; circumventing the TPM cannot restore the service. What proponents in fact seek to 
do is circumvent for the purpose of implementing a new external service, which is 
somewhat different than accessing the game itself. 
Moreover, Class 23 opponents make a strong case that when matchmaking 
support ends, there are alternatives to circumvention. They explain that in most cases, 
gamers can still engage in one or more of the following:  single-player play, multiplayer 
play at one location using one device and multiple controllers, or multiplayer play using a 
local area network.
2339 In other words, the game is still accessible and still playable in 
multiplayer mode. 
2335 EFF/Albert Reply at 14. 
2336 See EFF/Albert Supp. at App. (table listing game server shutdowns in 2014, including four games 
where server connections were required for all play); id. at 11; EFF/Albert Reply at 9. 
2337 EFF/Albert Supp. at 14. 
2338 ESA Class 23 Opp’n at 8. Significantly, as noted above, opponents point to examples of disclaimers 
included on the packaging of video games that make clear that multiplayer support will be offered only for 
a limited time by license, or may even be discontinued by the time the game is purchased. Id. at 11, Exhibit 
C. 
2339 There may also be other means to enable remote multiplayer play that do not require circumvention. At 
the public hearing, EFF referred to a service called GameRanger that facilitates multiplayer play of older 
games over the internet, apparently without the need to modify the game itself, although it is unclear 
whether such services have or need licenses from game publishers. See Tr. at 205:14-19 (May 20, 2015) 
(Stoltz, EFF) (discussing GameRanger service); id. at 231:03-15 (Gholami, Azentium) (same); see also 
Games, GAMERANGER, http://www.gameranger.com/games (cited in EFF/Albert Supp. at 5 n.22) (listing 
723 games it supports for PC and Macintosh platforms). EFF/Albert also refer to software called 
XBConnect that “uses the local network play functionality in some games to allow for play over the 
Internet, often called ‘tunneling.’” EFF/Albert Supp. at 5. Without further details about these services, it is 
not possible to definitively determine on the record at hand whether these services indeed can operate 
without circumventing TPMs. 
345
 

[PAGE 350]
     
    
   
 
 
     
   
  
   
  
   
  
  
 
  
  
  
   
 
  
   
   
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
     
      
          
              
            
       
             
 
            
                
         
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
In addition, the Register is concerned that circumvention for multiplayer play 
could implicate the anti-trafficking provision of section 1201(a)(2), which provides in 
pertinent part that “[n]o person shall . . . otherwise traffic in any technology, product, 
service, device, component, or part thereof, that . . . is primarily designed or produced for 
the purpose of circumventing a technological measure that effectively controls access to a 
work protected under this title.”2340 Reinstating multiplayer play may require not only 
replicating or creating new protocols that communicate with games, but also launching a 
new centralized server and distributing the new protocols to gamers.
2341 It is far from 
clear to the Register that these activities would be consistent with the anti-trafficking 
limitations of section 1201(a)(2), which are not subject to waiver through the triennial 
proceeding.
2342 
For these reasons, while proponents have established that the prohibition on 
circumvention in section 1201(a)(1) is likely to have adverse effects on gamers’ ability to 
engage in continued personal gameplay when support for a server that performs a 
necessary authentication check for any type of play has ended, they have not met that 
burden in the case of discontinuation of developer support for online multiplayer play. 
ii. Preservation 
To the extent that the shutdown of an authentication server bars access to a video 
game entirely, the record demonstrates that efforts to preserve video games will likely be 
impeded by the prohibition on circumvention.
2343 The Register agrees with proponents 
that screen capture, which makes an audiovisual recording of the game in operation, is 
not adequate to mitigate the adverse effects on preservationists, who rightfully may seek 
to preserve playable versions of games.
2344 
But as was true in the case of continued play by gamers, the Register reaches a 
different conclusion with respect to circumvention to achieve multiplayer play through an 
external matchmaking server.  In addition to the analysis presented above, the Register 
notes that the record does not demonstrate that preservationists need to replicate online 
matchmaking servers if the objective is preservation of the game in playable form for 
future research and study.  First, as explained above, section 108 suggests that 
preservation activities are properly limited to on-site uses, and multiplayer play over the 
2340 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(2)(A).
 
2341 See EFF/Albert Supp. at 4-6.
 
2342 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(2)(A); see also id. § 1201(a)(1)(E) (“Neither the exception under subparagraph 
(B) from the applicability of the prohibition contained in subparagraph (A), nor any determination made in 
a rulemaking conducted under subparagraph (C), may be used as a defense in any action to enforce any 
provision of this title other than this paragraph.”). 
2343 See, e.g., EFF/Albert Supp. at App. (Statement of Jason Scott, Internet Archive) (describing the need 
for circumvention). 
2344 Id. at App. (Statement of T.L. Taylor, Massachusetts Institute of Technology) (“The preservation of 
computer games includes not only making sure we can see their graphics or hear their sounds, but 
understand the complexity of their mechanics . . . .”). 
346
 

[PAGE 351]
     
    
    
     
  
   
  
   
   
  
 
   
  
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
   
  
    
 
    
  
  
    
 
 
        
    
                  
                
 
     
   
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
internet would violate that principle.  Moreover, the objective of permitting researchers to 
experience multiplayer play would appear to be satisfied by the alternatives to 
circumvention put forward by opponents, namely, by connecting multiple controllers to a 
single device or using local networking capabilities.
2345 
c. Statutory Factors 
The Register finds that the statutory factors support an appropriately limited 
exemption to facilitate both continued personal gameplay and preservation activities. 
i. Continued Play 
With respect to games that depend upon a server-based authentication check for 
which developer support has been discontinued, the Register concludes that the first 
statutory factor—the availability for use of copyrighted works—weighs in favor of 
granting an exemption.  As explained, when a video game developer ends support for an 
authentication server necessary to play a particular game owned by a consumer, the 
consumer loses all access to that copyrighted work.  Granting the exemption would allow 
consumers to restore access to lawfully acquired games, thus enhancing the availability 
of copyrighted works.
2346 
The second and third statutory factors, which consider the availability for use of 
works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational purposes and the impact the 
prohibition on the circumvention has on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, 
scholarship, or research,2347 are not especially relevant to the analysis of continued play.  
Gamers’ desire to pursue continued gameplay appears primarily motivated by the 
entertainment value of the games rather than a desire to engage in criticism or pedagogy. 
Considering the fourth factor, the effect of circumvention on the market for or 
value of copyrighted works,2348 the analysis is similar to that under the fourth fair use 
factor.  Although, in the context of continued gameplay, proponents appear to concede 
that console jailbreaking is unnecessary, in analyzing market impact, opponents focus 
their arguments on the harms of such jailbreaking and associated piracy. As discussed 
above, the Register agrees that granting an exemption permitting gamers to engage in 
console jailbreaking could adversely affect the market for copyrighted works, including 
the value of the console software as an effective distribution platform.  Setting aside 
jailbroken consoles, however, there was no specific evidence to show that granting an 
2345 Though perhaps suboptimal, screen capture can be used to supplement preservation and exhibition 
efforts for multiplayer play. 
2346 In light of the finding that the threshold criteria for an exemption to allow continued online multiplayer 
play have not been satisfied, the Register declines to analyze this aspect of the proposal under the statutory 
factors. 
2347 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(ii)-(iii). 
2348 Id. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(iv). 
347
 

[PAGE 352]
     
    
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
     
       
  
   
   
    
 
 
 
 
   
    
  
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
     
  
 
   
    
          
   
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
exemption would adversely affect the market for video games.  Accordingly, outside of 
the context of jailbroken consoles, the fourth factor favors plaintiffs. 
Under the fifth factor, which includes such other considerations as the Librarian 
considers appropriate,2349 opponents claim an exemption could harm their brands, and 
that users of an exemption will be susceptible to security risks and software bugs.  While 
some of these concerns may be legitimate, without more evidence in the record to support 
them, they appear too speculative to weigh against an exemption.  Opponents also worry 
that some users might misinterpret an exemption for continued play as extending to 
trafficking in circumvention tools. As detailed above, the Register has taken trafficking 
concerns into account in considering the proposed class. 
ii. Preservation 
Under the first statutory factor, the Register concludes that a relatively narrow 
exemption, drawing upon some of the principles of section 108, would allow libraries, 
archives and museums to restore and maintain access to video games that might 
otherwise be lost, thus enhancing the availability of copyrighted works.  Such 
preservation efforts may also stimulate new copyrighted works offering commentary and 
analysis of video games. 
Regarding the second factor, which considers the availability for use of works for 
nonprofit archival, preservation and educational purposes, the record clearly favors 
granting the exemption.
2350 Similarly, on the current record, the third statutory factor, the 
impact of the prohibition on circumvention on criticism, comment, news reporting, 
teaching, scholarship, or research, weighs heavily in favor of granting the exemption.  
EFF/Albert provide substantial evidence that the prohibition on circumvention inhibits 
scholars from accessing older works and replicating “the experience of originally playing 
the game” in order to study game design or construction.2351 Scholars and others who 
seek to understand the cultural and design aspects of video games—as well as their 
research efforts and commentary—will benefit if the games remain available in playable 
form. 
Turning to the fourth factor, the effect of circumvention on the market for or value 
of copyrighted works, the Register concludes that a properly crafted exemption for 
preservationists can satisfy their needs without impacting the market for video games. As 
noted under the fair use analysis, it appears unlikely that jailbreaking of consoles by 
preservationists in a controlled setting would result in harm to the market for either 
console software or the video games that run on those consoles.  
2349 Id. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(v).
 
2350 EFF/Albert Supp. at 13 (citing PRESERVING VIRTUAL WORLDS REPORT at 6).
 
2351 Id. at 13-14.
 
348
 

[PAGE 353]
     
    
  
 
  
   
  
  
 
     
  
    
 
   
   
   
  
    
  
  
   
 
 
   
 
  
 
     
  
 
     
   
   
   
   
   
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Finally, under the fifth factor, again on this record, the brand and security 
concerns raised by opponents appear too speculative to weigh against an appropriately 
tailored exemption. 
4. NTIA Comments 
NTIA supports the adoption of this exemption largely as requested by proponents. 
Recognizing that the proposal would benefit two separate yet “intertwined” groups, NTIA 
believes that the record supports an exemption for both continued gameplay and 
preservation uses.
2352 In NTIA’s view, any exemption should authorize circumvention 
not only for single-player gameplay but also for multiplayer functionality.  NTIA asserts 
that consumers receive inconsistent notice at best that developers may discontinue 
support for multiplayer use.
2353 NTIA also discounts the utility of LAN-enabled 
multiplayer play, finding the requirement to be on the same local network to be a 
“significant limitation compared to the global reach afforded by play over the 
Internet.”
2354 
NTIA believes that the proposed uses are likely to be fair under section 107, 
stating that a use need not be transformative to be favored under the first factor, 
“especially when the user is acting to restore the ability to access a work that he or she 
had originally been allowed to use.”2355 NTIA rejects opponents’ view that the 
exemption could affect the market for sequels or other video games, stating “analysis of 
the fourth factor should focus on the market for the work at issue and not on the collateral 
effect on the market for other works.”2356 While acknowledging opponents’ concerns that 
allowing circumvention of TPMs on video game consoles could lead to “widespread 
piracy,” NTIA would nonetheless allow circumvention of consoles for purposes of the 
proposed exemption, asserting that it “is not likely to contribute significantly to [] 
piracy.”
2357 
NTIA also recommends that any exemption should include personal handheld 
gaming devices in addition to consoles or PCs, but does not point to any evidence in the 
record relating to handheld devices. 
As explained above, the Register finds that the record supports granting an 
exemption to cover both continued gameplay and preservation uses, but one more 
specifically contoured to reflect the evidence submitted. As summarized below, the 
Register does not agree that the record supports an exemption for online multiplayer play, 
in part due to trafficking concerns, which NTIA does not address.  Additionally, the 
2352 NTIA Letter at 64.
 
2353 Id. at 64-65.
 
2354 Id. at 69.
 
2355 Id. at 66.
 
2356 Id. at 67-68.
 
2357 Id. at 68.
 
349
 

[PAGE 354]
     
    
 
 
   
 
  
  
  
 
     
  
  
   
        
  
  
  
   
  
 
   
 
     
   
  
 
  
 
    
  
   
                 
           
       
     
      
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
record contains strong evidence linking jailbreaking of console software to increased 
piracy, and so the Register recommends limiting the ability to circumvent TPMs on 
consoles to preservationist uses only.  Finally, as noted above, the Register was unable to 
consider handheld devices due to the lack of record evidence. 
5. Conclusion and Recommendation 
For the reasons described above, the Register finds that the evidentiary record 
supports an exemption for PC and console-based video games to allow continued 
personal gameplay and preservation activities when developer server support has ended, 
though one more circumscribed than that described by proponents.  As in the past, when 
there is a basis in the record for some, but not all, of the class, the Register will refine the 
class definition to ensure it reflects the legal and evidentiary findings.
2358 
To begin with, the Register adopts proponents’ two-part test to determine when 
server support has ended; that is, either the developer has announced the end of server 
support, or there has been no server support for a period of at least six months.
2359 The 
Register also adopts proponents’ suggestion that the exemption should cease to apply to 
new acts of circumvention if server support for the game is restored by the copyright 
2360owner. 
Proponents’ focus is on self-contained copies of physical or downloaded games; 
as proposed, the exemption is not intended to reach “persistent world” games or 
subscription-based games.  To this end, following EFF/Albert’s suggestion, the Register 
recommends that the exemption exclude uses that require access to or copying of 
copyrightable content stored or previously stored on developer game servers, finding this 
to be an important limitation.2361 
The Register appreciates that there may be a lack of certainty in terms of whether 
gamers and preservationists are owners or licensees of the copies of the games in their 
possession.  The Register understands that, from a practical standpoint, proponents are 
speaking of those who lawfully possess physical or downloaded copies of games, 
regardless of whether the software is legally owned; thus, the Register recommends 
extending the exemption to such lawful possessors, understanding that they may not be 
the legal owners of the software copy they possess. The Register concludes that because 
the exemption is premised on fair use and not dependent upon section 117, the lack of 
ownership should not be determinative of eligibility for the exemption. 
2358 See, e.g., 2010 Recommendation at 16 (explaining that “in many cases, [an initial] subset of a category
 
of works should be further tailored in accordance with the evidence in the record”).
 
2359 EFF/Albert Supp. at 3.
 
2360 Id. at 4.
 
2361 Tr. at 228:13-25 (May 20, 2015) (Stoltz, EFF). 
350
 

[PAGE 355]
     
    
     
   
  
   
   
  
 
     
  
   
     
 
 
  
 
   
   
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
   
 
   
  
 
   
 
 
                
            
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
As discussed above, the Register has determined that with respect to online 
multiplayer play, proponents have failed to provide persuasive support for their case. In 
particular, the harms of which proponents complain appear to flow more from the 
termination of matchmaking services—which are not part of the copyrighted works— 
than from the imposition of TPMs controlling access to those services.  Moreover, it is 
not clear on the current record how the provision of alternative matchmaking protocols to 
multiple users could be accomplished without running afoul of the anti-trafficking 
provisions of section 1201(a)(2).  In any event, the record does show that continued 
access and use of the video games, including multiplayer play, is still possible using 
locally connected devices, a reasonable alternative to circumvention. 
With respect to gamers at large, the record supports granting an exemption to 
allow circumvention of TPMs on lawfully acquired PC and console-based video games 
that require communication with authentication servers when the requisite servers are 
taken offline.  In this scenario, the inability to circumvent the TPM means that all 
gameplay is precluded, a significant adverse effect.  Because the record demonstrates a 
substantial relationship between jailbreaking of video game consoles and piracy, 
however, the Register finds that the exemption for circumvention of authentication 
checks should not encompass the jailbreaking of console software by gamers for purposes 
of continued gameplay.  Indeed, as noted above, proponents have indicated that they are 
not seeking the ability to jailbreak consoles in this context.  As also noted above, 
proponents have failed to offer any evidence to support an exemption that extends to 
handheld devices. 
The Register additionally finds that the record supports granting an exemption for 
libraries, archives and museums to allow circumvention of TPMs so that video games can 
be preserved in playable condition when authentication servers are discontinued.  In the 
case of preservation, since the risks of piracy appear greatly diminished in that context, 
the exemption should also extend to TPMs controlling access to computer programs used 
to operate video game consoles, assuming such circumvention is necessary to maintain a 
console game in playable form.
2362 
The record clearly establishes that libraries and archives, along with museums, 
engage in valuable preservation activities with respect to video games.  It does not, 
however, support a broader exemption to allow reproductions and adaptations by other 
types of institutions or individual actors for more general “preservation” purposes.  The 
Register notes, however, that interested individuals may be able to contribute to valuable 
preservation efforts by lending their talents and expertise to qualified institutions. 
Certain limitations set forth in section 108 of the Copyright Act are instructive in 
defining the appropriate scope of a preservation exemption for video games.  As 
suggested by section 108, the exemption should be limited to institutions that open their 
2362 The Register notes, however, that this piracy concern may not apply to older consoles because they may 
not need to be circumvented to restore video game functionality. See EFF/Albert Reply at 5-6. 
351
 

[PAGE 356]
     
    
    
   
 
   
  
 
    
  
  
  
  
 
 
   
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
    
 
 
 
 
	 
	 
	 
	 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
collections to the public and/or to outside researchers.  Additionally, the activities must be 
conducted without any purpose of direct or indirect commercial advantage.  While the 
uses may include reproduction and modification of video game and console software 
necessary to preserve games in playable form, they do not extend to exhibition activities 
involving public performance or display.  And finally, any digital copies or adaptations of 
the video games or console software created by the institution as a result of preservation 
efforts must not be distributed or otherwise made accessible beyond the physical 
premises of the institution. 
Accordingly, the Register recommends that the following class of works be 
exempt from the prohibition on circumvention for the next three years: 
(i)	 Video games in the form of computer programs embodied in 
physical or downloaded formats that have been lawfully acquired 
as complete games, when the copyright owner or its authorized 
representative has ceased to provide access to an external 
computer server necessary to facilitate an authentication process 
to enable local gameplay, solely for the purpose of: 
(A)	 Permitting access to the video game to allow copying and 
modification of the computer program to restore access to 
the game for personal gameplay on a personal computer or 
video game console; or 
(B)	 Permitting access to the video game to allow copying and 
modification of the computer program to restore access to 
the game on a personal computer or video game console 
when necessary to allow preservation of the game in a 
playable form by an eligible library, archives or museum, 
where such activities are carried out without any purpose 
of direct or indirect commercial advantage and the video 
game is not distributed or made available outside of the 
physical premises of the eligible library, archives or 
museum. 
(ii) Computer programs used to operate video game consoles solely to 
the extent necessary for an eligible library, archives or museum to 
engage in the preservation activities described in paragraph 
(i)(B). 
(iii) For purposes of the exemptions in paragraphs (i) and (ii), the 
following definitions shall apply: 
(A)	 “Complete games” means video games that can be played 
by users without accessing or reproducing copyrightable 
content stored or previously stored on an external 
computer server. 
352
 

[PAGE 357]
     
    
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
   
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
	 
	 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
(B) “Ceased to provide access” means that the copyright owner 
or its authorized representative has either issued an 
affirmative statement indicating that external server 
support for the video game has ended and such support is 
in fact no longer available or, alternatively, server support 
has been discontinued for a period of at least six months; 
provided, however, that server support has not since been 
restored. 
(C)	 “Local gameplay” means gameplay conducted on a 
personal computer or video game console, or locally 
connected personal computers or consoles, and not through 
an online service or facility. 
(D)	 A library, archives or museum is considered “eligible” 
when the collections of the library, archives or museum are 
open to the public and/or are routinely made available to 
researchers who are not affiliated with the library, archives 
or museum. 
353
 

[PAGE 358]
     
    
    
  
 
 
  
 
   
   
  
   
   
 
   
   
   
  
  
   
 
 
    
 
  
            
            
                
             
            
           
          
            
       
      
                  
      
          
     
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
L. Proposed Class 24:  Abandoned Software – Music Recording Software 
1. Proposal 
Proposed Class 24 would allow circumvention of a dongle-like access control that 
is allegedly no longer supported by the developer or copyright owner and protects a 
specific type of music recording software, Ensoniq PARIS.  Three individuals, Richard 
Kelley, James McCloskey, and Michael Yanoska, filed similar petitions seeking this 
exemption,
2363 and the NPRM described the proposed class as follows: 
Proposed Class 24: This proposed class would allow circumvention of 
access controls consisting of the PACE content protection system, which 
restricts access to the full functionality of lawfully acquired Ensoniq 
PARIS music recording software.2364 
According to petitioners, access controls prevent users of Ensoniq PARIS, a 
digital audio workstation used in the professional audio industry by artists, composers, 
and sound engineers,2365 from utilizing their PARIS software and “hav[ing] access to 
their own original music.”2366 Petitioners suggested that the problem has arisen because 
Intelligent Devices, the company that created and sold the PARIS software, “refus[es] to 
provide new PACE response codes to ‘unlock’ the [PARIS] software,” thus preventing 
“the small group of [PARIS] users still in existence” from using the software purchased 
by such users on new computers.
2367 
Following the initial petition phase of the proceeding, none of the petitioners 
submitted legal arguments or evidence or participated in the public hearings in support of 
their petition.  Short comments expressing general support for the proposal were filed by 
the Music Library Association (“MLA”), the Free Software Foundation (“FSF”), 
Catherine Gellis and the Digital Age Defense project (“Gellis/Digital Age Defense”), and 
over 1500 individuals.  These comments, however, were written generically to apply to 
multiple classes, and no commenter provided specific information concerning the PARIS 
2363 Kelley Pet. at 1 (seeking an exemption for “[o]bsolete software/hardware combinations protected by a 
software based copy protection mechanism (software dongle) when the manufacturer is unable (because of 
no longer being in business) or unwilling to provide access via this system to those who are otherwise 
entitled access” or “that prevents the hardware and software from running on current operating systems or 
current hardware by those otherwise entitled to access to the software and hardware”); McCloskey Pet. at 1 
(seeking an exemption for “[c]omputer programs protected by dongles that prevent access due to 
malfunction or damage and which are obsolete,” including the PARIS software); Yanoska Pet. at 1 
(requesting “[e]limination of the PACE control on recording software that was created and sold over 15 
years ago (which is no longer sold or supported by the creating company)”). 
2364 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,870. 
2365 Kelley Pet. at 1-2. The Ensoniq PARIS workstation is a closed system consisting of the PARIS 
software and audio recording and mixing hardware. Id. 
2366 McCloskey Pet. at 2; see also Kelley Pet. at 2-3. 
2367 Yanoska Pet. at 1. 
354
 

[PAGE 359]
     
    
    
   
    
 
 
  
  
  
    
 
 
 
  
  
   
  
  
    
  
    
  
                     
                   
           
                    
       
            
   
            
  
                
        
 
 
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
software or the PACE system.2368 Gellis made a statement in broad support of the 
exemption at the public hearing, but did not provide supporting details or tailor her 
remarks to the specifics of the proposed class.2369 The class is opposed by Joint Creators, 
who raise significant concerns about the lack of supporting evidence, as well as the scope 
of the proposed exemption, which have not been rebutted.2370 
2. NTIA Comments 
NTIA explains that while it is “generally open to supporting exemptions for 
obsolete, legally purchased software . . . proponents need to provide sufficient evidence 
on the record,” and that “proponents did not meet that burden in this case.”2371 
Accordingly, NTIA concludes that “[w]ithout more evidence in the record to address 
opponents’ arguments and bolster supporting claims, [it] is unable to support the 
proposed exemption at this time.”
2372 
3. Conclusion and Recommendation 
In their petitions, Kelley, McCloskey, and Yanoska raise a potentially valid 
concern that the loss of developer or copyright owner support required to access the 
PARIS software may result in adverse effects on those trying to make legitimate uses of 
that software.  It is therefore unfortunate that neither they nor any other commenting 
party followed up with a substantive submission detailing the legal and factual support 
for the proposal.
2373 In light of the lack of a record to substantiate the requested 
exemption, the Register cannot recommend adoption of Proposed Class 24.2374 
2368 See MLA Class 24 Supp. at 1; FSF Class 24 Supp. at 1; Gellis/Digital Age Defense Class 24 Supp. at 1;
 
Battilana Class 24 Supp. at 1; see also generally Digital Right to Repair Class 24 Supp. (1530 individuals).
 
2369 Tr. at 44:11-45:22 (May 21, 2015) (Gellis, Digital Age Defense).
 
2370 Joint Creators Class 24 Opp’n at 3 (finding fault with the claim that the PARIS software, rather than the
 
PACE TPM on the software, is obsolete).
 
2371 NTIA Letter at 70 (citing NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,857).
 
2372 Id. at 71.
 
2373 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C); 2012 Recommendation at 8 (explaining the preponderance of the
 
evidence standard).
 
2374 The Register notes that if proponents are still interested in accessing the PARIS software, they may
 
wish to contact the responsible companies directly to obtain authorization to circumvent the alleged access 
controls.
 
355
 

[PAGE 360]
     
    
    
  
  
  
   
   
   
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
            
           
              
                
  
              
              
      
          
             
  
              
           
          
                  
              
             
          
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
M. Proposed Class 26:  Software – 3D Printers 
1. Proposal 
Proponent Public Knowledge seeks an exemption to permit the circumvention of 
access controls on computer programs in 3D printers to enable the use of non­
manufacturer-approved feedstock in the printers.2375 The Office understands the term 
“3D printing” to describe various technologies that translate digital files into physical 
objects by adding successive layers of material.
2376 3D printing—also called “additive” 
manufacturing—can b e distinguished from traditional computer-controlled 
manufacturing, such as industrial CNC mills, lathes, or plasma or laser cutters, which are 
“subtractive” material removal processes.  As proposed, the exemption would apply to 
both commercial and noncommercial 3D printers.
2377 The NPRM described the class as 
follows: 
Proposed Class 26: This proposed class would allow circumvention of 
TPMs on firmware or software in 3D printers to allow use of non­
manufacturer-approved feedstock in the printer.
2378 
Comments supporting the proposed exemption were filed by Catherine Gellis and the 
Digital Age Defense project (“Gellis/Digital Age Defense”), the Free Software 
Foundation (“FSF”) and over 1600 individuals.2379 
a. Background 
The 3D printing industry is growing rapidly.  In 2013, worldwide sales for 3D 
printer systems and materials were $1.5 billion, and are projected to grow to $7 billion in 
2375 Public Knowledge specifically proposed the following: “an exemption for users of 3D printers that are 
protected by control technologies when circumvention is accomplishes [sic] solely for the purpose of using 
non-manufacturer approved feedstock in the printer.” Public Knowledge 3D Printing Pet. at 2. The Library 
Copyright Alliance (“LCA”) joined Public Knowledge in the initial supporting comments, but not the reply 
round of comments. 
2376 Public Knowledge/LCA Supp. at 3; see also Stratasys Opp’n at 1 (“The proposed class of ‘3D printers’ 
comprises various technologies that translate digital files into physical objects by adding successive layers 
of material, sometimes referred to as additive manufacturing.”). 
2377 Tr. at 137:19-23 (May 28, 2015) (Weinberg) (explaining “while [Class 26] was originally motivated by 
focus on consumer use, I don’t think there is any reason to exclude manufacturing or more sophisticated 
commercial players”). 
2378 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,871. The Register notes that a lthough the terms “firmware” and “software” 
are variously used throughout the Recommendation, both are “computer programs” within the meaning of 
the Copyright Act. See 17 U.S.C. § 101 (definition of “computer program”). 
2379 Gellis/Digital Age Defense Class 26 Supp.; FSF Class 26 Supp.; Digital Right to Repair Class 26 Supp. 
(1577 individuals); Gregory Borodiansky Reply; Patrick Brett Reply; Digital Right to Repair Class 26 
Reply (123 individuals); Henry Feldman Reply; Patrick Ferguson Reply; Robert Gusek Reply; Alex Hatch 
Reply; Don Lowery Reply; Matthew Nupen Reply; Michael Weinberg Reply. 
356
 

[PAGE 361]
     
    
    
  
  
   
   
   
  
 
   
  
  
 
    
    
 
    
 
 
   
   
  
  
   
       
    
      
    
      
    
               
              
     
           
   
        
           
       
           
            
 
 
                                                 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
2016 and $21 billion in 2020.2380 The materials or “feedstock” used in a 3D printer can 
consist of metals, waste plastics, woods, or bio-tissue, but most typically are ABS or PLA 
plastics.2381 Manufacturers of 3D printers commonly sell manufacturer-approved 
feedstock, in part for alleged quality control purposes.2382 Public Knowledge explains 
that manufacturers of some 3D printers use TPMs to restrict the types of feedstock that 
can be used in their 3D printers to authorized feedstock.2383 Public Knowledge seeks an 
exemption permitting users to circumvent these TPMs in order to use non-manufacturer­
approved feedstock in their 3D printers.  This feedstock may be a less expensive version 
of the same material used by the manufacturer (e.g., ABS plastic with the same chemical 
composition as manufacturer-approved feedstock) or feedstock composed of a different 
material (e.g., metal instead of plastic).
2384 
Public Knowledge explains that many TPM systems rely on a microchip attached 
to a printer feedstock cartridge that allows printer operating system software to verify that 
the feedstock is manufacturer-authorized before the software allows the printer to print 
3D objects.
2385 Although Public Knowledge did not provide specifics, it suggests that in 
some systems, these microchips may not even control access to a copyrighted work.2386 
Some 3D printer TPMs use “dumb” chips such as radio-frequency identification chips, 
key cards, or chips that contain serial numbers.2387 Circumvention of these TPMs is 
likely to require copying factual information from a verification chip to a third-party chip, 
or reprogramming an original chip with information about the third-party replacement 
feedstock.
2388 By way of example, Public Knowledge pointed to the Cube, a home 
printer manufactured by 3D Systems, which restricts use to only manufacturer-produced 
feedstock cartridges by verifying the existence of a valid chip on the cartridge.2389 Other 
3D printers use more complex chip-based TPMs, including authentication methods that 
contain copyrighted software on the chip, but Public Knowledge did not further explain 
how those TPMs functioned.2390 Opponent Stratasys, a 3D printer manufacturer, 
2380 Stratasys Opp’n at 26 (citing WOHLERS ASSOCIATES, WOHLERS REPORT 2014: 3D PRINTING AND 
ADDITIVE MANUFACTURING STATE OF THE INDUSTRY 110, 116 (2014) (“WOHLERS REPORT”)).
 
2381 Public Knowledge/LCA Supp. at 4, 9.
 
2382 See Stratasys Opp’n at 27-30.
 
2383 Public Knowledge/LCA Supp. at 5.
 
2384 Id. at 9-10.
 
2385 Public Knowledge Class 26 Reply at 2; Public Knowledge/LCA Supp. at 5. Public Knowledge
 
declined to provide information about other specific TPMs or circumvention methods. Public Knowledge
 
Class 26 Reply at 1-2.
 
2386 See Tr. at 127:03-12 (May 28, 2015) (Siy, Public Knowledge); see also Stratasys Opp’n at 14; Public
 
Knowledge/LCA Supp. at 6.
 
2387 Tr. at 134:19-136:08 (May 28, 2015) (Weinberg; Charlesworth, USCO).
 
2388 Public Knowledge Class 26 Reply at 2; Stratasys Opp’n at 9-10.
 
2389 Public Knowledge/LCA Supp. at 5.
 
2390 Tr. at 185:02-11 (May 28, 2015) (Siy, Public Knowledge) (stating that more sophisticated chip-based
 
TPMs are coming to the market which may require different circumvention methods); see also id. at
 
357
 

[PAGE 362]
     
    
 
  
      
   
  
   
   
  
   
   
   
 
  
 
 
   
    
  
 
  
      
  
  
            
              
       
             
             
         
           
                
               
  
                 
                 
   
  
   
                
                
       
            
           
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
observed that these “smart” chips can “hold data read by the printer’s software” which 
“generally consists of nonexecuting code that includes information such as the amount of 
material in the cartridge, the type of material, and the batch number.”2391 
In addition to whatever hardware or software modifications are needed so that a 
3D printer will accept non-manufacturer-approved feedstock,2392 use of feedstock 
composed of materials other than the material a 3D printer has been designed to use (e.g., 
metal instead of plastic) may require further modification of the printer’s operating 
system software, for example, to change preset variables such as the rate at which the 
heated feedstock is extruded to create the object or the temperature of the extrusion 
nozzle.
2393 Without those modifications, 3D-printed objects using such feedstock may 
print with errors or not print at all.  Stratasys explains that there are TPMs (separate and 
apart from the chip verification systems) that prevent access to this operating system 
software, such as “panels, ports, and user names and passwords on the user console,” but 
did not provide further detail or offer examples of printer models that employ these 
TPMs.
2394 
In addition, Stratasys states that 3D printers may contain “other intellectual 
property” such as “design software, [computer assisted design or] CAD files, proprietary 
machine-readable files, and reports compiling performance or other data.”2395 Design 
software is used to design three-dimensional objects to be printed on a 3D printer; 
Stratasys acknowledges that this software is typically developed and owned by third 
parties, not Stratasys, or is available as open source software.
2396 CAD files, in turn, are 
digital files typically created on a desktop computer that hold the designs of 3D objects; 
Stratasys notes that such designs may be copyrighted and owned by third-parties.
2397 
133:07-11 (Weinberg) (“You could also structure the system where there is much more information in the 
feedstock container chip, and so it’s a more, instead of a kind of look-and-see structure, the two pieces talk 
to each other in a much more intensive way.”). 
2391 Stratasys Opp’n at 9. Stratasys does not believe that the software on the microchips themselves is 
protected by copyright, but suggests future versions might be copyrightable. Tr. at 169:09-14 (May 28, 
2015) (Riley, USCO; Carey, Stratasys); id. at 171:23-172:03 (Carey, Stratasys). 
2392 See Tr. at 126:11-16 (May 28, 2015) (Siy, Public Knowledge) (“[U]ltimately what we want to be able to 
do is to use a chip that was not created by the original manufacturer or to use feedstock attached to a chip in 
a cartridge where the feedstock was not created by the original manufacturer with that 3D printer.”); id. at 
127:23-128:01 (Siy, Public Knowledge). 
2393 Stratasys Opp’n at 10 (asserting that “circumvention that would allow a 3D printer to process materials 
whose properties vary intentionally from those for which a system is calibrated[] . . . requires unauthorized 
modification of copyright protected software”). 
2394 Id. 
2395 Id. at 10-11.
 
2396 Tr. at 165:18-24 (May 28, 2015) (Carey, Stratasys) (“The design software is separate from what we do.
 
There are CAD vendors that [] make the design software. We accept all those files.”); Stratasys Opp’n at
 
28 (referencing Autodesk’s open source 3D printing software platform).
 
2397 See Stratasys Opp’n at 11 (“[I]ntellectual property may belong to the manufacturer or to third parties,
 
such as third-party creators of design files provided pursuant to a license.”).
 
358
 

[PAGE 363]
     
    
    
  
   
 
     
 
  
   
  
 
  
 
  
    
    
  
  
  
 
  
   
  
 
    
              
  
    
  
   
           
        
          
              
      
             
                
                    
  
       
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
According to Stratasys, internal software on its printers converts CAD files into 
proprietary “CMB” files, which “consist of machine-readable instructions for building a 
printed part” on a Stratasys printer.2398 The “motion control and system control software 
embedded on the printer translate the instructions in the CMB file to cause the hardware 
to act on the materials in precise ways.”
2399 Stratasys claims that “[a] user who wanted to 
change the behavior of the hardware to work with different materials would need to 
modify each component of this process, the motion control software, the system control 
software, and the CMB files.”2400 Finally, Stratasys states that 3D printers may collect “a 
customer’s proprietary or other confidential information,” such as customer accessible 
performance data.2401 
b. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Public Knowledge claims that circumventing a chip-based verification system on 
a 3D printer in order to use third-party feedstock is a “perfectly lawful” noninfringing use 
and that manufacturers’ desire to limit the use of third-party feedstock is “remote” from 
the proper scope of copyright law.2402 In addition, Public Knowledge contends that 
because the software is embedded in the 3D printer and has “no market value 
independent of the printer itself,” 3D printer manufacturers are “unlikely” to be 
concerned over unauthorized reproduction and distribution of the software separate from 
the printer it is embedded within.
2403 
Public Knowledge asserts that any necessary reproductions of software would be 
noninfringing as a fair use under section 107 or under section 117’s limitation on 
exclusive rights for computer programs.2404 Although Public Knowledge did not directly 
address the four fair use factors under section 107, it made arguments that indirectly 
speak to these factors.  First, regarding the purpose and character of the use, Public 
Knowledge claims that the TPMs at issue prevent the use of non-authorized feedstock in 
3D printers, but are not intended to protect the copyrighted software itself.2405 Public 
2398 Id. Stratasys also creates software that “convert[s] design files into machine readable instructions.” Id. 
at 8.
 
2399 Id. at 11.
 
2400 Id.
 
2401 Id. at 22. 
2402 Public Knowledge/LCA Supp. at 6-8. Public Knowledge also argues tha t Congress would support 
“treat[ing] machine-embedded software differently than other protected works[,]” pointing to the fact that 
in section 109, Congress chose to exempt certain computer programs embodied in machines from the 
general prohibitions on renting, leasing, or lending computer programs. Id. at 7; see also 17 U.S.C. § 109. 
2403 Public Knowledge/LCA Supp. at 6. 
2404 Tr. at 186:21-23 (May 28, 2015) (Siy, Public Knowledge) (“I think that fair use can cover [printer 
operating system software] modification.”); Public Knowledge Reply at 2 & n.8. One comment also claims 
that “tinkering” with 3D printers would be a fair use. Digital Right to Repair Class 26 Supp. at 911 
(Kenneth Kolbly). 
2405 Public Knowledge 3D Printing Pet. at 3. 
359
 

[PAGE 364]
     
    
   
    
  
  
 
 
    
  
  
  
 
  
   
  
     
 
 
  
 
     
  
 
   
 
              
      
        
      
     
       
   
           
                  
               
                  
            
       
    
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Knowledge also notes that interoperability is a recognized purpose under the fair use 
doctrine.2406 Second, concerning the nature of the copyrighted work, Public Knowledge 
states that “[the software] is only useful when paired with the durable good itself,”2407 
suggesting that the software is to a significant degree functional in nature.  Third, 
regarding the amount and substantiality used in relation to the copyrighted work as a 
whole, Public Knowledge suggests that necessary alterations to use non-authorized 
feedstock “can vary.”
2408 Fourth, addressing the effect of the use upon the potential 
market for or value of the copyrighted work, Public Knowledge argues there is no real 
market for the printer software, as it “has no market value independent of the printer 
itself, and is not marketed independently of the printer.”
2409 
Section 117 allows the owner of a computer program to make a copy or 
adaptation of that work if the new copy or adaptation is created as an “essential step” to 
use the program with a machine.2410 Public Knowledge maintains that section 117 allows 
owners of copies of the printer operating system software to modify that software to use 
it with the 3D printer.
2411 First, Public Knowledge asserts that the owners of 3D printers 
also own the copies of the printer operating system software on those printers and that, as 
owners, they are entitled to exercise their privilege to make copies or adaptations of those 
programs under section 117.2412 Second, Public Knowledge contends that any 
reproductions or modifications made to printer operating system software are essential to 
utilize third-party feedstock in a 3D printer.2413 Proponent Michael Weinberg2414 was not 
as sanguine on the ownership issue, however; he testified that “especially in the consumer 
market,” there were different degrees of legal sophistication of 3D printer manufacturers 
and that “it would be highly surprising if you did not see almost every version of 
copyright license theory applied to software in this space . . . .”2415 
2406 Id. (citing Lexmark Int’l, Inc. v. Static Control Components, 387 F.3d 522 (6th Cir. 2004)).
 
2407 Public Knowledge/LCA Supp. at 6.
 
2408 Tr. at 132:01 (May 28, 2015) (Siy, Public Knowledge).
 
2409 Public Knowledge/LCA Supp. at 6.
 
2410 17 U.S.C. § 117(a)(1).
 
2411 Public Knowledge Class 26 Reply at 3.
 
2412 Id. at 3 n.13.
 
2413 Tr. at 143:12-17 (May 28, 2015) (Siy, Public Knowledge) (“[T]he reproductions that might be at issue
 
would be RAM copies made simply in the utilization of the 3D printer itself or any modifications necessary 
in order to utilize a 3D printer with the new feedstock, and both of these fall within Section 117.”). 
2414 At the time of the filing of its petition and supporting comments, Michael Weinberg was employed by 
Public Knowledge. Weinberg subsequently left Public Knowledge and filed reply comments and testified 
in his personal capacity. Id. at 123:15-20 (Weinberg). 
2415 Id. at 148:10-17 (Weinberg). 
360
 

[PAGE 365]
     
    
  
  
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
   
  
 
 
    
   
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
      
   
    
       
      
                 
 
      
     
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
c. Asserted Adverse Effects 
Public Knowledge contends that the inability to circumvent TPMs on 3D printers 
to use third-party feedstock creates “a significant negative impact on innovation in the 3D 
printing field, [drives] up costs for consumers, and undermin[es] expectations of 
ownership around 3D printers.”2416 According to Public Knowledge, manufacturerapproved feedstock costs “three times as much as [feedstock offered by] its third party 
competitor.”2417 Public Knowledge claims that an exemption would “encourage 
innovation by protecting and growing the market for innovation in consumables” and 
points to a general movement towards using diverse and innovative filaments, such as 
translucent or metal feedstock and even living tissue.2418 As support, Public Knowledge 
provides examples of printing living tissues to aid in organ transplants and of a functional 
3D-printed boat created out of recycled milk jugs.2419 
Public Knowledge further states that an exemption would “[r]eaffirm [p]ublic 
[c]onfidence in [o]wnership” of 3D printers.2420 It also claims that an exemption would 
allow consumers and the 3D printing industry to avoid the legal uncertainty experienced 
in the 2D printing industry before “a landmark court ruling” affirmed consumers’ ability 
to use third-party ink in paper and ink printers.2421 
Finally, Public Knowledge notes that the existence of TPM-free options offered 
by some 3D printer manufacturers “does nothing to diminish the importance of this 
exemption,” and that “[a]llowing manufacturers to distort the aftermarket for filament 
simply because there are other manufacturers in the market would be a misuse of 
copyright law.”2422 Emphasizing the importance of consumer choice, Weinberg testified 
that different 3D printers have unique functionalities, and that consumers differentiate 
between printers by comparing technical or physical properties, which are often 
patented.2423 
d. Argument Under Statutory Factors 
Reviewing the statutory factors in section 1201(a)(1), Public Knowledge asserts 
that “the first three factors do not directly apply to this exemption,” explaining that “the 
circumvention of technological measures designed to prevent the use of third party 
consumables in 3D printers is not the type of harm that Congress was considering when it 
2416 Public Knowledge/LCA Supp. at 8.
 
2417 Id. at 10.
 
2418 Id. at 9, 13.
 
2419 Public Knowledge 3D Printing Pet. at 4 nn.1-2.
 
2420 Public Knowledge/LCA Supp. at 11.
 
2421 See id. at 10. Public Knowledge does not provide a citation, but presumably is referring to Lexmark ,
 
387 F.3d 522.
 
2422 Public Knowledge/LCA Supp. at 11.
 
2423 Tr. at 182:02-13 (May 28, 2015) (Weinberg).
 
361
 

[PAGE 366]
     
    
  
  
   
   
    
    
 
 
 
  
 
   
   
   
 
  
 
     
               
            
          
     
      
  
     
        
          
           
 
         
  
              
           
 
            
                 
             
           
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
passed the DMCA.”2424 According to Public Knowledge, the fourth factor, which 
evaluates the market for copyrighted works, favors granting an exemption because the 
TPM is not “primarily designed” to protect the operating system software, which is not 
sold separately from the printer.2425 Public Knowledge argues that the value of that 
software “is tied to the value of the printer, and the value of the printer is not connected to 
the existence or nonexistence of the exemption.”
2426 Weinberg also claims that 
consumers discriminate based on the technical features and capabilities of various 3D 
printers, without evaluating the copyrighted printer operating system software.2427 
Public Knowledge contends that the fifth statutory factor, which evaluates such 
other factors as the Librarian considers appropriate, is the most significant.2428 
Discussing that factor, Public Knowledge argues that an exemption would strengthen 
property rights,2429 encourage competition and innovation,2430 and meet consumer 
expectations concerning ownership of consumer devices.2431 Comments received from 
individual consumers echo this sentiment concerning ownership, with most essentially 
stating “I own my 3D printer and should be able to use it to print with whatever I 
want.”
2432 These comments also express expectations that 3D printers should be treated 
the same as 2D printers under the law.2433 
2. Opposition 
Proposed Class 26 is opposed by Stratasys and the Intellectual Property Owners 
Association (“IPO”). They argue that proponents have failed to make a prima facie case 
2424 Public Knowledge/LCA Supp. at 11-12; see also Lexmark, 387 F.3d at 551-53. The first three factors 
consider issues such as “the availability for use of copyrighted works” for general and certain nonprofit 
purposes and considerations regarding “criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or 
research.”  17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(i)-(iii). 
2425 Public Knowledge/LCA Supp. at 12. 
2426 Id. 
2427 Tr. at 182:09-13 (May 28, 2015) (Weinberg). 
2428 Public Knowledge/LCA Supp. at 12; 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(v). 
2429 Public Knowledge/LCA Supp. at 13 (“Ownership is an important property right, and this exemption 
would strengthen that right by removing uncertainty surrounding what can and cannot be done with 
printers.”). 
2430 Id. (An exemption “would encourage innovation by protecting and growing the market for innovation 
in consumables.”). 
2431 Id. at 12 (“Users would be surprised—rightly so —if copyright law prevented them from replacing parts 
of their noncopyrightable devices simply because the manufacturer included a digital verification chip in its 
design.”). 
2432 See, e.g., Digital Right to Repair Class 26 Supp. at 4 (Aaron Dudek). 
2433 Id. at 31 (Adrian Gill) (“I don’t need to ask permission from HP if I want to put different ink or paper 
into my normal printer, and there’s no difference.”); id. at 289 (Christian Moomaw) (“That’s like telling me 
that I can only use paper from certain manufacturers in my printer.”). 
362
 

[PAGE 367]
     
    
  
 
  
 
    
 
 
  
    
 
 
   
   
     
    
  
  
  
  
    
        
                  
        
           
   
   
                
              
         
        
           
           
    
          
         
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
in support of an exemption and that the balance of statutory factors weighs against their 
proposal.2434 
a. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Opponents maintain that proponents have not documented “distinct, verifiable and 
measureable impacts . . . actually occurring in the marketplace,” but instead only 
“speculative or insignificant harms.”
2435 Stratasys also contends that proponents’ 
proposed uses—using non- manufacturer-approved feedstock or new feedstock 
materials—do not qualify as noninfringing uses because “[c]ircumvention of a [TPM] 
that does not control access to a copyright-protected work is beyond the scope of the 
rulemaking and cannot support an exemption”2436 and because Public Knowledge 
“make[s] no argument or comment as to how modifying operating system software or 
firmware could be a noninfringing use.”2437 
Opponents do not address the fair use factors, with Stratasys maintaining instead 
that proponents did not even contend that fair use applied.2438 Stratasys disputed section 
117’s applicability on the ground that purchasers license rather than own the software in a 
3D printer.2439 Specifically, a Stratasys representative claimed that all of its 3D printers 
come with a license for the software.2440 Proponents do not refute this claim. 
b. Asserted Adverse Effects 
Stratasys believes that proponents’ asserted adverse effects are insubstantial 
because “‘[u]ndetermined expectations of ownership,’ ‘uncertainty,’ and ‘anxiety about 
the proper role of copyright’ do not constitute the ‘distinct, verifiable, and measurable 
impacts’ required to meet the rulemaking standard.”
2441 Stratasys claims that evidence of 
“dissatisfaction [at] not being able to use the material of one’s choice in a 3D printer” is 
2434 Stratasys Opp’n at 2; IPO Class 26 Opp’n at 2. 
2435 IPO Class 26 Opp’n at 2 (citing NOI, 79 Fed. Reg. at 55,690); see also Stratasys Opp’n at 13 (arguing 
that proponents “cannot obtain an exemption from liability for undefined acts of circumvention” and that 
proponents’ comments in support “do not provide a sufficient record on which to base an exemption”). 
2436 Stratasys Opp’n at 13. 
2437 Id. at 14. 
2438 Id. (“Petitioners have not offered any argument that fair use or another statutory exception operates to 
render such activity non-infringing.”). Stratasys’ representative did not respond to proponents’ assertions at 
the hearing that fair use applied to this class. 
2439 Perhaps because proponents asserted that the proposed uses were noninfringing under section 117 only 
in reply comments, Stratasys disputed this position during the public hearing as opposed to in written 
comments. But see id. at 13 n.58 (noting that the 2010 Rulemaking found that cellphone unlocking was 
likely noninfringing under section 117). 
2440 Tr. at 164:09-13 (May 28, 2015) (Carey, Stratasys; Charlesworth, USCO). 
2441 Stratasys Opp’n at 15 (citing 2010 Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 45,833). 
363
 

[PAGE 368]
     
    
  
  
   
 
      
   
    
  
  
 
  
   
  
 
  
  
   
 
  
   
  
 
   
  
 
 
     
   
           
      
   
   
   
   
   
           
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
“of minimal probative value because [proponents] do not link such dissatisfaction 
regarding this constraint to TPMs.”2442 
Stratasys also disputes that TPMs discourage innovation in 3D printing, alleging 
that closed systems allow for greater revenue from materials sales to support research and 
development into new materials and that independent developers are free to use open 
systems for experimentation.
2443 Stratasys points to the large amount of investment made 
in 3D printing technologies, noting that the development of feedstock materials is 
Stratasys’ “greatest area of investment.”2444 Stratasys notes that proponents “do not point 
to one instance of an independent materials producer hampered by TPMs.”2445 Stratasys 
adds that engineering constraints necessarily limit use of different materials, as feedstock 
materials require fine-tuning of temperatures, print nozzles can only process feedstock of 
a particular diameter, and extruders cannot tolerate materials that are abrasive or 
physically or chemically different from manufacturer-approved feedstock.2446 Finally, 
Stratasys claims that use of non-manufacturer-approved feedstock to save cost “is a 
matter of convenience and preference” and not “the type of adverse impact[] the 
rulemaking is intended to address.”2447 
c. Argument Under Statutory Factors 
Stratasys argues that the statutory factors weigh against granting an exemption, 
although it agrees with proponents that factors two and three are of “limited 
applicability” to this proposed class.
2448 Stratasys asserts that the first factor, “the 
availability for use of copyrighted works,” weighs against granting an exception because 
the TPMs at issue “increase[] the availability in the marketplace of particular kinds of 3D 
printing systems.”
2449 It also indicates that TPMs on the operating system software of the 
3D printer protect other proprietary material stored on the printer, namely, “design 
software, design files, and proprietary data collected during the printing process, such as 
customer-accessible performance data,” although it does not provide details.
2450 Notably, 
Stratasys does not appear to contend that the chip-based TPMs used to exclude non­
manufacturer-approved feedstock are employed to protect this material. 
Looking to the fourth factor, Stratasys claims that an exemption would harm the 
market for copyrighted works “in at least three ways: (1) it would threaten the value of a 
2442 Id. at 15-16.
 
2443 Id. at 16; Tr. at 181:14-20 (May 28, 2015) (Carey, Stratasys).
 
2444 Tr. at 181:17-20 (May 28, 2015) (Carey, Stratasys).
 
2445 Stratasys Opp’n at 17.
 
2446 Id. at 16.
 
2447 Id. at 18.
 
2448 Id. at 23.
 
2449 Id. at 21-22.
 
2450 Id. at 22; see also IPO Opp’n at 4.
 
364
 

[PAGE 369]
     
    
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
    
 
  
   
 
   
    
 
   
    
 
   
  
  
   
 
  
   
   
                
 
   
           
           
      
   
                  
            
 
    
        
   
  
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
manufacturer’s 3D printers; (2) it would undermine security protections for intellectual 
property and confidential information embedded on printers; and (3) it would undermine 
growth in the overall market for 3D printers and 3D printed objects by placing at risk 
technological advances enabled by secure, fully-integrated 3D printing systems.”
2451 
Stratasys argues that some companies are starting to offer stand-alone 3D printer 
operating system software, though the example it cites is of an open source program.2452 
Stratasys draws an analogy to the 2012 Rulemaking, which it states protected embedded 
software in video game consoles, and thus protected both the console operating system 
code as a secure distribution platform, and also protected the video games themselves.2453 
Stratasys argues that denying an exemption in this case would similarly protect the value 
of 3D printers as “secure platforms for the distribution of proprietary design and 
modeling software and design files,” as well as the intellectual property embedded in 
those printers.2454 
Under the fifth factor, Stratasys offers public policy arguments relating to 
economic, quality control, and branding concerns.  Stratasys claims that “[p]rinter 
manufacturers rely on anticipated revenue streams from the sale of materials in order to 
make printers available at attractive prices” to reach more consumers.2455 In short, it 
argues that an exception would threaten manufacturers’ ability to engage in 
“metering,”2456 which allows manufacturers to “set the price of the printer lower than 
they would otherwise, in order to sell more printers and increase their profits from selling 
materials.”
2457 
Stratasys asks the Register to consider that circumvention could decrease 
consumer benefits by bypassing “smart” feedback cartridge microchip technology that 
can “measure the amount of material remaining in a cartridge and [] notify the printer 
operator when replacement or service is required.”
2458 Stratasys claims that this 
performance-monitoring technology is vital for “effective rapid prototyping” and “direct 
digital manufacturing, especially for sensitive applications such as medical implants and 
aerospace parts.”
2459 Opponents emphasize the importance of using authorized materials 
2451 Stratasys Opp’n at 23. 
2452 Id. at 28 (citing Rakesh Sharma, The Autodesk 3D Printer: A Calculated Bet, FORBES (Mar. 23, 2014), 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/rakeshsharma/2014/05/23/the-autodesk-3d-printer-a-calculated-bet). 
2453 Id. at 23. 
2454 Id. at 23-24 (claiming an exemption would “negatively affect a manufacturer’s reputation and the image 
of the manufacturer’s systems in the marketplace” by printing substandard objects made with non­
manufacturer-approved feedstock and would hinder the ability to collect service performance data). 
2455 Id. at 27. 
2456 Metering is a type of tying that “uses demand for the tied product to measure expected demand for the 
tying product.” Thomas A. Lambert, Appropriate Liability Rules for Tying and Bundled Discounting, 72 
OHIO ST. L.J. 909, 917 (2011). 
2457 Stratasys Opp’n at Exhibit A at 11. 
2458 Id. at 28. 
2459 Id. 
365
 

[PAGE 370]
     
    
 
    
   
 
   
 
   
 
  
  
      
    
   
   
     
     
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
    
   
     
   
  
    
                    
            
             
          
       
 
      
   
          
        
        
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
for 3D printing, stating that “[c]omposite materials have been demonstrated to damage 
the [printer’s] extruder.”2460 In essence, opponents argue that some materials should 
never be used in certain 3D printers, because the mechanical properties of the printer are 
not suited to such use. 
Even where use of alternate materials is possible, Stratasys is concerned that 
printing using non-optimized feedstock “may result in poorer quality printed objects or 
damage to the printer, both of which adversely affect the printer manufacturer’s 
reputation.”
2461 Stratasys argues that certain industrial applications require a high degree 
of precision, for example, “medical implants, aerospace parts, or consumer goods subject 
to strict safety standards,” and some printer materials are engineered to be “food-safe, 
colorful, flexible, or durable, and to resist flame, smoke, high-temperatures, fatigue, and 
mechanical stress.”
2462 It further notes that its industrial customers test 3D printers to 
ensure quality to make sure they are fit for a particular use,2463 and that federal 
regulations may impose certification or manufacturing requirements that apply to 3D­
printed goods.2464 Stratasys raises the serious concern that someone who is printing 
products for such regulated uses might break a TPM to use an “inferior material” to print 
parts that could endanger a downstream user.2465 Although these concerns appear 
directed towards industrial operations, Stratasys believes that the exemption should be 
denied for both consumer and commercial uses, cautioning that “[t]here is a spectrum of 
‘prosumers’ (i.e., ‘professional consumers’) and crowd-sourced communities [that] 
commercialize their use of 3D printers to varying degrees.”
2466 
3. Discussion 
Public Knowledge seeks a broad exemption comprising every 3D printer using 
TPMs, and encompassing those sold for both consumer and industrial uses.  As an initial 
matter, it appears that the technological properties of 3D printers, including the use of 
TPMs,2467 the relative complexity of those TPMs,2468 and the technological features of 
3D printers,2469 vary greatly. The record suggests that, depending on the software 
2460 Id. at 29. 
2461 Id. 
2462 Id. at 5. 
2463 Id. at Exhibit A at 6 (“Stratasys’ industrial customers, seeking to use 3D printing to create tools or parts,
 
typically ask to see and test benchmarks (examples) before purchasing a printing system, in order to ensure
 
that the quality and the specifications of the printed model meet their needs.”).
 
2464 Tr. at 154:16-23, 156:13-158:09 (May 28, 2015) (Charlesworth, USCO; Carey, Stratasys) (citing
 
Federal Aviation Administration, Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”), and general Federal Acquisition 
Regulations).
 
2465 Id. at 159:16-160:16 (Cheney, NTIA; Carey, Stratasys).
 
2466 Stratasys Opp’n at 3.
 
2467 Public Knowledge/LCA Supp. at 5-6; Stratasys Opp’n at 10.
 
2468 Tr. at 134:19-136:08 (May 28, 2015) (Weinberg; Charlesworth, USCO).
 
2469 See id. at 182:02-13 (Weinberg); see also Stratasys Opp’n at 3.
 
366
 

[PAGE 371]
     
    
  
    
  
  
   
      
 
  
  
 
  
  
     
  
  
  
   
    
  
    
  
    
      
               
      
              
                
          
      
                  
                 
                
           
              
                 
               
               
                 
   
             
   
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
implementation on the printer, users may or may not need to copy the printer operating 
system software to make the modifications required to use third-party feedstock.2470 
Stratasys listed over 250 companies producing consumer 3D printers and 33 companies 
producing industrial 3D printers, including a number of non-TPM-protected printers, with 
wide-ranging capabilities, prices and feedstock options.2471 Proponents focus their 
evidence on chip-based verification methods, so that is the Register’s focus as well in 
considering the proposed exemption.2472 
At the outset, the Register notes that both proponents and opponents appear to 
acknowledge that in some cases, forcing a 3D printer to accept third-party feedstock may 
not run afoul of section 1201(a)(1).  Although the record lacks specifics, it appears that in 
some cases, the necessary alteration may not involve a copyrighted work.
2473 
Additionally, there is some support in case law for the conclusion that where a chip on a 
feedstock cartridge contains a simple code, but the software is otherwise freely readable 
after purchasing the printer, the code may not effectively control access to a work.2474 In 
such cases an exemption would be unnecessary under section 1201(a)(1).  But it appears 
there are other cases where a consumer wishing to use third-party feedstock in a 3D 
printer would need to engage in circumvention of a TPM protecting a copyrightable 
work, for example, when more complex code must be modified so the printer can handle 
alternative feedstock. It is therefore appropriate to proceed with the analysis. 
a. Noninfringing Uses 
Although their legal analysis is somewhat limited,
2475 the Register concludes that 
Class 26 proponents have sufficiently established that the copying and modification of 
printer software to accept alternative printing materials is likely to be a noninfringing use. 
2470 Tr. at 141:15-22 (May 28, 2015) (Charlesworth, USCO; Weinberg). 
2471 Stratasys Opp’n at Exhibit A at 4 (citing WOHLERS REPORT at 59, 99); see also id. at 19-21. 
2472 Tr. at 134:19-135:04 (May 28, 2015) (Weinberg). 
2473 See id. at 127:03-12 (Siy, Public Knowledge); Stratasys Opp’n at 14 (“To the extent that Petitioners 
argue that certain methods of chip-based circumvention do not violate the DMCA because the chip is not 
controlling access to a copyright-protected work, then . . . an exemption for such circumvention is not 
within the scope of the rulemaking.”). 
2474 See Lexmark, 387 F.3d at 547 (“Just as one would not say that a lock on the back door of a house 
‘controls access’ to a house whose front door does not contain a lock and just as one would not say that a 
lock on any door of a house ‘controls access’ to the house after its purchaser receives the key to the lock, it 
does not make sense to say that this provision of the DMCA applies to otherwise-readily-accessible 
copyrighted works. Add to this the fact that the DMCA not only requires the technological measure to 
‘control access’ but also requires the measure to control that access ‘effectively,’ and it seems clear that this 
provision does not naturally extend to a technological measure that restricts one form of access but leaves 
another route wide open.” (citation omitted)). Courts may also disfavor use of printer verification chips as 
TPMs if their primary purpose is to prevent use of consumables in consumer goods. See id. at 553 
(Merritt, J., concurring). 
2475 Tr. at 186:21-23 (May 28, 2015) (Siy, Public Knowledge) (“I think that fair use can cover [printer 
operating system software] modification.”). 
367
 

[PAGE 372]
     
    
 
 
   
  
      
  
     
 
     
  
  
 
 
    
    
   
 
   
               
               
             
   
              
               
            
                
            
   
                 
          
          
            
                 
             
              
           
            
            
          
               
            
        
   
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
The Register observes that the question here appears somewhat analogous to that 
addressed by the Sixth Circuit in Lexmark International, Inc. v. Static Control 
Components, Inc., in which the court considered whether a third party manufacturer of 
toner cartridges violated the Copyright Act when it reverse-engineered and then 
reproduced a manufacturers’ verification chip on toner cartridges. There, as here, the 
third-party circumvented a TPM so that non-manufacturer-approved cartridges could be 
used with a printer.
2476 In Lexmark, the Sixth Circuit discussed policy issues also 
relevant to this class, concluding that Congress did not intend for the DMCA to “create 
monopolies of manufactured goods.”2477 The court further suggested that technological 
measures that protect access to creative works, such as video games or DVDs, were at the 
core of what the DMCA was intended to protect, rather than the functional aspects of 
printer operating system programs.2478 
Turning more specifically to the question of fair use, regarding the first factor, the 
purpose and character of the use, the Register notes that interoperability is recognized as 
a favored purpose under the law.2479 The record shows that in many cases, third-party 
feedstock cannot be used without altering the printer operating system software.2480 This 
factor therefore favors proponents.2481 
2476 Lexmark, 387 F.3d at 528-529. 
2477 Id. at 551 (Merritt, J., concurring); see also id. at 553 (Feikens, J., concurring in part and dissenting in 
part) (“We agree that the [DMCA] was not intended by Congress to be used to create a monopoly in the 
secondary markets for parts or components of products that consumers have already purchased.”). 
2478 Id. at 548. 
2479 See, e.g., id. at 544, 545-546 (discussing interoperability and noting that, under the first factor, the 
defendant did not copy the program at issue “for its commercial value as a copyrighted work” (emphasis in 
original)); see also Sega Enters. Ltd. v. Accolade, Inc., 977 F.2d 1510, 1522-23 (9th Cir. 1992) (under the 
first statutory factor, copying of software for “identification of the functional requirements for . . . 
compatibility” was a public benefit, did not harm the original work’s commercial value, and favored a 
finding of fair use). 
2480 Stratasys Opp’n at Exhibit A at 5 (“New materials . . . require tuning the system parameters (controlled 
by software) to the material’s properties . . . .”). 
2481 Congress recognized the importance of compatibility in the DMCA by including a statutory exemption 
to the prohibition on circumvention for certain reverse engineering activities. See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(f); see 
also 144 CONG. REC. E2138 (daily ed. Oct. 13, 1998) (statement of Rep. Bliley) (stating that “section 1201 
should not inhibit interoperability of devices ‘in the consumer electronics environment’”). But, for the 
reasons that follow, section 1201(f) may not protect the activities at issue here and so does not obviate the 
need for an exemption under section 1201(a)(1). Section 1201(f) requires that the circumvention be 
performed by the person who “identif[ies] and analyz[es] those elements of the [software] program that are 
necessary to achieve interoperability.” 17 U.S.C. § 1201(f)(1). As the Register concluded in 2010 when 
considering an exemption to allow jailbreaking of smartphones, and again in 2012 when considering video 
game consoles, when an exemption is sought to permit anyone to circumvent a TPM— and “not just those 
who [perform] ‘identification and analysis’ of programmatic elements”—it creates “significant doubt” as to 
whether section 1201(f) would apply.  2012 Recommendation at 45 n.212 (citing 2010 Recommendation at 
94-95 & n.318). 
368
 

[PAGE 373]
     
    
 
   
 
 
 
    
 
    
  
   
    
   
     
   
   
   
 
 
 
     
  
     
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
   
            
             
            
      
   
    
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Concerning the second factor, the nature of the work, the Register notes that 
proponents wish to access the work not for its creative appeal, but because the work is 
useful in printing 3D objects.  In other words, the work to be accessed is functional in 
nature.  This factor thus favors proponents. 
The third factor considers the amount and substantiality used in relation to the 
copyrighted work as a whole, but there was very little record of how much the printer 
operating system software would need to be changed to use third-party feedstock—only 
that it could “vary.” 
2482 This factor thus favors neither party. 
Factor four, which is highly contested, considers “the effect of the use on the 
potential market for or value of the copyrighted work.”2483 Public Knowledge suggests 
that the market at issue is very narrow, consisting of only the printer operating system 
software, which “has no market value independent of the printer itself, and is not 
marketed independently of the printer.”2484 Stratasys points to the large market value of 
the overall 3D printer industry.2485 In essence, opponents urge the Office to take a 
broader view of the effects of circumvention on the market as a whole. 
Here, the Sixth Circuit’s Lexmark decision is again instructive.  Although that 
case was ultimately decided on other grounds, in conducting a fair use analysis, the court 
determined that the proper focus was on the market for the copyrighted work (the printer 
operating system software) and not the market for the consumable (the toner 
cartridges).2486 Based on the record submitted here, there does not appear to be a market 
for printer operating system programs separate from the 3D printers themselves, or a 
quantifiable way to apportion the value of the 3D printer attributable to the software 
features.  Although opponents suggest that feedstock sales by manufacturers may 
subsidize the retail cost of printers, there was no evidence presented to establish that the 
use of unauthorized feedstock would substantially undermine printer sales.  Moreover, as 
discussed below, manufacturers’ pricing policies are not the focus of copyright law.  For 
these reasons, the fourth fair use factor does not weigh against proponents. 
As three of the four fair use factors favor proponents, and one is neutral, the 
Register concludes that necessary copying and alteration of 3D printer software to 
accommodate alternative feedstock likely constitute fair use of such a work. 
The Register further concludes that the overall record supports proponents’ claim 
that modifying software to permit use of non-manufacturer-approved feedstock may also 
2482 Tr. at 132:01 (May 28, 2015) (Siy, Public Knowledge) (amount “can vary”); id. at 188:09 (Carey,
 
Stratasys) (not aware of how much of a change in software would be needed).
 
2483 Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 590 (1994) (quoting 17 U.S.C. § 107(4)).
 
2484 Public Knowledge/LCA Supp. at 6.
 
2485 Stratasys Opp’n at 25-26.
 
2486 Lexmark, 387 F.3d at 544-45.
 
369
 

[PAGE 374]
     
    
    
  
 
  
   
 
    
 
  
     
   
  
  
  
  
 
  
    
   
   
 
  
  
                  
                   
            
   
     
              
            
           
          
     
              
   
                  
           
         
     
     
   
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
be a non-infringing use under section 117, at least in some cases.2487 Section 117(a) 
allows the owner of a copy of a computer program to make or authorize the making of 
another copy or adaptation of that program created “as an essential step in the utilization 
of the computer program in conjunction with a machine and that . . . is used in no other 
manner.”
2488 The limited factual record2489 makes it difficult to determine whether 
purchasers of 3D printers are likely to qualify as “owners” of the accompanying software 
under section 117.  Proponents raised the issue only in reply comments and submitted no 
sales terms or other evidence to support their contention that consumers own the 
software.  At the hearing, Weinberg acknowledged that at least some 3D printers are 
likely sold with terms purporting to license the printer’s operating system software, but 
contended that in many cases, there are no terms.2490 For its part, Stratasys attests that its 
printer operating system software is subject to an explicit license, but it did not represent 
that this was true of the industry generally.2491 
Based on this limited information, it appears likely that in at least some cases, 
purchasers of 3D printers may be owners for purposes of section 117.  The Register has 
previously reviewed the relevant case law governing the determination of ownership of a 
software copy for purposes of section 117 when formal title is lacking and/or a license or 
agreement imposes restrictions on the use of the computer program and concluded that 
the state of the law is unclear.
2492 While Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc.2493 and Krause v. 
Titleserv, Inc.2494—the two leading precedents in this area —provide “useful guideposts,” 
they are “controlling precedent in only two circuits and are inconsistent in their 
approach.”
2495 
In Krause, the Second Circuit held that formal title was not necessary to 
demonstrate ownership under section 117, but instructed courts to look to a range of 
2487 Public Knowledge Class 26 Reply at 3 (“17 U.S.C. § 117 facilitates the modification of software by 
owners of a copy of the software [who use] the software . . . with a machine (the printer) [by providing that 
use] is expressly not an infringement.”); Tr. at 143:12-144:14 (Siy, Public Knowledge; Charlesworth, 
USCO) (referencing section 117). 
2488 17 U.S.C. § 117(a). 
2489 The Register notes that analysis of this class generally was hampered by a limited factual record— 
especially as presented by proponents— and reminds the parties that “[i]n addressing factual matters, 
commenters should be aware that the Register favors specific, ‘real-world’ examples supported by evidence 
over speculative, hypothetical observations.” NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,857. 
2490 Tr. at 148:09-19 (May 28, 2015) (Weinberg). 
2491 Id. at 164:06-25 (Charlesworth, USCO; Carey, Stratasys) (asserting that Stratasys’ software is subject to 
a license in every case). 
2492 See 2010 Recommendation at 90 (stating that “the law relating to who is the owner of a copy of a 
computer program under Section 117 is in flux”); see also id. at 129, 132; 2012 Recommendation at 92 
(“The Register concludes that the state of the law remains unclear.”). 
2493 621 F.3d 1102 (9th Cir. 2010). 
2494 402 F.3d 119 (2d Cir. 2005). 
2495 2012 Recommendation at 92. 
370
 

[PAGE 375]
     
    
 
   
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
   
  
    
  
   
 
  
  
    
                 
                   
              
             
               
              
      
   
      
              
        
         
 
     
                 
          
           
             
      
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
factors to determine “whether the party exercises sufficient incidents of ownership over a 
copy of the program to be sensibly considered the owner of the copy.”2496 In Vernor, the 
Ninth Circuit held that “a software user is a licensee rather than an owner of a copy 
where the copyright owner (1) specifies that the user is granted a license; (2) significantly 
restricts the user’s ability to transfer the software; and (3) imposes notable use 
restrictions.”
2497 
In this proceeding, other than possible updating or patching of software,2498 there 
is little evidence that printer manufacturers exert continuing control over printer software, 
suggesting that some purchasers of 3D printers may qualify under existing case law as 
“owners” under section 117.  That said, the Register recognizes that more sophisticated 
3D printers—for example, those used in industrial enterprises—may involve more 
substantial ongoing relationships between the printer manufacturer and the end user, and 
it is possible that the software in such printers is subject to a license.
2499 
Users of 3D printer operating system software who do meet the ownership 
requirement of section 117 must also show that alteration of the software is essential to 
operate the software in connection with the printer.
2500 The record seems undisputed that 
to successfully operate some TPM-protected 3D printers with third-party materials, it 
may be necessary to alter the operating system software.2501 Based on the record 
submitted, it therefore appears likely that some activities in which proponents seek to 
engage could qualify as noninfringing uses under section 117. 
b. Adverse Effects 
Public Knowledge claims that the lack of an exemption increases consumer costs 
and has a significant negative impact on 3D printing innovation.2502 At the same time, 
2496 Krause, 402 F.3d at 124. These factors include: (1) whether substantial consideration was paid for the 
copy; (2) whether the copy was created for the sole benefit of the purchaser; (3) whether the copy was 
customized to serve the purchaser’s use; (4) whether the copy was stored on property owned by the 
purchaser; (5) whether the creator reserved the right to repossess the copy; (6) whether the creator agreed 
that the purchaser had the right to possess and use the programs forever regardless of whether the 
relationship between the parties terminated; and (7) whether the purchaser was free to discard or destroy 
the copy anytime it wished. Id. 
2497 Vernor, 621 F.3d at 1111. 
2498 Tr. at 166:08-09 (May 28, 2015) (Carey, Stratasys). 
2499 See Stratasys Opp’n at Exhibit A at 6 (“Industry-wide, high-end 3D printing systems more commonly 
employ software verification than desktop (entry-level) printing systems, and (as with Statasys’ high-end 
systems) customers of high-end printing systems typically purchase material from the printer 
manufacturer.”). 
2500 17 U.S.C. § 117(a). 
2501 Stratasys Opp’n at Exhibit A at 5 (“New materials . . . require tuning the system parameters (controlled 
by software) to the material’s properties . . . .”). 
2502 Public Knowledge/LCA Supp. at 8. Public Knowledge also claims that granting an exemption would 
“[r]eaffirm [p]ublic [c]onfidence in [o]wnership,” but has provided little by which the Register may 
evaluate this claim. Id. at 11. 
371
 

[PAGE 376]
     
    
 
  
    
 
    
 
 
     
    
    
    
     
 
    
 
 
    
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
   
 
           
          
               
            
   
               
              
  
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
the record reflects that there is a good selection of non-TPM-protected printers on the 
market that do not restrict feedstock, albeit with varying capabilities. 
The Register finds that proponents have demonstrated that the use of TPMs to 
restrict the use of third-party feedstock may inhibit some consumers’ ability to make 
noninfringing uses of 3D printer software.  The Register notes that the mere fact that 
manufacturer-approved feedstock may cost more is not an adverse effect stemming from 
the prohibition on circumvention.  But consumers may have reasons beyond cost to use 
alternative materials in a 3D printer, and a TPM may prevent that type of interoperability. 
Moreover, while there may be a variety of 3D printers in the market, including some 
without TPMs, proponents provided evidence that certain printers that are protected by 
TPMs have unique and desirable functions that may not be available in non-TPM­
protected printers.
2503 Further, while opponents may well be correct that the technical 
constraints of certain printer models may present significant challenges to some of the 
proposed uses,
2504 it does not change the fact that a particular printer may be unusable 
with alternative materials absent circumvention.2505 
For these reasons, the Register believes that proponents have demonstrated that 
the inability to circumvent TPMs in some 3D printers is likely to have an adverse impact 
on noninfringing activities in the upcoming three-year period. 
c. Statutory Factors 
While the five statutory factors do not uniformly favor proponents, for the reasons 
discussed below, the Register finds that overall, the statutory factors favor granting an 
exemption.  An exemption will serve to increase the ability of consumers to create new 
works using innovative methods and appears unlikely to materially adversely impact the 
market for copyrighted 3D printer software. 
With respect to the first factor, the availability for use of copyrighted works, the 
Register first considers whether an exemption is likely to affect the availability of 
copyrighted printer operating software.  The current record does not demonstrate that an 
exemption would threaten the availability of such software, or, indeed, that a viable 
market for this type of software exists separate from the printers themselves.  Further, 
altering such software for purposes of interoperability in this case is likely a fair use or 
allowed under section 117. 
2503 See Tr. at 183:03-05 (May 28, 2015) (Weinberg) (explaining that some functional processes of 3D 
printers are patented, and are only available with a specific manufacturer); see also Stratasys Opp’n at 3 
(“3D printer users benefit from having a variety of systems in the market so they can choose the system 
suited to their intended use. . . . [D]ifferent technological approaches confer different advantages”). 
2504 Stratasys Opp’n at 16. 
2505 The Register notes that users modifying a 3D printer to circumvent a TPM may be breaking the 
printer’s warranty. Tr. at 168:12-17 (May 28, 2015) (Charlesworth, USCO; Carey, Stratasys); id. at 138:02­
03 (Weinberg). 
372
 

[PAGE 377]
     
    
   
  
 
 
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
 
   
  
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
   
              
        
              
                
              
                  
             
                   
               
             
      
   
   
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Nor is there evidence that granting the exemption will adversely affect the 
availability of copyrighted works besides the printer software. To be sure, Stratasys 
claims that 3D printers may contain other proprietary matter besides the software that is 
used to operate the 3D printer—design software, design files, and proprietary customer 
data.2506 According to Stratasys, the TPMs on the operating system software for the 3D 
printer also protect access to this material, and accordingly it urges the Register to reject 
the proposed exemption for the same reasons she previously rejected an exemption for 
jailbreaking of video game consoles, where TPMs protect both the game console 
firmware and the games that are played on those consoles.
2507 But unlike in the case of 
video game consoles, there is no evidence in the current record that design software 
developers or persons creating 3D designs rely on 3D printer TPMs to provide a secure 
method of distribution for their copyrighted works.  Nor is there any evidence that 
circumventing TPMs would lead to piracy of these proprietary materials.  In contrast, in 
2012, the record showed that video game consoles were designed to operate as secure 
distribution platforms for creative works and that TPMs on such consoles were heavily 
relied on as part of an integrated protection system by all major console video game 
manufacturers.  There, opponents documented that circumvention of consoles directly 
leads to piracy of copyrighted expressive works; that is, the video games themselves.
2508 
In any event, proponents are not seeking access to any design software, design files, or 
proprietary data, and so any potential exemption can thus be limited solely to 
circumvention for the use of non-manufacturer-approved feedstock. 
Factors two and three, concerning the availability for use of works for nonprofit 
archival, preservation, and educational purposes and the impact that the prohibition on 
circumvention has on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or 
research, respectively, do not appear to be germane to this class. 
Evaluating the fourth factor, the effect of circumvention on the market for or 
value of copyrighted works, the Register finds that there is currently no independent 
2506 The record does not reveal the precise nature of the proprietary data that are held on a 3D printer. 
Stratasys states, without elaboration, that these data include “customer-accessible performance data that 
may contain a customers’ [sic] proprietary or other confidential information.” Stratasys Opp’n at 22. To 
the extent the proprietary data are the customer’s own data, Stratasys’ point is obscure, since it would be the 
customer (as the owner of the 3D printer) who is engaging in circumvention. Furthermore, the record 
suggests that design software is often installed on a separate computer, not the 3D printer, and is typically 
owned by third parties and perhaps licensed to users. Tr. at 165:18-24 (May 28, 2015) (Carey, Stratasys) 
(“The design software is separate from what we do. There are CAD vendors that . . . make the design 
software. We accept all those files.”). At the same time, neither Public Knowledge nor any other party 
challenges Stratasys’ claim that 3D printers can include both design software and proprietary data. 
Accordingly, the Register accepts Stratasys’ assertion. 
2507 See 2012 Recommendation at 47-48. 
2508 Id. at 32-36. 
373
 

[PAGE 378]
     
    
   
   
    
   
  
 
  
  
   
   
   
       
  
    
 
 
   
 
    
    
 
   
     
             
             
    
      
   
             
               
           
             
          
             
                
        
           
     
   
       
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
market for 3D printer operating software.2509 Moreover, opponents have not shown how 
allowing an exemption is likely to diminish the value of a 3D printer’s copyrighted 
software.  Opponents again suggest the Register should evaluate 3D printer TPMs in the 
same manner as TPMs on video game consoles and deny an exemption because, like 
consoles, the printers operate as secure distribution platforms for other creative works.
2510 
As discussed above, there is not enough evidence in the record to support this assertion. 
The fifth statutory consideration, which evaluates “such other factors as the 
Librarian considers appropriate,” allows the Librarian to evaluate additional pertinent 
concerns that might otherwise go unaddressed.  Stratasys urges that many 3D printer 
manufacturers market their products by selling printers for a lower price, while making 
up for that discount with the sale of manufacturer-distributed feedstock.
2511 Opponents 
worry that an exemption permitting circumvention might undermine this business 
practice. While this is certainly a reasonable concern for those in the 3D printing 
business, it is considerably removed from section 1201(a)(1)’s goal of facilitating and 
protecting the availability of creative works2512 and is thus not a basis to deny the 
exemption.2513 
Finally, opponents point to regulatory and safety concerns that might arise if an 
exemption were granted.  The record indicates that 3D printing processes are used to 
produce medical implants, aerospace parts, and consumer goods, which are all subject to 
strict safety standards.2514 It is reasonable to suspect that if these types of items were 
manufactured using alternative materials or with altered printer software, the resulting 
goods might not comply with the applicable standards.  Indeed, some printers of 
industrial objects are subjected to rigorous testing to certify that their 3D printed products 
meet industry standards
2515 or are compliant with applicable regulations.2516 
2509 Although Stratasys contends that companies are starting to offer stand-alone 3D printing software, the 
only example provided was of an open source platform. Stratasys Opp’n at 28 (referencing Autodesk’s 
open source 3D printing software platform). 
2510 IPO Opp’n at 4; Stratasys Opp’n at 22. 
2511 Stratasys Opp’n at 27. 
2512 Public Knowledge Class 26 Reply at 2; see also Lexmark, 387 F.3d at 549 (“Nowhere in its 
deliberations over the DMCA did Congress express an interest in creating liability for the circumvention of 
technological measures designed to prevent consumers from using consumers goods while leaving the 
copyrightable content of a work unprotected.”); id. at 551 (Merritt, J., concurring) (stating that “companies 
like Lexmark cannot use the DMCA in conjunction with copyright law to create monopolies of 
manufactured goods”); id. at 553 (Feikens, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) (“We agree that the 
[DMCA] was not intended by Congress to be used to create a monopoly in the secondary markets for parts 
or components of products that consumers have already purchased.”). 
2513 Opponents’ additional business-related concerns of a negative impact on the collection of service 
performance data and reputational harm were also unpersuasive. 
2514 Stratasys Opp’n at 5. 
2515 Id. at Exhibit A at 6. 
374
 

[PAGE 379]
     
    
 
   
   
   
    
   
   
    
  
 
 
     
  
    
 
  
  
  
      
     
    
  
   
 
    
          
         
                
               
  
    
  
              
            
             
 
     
  
   
        
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Notably, FDA reinforced this concern in a letter to the Office, explaining that an 
exemption for this class might create unintended public health and safety risks in relation 
to medical devices produced using 3D printers.2517 FDA explained that “manufacturers 
who utilize 3D printing to ultimately manufacture medical devices need to ensure that 
their products are safe and effective for their intended use.”2518 For instance, according 
to FDA, “if a 3D printed medical device is intended for insertion into the body, then the 
manufacturer under FDA regulations would have to demonstrate that the products are 
safe and effective for that intended use.”
2519 
These safety and regulatory concerns are not copyright-related, but are 
sufficiently weighty to merit consideration in drafting an exemption.  The parties agree 
that an exemption that attempted to draw a line between noncommercial versus 
commercial or industrial uses of 3D printers would be difficult in practice.2520 Because it 
is clear, however, that the initial proposal was motivated largely by noncommercial, 
consumer uses,2521 as set forth below, the Register finds that it is appropriate to limit the 
exemption to exclude uses that may be subject to regulation or certification. 
4. NTIA Comments 
NTIA believes that “an exemption [in this class] would benefit consumers and the 
industry by fueling innovation of new feedstocks and reducing costs of feedstock for 
consumers.”
2522 NTIA notes that in some cases, “it is unclear whether one needs to 
circumvent a TPM that controls access to a copyrighted work,” but in other cases, it 
appears likely that a copyrighted work is at issue.2523 NTIA therefore supports an 
exemption to alleviate “consumer uncertainty regarding the permissibility of 
circumvention for interoperability of feedstock.”
2524 In NTIA’s view, the Lexmark case 
also “suggests that copying or modifying a copyrightable program on a 3D printer to 
enable interoperability with third party feedstock may be seen as fair use.”2525 While 
2516 Tr. at 154:12-23, 156:13-157:02 (May 28, 2015) (Charlesworth, USCO; Carey, Stratasys) (citing 
Federal Aviation Administration, FDA, and general Federal Acquisition Regulations). 
2517 See Letter from Bakul Patel, Assoc. Dir. for Digital Health, Ctr. for Devices and Radiological Health, 
FDA, to Jacqueline C. Charlesworth, Gen. Counsel and Assoc. Register of Copyrights, USCO, at 4 (Aug. 
18, 2015). 
2518 Id. 
2519 Id. 
2520 Public Knowledge Class 26 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1-3; Stratasys Post-Hearing Resp. at 1-3. 
2521 Tr. at 137:19-23 (May 28, 2015) (Weinberg) (“[W]hile this was originally motivated by focus on 
consumer use, I don’t think there is any reason to exclude manufacturing or more sophisticated commercial 
players.”). 
2522 NTIA Letter at 89. 
2523 Id. 
2524 Id. at 90.
 
2525 Id. at 91-92 (citing Lexmark, 387 F.3d at 549).
 
375
 

[PAGE 380]
     
    
 
  
   
    
 
   
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
    
  
  
  
 
  
 
   
 
   
    
   
   
  
        
               
        
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
acknowledging manufacturer concerns that an exemption could facilitate the introduction 
of inferior materials into supply chains, NTIA “is troubled by the growing misuse of the 
DMCA to serve non-copyright interests” and states that “Section 1201 is a poor fit to 
ensure quality control in [] manufacturing.”2526 
Noting that “manufacturers may use low end or consumer-oriented machines 
during different parts of the design process,” NTIA supports an exemption that “does not 
distinguish between commercial, noncommercial, or consumer uses of a 3D printer.” 2527 
Further, it supports a “broad exemption that does not distinguish between technical 
specifications of TPMs.”2528 
As explained below, the Register finds that the record supports granting an 
exemption, but recommends that it is tailored to the types of consumer-oriented uses 
introduced in the record. The record supports excluding circumvention on printers used 
to produce goods subject to legal or regulatory oversight or related certification 
processes, to balance the supply chain concerns that NTIA recognizes. 
5. Conclusion and Recommendation 
The Register concludes that proponents have established that TPMs constrain the 
types of feedstock that can be used in 3D printers and that this is likely to adversely affect 
noninfringing uses of the software that controls that functionality.  The Register further 
finds that in some cases the 3D printer operating system software must be altered to print 
3D objects using non-manufacturer-approved feedstock.  Nonetheless, the record, which 
focuses on consumer uses, points to a more narrowly defined class than originally 
suggested.  Consistent with past rulemakings, the Register will tailor the proposed 
recommended exemption to reflect the record evidence.
2529 To begin with, because the 
record submitted by proponents was limited to 3D printers that employ microchip-based 
verification systems, the recommended exemption will be tied to 3D printer models that 
require circumvention of this type of TPM. 
Significantly, the Register does not recommend extending an exemption to 
circumstances where the use of third-party feedstock could cause the resulting 3D-printed 
object to fail legal requirements or regulatory mandates, including safety certification 
criteria or other similar standards.  Opponent Stratasys raised legitimate concerns 
regarding the production of regulated products using non-approved feedstock that could 
then be introduced into the stream of commerce, and FDA noted specific concerns about 
the use of 3D printers to manufacture medical devices that would be used by patients. At 
2526 Id. at 90. 
2527 Id. at 91. 
2528 Id. 
2529 2010 Recommendation at 16 (explaining that “the records in [the 2010] and prior rulemaking 
proceedings have demonstrated that in many cases, [an initial] subset of a category of works should be 
further tailored in accordance with the evidence in the record”). 
376
 

[PAGE 381]
     
    
  
   
 
   
    
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
             
      
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
the same time, as explained above, proponents’ case did not focus on these types of uses.  
Instead, proponents highlighted consumer and experimental uses of 3D printers.2530 
While the parties agree that it may be difficult to demarcate the line between commercial 
and noncommercial uses of 3D printers, the standards that govern the resulting products 
are more definitely defined.  Users should be free to tinker with their 3D printers, but 
without putting those further down the stream of commerce at risk.  
Finally, in reflection of the record, the recommended exemption is limited to 
circumvention for the purpose of using alternate feedstock; it does not encompass 
circumvention for the purpose of accessing design software, design files, or proprietary 
data. 
In keeping with the Register’s findings based on the record before her, the 
Register recommends that the Librarian designate the following class: 
Computer programs that operate 3D printers that employ microchipreliant technological measures to limit the use of feedstock, when 
circumvention is accomplished solely for the purpose of using 
alternative feedstock and not for the purpose of accessing design 
software, design files or proprietary data; provided, however, that the 
exemption shall not extend to any computer program on a 3D printer 
that produces goods or materials for use in commerce the physical 
production of which is subject to legal or regulatory oversight or a 
related certification process, or where the circumvention is otherwise 
unlawful. 
2530 See NTIA Letter at 91; Tr. at 137:19-23 (May 28, 2015) (Weinberg) (conceding that the proposed 
exemption was “originally motivated by focus on consumer use”). 
377
 

[PAGE 382]
     
    
     
  
  
 
 
 
  
   
 
     
  
  
 
  
     
 
   
    
    
 
   
 
   
  
   
 
  
 
  
   
              
           
         
                 
               
             
      
     
 
 
                                                 
 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
N. Proposed Class 27B: Networked Medical Devices – Patient Data 
1. Proposal 
Many modern implanted medical devices, such as pacemakers, implantable 
cardioverter defibrillators (“ICDs”), insulin pumps, and continuous glucose monitors, 
measure and record data about physiological developments taking place within the body, 
and communicate that data wirelessly to equipment maintained at hospitals or doctors’ 
offices, or to corresponding personal monitoring systems.  Some personal monitoring 
systems, in turn, transmit data to a monitoring company and ultimately to the patient’s 
physician.  Increasingly, these transmissions of data are protected by TPMs, including 
encryption schemes.  Proponents are requesting an exemption that would allow a patient, 
or persons acting on behalf of the patient, to circumvent TPMs on these transmissions so 
that the patient is able to access the data generated by his or her own implanted medical 
device and any corresponding personal monitoring system, without the need to visit a 
hospital or doctor’s office. 
Proponent Medical Device Research Coalition (“MDRC”) filed a petition seeking 
an exemption that covered two proposed uses: (1) allowing patients to access the data 
generated by their medical devices and any corresponding monitoring systems, and (2) 
allowing research into software flaws that adversely affect the safety, security and 
efficacy of medical devices.
2531 The Office set forth the following class in the NPRM: 
Proposed Class 27: The proposed class would allow circumvention of 
TPMs protecting computer programs in medical devices designed for 
attachment to or implantation in patients and in their corresponding 
monitoring devices, as well as the outputs generated through those 
programs.  As proposed, the exemption would be limited to cases where 
circumvention is at the direction of a patient seeking access to information 
generated by his or her own device, or at the direction of those conducting 
research into the safety, security, and effectiveness of such devices. The 
proposal would cover devices such as pacemakers, implantable 
cardioverter defibrillators, insulin pumps, and continuous glucose 
monitors.
2532 
In addition to MDRC, comments supporting this class were filed by Professor Matthew 
D. Green,
2533 Jay Freeman,2534 Public Knowledge,2535 Free Software Foundation 
2531 MDRC’s proposed regulatory language reads as follows: “Computer programs, in the form of firmware 
or software, including the outputs generated by those programs, that are contained within or generated by 
medical devices and their corresponding monitoring systems, when such devices are designed for 
attachment to or implantation in patients, and where such circumvention is at the direction of a patient 
seeking access to information generated by his or her own device or at the direction of those conducting 
research into the safety, security, and effectiveness of such devices.” MDRC Pet. at 1-2. 
2532 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,871. 
2533 Green Class 27 Supp. 
378
 

[PAGE 383]
     
    
     
   
   
  
  
   
  
  
  
      
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
   
  
    
   
    
     
      
     
     
       
                
                
       
                
        
           
            
    
                 
       
     
          
         
              
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 
 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
(“FSF”),2536 New America’s Open Technology Institute (“OTI”),2537 Catherine Gellis and 
the Digital Age Defense project (“Gellis/Digital Age Defense”),2538 and over 1600 
individual commenters.2539 
Based on the record as developed in the course of the proceeding, the Register 
concludes that Proposed Class 27 should be divided into Proposed Class 27A (Security 
and Safety Research) and Proposed Class 27B (Patient Data), so that the two distinct 
types of uses proponents seek to enable can be separately addressed. The discussion here 
will address only Proposed Class 27B, that is, circumvention to allow patient access to 
data generated by his or her own medical device and/or corresponding monitoring 
system.
2540 In addition, as discussed below, the record reveals that Proposed Class 27B 
does not actually focus on circumvention to access computer programs that are on 
medical devices or monitoring systems, but rather the data outputs generated by those 
programs.  For this reason, the Office treats Proposed Class 27B as a proposal to 
circumvent access controls on protectable compilations of medical device data, which 
would fall into the more general class of literary works.
2541 
a. Background 
At the outset, it is important to understand the devices, and the copyrighted works, 
that are encompassed by Class 27B.  As noted above, the proposed exemption refers to 
“medical devices” and their “corresponding monitoring systems.”  MDRC explains that 
by “medical devices,” it means, specifically, “devices that are physically implanted in 
whole or in part to the body and are used as part of the delivery of therapy and medical 
care to a patient,” including pacemakers, ICDs, insulin pumps, and continuous glucose 
monitors.
2542 While in its petition MDRC also referred to “devices [that] are designed for 
2534 Freeman Class 27 Supp. 
2535 Public Knowledge Class 27 Supp. 
2536 FSF Class 27 Supp. 
2537 OTI Class 27 Reply. 
2538 Gellis/Digital Age Defense Class 27 Supp. 
2539 Digital Right to Repair Class 27 Supp. (1659 individuals); Gregory Borodiansky Class 27 Reply; Henry 
Feldman Class 27 Reply; Patrick Ferguson Class 27 Reply; Don Lowery Class 27 Reply; Bruce Schneier 
Class 27 Reply; Michael Weinberg Class 27 Reply. 
2540 Proposed Class 27A, which would permit research directed to security and software flaws in medical 
devices, is discussed with other analogous proposals elsewhere in the Recommendation. 
2541 See U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, COMPENDIUM OF U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE PRACTICES § 503.1(BA) (3d ed. 
2014) (“COMPENDIUM (THIRD)”) (describing “compilations of information” as falling within the “literary 
work” category of authorship). 
2542 MDRC Supp. at 2. Pacemakers and ICD s are wholly implanted within the body, usually in the chest or 
the abdomen. See Tests and Procedures: Pacemaker— Definition, MAYO CLINIC, http://www.mayoclinic 
.org/tests-procedures/pacemaker/basics/definition/prc-20014279 (last visited Oct. 7, 2015); NAT’L HEART, 
LUNG, AND BLOOD INST., What Is an Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillator?, NAT’L INSTS. OF HEALTH, 
http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/health-topics/topics/icd (last visited Oct. 7, 2015) (“NAT’L HEART, LUNG, 
AND BLOOD INST.”) (cited in MDRC Supp. at App. C at ¶ 5 n.12). Insulin pumps, which consist of needles 
379
 

[PAGE 384]
     
    
   
 
 
   
      
  
   
  
   
    
  
  
 
  
   
 
   
   
   
 
  
      
   
           
               
               
      
    
       
    
     
                 
              
      
        
               
          
              
    
             
  
              
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
attachment” as well as implantation in patients,2543 MDRC’s subsequent filings and the 
remainder of the record demonstrate that the proposed exemption is not intended to 
encompass attached devices that are neither wholly nor partially implanted, and MDRC 
specifically excludes “consumer health devices, such as digital pedometers and other 
devices that gather data and report their results directly to the patient.”
2544 The term 
“[c]orresponding monitoring systems,” in turn, refers specifically to devices such as 
handheld receivers or monitoring base stations, that wirelessly receive data from medical 
devices, and in some cases further relay that data to a centralized monitoring facility or to 
the physician.
2545 As used herein, then, the term “corresponding” or “personal” 
monitoring system refers to a portable or home device rather than a monitoring system 
that resides at a centralized facility or with a health care provider.2546 
Proponents address continuous glucose monitors and ICDs as representative 
examples of the types of medical devices and monitoring systems that would be 
encompassed by the exemption.  A continuous glucose monitor is an example of a 
“partially implanted” medical device.  It tracks and reports a patient’s glucose levels 
using a small, replaceable sensor that is inserted by the patient under the skin; the sensor 
is attached by wire to a transmitter that is outside the patient’s body. The transmitter 
wirelessly relays glucose values on a periodic basis to a portable (handheld) “receiving 
computer” that displays certain information about a patient’s glucose level.
2547 (In the 
case of a continuous glucose monitor, the sensor and transmitter together would 
constitute the “medical device,” and the handheld receiving computer would be the 
“corresponding monitoring system,” as those terms have been used in the proposed 
exemption.) The information displayed on the handheld receiving device, however, may 
not be comprehensive. Benjamin West, an independent researcher and member of 
MDRC, testified that his own continuous glucose monitor displays the current glucose 
and tubing attached to the body that deliver insulin doses, and continuous glucose monitors, which consist 
of sensors placed under the skin, are only partially implanted, and can be described as temporary, as they 
often require replacement after a set period of days. See Jerome Radcliffe, Hacking Medical Devices for 
Fun and Insulin: Breaking the Human SCADA System, BLACK HAT (2011), https://media.blackhat.com/bh­
us-11/Radcliffe/BH_US_11_Radcliffe_Hacking_Medical_Devices_WP.pdf (“Radcliffe”) (cited in MDRC 
Supp. at 10 n.62); Tr. at 8:10-13 (May 29, 2015) (West, MDRC). 
2543 MDRC Pet. at 1. 
2544 MDRC Supp. at 2. 
2545 For background on monitoring systems, see id. at 5, 7-8, App. C; see also Tr. at 8:10-19 (May 29, 2015) 
(West, MDRC); Tr. at 53:11-13 (May 29, 2015) (Sellars, MDRC); Sherwin Siy, Copyright Law and My 
Mother’ s Heart, PUBLIC KNOWLEDGE (Jan. 20, 2015), https://www.publicknowledge.org/news­
blog/blogs/copyright-law-and-my-mothers-heart (“Copyright Law and My Mother’ s Heart”) (cited in 
MDRC Supp. at 11 n.68) (noting that data from a pacemaker and emergency defibrillator “are stored on the 
device itself,” then “transferred to the base station, and then later transmitted to a monitoring company,” 
which will notify the doctor of any pertinent information, or that alternatively data can be retrieved through 
direct interrogations by a doctor). 
2546 See Tr. at 48:02-09 (May 29, 2015) (Sellars, MDRC) (discussing monitoring devices not easily 
accessible by patients). 
2547 Id. at 8:10-19 (West, MDRC); see also Radcliffe (cited in MDRC Supp. at 10 n.62). 
380
 

[PAGE 385]
     
    
   
  
    
     
  
    
   
   
    
   
 
     
  
  
  
 
    
 
  
     
          
         
               
      
                
        
       
                  
          
                  
                 
             
             
    
                   
             
            
      
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
number and provides a general indication whether glucose levels have gone up or down 
since the last reading.2548 He explained, however, that knowing the exact amount by 
which glucose levels had changed since the last reading is also significant.2549 
ICDs, in turn, are small devices that are fully implanted in the chest or the 
abdomen that “regulate[] the beating of [the] heart and deliver[] shocks to treat lifethreatening ventricular arrhythmias.”2550 ICD patient Hugo Campos explains that ICDs 
also monitor device battery life, the amount of time it takes to deliver a life-saving shock, 
a patient’s heart rhythm and daily activity, and variations of chest impedances to see if 
there is a buildup of fluids in the chest, though such data is not immediately available to 
the patient.
2551 Instead, such patient data is recorded in the ICD, and can be reviewed by 
the patient only during periodic checkups with a doctor, who obtains the data either 
directly from the device using an “interrogation” tool largely available in hospitals or 
similar environments, or via a report that is generated by the device manufacturer or 
monitoring company, which receives the data through a monitoring system installed at 
the patient’s home.
2552 As discussed below, proponents assert that immediate access to 
the data from an ICD can be valuable to a patient. 
Proponents concede that, for purposes of accessing such patient data, they are not 
seeking to copy or modify firmware or software contained in their medical devices or 
corresponding monitoring systems2553 and do not claim the need even to access such 
firmware or software.2554 Instead, MDRC makes clear that it only seeks to access the 
“data outputs” that are generated by that firmware or software, and transmitted out of 
medical devices or monitoring systems, which it claims are capable of being intercepted 
but may be protected by TPMs.
2555 In other words, for purposes of Proposed Class 27B, 
MDRC is seeking to access data, not computer programs.  Furthermore, MDRC appears 
2548 Tr. at 10:03-19 (May 29, 2015) (West, MDRC; Charlesworth, USCO). 
2549 Id. at 9:14-10:13 (West, MDRC; Charlesworth, USCO; Damle, USCO). 
2550 MDRC Supp. at App. C at ¶ 5; see also NAT’L HEART, LUNG, AND BLOOD INST. (cited in MDRC Supp. 
at App. C at ¶ 5 n.12). 
2551 Hugo Campos, Hugo Campos Fights for the Right To Open His Heart’ s Data, TED (Jan. 20, 2012), 
http://tedxtalks.ted.com/video/TEDxCambridge-Hugo-Campos-fight (cited in MDRC Pet. at 3 n.7); see 
also MDRC Supp. at App. C at ¶¶ 5-6. 
2552 MDRC Supp. at App. C at ¶¶ 1, 6; see also Copyright Law and My Mother’ s Heart (cited in MDRC 
Supp. at 11 n.68); Tr. at 48:02-09 (May 29, 2015) (Sellars, MDRC). 
2553 Tr. at 34:02-05 (May 29, 2015) (Sellars, MDRC) (stating that the “exemption here is seeking to access 
the . . . data outputs of the device, not to modify the software that is in the devices”). 
2554 The Register notes that although the terms “firmware” and “software” are variously used throughout the 
Recommendation, both are “computer programs” within the meaning of the Copyright Act. See 17 U.S.C. 
§ 101 (definition of “computer program”). 
2555 MDRC Supp. at 4 (noting that the works in question for patient access to data are “the data outputs of 
these devices”); see also MDRC Reply at 4 (“Currently implanted or attached devices are only implicated 
by the proposed exemption in circumstances where patients seek to access their own data through the 
passive monitoring of data already being transmitted.”). 
381
 

[PAGE 386]
     
    
   
    
   
   
   
  
 
 
   
    
  
  
                 
          
          
          
               
              
               
                 
             
                
       
               
 
             
        
            
              
          
                
               
                
     
         
      
      
    
     
      
 
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
to limit its request to circumvention of TPMs protecting wireless data outputs, explaining 
that the data would be accessed using “a form of radio transmission interception.”2556 
Accordingly, although it appears that some personal monitoring systems referenced in 
MDRC’s written comments transmit collected data to central locations via telephone 
lines,2557 MDRC is seeking only to circumvent TPMs on wireless transmissions.  
Proponents assert that an exemption is necessary because medical device 
manufacturers are increasingly applying TPMs to the data outputs of medical devices and 
monitoring systems.2558 Even though some devices do not currently employ TPMs, 
proponents note that recent guidance issued by the Food and Drug Administration 
(“FDA”) recommends that manufacturers impose TPMs to protect device security and 
patient privacy, such as by limiting access to data through passwords, code 
authentication, and encryption of wireless communications.
2559 Proponents assert that 
those recommendations are likely to be adopted by the medical device industry and lead 
to an increase in the application of TPMs; they explain that “[g]uidance documents like 
these, while not legally binding, are the usual means by which the FDA indicates its 
2556 MDRC Supp. at 10; see also MDRC Reply at 4 & n.15 (explaining that the exemption would be limited 
to “passive monitoring of data already being transmitted” through “a form of radio transmission 
interception”). At the public hearing, a representative from MDRC made a passing reference to the use of 
“hardware or software USB sniffers” to access data held on the handheld receiving computer of a 
continuous glucose monitor. See Tr. at 8:22-9:04 (May 29, 2015) (West, MDRC) (“[W]e used a 
combination of hardware and software USB sniffers to create a transcript of the interactions that the vendor 
typically has with these devices.”); see also MDRC Supp. at App. F at ¶ 2 (referencing investigation of 
“USB . . . protocols” without elaboration). The Register understands the USB standard to be a protocol for 
communication over physical cables. MDRC’s written submissions, however, are clearly limited to 
“passive monitoring of data already being transmitted,” MDRC Reply at 4, and do not indicate any desire 
to circumvent access controls on wired communications for that purpose. 
2557 See MDRC Supp. at App. C at ¶ 6; How the CareLink Network Works, MEDTRONIC, (Mar. 26, 2014), 
http://www.medtronic.com/patients/sudden-cardiac-arrest/living-with/carelink/how-it-works/index.htm 
(cited in MDRC Supp. at App. C at ¶ 6 n.15); see also Daniel Halperin et al., Security and Privacy for 
Implantable Medical Devices, 7 IEEE: PERV ASIVE COMPUTING 30, 32-33 & fig. A (2008) (“Halperin et al.”) 
(cited in MDRC Supp. at 2 n.4) (explaining that “major pacemaker and ICD manufacturers now produce athome monitors that wirelessly collect data from implanted devices and relay it to a central repository over a 
dialup connection,” which is depicted as a telephone or internet protocol network). 
2558 MDRC Supp. at 3; see also Public Knowledge Class 27 Supp. at 1; Tr. at 60:08-12 (May 29, 2015) 
(West, MDRC); Tr. at 17:01-08 (May 29, 2015) (Sellars, MDRC) (noting that “on many devices that are on 
the market today and on more that are coming out in the near future, even accessing the data itself would 
mean circumventing a technological protection measure”). 
2559 MDRC Supp. at 7, 9 (citing FDA, CONTENT OF PREMARKET SUBMISSION FOR MANAGEMENT OF 
CYBERSECURITY IN MEDICAL DEVICES: GUIDANCE FOR INDUSTRY AND FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION 
STAFF 4 (Oct. 2, 2014), available at http://www.fda.gov/downloads/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulation 
andGuidance/GuidanceDocuments/UCM356190.pdf and FDA, RADIO FREQUENCY WIRELESS 
TECHNOLOGY IN MEDICAL DEVICES: GUIDANCE FOR INDUSTRY AND FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION 
STAFF 10-11 (Aug. 14, 2013), available at http://www.fda.gov/downloads/MedicalDevices/Device 
RegulationandGuidance/GuidanceDocuments/ucm077272.pdf). 
382
 

[PAGE 387]
     
    
  
    
   
 
   
     
     
  
    
  
 
     
 
  
 
   
  
     
 
   
 
 
  
     
    
             
    
             
      
    
    
  
  
  
                   
                  
       
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
preferences when examining devices, and entities regulated by the FDA routinely treat 
these guidelines as rules in order to assure expediency in FDA approvals.”2560 
Proponents point to a few types of TPMs that restrict access to the wireless data 
outputs of medical devices and monitoring systems, including encryption systems that 
require a private decryption key and proprietary readers that are necessary in order to 
access device information.2561 MDRC explains that, once the radio transmissions from 
the device are intercepted, “reverse engineering techniques” can be employed to decode 
device outputs communicated along radio frequencies transmitted by medical devices.
2562 
One threshold question raised by the Office in the NPRM is whether the data 
outputs of medical devices and corresponding monitoring systems constitute copyrightprotected material.
2563 MDRC observes that “based on current caselaw, it is likely that 
many of the outputs in question here are not protectable,” and that the prohibition on 
circumvention in section 1201 would thus not apply to efforts to circumvent TPMs on 
that data.
2564 MDRC elaborates that “[i]n most cases the data consists principally of the 
readouts of sensors gathering information on the physical characteristics of the patient 
and records of device activity, including the patient’s name, the treating physician’s 
name, information about the date of installation, and other facts that may be relevant to 
the patient’s care.”
2565 MDRC acknowledges that such data “reveals nothing more than a 
fact of nature, which, like an idea, is not protectable unless embodied in an original 
expression.”
2566 MDRC also notes that a comprehensive readout of data collected by the 
medical device would show “no selection of information, a requirement for protection of 
a compilation of data.”2567 Furthermore, MDRC states that the transmission of data “may 
not be sufficiently ‘fixed’ to be a protectable work if they are not being saved 
simultaneously with their transmission.”2568 
But while this may be the most typical scenario, MDRC expresses concern that 
some data outputs “may have the necessary original selection and arrangement to be 
protectable expressions, [even if] the protection is quite thin.”2569 For example, MDRC 
2560 Id. at 9. 
2561 See, e.g., id. at 7-9; Public Knowledge Class 27 Supp. at 1.
 
2562 MDRC Supp. at 10.
 
2563 NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,871 (asking commenters to address “[w]hether the outputs generated by the
 
medical device programs constitute copyright-protected materials”).
 
2564 MDRC Supp. at 4.
 
2565 Id. at 5.
 
2566 Id. 
2567 Id. 
2568 Id. 
2569 Id. at 4-5 (citing Feist Publ’ns, Inc. v. Rural Tel. Serv. Co., 499 U.S. 340, 358 (1991) and CCC Info. 
Sys., Inc. v. Maclean Hunter Market Reports, Inc., 44 F.3d 61, 67 (2d Cir. 1994) for the proposition that a 
selection and arrangement of data may be protected by copyright). 
383
 

[PAGE 388]
     
    
 
  
   
   
    
    
   
   
  
     
    
 
   
 
  
    
   
  
   
   
   
  
     
   
    
                      
                 
                
               
                  
     
      
    
    
             
              
     
                 
    
         
    
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
asserts that data outputs on devices can be transmitted as batch reports “from the device 
either on a set schedule or when prompted by a wired or wireless connection to [a] device 
reader.”2570 It also suggests that “a collection of data sent as a batch report could be 
protectable, if it can be shown that it was assembled with a degree of originality in the 
selection and arrangement of the information.”2571 MDRC further asserts that “it is often 
not possible for a researcher to know whether a dispatch report contains protectable 
expression or not until after the researcher circumvents any TPM over that data,” which is 
likely to hold true for patients circumventing their devices as well.2572 Consequently, 
MDRC notes that accessing such protectable data outputs “may raise anticircumvention 
issues,”2573 and urges the Register to recommend an exemption to cover situations where 
the data output is copyrightable as a compilation.  In this regard, the Register observes 
that none of the opponents dispute that some data outputs, such as in the form of batch 
reports, might be copyrightable, and that one opponent, Advanced Medical Technology 
Association (“AdvaMed”), expressly claims that “the structure, format, and arrangement 
of the output data” could be protectable.
2574 
b. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Proponents assert that, to the extent data outputs are protectable under copyright, 
patient access to that data constitutes a fair use. Under the first factor, the purpose and 
character of the use, MDRC argues that making copies of lawfully acquired material 
“underlying unprotectable data” is often considered fair.2575 Proponents further assert 
that giving a patient access to the data outputs from his or her own device should be 
favored because it allows the patient to evaluate whether the device is working.2576 
Though not in the context of addressing fair use, MDRC observes that patients can use 
the data to “determine whether a medical emergency is occurring.”2577 By way of 
illustration, MDRC provided the statement of a patient with an ICD who explained that 
immediate access to the data being output from his device could help him instantly detect 
2570 Id. at 5; see also Halperin et al. at 30, 33 & fig. B (cited in MDRC Supp. at 2 n.4); Tr. at 18:16-25 (May 
29, 2015) (Sellars, MDRC) (“I would also note in some devices, the data is not streamed in real time, it’s 
dispatched, and when there is a dispatch of data, there is often a greater affordance for an arrangement or 
selection of particular information. Also, sometimes this data will include metadata about the patient, 
including who their primary care physician is, who they are, their date of birth, and other information that 
might be relevant to their care.”). 
2571 MDRC Supp. at 6 & n.37. 
2572 Id. at 6-7. 
2573 Id. at 5. 
2574 AdvaMed Class 27 Opp’n at 5 (citing Eng’g Dynamics, Inc. v. Structural Software, Inc., 26 F.3d 1335, 
1345 (5th Cir. 1994) and Positive Software Solutions, Inc. v. New Century Mortgage Corp., 259 F. Supp. 2d 
531, 535 (N.D. Tex. 2003)). 
2575 MDRC Supp. at 13 & nn.87-88 (citing Assessment Techs. of Wisconsin, LLC v. WIREdata, Inc., 350 
F.3d 640, 645 (7th Cir. 2003)). 
2576 See, e.g., Public Knowledge Class 27 Supp. at 2. 
2577 MDRC Supp. at 3. 
384
 

[PAGE 389]
     
    
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
    
   
    
   
   
   
   
   
  
 
     
   
  
  
      
  
 
 
       
                
              
      
    
       
      
              
              
    
             
  
             
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
problems, for example, “an automatic switch in pacing mode” that “may indicate the 
onset of atrial fibrillation, a common arrhythmia that increases a person’s risk of having 
an ischemic stroke,” or “a sudden change in lead impedance” that might “indicate a 
serious device malfunction that can lead to inappropriate shocks to the heart.”
2578 Public 
Knowledge urges that “the purpose[] of improving the health and well-being of 
individual circumventing patients” should weigh in favor of fair use.
2579 
Proponents assert that the second fair use factor similarly weighs in favor of a 
finding of fair use, because even where data outputs are selected and organized in a 
manner that renders them protectable, the copyright protection is “thin.”2580 Public 
Knowledge further notes that the data outputs “are functional in nature, containing 
arguable amounts of creative expression mixed with unprotectable facts and functional 
elements.”
2581 
With respect to the third fair use factor, proponents acknowledge that in some 
cases they might be accessing an entire work.2582 Public Knowledge nonetheless asserts 
that any use of copyrightable expression would fall under fair use because even “using 
the totality of a work is never a bar to a finding of fair use.”2583 Additionally, Public 
Knowledge contends that proponents would not be copying and using the data structures 
in and of themselves, but instead would be using “the output data to convey the raw 
information contained within any data structures.”
2584 MDRC further argues that “to the 
extent one must make a copy to reveal the underlying [uncopyrightable] data, courts give 
that incidental copying latitude.”2585 
Proponents assert that the fourth factor also weighs in favor of fair use, because 
use of the data does not supplant market demand for, or harm the value of, the data 
outputs, or the software or devices that generate those outputs.
2586 MDRC argues that 
any copies made to access underlying unprotectable data neither supplant patient need for 
the medical devices themselves, nor the “need for the reports that medical device 
companies may generate with the same underlying data, which are combined with other 
2578 Id. at App. C at ¶ 8.
 
2579 Public Knowledge Class 27 Reply at 3; see also Public Knowledge Class 27 Supp. at 2 (“[P]ursuing the
 
safety, security, or effectiveness of [a] device . . . should categorically also be considered fair, based upon
 
the literal lifesaving purpose of the use.”).
 
2580 MDRC Supp. at 4-5.
 
2581 Public Knowledge Class 27 Reply at 3.
 
2582 See id.; MDRC Reply at 21-22.
 
2583 Public Knowledge Class 27 Reply at 3 (citing Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 586­
87 (1994) and Perfect 10, Inc. v. Amazon, Inc., 508 F.3d 1146, 1167-68 (9th Cir. 2007)).
 
2584 Id. at 4.
 
2585 MDRC Supp. at 15 (citing WIREdata, 350 F.3d at 644-45 and Golan v. Holder, 132 S. Ct. 873, 890
 
(2012)).
 
2586 See id. at 23; MDRC Reply at 5; Public Knowledge Class 27 Reply at 3. 
385
 

[PAGE 390]
     
    
     
 
  
   
 
     
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
   
   
 
  
     
   
   
              
            
               
              
              
            
       
       
  
     
            
                
          
     
      
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
information and presented in tandem with a consultation from a physician.” 2587 Public 
Knowledge also argues that proponents’ desired uses would not supplant the market for 
or diminish the value of medical device software because patients will have already 
purchased the software by buying the device.2588 Public Knowledge also questions 
whether there is a market at all for “the software itself, as opposed to the devices that 
contain it.”
2589 Proponents did not separately address potential effects on the market for 
corresponding monitoring systems or software on those systems.  But they generally 
treated monitoring systems as necessary incidents to the medical devices themselves, 
suggesting the view that the market for medical devices and that of corresponding 
monitoring systems are essentially the same. 
Finally, MDRC observes that “[c]ourts are empowered to consider other factors in 
a fair use determination,” and urges that “in the particular case of accessing one’s own 
data from a medical device, it’s entirely possible that a court would take into account the 
highly personal and potentially life-saving nature of the information in question.”
2590 
c. Asserted Adverse Effects 
Proponents argue that the prohibition on circumvention adversely affects their 
desired uses because, absent an exemption to cover potentially protected data outputs, 
they would have only limited access to their personal medical data.  For example, in the 
case of ICDs, proponents note that important medical data is only accessible at periodic 
checkups with a doctor, as explained above.  This is often inadequate since patients may 
receive pertinent information months after their “devices . . . detect time-sensitive 
anomalies that patients may not feel, including changes in heart rhythm or blood 
flow.”
2591 In addition, not only do patients have to schedule a consultation with their 
doctors, but the reports created by device manufacturers or monitoring companies are 
sometimes only shared with the patient “for a fee.”
2592 
2587 MDRC Supp. at 14 (asserting that the “uses of data advocated here instead concern time-sensitive 
access for safety and security reasons, including detecting anomalies and emergencies, or sharing time 
sensitive medical information with family members as part of their care”); see also MDRC Reply at 5 
(“[T]he types of uses considered in this exemption would never supplant the need for the original device in 
any conceivable use case. No cardiac patient would look at a device’s source code in lieu of getting a 
pacemaker; no patient with diabetes would look at the data readout from an insulin pump instead of getting 
one.”); Tr. at 27:02-11 (May 29, 2015) (Sellars, MDRC). 
2588 Public Knowledge Class 27 Reply at 3. 
2589 Id. 
2590 MDRC Supp. at 14-15.
 
2591 MDRC Reply at 9-10; see also Public Knowledge Class 27 Reply at 6 (contending that accessing data
 
through doctors or other medical professionals is not a viable alternative to accessing it directly from the
 
device because such devices have “vital information whose relevance and importance—such as blood sugar
 
levels or heart rhythms—are often immediate”).
 
2592 MDRC Supp. at App. C at ¶ 6.
 
386
 

[PAGE 391]
     
    
   
 
     
   
 
    
 
  
 
     
  
  
    
   
  
    
 
  
   
     
  
    
 
 
 
                 
                
            
     
              
                  
          
          
                  
             
              
 
        
         
             
  
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
Proponents also contend that, if patients are able more easily to access their own 
medical data, such access will improve patient care by allowing patients to immediately 
detect major health risks,2593 thus facilitating highly personalized treatment,2594 giving 
patients better ability to oversee their own health,2595 and providing both patients and 
their doctors with more timely information on physiological events occurring within the 
body.
2596 For instance, Campos, the ICD patient mentioned above, explained that 
“manually logging symptomatic cardiac episodes led me to identify the consumption of 
Scotch whisky as a trigger for atrial arrhythmias, and of caffeine as seemingly not 
harmful,” but that he could track his health at a more granular level if the data generated 
by the ICD were more readily available to him for analysis.
2597 West, the patient with the 
continuous glucose monitor, explained that while his handheld receiving computer 
indicates his current glucose level and whether that level is higher or lower than the last 
glucose reading, knowing as well the exact level of change from the prior reading is a 
“very important cue” in helping him manage his disease.
2598 
d. Argument Under Statutory Factors 
Proponents argue that the statutory factors set forth in section 1201(a)(1) support 
granting this exemption as well.  Regarding the first factor, the availability for use of 
copyrighted works, MDRC notes that the use of works for medical treatment “does not 
depend on the presence or absence of TPMs” because it is undertaken by the patient out 
of necessity.
2599 MDRC thus maintains that the availability of either the data outputs or 
the software running a medical device would not be affected by an exemption because 
“the device and copyrighted work are inseparable.”
2600 
For the second factor, MDRC argues that availability for use for nonprofit, 
archival, preservation and educational purposes is negatively impacted by the prohibition 
on circumvention because “there are no alternatives [to circumvention] for time-sensitive 
2593 See, e.g., id. at 3, 19; Public Knowledge Class 27 Supp. at 7 (contending that the “inability of patients . 
. . to access networked medical devices creates clear and present harms for them,” as even instances where 
such harms begin as “mere inconvenience[s]” can “over the duration of a course of treatment, escalate into 
a grave barrier”); MDRC Reply at 9. 
2594 See, e.g., MDRC Reply at 7; see also Tr. at 56:03-12 (May 29, 2015) (Sellars, MDRC). 
2595 See, e.g., MDRC Reply at 10 (stating that patients’ access to data on the amount of insulin being 
released from insulin pump can give patients better ability to care for themselves); Freeman Class 27 Supp. 
at 1; see also Tr. at 11:12-12:11 (May 29, 2015) (West, MDRC). 
2596 See, e.g., MDRC Supp. at 19 (“At the individual level, physiological events that could be critical to a 
patient’s well-being may be missed if the device detects the event but does not inform the patient.”); 
Freeman Class 27 Supp. at 1; MDRC Reply at 10-11; see also Tr. at 14:13-15:18 (May 29, 2015) (West, 
MDRC). 
2597 MDRC Supp. at App. C at ¶ 9. 
2598 Tr. at 9:11-19, 10:03-13 (May 29, 2015) (West, MDRC). 
2599 MDRC Supp. at 23 (“[I]f a person needs an insulin pump, they get an insulin pump.”). 
2600 Id. 
387
 

[PAGE 392]
     
    
  
    
    
  
 
  
   
  
    
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
    
   
   
    
                 
              
 
    
        
     
     
                  
          
               
            
          
            
          
         
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
access to a patient’s data for purposes of detecting device flaws or life-threatening 
events.”2601 It further notes the existence of programs and websites that allow patients to 
share their data to better understand and study the data as well as their own health.2602 
With respect to the third factor, MDRC asserts that medical device users having greater 
access to their medical data will enable them, as well as others through the sharing of the 
data, to engage in more research, reporting, and commentary about health issues.2603 
As for the fourth factor, MDRC contends that “showing ways that patients can 
leverage the data gathered on these devices to prevent adverse incidents and improve 
their health” will increase market demand for medical devices (and the software 
contained therein).
2604 Public Knowledge also notes, in the context of its fair use 
argument, that circumvention for purposes of access to device software that has already 
been paid for would not substitute for the market for or negatively affect the value of that 
software.2605 
With respect to other factors that may be considered by the Librarian, proponents 
respond to opponents’ concerns, discussed below, that an exemption could have potential 
impacts on health, safety, and security by noting that other laws, such as the Computer 
Fraud and Abuse Act (“CFAA”), which prohibits unauthorized access of certain protected 
computer systems,
2606 and the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(“HIPAA”), which protects private health information from unauthorized disclosure,2607 
might prevent any unwanted or malicious actions.2608 At the same time, proponents point 
out that HIPAA does not preclude patients from accessing their own medical data or 
choosing to share it with third parties.2609 Proponents further contend that “the Librarian 
and the Office are ill equipped to make determinations about privacy and patient safety,” 
and that FDA is the correct administrative body to regulate in these areas.2610 Proponents 
thus urge the Librarian and the Office to “remove the potential impediments of Section 
2601 Id. at 24.
 
2602 MDRC Reply at 12.
 
2603 See MDRC Supp. at 24, App. C; see also MDRC Reply at 12 (noting that one patient who was able to
 
access his own medical data has made it “publicly available so others may use it to conduct further
 
research”).
 
2604 MDRC Supp. at 25.
 
2605 Public Knowledge Class 27 Reply at 3.
 
2606 18 U.S.C. § 1030.
 
2607 42 U.S.C. § 1320d-6.
 
2608 See Tr. at 43:20-44:02 (May 29, 2015) (Sellars, MDRC) (asserting that “other laws could fill in the gap
 
for bad actors”); see also Public Knowledge Class 27 Post-Hearing Resp. at 3-4.
 
2609 See Public Knowledge Class 27 Reply at 9 (contending that “[n]either HIPAA, nor any other privacy
 
statute, prevents patients from disclosing their own records to third parties directly” or authorizing third
 
parties to make use of such information); see also MDRC Post-Hearing Resp. at 4-5 (asserting, for 
example, that the proposed exemption is not in conflict with the CFAA since the exemption “requires
 
consent from a patient if the device is used in that patient’s care”).
 
2610 Public Knowledge Class 27 Reply at 9; MDRC Reply at 18-20. 
388
 

[PAGE 393]
     
    
 
   
 
  
    
  
  
  
   
  
     
  
 
 
   
   
  
 
  
  
  
   
 
   
                
           
       
       
                
            
 
              
  
              
              
       
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
1201” by granting an exemption so that the appropriate agency can more practically 
decide these issues.2611 Public Knowledge also argues that concerns expressed by 
opponents about the exposure of trade secrets are irrelevant to copyright interests and are 
“no part of the statutory factors for determining an exemption.”2612 
As is also discussed below, opponents raise issues regarding the impact of the 
exemption on the battery life and performance of implanted devices due to more frequent 
queries for data readouts.  MDRC explains that it “is not asking for continuous 
interrogation of devices,” but instead only “to be able to intercept and read” the data 
already periodically dispatched by the devices.
2613 Public Knowledge suggests, however, 
that the exemption should also permit more active access through on-demand querying of 
the device, claiming that there is likely to be “minimal effect” from such activity and that 
any remaining concerns can easily be remedied by merely changing the device’s 
battery.
2614 But Public Knowledge does not provide any specific evidence on the 
parameters of, or the need for, such increased access, or the feasibility of battery 
replacement.
2615 
Finally, proponents suggest that the prohibition on circumvention is interfering 
with patients’ rights to and ownership of their medical data by isolating them from their 
own data and preventing them from using it to learn more about their health.
2616 
2. Opposition 
The Office received comments in opposition to the proposed exemption from 
AdvaMed, Intellectual Property Owners Association (“IPO”), LifeScience Alley, and 
National Association of Manufacturers (“NAM”).
2617 
a. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Citing Engineering Dynamics, Inc. v. Structural Software, Inc., which held that 
user input and output formats for a computer system are copyrightable,2618 and Positive 
Software Solutions, Inc. v. New Century Mortgage Corp., which held the same for data 
2611 Public Knowledge Class 27 Reply at 9; see also MDRC Reply at 18 (asserting that in a case where the 
authority of FDA and the Office overlap, “the most effective response is for each agency to regulate 
according to its expertise, and avoid duplicative efforts”). 
2612 Public Knowledge Class 27 Reply at 10. 
2613 MDRC Reply at 11; see also Public Knowledge Class 27 Reply at 8 (noting that “[a]ccessing data
 
already being transmitted by the device on its own schedule will have no effect upon its ordinary 
operation”).
 
2614 Public Knowledge Class 27 Reply at 8; see also Tr. at 47:13-19 (May 29, 2015) (Sellars, MDRC).
 
2615 Id.
 
2616 MDRC Supp. at 3; MDRC Reply at 8-12; Public Knowledge Class 27 Reply at 6.
 
2617 AdvaMed Class 27 Opp’n; IPO Class 27 Opp’n; LifeScience Alley Class 27 Opp’n; NAM Opp’n.
 
2618 26 F.3d at 1345 (addressing user input and output formats).
 
389
 

[PAGE 394]
     
    
   
  
     
  
 
 
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
    
 
   
 
    
  
   
   
 
  
 
  
   
          
     
  
    
                    
   
            
     
    
             
  
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
structures in a database,2619 AdvaMed asserts that “copyright protection in device outputs 
may extend to, for example, the structure, format, and arrangement of the output 
data.”2620 But AdvaMed does not elaborate on these precedents or provide any examples 
of output data that it claims are copyrightable.  
Even assuming that some outputs may be copyrightable, opponents present little 
argument to counter proponents’ assertion that patient access to such medical data 
transmitted from a device or its corresponding monitoring system would constitute a 
noninfringing fair use of such works. AdvaMed makes the bare assertion that “[t]he 
analysis of any use of the copyrighted works arguably points against the proposed uses 
falling under the fair use exception;”2621 it does not explain this point or conduct a factorby-factor analysis of fair use for the proposed activity of patient access. 
b. Asserted Adverse Effects 
Opponents concede that “patients have the inherent right to access their own 
medical data,”2622 but contend that alternatives to unauthorized circumvention exist such 
that proponents suffer no adverse impact resulting from the prohibition.2623 Specifically, 
proponents assert that “[s]uch data access rights can be exercised (and already are 
provided) through health care providers having the appropriate tools and training to 
collect and protect patient data without compromising the safety and longevity of [the 
patient’s] device.”2624 NAM further asserts that “[p]roponents have offered no evidence 
that patients are unable to obtain their data from qualified medical professionals when 
requested.”2625 Accordingly, NAM posits that the inability of patients to directly access 
their data through circumvention “is not the type of ‘distinct, verifiable, and measurable’ 
adverse impact that warrants an exemption to the prohibition.”
2626 
c. Argument Under Statutory Factors 
Regarding the first statutory factor, concerning the availability of copyrighted 
works, opponents assert that the prohibition on circumvention is not harming the ability 
for patients to access their personal medical data because “[c]urrently the patient has 
access to their data through their physician.”
2627 Opponents present no argument with 
2619 259 F. Supp. 2d at 535 (addressing Structured Query Language data structures). 
2620 AdvaMed Class 27 Opp’n at 5. 
2621 Id. 
2622 Id. at 2. 
2623 See, e.g., NAM Opp’n at 5-6; IPO Class 27 Opp’n at 2; LifeScience Alley Class 27 Opp’n at 4, 6;
 
AdvaMed Class 27 Opp’n at 2.
 
2624 AdvaMed Class 27 Opp’n at 2; see also LifeScience Alley Class 27 Opp’n at 4.
 
2625 NAM Opp’n at 5.
 
2626 Id. at 6. 
2627 LifeScience Alley Class 27 Opp’n at 6; see also IPO Class 27 Opp’n at 2; AdvaMed Class 27 Opp’n at 
2; NAM Opp’n at 5-6. 
390
 

[PAGE 395]
     
    
    
   
  
 
    
 
 
  
 
    
 
 
  
    
  
 
 
  
    
 
  
 
  
   
   
   
  
  
  
     
  
     
            
            
             
    
           
    
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
respect to the second and third factors. As for the fourth factor, which considers market 
impact, AdvaMed suggests that the proposed exemption will devalue medical devices, 
and impliedly the software and data outputs generated by such devices, by causing the 
public to believe that devices can be accessed or controlled by unauthorized parties and, 
as a result, are insecure or unsafe.2628 However, like proponents, opponents do not 
separately address how an exemption would affect the market for or value of any 
corresponding monitoring systems or data outputs. 
Opponents place much weight on the fifth statutory factor, allowing the Register 
and Librarian to consider such other factors as may be appropriate.  Opponents contend 
that allowing users to circumvent medical device access controls—to the extent they exist 
now and as they become more prevalent in the future—will be at best unsafe and even 
potentially life-threatening.  As a threshold matter, opponents maintain that the proposed 
exemption is overly broad in that it could include many different types of devices, 
making it “difficult to appraise the full scope or risks likely to be created.”
2629 But more 
generally, both here and in relation to the issue of security research addressed in Class 
27A, opponents take the position that circumvention should not be allowed for any 
medical device that currently is or in the future will be used in patient care, including 
implanted devices.  Opponents contend that tampering and unauthorized circumvention 
could result in malfunction, corruption of data, degradation, or damage, and thus present 
“an unnecessarily high risk to patient safety.”
2630 Notably, this line of argument seems to 
assume that circumvention of the computer software on the devices themselves would be 
necessary.  As explained above, however, and as clarified during the proceeding, it 
appears that the circumvention actually sought by proponents would permit access only 
to data outputs from devices or monitoring systems, rather than the devices or systems 
themselves. 
Opponents further contend that requesting data from devices at an abnormally 
high rate could result in serious injury or death, as telemetry sessions conducted when 
devices are “in a communication mode” drastically reduces their overall battery life and 
could cause them to stop performing critical functions prematurely.
2631 Thus, in 
AdvaMed’s view, “[i]f the Copyright Office were to advance an exemption permitting 
unauthorized circumvention activity for a patient to study his or her own device, it should 
be limited to the passive monitoring of radio transmissions that are produced by the 
device in its unaltered operating form.”2632 In addition, LifeScience Alley argues that 
allowing medical device users to have greater access to their medical data “will directly 
2628 AdvaMed Class 27 Opp’n at 7.
 
2629 Id. at 4; see also IPO Class 27 Opp’n at 2; NAM Opp’n at 2.
 
2630 AdvaMed Class 27 Opp’n at 4; see also LifeScience Alley Class 27 Opp’n at 4 (noting that “[a]ny
 
compromise of the proper operation of the software on a medical device could easily lead to patient
 
death”); NAM Opp’n at 7.
 
2631 See, e.g., AdvaMed Class 27 Opp’n at 2; LifeScience Alley Class 27 Opp’n at 4; NAM Opp’n at 7.
 
2632 AdvaMed Class 27 Opp’n at 3.
 
391
 

[PAGE 396]
     
    
   
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
 
 
 
    
   
  
  
    
    
     
  
  
  
       
         
   
          
     
          
          
      
             
                 
   
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
interfere with the doctor-patient relationship – in effect inducing patients to make 
decisions without the support of their doctor.”2633 
Opponents further assert that allowing circumvention could compromise 
personally identifiable or protected health information of both the patient who owns the 
device as well as other patients.  Opponents suggest, without much elaboration, that 
granting this exemption could allow a malicious actor to access patient data by remotely 
connecting to a device, a device’s corresponding monitoring system, or any associated 
networked system, all without permission from the patient or the device manufacturer.2634 
Opponents also maintain that unauthorized circumvention for the purpose of obtaining 
personal medical data could violate HIPAA by compromising patient privacy or 
contravene laws governing unauthorized access to computer systems.2635 AdvaMed 
additionally argues that an exemption could potentially “provide wrongdoers with 
knowledge of how to manipulate and interface with the devices,” thus enabling malicious 
hacking activities that could harm patients.2636 And opponents contend that allowing 
circumvention “poses trade secret concerns” because it could allow access to device 
firmware and outputs without having to request authorization from, or enter into a 
contractual relationship with, the device manufacturer.2637 
Finally, opponents urge the Office to “confer with the FDA and defer to its view in 
this matter, as FDA is the federal agency charged with assuring the safety, efficacy, and 
security of medical devices.”2638 
3. Discussion 
The Register finds that proponents have made a sufficient showing that medical 
device manufacturers are using TPMs to control access to the data outputs transmitted by 
such devices and related systems.
2639 The Register also concludes that the record 
demonstrates that the use of TPMs will likely increase in the next three years, particularly 
in light of the new guidance issued by FDA.2640 
The Register further agrees with proponents that, to be protected by copyright, the 
data output generated by a patient’s medical device must reflect a “collection and 
2633 LifeScience Alley Class 27 Opp’n at 6. 
2634 See, e.g., AdvaMed Class 27 Opp’n at 2, 4- 5; IPO Class 27 Opp’n at 3; LifeScience Alley Class 27
 
Opp’n at 4, 6.
 
2635 AdvaMed Class 27 Opp’n at 4, 7; IPO Class 27 Opp’n at 3.
 
2636 AdvaMed Class 27 Opp’n at 7.
 
2637 Id.; see also LifeScience Alley Class 27 Opp’n at 5.
 
2638 AdvaMed Class 27 Opp’n at 7; see also NAM Opp’n at 2; IPO Class 27 Opp’n at 2-3; LifeScience
 
Alley Class 27 at 2.
 
2639 See MDRC Supp. at 3, 7-9; see also Public Knowledge Class 27 Supp. at 1.
 
2640 See MDRC Supp. at 7, 9; Tr. at 17:01-08 (May 29, 2015) (Sellars, MDRC); Tr. at 60:08-12 (May 29,
 
2015) (West, MDRC). 
392
 

[PAGE 397]
     
    
   
    
  
 
  
    
     
   
  
 
      
                
          
               
          
              
         
             
               
                
             
           
              
          
            
              
         
 
             
            
           
              
            
           
            
         
         
               
           
              
        
               
             
                 
                 
                 
         
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
assembling of . . . data that are selected, coordinated or arranged in a way that the 
resulting work as a whole constitutes an original work of authorship.”2641 Although the 
record is not as specific as it could be concerning the precise nature of data outputs 
generated by various medical devices, it seems safe to assume that in many cases, these 
outputs would simply reflect an unoriginal stream of data consisting of facts about the 
patient’s physiological condition.
2642 If that were always the case, there would be no 
need for an exemption under section 1201(a)(1), because the outputs would not be 
protected under title 17.2643 
But the record also indicates that some data outputs produced by medical 
devices—for example, batch-type reports—might qualify for protection as literary works 
if they reflect a sufficiently original selection and presentation of data.2644 And 
2641 17 U.S.C. § 101 (definition of “compilation”); see also Feist, 499 U.S. at 348 (asserting that factual 
compilations can be copyrightable where “even a directory that contains absolutely no protectable written 
expression, only facts, meets the constitutional minimum for copyright protection if it features an original 
selection or arrangement”); CCC v. Maclean, 44 F.3d at 65-66; COMPENDIUM (THIRD) §§ 312.2, 508.1. 
2642 See, e.g., Feist, 499 U.S. at 363 (finding that listing telephone subscribers in alphabetical order was not 
original or creative in the coordination and arrangement of these facts since doing so is “an age-old 
practice, firmly rooted in tradition and so commonplace that it has come to be expected as a matter of 
course”); Matthew Bender & Co., Inc. v. West Pub. Co., 158 F.3d 674, 682, 688-89 (2d Cir. 1998) 
(determining that a compilation of data is not copyrightable where the selection is dictated by industry 
conventions or other external factors or where “the author made obvious, garden-variety, or routine 
selections”); BanxCorp. v. Costco Wholesale Corp., 978 F. Supp. 2d 280, 301, 307 (S.D.N.Y . 2013) 
(finding that data constitute unprotectable facts if they “purport[] to represent actual objective prices of 
actual things in the world” or discover merely “an ‘empirical reality’”). 
2643 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(A) (providing that “[n]o person shall circumvent a technological measure 
that effectively controls access to a work protected under this title” (emphasis added)); see also 2012 
Recommendation at 14-15 (concluding that an exemption for access to public domain literary works was 
unnecessary). 
2644 See COMPENDIUM (THIRD) § 508.1 (noting that a compilation “‘results from a process of selecting, 
bringing together, organizing, and arranging previously existing material of all kinds, regardless of whether 
the individual items in the material have been or ever could have been subject to copyright’” (quoting H.R. 
REP. NO. 94-1476, at 57 (1976), reprinted in 1976 U.S.C.C.A.N. 5659, 5670)); see also CCC v. Maclean, 
44 F.3d at 67-68 (finding that the selection and arrangement of data in a database of used vehicle prices 
were sufficiently original because of plaintiff’s presentation of independent predicted valuations for regions 
and the selection and presentation of optional features); Mason v. Montgomery Data, Inc., 967 F.2d 135, 
141-42 (5th Cir. 1992) (finding plaintiff’s maps to be original and copyrightable because plaintiff 
independently selected which information from conflicting sources to include on his maps); Key Publ’ns, 
Inc. v. Chinatown Today Publ’g Enters., Inc., 945 F.2d 509, 513-14 (2d Cir. 1991) (finding a directory of 
New York businesses to be sufficiently original because the plaintiff had exercised “judgment in choosing 
which facts from a given body of data to include,” such as excluding businesses that the plaintiff thought 
would not remain open for long and creatively arranging the businesses in categories); Kregos v. Associated 
Press, 937 F.2d 700, 704-05 (2d Cir. 1991) (reversing a summary judgment dismissal of a copyright claim 
in a baseball pitching form, holding that the form had sufficient creativity in the selection of nine specific 
pitching statistics out of many to display, particularly in comparison to other pitching forms that only used 
at most three pitching statistics); 2000 Final Rule, 65 Fed. Reg. at 64,566 (noting that databases “that 
contain a significant amount of uncopyrightable material . . . , may nonetheless be covered by copyright by 
virtue of the selection, coordination and arrangement of the materials”). 
393
 

[PAGE 398]
     
    
  
     
    
   
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
   
 
  
     
   
   
   
    
  
 
      
                      
           
    
          
       
               
              
             
  
              
              
             
  
      
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
proponents confirm that certain types of devices and systems do in fact dispatch data in 
batches rather than in real time.2645 Given the fact that opponents themselves argue that 
such outputs may be subject to copyright,2646 the Register credits proponents’ assertions 
that some outputs may be protectable.2647 
Accordingly, the Register finds that proponents have adequately demonstrated that 
patients’ access to their own medical data as embodied in protectable data compilations 
generated by implanted medical devices and corresponding home monitoring systems is 
likely to be hindered by TPMs that control access to that data.  As explained below, they 
have also established that the activities proponents seek to carry out are likely to 
constitute noninfringing fair uses.  As also discussed below, on the whole—though with 
important qualifications—the statutory factors set forth in section 1201(a)(1) tend to 
favor proponents. 
a. Noninfringing Uses 
The Register concludes that the overall record generally supports proponents’ 
claim that accessing personal medical data is likely to be noninfringing as a fair use under 
section 107. Additionally, the Register notes that opponents did not make any 
meaningful attempt to rebut proponents’ fair use claims. 
Regarding the first fair use factor, the record establishes that the purpose and 
character of the proposed use favor a finding of fair use.  The record reflects that 
proponents’ desired uses will be personal and noncommercial since the proposed 
exemption seeks to allow patients to access potentially life-saving data for their own use, 
rather than for any monetary gain.
2648 In addition, allowing patients to access this data is 
likely to foster patients’ research into their own conditions, as with the example provided 
by Campos, who discovered that consuming certain foods was associated with adverse 
health effects.
2649 Patients’ ability to access their own data may also foster more general 
2645 See MDRC Supp. at 5, 6 & n.37; Halperin et al. at 30, 33 & fig. B (cited in MDRC Supp. at 2 n.4) 
(example of batch report transmitted by medical devices and home monitoring system); Tr. at 18:16-25 
(May 29, 2015) (Sellars, MDRC). 
2646 See AdvaMed Class 27 Opp’n at 5 (citing Eng’g Dynamics v. Structural Software, 26 F.3d at 1345 and 
Positive Software Solutions, 259 F. Supp. 2d at 535). 
2647 See Feist, 499 U.S. at 348 (holding that factual compilations may be copyrightable where the “choices 
as to selection and arrangement, so long as they are made independently by the compiler and entail a 
minimal degree of creativity, are sufficiently original that Congress may protect such compilations through 
the copyright laws”). 
2648 See Harper & Row Publishers, Inc. v. Nation Enters., 471 U.S. 539, 562 (1985) (holding that “[t]he 
crux of the profit/nonprofit distinction is not whether the sole motive of the use is monetary gain but 
whether the user stands to profit from exploitation of the copyrighted material without paying the 
customary price”). 
2649 MDRC Supp. at App. C at ¶ 9. 
394
 

[PAGE 399]
     
    
     
     
 
  
  
  
   
    
 
     
  
     
  
  
  
    
 
 
 
 
   
         
             
            
    
    
                 
             
            
            
             
          
             
       
            
 
             
            
            
             
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
scholarship or research into specific medical conditions and technologies to the extent 
patients wish to share that data with others.2650 
Furthermore, as Public Knowledge notes, even if the data is output in a manner 
that reflects some creative selection or arrangement, it seems that the patient would not 
be copying the outputs because of the value of that selection or arrangement per se, but 
simply to gain access to “the raw information contained within any data structures.”2651 In 
other words, the purpose of the use is to obtain access to the underlying and 
uncopyrightable factual information contained within the data output to allow additional 
use and analysis.  That logic is supported to some extent by the Seventh Circuit’s decision 
in Assessment Technologies of Wisconsin, LLC v. WIREdata, Inc., cited by MDRC.
2652 In 
WIREdata, the defendant wanted to extract unprotectable data about properties that 
plaintiff had compiled into a database, and provide it to real estate brokers.2653 In ruling 
for the defendant, the court stressed that “the only purpose of the copying would be to 
extract noncopyrighted material.”2654 Similarly, here, to the extent that access to 
noncopyrightable patient data requires copying of a protected compilation of such data, 
the Register does not find this to override the highly personal, noncommercial and 
research-oriented nature of the uses at issue.2655 Moreover, to the extent the data is being 
reinterpreted and/or recompiled to allow more insights into a patient’s health status, the 
use may well be a transformative one.2656 
The second factor, the nature of the works, weighs in favor of fair use.  As noted 
above, even if data outputs are copyrightable, they are nonetheless highly factual in 
nature; any copyright protection extends only to the selection and arrangement of the data 
and not to the data itself, which is the focus of the use.  
2650 See 17 U.S.C. § 107; MDRC Reply at 12. 
2651 Public Knowledge Class 27 Reply at 4 (emphasis added); see also MDRC Supp. at 13 (explaining that 
the copying of the work is merely “done in the process of extracting underlying unprotectable data”). 
2652 See MDRC Supp. at 13 n.88. 
2653 WIREdata, 350 F.3d at 642-43. 
2654 Id. at 645; see also Evolution, Inc. v. SunTrust Bank, 342 F. Supp. 2d 943, 955-56 (D. Kan. 2004) 
(finding that copying portions of plaintiff’s source code to extract defendants’ own data from plaintiff’s 
program was a fair use); Nautical Solutions Marketing, Inc. v. Boats.com, No. 8:02-CV-760-T-23TGW, 
2004 WL 783121, at *2 (M.D. Fla. Apr. 1, 2004) (finding that temporarily copying public web pages in 
order extract unprotectable yacht listing facts was a fair use); Ticketmaster Corp. v. Tickets.com, Inc., No. 
CV997654HLHVBKX, 2003 WL 21406289, at *2, *5 (C.D.Ca. Mar. 7, 2003) (finding that temporarily 
copying a competing ticket seller’s website to extract unprotected public facts about events, such as dates, 
times, and prices, was a fair use). 
2655 See 2012 Recommendation at 74 (noting that noncommercial and personal uses may weigh in favor of 
fair use). 
2656 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 579 (explaining that the first factor looks to whether the new work “adds 
something new, with a further purpose or different character, altering the first with new expression, 
meaning, or message”); Authors Guild, Inc. v. HathiTrust, 755 F.3d 87, 97 (2d Cir. 2014) (finding that 
creating a full text searchable database from copied and digitized books was a transformative use). 
395
 

[PAGE 400]
     
    
 
 
    
  
    
 
  
   
 
  
 
 
   
  
    
  
 
   
   
   
    
 
 
    
    
 
 
           
           
                
              
              
                 
            
       
          
               
     
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
In addressing the third factor, which considers the amount of the work used, 
proponents concede that in most cases the proposed use would involve reproduction of 
data outputs in their entirety.2657 As the WIREdata case discussed above, courts have, 
however, been willing to permit complete copying of the original work in certain cases 
where it is necessary to achieve a permissible use.2658 And in prior rulemakings, the 
Register has found such copying to be consistent with fair use, for example, in 
determining that the third factor is of little weight in the context of jailbreaking 
smartphones to enable interoperability, a salutary purpose.  Here, the record suggests that 
copying of the data output in the form provided by the device manufacturer may be 
necessary to allow a patient to access and analyze the complete set of relevant data. 
Thus, even if the third factor arguably disfavors a fair use finding, the weight to be given 
to it under the circumstances is slight.
2659 
Factor four, regarding the effect on the market for or value of the copyrighted 
work, concerns “not only the extent of market harm caused by the particular actions of 
the [user], but also whether unrestricted and widespread conduct of the sort engaged in by 
the [proponent of fair use] . . . would result in a substantially adverse impact on the 
potential market.”
2660 On the current record, there is no indication that the desired uses 
will usurp the market for medical devices, their corresponding monitoring systems, the 
copyrighted computer programs within those devices and systems, or the data outputs 
generated by those devices and systems.2661 With respect to the devices and the software 
therein, as MDRC succinctly explains, “[n]o cardiac patient would look at a device’s 
source code in lieu of getting a pacemaker; no patient with diabetes would look at the 
data readout from an insulin pump instead of getting one.”2662 Nor is there any indication 
in this record that home monitoring systems exist in a separate market from the medical 
devices themselves, or that a market exists for data outputs in and of themselves. 
For their part, opponents provide no countervailing evidence of market harm or 
substitution for the devices, monitoring systems, software, or data outputs. To the extent 
that opponents assert that granting the exemption could erode the public’s confidence in 
the safety and security of medical devices and potentially enable malicious hacking 
activities, the Register concludes that these harms are unsupported by record evidence 
2657 See, e.g., Public Knowledge Class 27 Reply at 3-4. 
2658 WIREdata, 350 F.3d at 645 (holding that where the “only way [defendant] could obtain public-domain 
data about properties” was by “copying the compilation and not just the compiled data . . . it would be 
privileged to make such a copy”); see also HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 98 (“For some purposes, it may be 
necessary to copy the entire copyrighted work, in which case Factor Three does not weigh against a finding 
of fair use.”); Kelly v. Arriba Soft Corp., 336 F.3d 811, 820-21 (9th Cir. 2003) (holding that the third fair 
use factor did not weigh against copier when copying the entire work was reasonably necessary). 
2659 2010 Recommendation at 97; see also 2012 Recommendation at 73-74. 
2660 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 590 (internal quotations omitted). 
2661 See, e.g., MDRC Supp. at 12, 23; MDRC Reply at 5; Public Knowledge Class 27 Reply at 3. 
2662 MDRC Reply at 5. 
396
 

[PAGE 401]
     
    
  
  
 
 
  
  
   
     
    
   
  
   
     
  
  
  
 
   
  
      
 
   
    
  
 
 
          
     
                
      
           
          
              
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
and therefore speculative in nature.  In sum, the Register finds that, on the current record, 
the fourth fair use factor favors proponents.  
On balance, based on the record in this proceeding, the Register finds that the 
proposed personal and noncommercial uses of patient data as described above are likely 
to be fair. 
b. Adverse Effects 
Proponents have successfully established that in many instances, access controls 
on medical device data outputs have, or are likely in the upcoming triennial period to 
have, an adverse impact on patients’ ability to directly access their medical data.
2663 They 
have also established that TPMs are becoming more prevalent in the medical device 
industry, partly in response to FDA guidance on cybersecurity.2664 The record further 
demonstrates that without an exemption, patients may be unable to see or analyze their 
data without visiting a hospital or doctor’s office, and that there can be substantial 
benefits to allowing patients to access the data outputs as they are generated.2665 
Although opponents urge that accessing data through health care providers is an 
acceptable alternative to circumvention,2666 proponents convincingly explain that this 
alternative does not mitigate any adverse effects, because patients may have to wait 
months in order to receive vital information from their health care providers and may lose 
the opportunity to take corrective action in the meantime.
2667 Moreover, the record 
shows that even where a device or monitoring system provides some data to the patient, it 
may not provide other data that may help a patient manage or understand his or her own 
condition, as in the case of a continuous glucose monitor.
2668 Patients may thus be 
precluded from real-time monitoring of their own health status, including medical 
incidents reflected in data outputs, as well as the ability to correlate dietary practices and 
other behaviors with the impact on their physical well-being.
2669 The Register therefore 
concludes that, especially as they become increasingly prevalent, TPMs controlling 
access to medical device outputs are likely in the next three years to have an adverse 
effect on noninfringing uses of personal medical information.  
2663 See MDRC Supp. at 3, 18-19; MDRC Reply at 8-12.
 
2664 See MDRC Supp. at 7, 9.
 
2665 See, e.g., id. at App. C; Tr. at 8:01-06, 14:19-25, 15:10-18 (May 29, 2015) (West, MDRC).
 
2666 AdvaMed Class 27 Opp’n at 2; NAM Opp’n at 5.
 
2667 MDRC Reply at 9-10; Public Knowledge Class 27 Reply at 6.
 
2668 See, e.g., Tr. at 9:05-19 (May 29, 2015) (West, MDRC).
 
2669 See, e.g., MDRC Supp. at App. C.; Tr. at 7:21-8:09 (May 29, 2015) (West, MDRC).
 
397
 

[PAGE 402]
     
    
  
  
  
   
  
    
    
  
  
  
   
    
     
 
  
   
   
  
   
  
 
   
   
  
    
 
  
     
     
     
    
         
     
            
   
     
     
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
c. Statutory Factors 
The Register finds that the first factor, concerning the availability for use of 
copyrighted works,2670 is essentially neutral or slightly favors proponents.  Proponents 
persuasively establish that an exemption would not adversely affect the availability of 
works because patients would continue to obtain medical devices, the computer programs 
within those devices and data outputs generated by those devices, because such devices 
are necessary for the health of those patients.2671 
Proponents do not directly address the second or third statutory factors. The 
Register finds that the second factor, concerning the availability for use of works for 
nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational purposes,2672 does not appear especially 
relevant based on the record presented.   With respect to the third factor, however, which 
addresses scholarship and research,2673 the record shows that the exemption would permit 
personal research activities by virtue of patients’ ability to access and analyze their 
medical data, as well as perhaps broader research and scholarly activities should patients 
choose to share that data with others.
2674 Factor three therefore weighs in favor of the 
exemption. 
Regarding the fourth statutory factor,2675 the Register determines that the effect of 
the exemption on the market for or value of the copyrighted works is unlikely to be 
adverse. As noted above, there is no indication in the record that the desired data access 
will usurp the market for medical devices, corresponding monitoring systems, or the 
computer programs within them.
2676 Furthermore, the record in this proceeding does not 
demonstrate the existence of a market for the data outputs generated by medical devices 
or monitoring systems.  Factor four therefore also favors an exemption. 
Finally, the statute also allows the Librarian to consider “such other factors” as 
may be appropriate.2677 This “catchall” provision plays a significant role in the 
discussion and review of Proposed Class 27B.  Opponents assert that the proposed 
exemption implicates significant health and safety concerns. These include potential 
dangers resulting from unauthorized circumvention, such as device malfunction, 
degradation, or even damage,
2678 as well as the efficacy and safety of medical devices if 
2670 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(i).
 
2671 See MDRC Supp. at 23.
 
2672 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(ii).
 
2673 Id. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(iii)
 
2674 See MDRC Supp. at 24, App. C; MDRC Reply at 12.
 
2675 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(iv).
 
2676 See MDRC Supp. at 12 (citing Cariou v. Prince, 714 F.3d 694, 708-09 (2d Cir. 2013)); Public
 
Knowledge Class 27 Reply at 3.
 
2677 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(v).
 
2678 AdvaMed Class 27 Opp’n at 4.
 
398
 

[PAGE 403]
     
    
      
 
   
   
 
  
   
  
 
  
   
  
   
  
   
   
  
    
   
 
 
  
 
               
                  
              
        
             
            
            
             
              
              
              
            
                
          
     
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
they are subject to excessive data access requests.2679 Opponents also urge that 
manufacturers who make and market medical devices must comply with a host of federal 
and state regulatory mandates, and that TPMs have played a role in ensuring such 
compliance.
2680 The serious nature of these concerns means that they must be carefully 
considered in evaluating Proposed Class 27B. 
As suggested by some of the commenting parties, the Copyright Office advised 
FDA of the pendency of this proceeding, so that FDA could provide comments if it 
wished.2681 In a communication to the Office, FDA expressed the overarching concern 
that allowing circumvention of TPMs on medical devices as a general matter could 
interfere with its regulatory authority over medical devices. This concern, however, 
would seem mainly to go to efforts to modify the devices themselves rather than passive 
access to patient data.2682 As more pertinent here, FDA expressed wariness about 
facilitating access to data that includes patient health information or personally 
identifiable information, noting that the use of such data is regulated by agencies other 
than FDA.2683 FDA therefore broadly recommended the Office clarify in any exemption 
that the exemption should not “affect the regulation of products that fall within the 
jurisdiction of other federal agencies.”2684 
The Register finds that, under the fifth statutory factor allowing for consideration 
of additional factors as appropriate, while the substantial issues of public safety, personal 
privacy, and regulatory compliance counsel caution, they do not necessarily weigh 
against an exemption.  The proposal seeks to allow access to individual patient data for 
use by the patients themselves, not by third parties.  It does not seek circumvention of 
software on medical devices themselves.  In addition, as FDA suggests, an exemption can 
be crafted to ensure that privacy and other laws must be observed.  On the whole, then, 
the statutory factors largely favor an exemption. 
2679 Id. at 2; LifeScience Alley Class 27 Opp’n at 4; NAM Opp’n at 7. 
2680 NAM Opp’n at 2; IPO Class 27 Opp’n at 3; LifeScience Alley Class 27 Opp’n at 2. 
2681 Letter from Jacqueline C. Charlesworth, Gen. Counsel and Assoc. Register of Copyrights, USCO, to 
Elizabeth H. Dickinson, Chief Counsel, FDA (May 12, 2015). 
2682 See generally Letter from Bakul Patel, Assoc. Dir. for Digital Health, Ctr. for Devices and Radiological 
Health, FDA, to Jacqueline C. Charlesworth, Gen. Counsel and Assoc. Register of Copyrights, USCO 
(Aug. 18, 2015) (“FDA Letter”). Consideration of FDA ’s response is appropriate because the matter of 
FDA’s potential concerns with respect to this exemption has been part of the record since the filing of 
opposition comments on March 27, 2015. See, e.g., AdvaMed Class 27 Opp’n at 3-4. This concern was 
also raised at the public hearings. See Tr. at 26:11-21 (May 29, 2015) (Sellars, MDRC). Proponents thus 
had the opportunity to address these concerns both in their reply comments and at the public hearings, and 
the record reflects significant public input on these issues in this class. 
2683 FDA Letter at 4-5 (“If [data] alludes to Patient Health Information (PHI), or Personal Identifiable 
Information (PII), then such information is regulated by other Federal Institutions and Agencies.”). 
2684 Id. at 5. 
399
 

[PAGE 404]
     
    
  
 
  
  
    
   
    
   
  
    
  
 
   
  
  
   
     
   
   
    
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
     
   
   
   
   
           
             
            
 
 
                                                 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
4. NTIA Comments 
NTIA recommends in favor of an exemption in Class 27B.  Although NTIA notes 
that copying medical data “likely would not constitute an infringing activity,” it 
nonetheless acknowledges opponents’ claim that “a medical device’s output could be 
entitled to copyright protection.”2685 Accordingly, like the Register, NTIA concludes that 
“in the event that the collection of medical data from a device does involve copying a 
protectable database structure, that copying is likely to be a fair use.”2686 NTIA explains 
that “granting an exemption would provide relief from the harm that proponents have 
demonstrated,” namely, being “unable to see and react to data collected by medical 
devices (e.g., glucose spikes, heart rate drops) in real time.”2687 NTIA also opines that 
the exemption is unlikely to adversely affect the operation of the medical device itself, 
relying on proponents’ assertions that “some devices already continually collect data, and 
that one can intercept that data stream without interrogation, reducing or eliminating any 
additional strain on battery life.”2688 
NTIA acknowledges that “FDA has considerable regulatory authority in the area 
of medical device safety,” and that “parties have raised important questions about safety 
and efficacy of medical devices.”2689 It thus proposes that the exemption language could 
provide as follows:  “This exemption does not obviate the need to comply with other 
applicable laws and regulations, including any obligations that may arise under the 
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.”
2690 
As discussed below, the Register agrees with NTIA that an exemption should be 
granted, that it should be limited to passive interception of data already generated by the 
device, and that it should expressly provide that actions taken under the exemption must 
be otherwise lawful.  
5. Conclusion and Recommendation 
At the outset, the Register observes that most would agree that patients should be 
able to access their own medical information.  Traditionally, and continuing to today, 
much of that access is through medical professionals.  But as technology evolves, it may 
offer new opportunities for individuals to monitor their own health and participate to a 
greater degree in their medical care. This exemption, in which patients seek to access the 
2685 NTIA Letter at 60-61.
 
2686 Id. at 61
 
2687 Id. at 59.
 
2688 Id. at 60.
 
2689 Id. at 62.
 
2690 Id. While NTIA’s proposed regulatory language states that the circumvention be permitted when 
conducted “at the direction of the patient,” it does not address whether such a provision is consistent with 
the anti-trafficking provisions set forth in section 1201(a)(2) and (b). See id. at 61-62.
 
400
 

[PAGE 405]
     
    
  
   
   
 
     
  
   
  
 
   
 
  
    
  
    
   
 
   
   
 
 
  
     
  
 
    
 
   
 
         
              
            
       
         
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
data generated by the sometimes life-saving medical devices upon which they rely, 
reflects just such a case. 
Proponents have demonstrated that patient access to medical data generated by 
implanted medical devices and their corresponding personal monitoring systems is, and is 
likely to continue to be, hindered by TPMs that protect data outputs of those devices and 
systems. They have also established that, to t he extent they involve copyrighted works, 
the uses in which proponents seek to engage are likely to be fair and noninfringing.  
Additionally, the statutory factors are supportive of an exemption, except for the potential 
safety and privacy concerns cited by FDA.  Recognizing these concerns, while the 
Register recommends that an exemption be granted, the exemption should protect other 
agencies’ regulatory authority, as detailed below. 
As discussed above, a significant point of contention was the effect that 
circumvention might or might not have on the longevity or efficacy of devices due to 
requests for data outputs at a higher rate than what is normally transmitted. Although the 
record is somewhat inconclusive in this regard, what is clear is that proponents to some 
extent concede that battery life could be impacted by interrogation and have not 
demonstrated that the suggested harms will not occur from such activities.  Accordingly, 
the Register will adopt the approach suggested by proponent MDRC, and recommend 
limiting the exemption to circumvention solely for the purpose of passively accessing 
data that is already being generated or transmitted by the device. 
Further, as proposed by its supporters, the exemption would allow circumvention 
not only by a patient, but also “at the direction of a patient.”
2691 While the Register is 
sympathetic to the practical issues that may arise if patients do not have the knowledge or 
the ability to circumvent TPMs, the phrase “at the direction of a patient” may implicate 
the anti-trafficking provisions set forth in section 1201(a)(2) and (b).2692 Section 
1201(a)(1) grants the Librarian the authority to adopt exemptions that apply to the 
prohibition on circumvention of technological measures that control access to 
copyrighted works, but does not grant authority to adopt exemptions concerning 
trafficking in circumvention tools.  Moreover, section 1201(a)(1)(E) expressly provides 
that determinations made in the triennial rulemaking proceeding may not “be used as a 
defense in any action to enforce any provision of this title other than [the] paragraph 
[allowing for circumvention itself].”
2693 
A similar issue was present in the 2012 exemption for the unlocking of 
cellphones, which the Librarian granted in a manner consistent with section 1201(a)(1), 
expressly allowing circumvention initiated only by the owners of computer programs on 
2691 See MDRC Pet. at 1-2; NPRM, 79 Fed. Reg. at 73,871. 
2692 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(2), (b). The anti-trafficking rules set forth in section 1201(a)(2) and (b) generally 
prohibit the manufacture and provision of technologies, products or services— or “part[s] thereof”—that are 
“primarily” designed for purposes of circumvention. 
2693 Id. § 1201(a)(1)(E); NOI, 79 Fed. Reg. at 55,688 n.2. 
401
 

[PAGE 406]
     
    
    
   
  
      
   
   
   
 
 
 
 
  
    
   
 
  
 
   
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
    
   
 
              
       
             
             
        
   
                    
       
         
       
   
      
 
 
                                                 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
the phones.2694 In order to broaden the exemption to allow circumvention “by another 
person at the direction of the owner,” Congress enacted the Unlocking Consumer Choice 
and Wireless Competition Act2695—thus suggesting that it was necessary to amend the 
law to permit circumvention “at the direction of” an owner. 2696 Accordingly, the Register 
declines to recommend allowing circumvention “at the direction of a patient,” and instead 
recommends, as consistent with section 1201(a)(1), circumvention only by the patient 
with respect to his or her own medical device or corresponding personal monitoring 
system.
2697 This limitation also helps to address some of the potential privacy issues 
raised by commenting parties and FDA. 
Additionally, in light of the concerns expressed by opponents, as well as FDA, 
about the potential of any exemption to undermine other legal or regulatory mandates— 
including HIPAA, CFAA, or FDA regulations—any actions taken under the exemption 
will need to be compliant with all applicable laws and regulations.  The Register notes 
that HIPAA provides important safeguards for individuals’ medical records and other 
private medical information.
2698 The CFAA generally prohibits unauthorized access of 
computer systems.2699 These laws and others, as well as FDA regulatory oversight, 
provide critical legal protections in relation to medical devices and their related computer 
systems and should be carefully studied by those seeking to take advantage of the 
exemption. 
Although regulatory concerns expressed by FDA and other federal agencies have 
led the Register to recommend delaying the effective date of the exemptions for security 
research in Classes 25, 22, and 27A (except for voting machines), and for vehicle 
diagnosis, repair and modification in Class 21, the Register concludes that a delay of the 
exemption in this class is unnecessary.  In the other classes, the agencies raised serious 
concerns about the effect of the exemptions on the health and safety of the public and on 
the environment that, based on the record, could not be fully addressed within the 
confines of this rulemaking process.  Here, by contrast, these concerns do not appear as 
salient. While patient privacy is important, it is not apparent that the e xemption would 
foster mishandling of data since it is being accessed by the patients to whom it belongs.  
Moreover, FDA does not express any specific health or safety concerns about the passive 
2694 2012 Final Rule, 77 Fed. Reg. at 65,264. The 2010 exemption also included a similar l imitation. 2010 
Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. at 43,830-32. 
2695 Unlocking Act, Pub. L. No. 113-144, § 2(c), 128 Stat. 1751, 1751-52 (2014). 
2696 As discussed in Class 21, it may be useful for Congress to consider whether the accommodation 
provided in the Unlocking Act to allow assistance from third parties should be extended to circumvention 
activities beyond unlocking. 
2697 Even if the owner of a medical device is not the owner of the software, the Register finds that the uses 
encompassed by the exemption are likely to be fair. 
2698 42 U.S.C. § 1320d-6; see also The Privacy Rule, U.S. DEP’T OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVS., 
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/privacyrule (last visited Oct. 7, 2015) (describing 
HIPAA privacy requirements). 
2699 See 18 U.S.C. § 1030. 
402
 

[PAGE 407]
     
    
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
  
   
  
  
 
 
 
 

 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding October 2015 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
monitoring of radio transmissions that are already being produced by a device or 
monitoring system, which is all that the exemption will allow. 
Therefore, the Register recommends that the Librarian designate the following 
class: 
Literary works consisting of compilations of data generated by 
medical devices that are wholly or partially implanted in the body or 
by their corresponding personal monitoring systems, where such 
circumvention is undertaken by a patient for the sole purpose of 
lawfully accessing the data generated by his or her own device or 
monitoring system and does not constitute a violation of applicable 
law, including without limitation the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996, the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 
1986 or regulations of the Food and Drug Administration, and is 
accomplished through the passive monitoring of wireless 
transmissions that are already being produced by such device or 
monitoring system. 
403
 