[PAGE 1]
united states copyright office
section 1201 rulemaking:  
Seventh Triennial Proceeding to Determine 
Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention
recommendation of the acting register of copyrights october 2018 

[PAGE 2]


[PAGE 3]
 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: 
Seventh Triennial Proceeding to Determine 
Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
I. INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 1 
II. LEGAL BACKGROUND ..................................................................................................... 9 
A. Section 1201(a)(1) ............................................................................................................. 9 
B. Relationship to Other Provisions of Section 1201 and Other Laws ........................ 11 
C. Rulemaking Standards ................................................................................................. 12 
D. Streamlined Renewal Process ...................................................................................... 17 
III. HISTORY OF SEVENTH TRIENNIAL PROCEEDING ................................................ 20 
IV. RENEWAL RECOMMENDATIONS ............................................................................... 22 
V. DISCUSSION OF NEW PROPOSED CLASSES ............................................................. 31 
A. Proposed Class 1: Audiovisual Works— Criticism and Comment ......................... 31 
B. Proposed Class 2: Audiovisual Works— Accessibility ............................................. 89 
C. Proposed Class 3: Audiovisual Works— Space-shifting ......................................... 111 
D. Proposed Class 4: Audiovisual Works— HDCP/HDMI ......................................... 128 
E. Proposed Class 5: Computer Programs— Unlocking ............................................. 145 
F. Proposed Class 6: Computer Programs— Jailbreaking .......................................... 163 
G. Proposed Class 7: Computer Programs— Repair .................................................... 184 
H. Proposed Class 9: Computer Programs— Software Preservation∗ ....................... 230 
I. Proposed Class 8:  Computer Programs – Video Game Preservation ................. 255 
J. Proposed Class 10: Computer Programs— Security Research .............................. 283 
K. Proposed Class 11: Computer Programs— Avionics .............................................. 314 
L. Proposed Class 12: Computer Programs— 3D Printing ......................................... 318 
RECOMMENDED REGULATORY LANGUAGE ............................................................... 330 
                                                      
∗ Because the issues in this class are relevant to the analysis in Proposed Class 8, the Acting 
Register addresses this class first. 

[PAGE 4]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
1 
I. Introduction 
Enacted in 1998 as part of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (“DMCA”), section 1201 
of Title 17 plays a critical role in fostering the dissemination and enjoyment of creative 
works online.  In adopting section 1201, Congress recognized that the development of 
the online marketplace for copyrighted works required a legal framework that 
adequately addressed the harm of internet piracy and encouraged copyright owners to 
make their works available to the public in emerging digital formats.1  Section 1201 
accordingly affords copyright owners important legal protections against those who 
circumvent technological measures used to prevent unauthorized access to their works.  
Many have credited section 1201 as a key factor in the growth of the vast array of 
content delivery platforms available to consumers today, which offer more lawful 
options to access expressive material than ever existed previously.2 
In adopting these new protections, however, Congress also recognized the need to 
ensure that legitimate uses of copyrighted works not be inhibited unnecessarily.  The 
triennial section 1201 rulemaking is a key part of the statutory scheme, striking a balance 
between copyright and digital technologies.  Every three years, the Librarian of 
Congress, upon the recommendation of the Register of Copyrights, determines whether 
the prohibition on circumvention is having, or is likely to have, an adverse effect on 
users’ ability to make noninfringing uses of a particular class of copyrighted works.
3  
Upon such a determination, the Librarian may adopt a temporary exemption waiving 
the prohibition for such users for the ensuing three-year period.4   
The rulemaking occurs through a formal public process administered by the Register of 
Copyrights, who consults with the National Telecommunications and Information 
Administration of the Department of Commerce (“NTIA”).  The first rulemaking was 
completed in 2000, and subsequent rulemakings have taken place every three years since 
then. 
                                                      
1 See U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, SECTION 1201 OF TITLE 17 9–10 (2017), https://www.copyright.gov/
policy/1201/section-1201-full-report.pdf (“Section 1201 Report”). 
2 See, e.g., Chapter 12 of Title 17: Hearing Before the Subcomm. on Courts, Intellectual Prop. & the 
Internet of the H. Comm. on the Judiciary, 113th Cong. 2 (2014) (statement of Rep. Tom Marino, ViceChairman, Subcomm. on Courts, Intellectual Prop. & the Internet) (“The digital economy has 
enabled wide distribution of movies, music, eBooks and other digital content.  Chapter 12 seems  
to have a lot to do with [that] economic growth . . . .”); id. at 3 (statement of Rep. Jerrold Nadler, 
Ranking Member, Subcomm. on Courts, Intellectual Prop. & the Internet) (“Section 1201 has 
proven to be extremely helpful to creators because it has helped creators to have the confidence 
to provide video content over the internet despite the risk of piracy.”). 
3 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 
4 Id. § 1201(a)(1)(D). 

[PAGE 5]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
2 
Revised Rulemaking Procedures 
For this seventh triennial proceeding, following a comprehensive policy study,5 the 
Copyright Office implemented new streamlining procedures to facilitate the renewal of 
previously adopted exemptions to which there is no meaningful opposition.  This 
process proved successful, allowing stakeholders to seek renewal of noncontroversial 
exemptions—some of which had been repeatedly granted over multiple rulemakings —
without the need to provide wholly new evidentiary showings in support.  For example, 
in 2015, the American Foundation for the Blind participated in three rounds of 
comments and sent two affiliates to a hearing regarding an unopposed exemption to 
facilitate assistive technology for e-books.  This time, the same exemption was renewed 
through a brief four-paragraph statement.   
In fact, the Office did not receive meaningful opposition to renewal of any of the 
exemptions granted in the 2015 rulemaking, which enabled the Acting Register to 
announce her intention to recommend readoption of those exemptions at the early 
stages of this proceeding.  This in turn allowed participants to concentrate their energies 
on new proposals, including requested expansions of existing exemptions.  Indeed, the 
significant number of petitions received in this cycle indicates that stakeholders now are 
able to devote resources to a broad range of additional issues.   
The Acting Register expects that the streamlining process likewise will benefit the 
records in future proceedings.  In this regard, the new procedures underscore the 
importance of ensuring that exemption proposals are supported by sufficient evidence, 
as the same record can now be relied upon in multiple subsequent proceedings.  At the 
same time, the process gives opponents the opportunity to demonstrate that the factual 
or legal grounds supporting an exemption in a prior cycle have changed to the point that 
the renewal petition should be considered as part of the full rulemaking process.  The 
Acting Register continues to believe that a legislative change providing for presumptive 
renewal of existing exemptions would introduce even greater efficiencies by eliminating 
the need for parties to petition for, and the Office to consider, readoption of uncontested 
exemptions.
6  Nevertheless, the streamlining procedures appear to have accomplished 
their goal of reducing unnecessary burdens on both participants and the Office. 
Policy Considerations 
This proceeding involves many of the same proposed uses of copyrighted works that the 
Office has frequently considered in prior rulemakings.  Several exemption petitions seek 
                                                      
5 See Section 1201 Report at 141. 
6 See id. at 141; The Register’s Perspective on Copyright Review: Hearing Before the H. Comm. on the 
Judiciary, 114th Cong. 27 (2015) (statement of Maria A. Pallante, Register of Copyrights and Dir., 
U.S. Copyright Office).   

[PAGE 6]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
3 
to access traditional forms of expressive content for purposes such as teaching and 
facilitating use by persons with disabilities— activities that Congress undoubtedly had in 
mind when it created the triennial review process and that have long been a focus of the 
rulemaking.  This cycle also saw an increased focus on ensuring that preservation 
activities undertaken by libraries, archives, and museums can reach a wide and 
increasing range of digital works, including computer software and video games. 
At the same time, the landscape for the seventh section 1201 rulemaking differs in 
important ways from that of its inception in 1998, and even from 2008.  A significant 
portion of the exemption proposals received in this cycle reflect a new consumer reality 
resulting from the growing pervasiveness of the Internet of Things.  Like the 2015 
rulemaking, this proceeding saw numerous requests to access copyrighted software 
contained in consumer products and other devices and systems.  Proponents of these 
exemptions do not wish to access such software for its creative content, but instead are 
seeking to study, repair, or modify the functionality of the device or system itself.  In the 
written comments and public hearings, many of these stakeholders expressed frustration 
at the notion that copyright should prevent owners of devices from repairing, tinkering 
with, or otherwise exercising control over their own property.  In the words of one 
individual, “[i]t’s my own damn car, I paid for it, I should be able to repair it or have the 
person of my choice do it for me.”
7 
Several of these proposals seek to extend exemptions granted in the last rulemaking to a 
broader range of products.  For example, security researchers currently authorized to 
circumvent technological measures in consumer devices, vehicles, and medical devices 
petition to apply that exemption to software-enabled devices generally.  Similarly, other 
petitioners seek to broaden the current exemption for repair and modification of motor 
vehicles to encompass other devices ranging from smartphones to home appliances to 
consumables.  In considering these proposals, the Office again notes that many of these 
activities seem to “have little to do with the consumption of creative content or the core 
concerns of copyright.”8  It should be emphasized, however, that section 1201 does not 
permit the Acting Register to recommend, or the Librarian to grant, exemptions on that 
basis alone.  They may do so only where specific evidence demonstrates that the statute 
                                                      
7 DeVolve Class 7 Reply.  Comments received in this rulemaking are available at 
http://copyright.gov/1201/2018.  References to these comments in this Recommendation are by 
party name (abbreviated where appropriate), followed by class number and “Initial,” “Opp’n,” or 
“Reply” for comments submitted in the first, second, or third round, respectively. 
8 REGISTER OF COPYRIGHTS, SECTION 1201 RULEMAKING: SIXTH TRIENNIAL PROCEEDING TO 
DETERMINE EXEMPTIONS TO THE PROHIBITION ON CIRCUMVENTION, RECOMMENDATION OF THE 
REGISTER OF COPYRIGHTS 2 (2015). References to the Register’s Recommendations in prior 
rulemakings are cited by the year of publication followed by “Recommendation” (e.g., “2015 
Recommendation”).  Prior Recommendations are available on the Copyright Office website at 
https://www.copyright.gov/1201/.   

[PAGE 7]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
4 
is causing, or is likely to cause, an adverse impact on noninfringing uses of copyrighted 
works.  Moreover, the Acting Register’s ability to consider broad exemptions in these 
categories, encompassing wide and varied assortments of devices, is limited by the 
statutory rulemaking standard, which restricts the inquiry to “particular class[es] of 
copyrighted works” for which there is evidence of adverse effects.9 
It is also important to acknowledge the significant countervailing interests that could be 
implicated by overbroad exemptions.  Copyright owners participating in this 
proceeding emphasized the substantial investments they have made in distributing their 
creative works through subscription streaming services and other protected ways to 
lawfully access music, movies, games, books, and more.  These platforms provide a 
critical revenue source for modern artists and authors, and are supplanting more 
traditional avenues for users to access a wide variety of cultural works.  And they all 
rely on ensuring that the devices and formats used to access this content remain secure 
and are not used to facilitate infringement.  Confronting a very real history of massive 
piracy of music, movies, and other creative works, rightsholders have concerns over 
what they characterize as a perfunctory dismissal of serious infringement risks and the 
blurring of important nuances in the copyright law. 
Given these competing policy interests, as well as the inherent constraints of the 
rulemaking process, the Acting Register recently has advised Congress that many of 
these issues would be appropriate subjects for legislation.  Specifically, in its 2017 
Section 1201 Report, the Office recommended that Congress consider expanding the 
permanent exemption under section 1201(j) permitting circumvention for purposes of 
security testing.
10  Additionally, the Office recommended congressional consideration of 
new permanent exemptions for diagnosis, repair, and maintenance of software-enabled 
devices,11 and for unlocking of wireless devices.12  While the Acting Register has 
attempted to appropriately balance stakeholder interests to the extent permitted under 
the regulatory framework, legislative review would enable Congress and interested 
parties to address these issues in a more comprehensive manner. 
This rulemaking also echoes the 2015 proceeding in that some proposed exemptions 
potentially involve activities subject to legal or regulatory regimes outside of copyright.  
In 2015, the Environmental Protection Agency, the Department of Transportation, and 
the Food and Drug Administration expressed concerns over the impact that the 
proposed exemptions for security research and vehicle modification could have on 
health and safety matters within their jurisdictions.  While recognizing that such 
                                                      
9 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 
10 Section 1201 Report at 71–80. 
11 Id. at 88–95. 
12 Id. at 97–99. 

[PAGE 8]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
5 
concerns did not directly implicate copyright, the Register concluded that they were 
sufficiently serious that other agencies should have the opportunity to prepare for any 
potential impacts.  Therefore, the Register recommended, and the Librarian 
implemented, a one-year delay in the effective date of those exemptions.13  
Subsequently, however, the Office noted that it did not anticipate the need for future 
delays now that those agencies have had time to respond, and that going forward it 
“will generally decline to consider health, safety, and environmental concerns” as part of 
the rulemaking.14  Consistent with those statements, the Acting Register in this 
proceeding did not accord significant weight to such considerations, despite the urging 
of some participants.  While the Acting Register certainly appreciates the seriousness of 
these issues, they generally are best addressed through other legal frameworks and by 
agencies with expertise in those areas.  Indeed, in contrast to 2015, only one additional 
federal agency submitted comments in this proceeding, and that agency— the U.S. 
Department of Justice’s Computer Crime and Intellectual Property Section (“CCIPS”)—
agrees with this view.  
Finally, this proceeding again raises the question of whether, or to what extent, third 
parties, such as independent automobile repair shops, may provide assistance to persons 
entitled to exercise an exemption.  In 2015 the Register declined requests to recommend 
an exemption for circumvention “on behalf of the owner” of a motor vehicle, finding 
that such assistance could run afoul of the prohibition on trafficking in circumvention 
“service[s]” under section 1201(a)(2) and (b).  The anti-trafficking provisions provide 
vital protections to copyright owners, and Congress did not authorize the Librarian to 
grant exemptions from them.  In this proceeding, proponents of the vehicle repair 
exemption again request provision for third-party assistance, arguing that limiting the 
exemption to individual owners threatens to render it effectively meaningless for those 
who lack the technical knowledge to access and manipulate increasingly complex 
embedded computer systems.  The Acting Register is sympathetic to these concerns and 
has attempted to draft the exemption language in a manner that accommodates such 
assistance to the extent it does not implicate the anti-trafficking provisions.  As the Office 
has recently noted, however, the scope of those provisions is uncertain,15 and it is 
beyond the scope of the rulemaking for the Acting Register to opine on that issue.  The 
Office continues to believe that legislation permitting third-party assistance in 
appropriate circumstances would benefit stakeholders and provide valuable clarity to 
the overall statutory scheme.16 
 
                                                      
13 See 2015 Recommendation at 3. 
14 Section 1201 Report at 125–26. 
15 See id. at 56–59. 
16 See id. at 59–61. 

[PAGE 9]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
6 
Summary of Recommendations 
The Librarian has previously adopted six sets of exemptions under section 1201 based 
upon prior Recommendations of the Register.17  In this seventh triennial proceeding, as 
discussed more fully below, the Acting Register recommends that the Librarian adopt 
another set of exemptions covering the following types of uses:  
• Excerpts of motion pictures (including television programs and videos) 
for criticism and comment: 
 For educational uses,  
 By college and university or K-12 faculty and students 
 By faculty of massive open online courses (“MOOCs”) 
 By educators and participants in digital and literacy 
programs offered by libraries, museums and other 
nonprofits  
 For nonfiction multimedia e-books  
 For uses in documentary films and other films where the use is in 
parody or for a biographical or historically significant nature 
 For uses in noncommercial videos 
• Motion pictures (including television programs and videos), for the 
provision of captioning and/or audio description by disability services 
offices or similar units at educational institutions for students with 
disabilities 
• Literary works distributed electronically (i.e., e-books), for use with 
assistive technologies for persons who are blind, visually impaired or 
have print disabilities 
• Literary works consisting of compilations of data generated by implanted 
medical devices and corresponding personal monitoring systems 
• Computer programs that operate the following types of devices, to allow 
connection of a new or used device to an alternative wireless network 
(“unlocking”): 
                                                      
17 Each of these Final Rules and the Register’s Recommendations can be found at 
http://www.copyright.gov/1201. 

[PAGE 10]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
7 
 Cellphones 
 Tablets 
 Mobile hotspots 
 Wearable devices (e.g., smartwatches) 
• Computer programs that operate the following types of devices, to allow 
the device to interoperate with or to remove software applications 
(“jailbreaking”): 
 Smartphones 
 Tablets and other all-purpose mobile computing devices 
 Smart TVs 
 Voice assistant devices 
• Computer programs that control motorized land vehicles, including farm 
equipment, for purposes of diagnosis, repair, or modification of the 
vehicle, including to access diagnostic data  
• Computer programs that control smartphones, home appliances, or home 
systems, for diagnosis, maintenance, or repair of the device or system 
• Computer programs for purposes of good-faith security research 
• Computer programs other than video games, for the preservation of 
computer programs and computer program-dependent materials by 
libraries, archives, and museums 
• Video games for which outside server support has been discontinued, to 
allow individual play by gamers and preservation of games by libraries, 
archives, and museums (as well as necessary jailbreaking of console 
computer code for preservation uses only), and preservation of 
discontinued video games that never required server support 
• Computer programs that operate 3D printers, to allow use of alternative 
feedstock 
The Register declines to recommend the following requested exemptions: 
• Audiovisual works, for broad-based space-shifting and format-shifting 
(declined due to lack of legal and factual support for exemption) 

[PAGE 11]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
8 
• Audiovisual works protected by HDCP/HDMI, for non-infringing uses 
(declined due to lack of legal and factual support for exemption) 
• Access to avionics data (declined due to lack of factual support that 
access controls were protecting copyrighted works) 
  

[PAGE 12]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
9 
II. Legal Background 
A. Section 1201(a)(1) 
In 1998, Congress enacted the DMCA to implement provisions of the World Intellectual 
Property Organization (“WIPO”) Copyright Treaty and WIPO Performances and 
Phonograms Treaty.  Title I of the DMCA added a new chapter 12 to title 17 of the 
United States Code, which prohibits circumvention of technological measures employed 
by or on behalf of copyright owners to protect access to their works.  In enacting section 
1201, Congress recognized that the same features making digital technology a valuable 
delivery mechanism—the ability to quickly create and distribute near -perfect copies of 
works on a vast scale—also carry the potential to enable piracy to a degree unimaginable 
in the analog context.  As a result, Congress sought to support copyright owners’ use of 
mechanisms known as “technological protection measures,” or “TPMs,” when offering 
works in digital form.   
Specifically, section 1201(a)(1) states, in pertinent part, that “[n]o person shall 
circumvent a technological measure that effectively controls access to a work protected 
under [title 17].”  The phrase “circumvent a technological measure” means “to 
descramble a scrambled work, to decrypt an encrypted work, or otherwise to avoid, 
bypass, remove, deactivate, or impair a technological measure, without the authority of 
the copyright owner.”18  A technological measure that “effectively controls access to a 
work” is one that “in the ordinary course of its operation, requires the application of 
information, or a process or a treatment, with the authority of the copyright owner, to 
gain access to the work.”19 
In addition to the blanket prohibition on circumvention, Congress created permanent 
exemptions to preserve access to works for certain legitimate purposes (e.g., library 
browsing, reverse engineering) and to allow users to legally circumvent TPMs in limited 
circumstances.  As originally drafted, however, section 1201 did not provide a process to 
create additional exemptions from the blanket anti-circumvention prohibition.  The 
House of Representatives Committee on Commerce (“Commerce Committee” or 
“Committee”) was concerned that the lack of an ability to waive the circumvention 
prohibition might undermine the fair use of copyrighted works.
20  The Committee 
concluded that it would be appropriate to “modify the flat prohibition against the 
circumvention of effective technological measures that control access to copyrighted 
materials, in order to ensure that access for lawful purposes is not unjustifiably 
                                                      
18 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(3)(A). 
19 Id. § 1201(a)(3)(B).   
20 H.R. REP. NO. 105-551, pt. 2, at 36 (1998) (“Commerce Comm. Report”). 

[PAGE 13]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
10 
diminished.”21  Congress thus created this rulemaking proceeding to address lawful 
uses of copyrighted works not addressed by the permanent exemptions. 
The Commerce Committee characterized the rulemaking proceeding as a “‘fail-safe’ 
mechanism,” stating that “[t]his mechanism would monitor developments in the 
marketplace for copyrighted materials, and allow the enforceability of the prohibition 
against the act of circumvention to be selectively waived, for limited time periods, if 
necessary to prevent a diminution in the availability to individual users of a particular 
category of copyrighted materials.”22  
As ultimately enacted, the “fail-safe” mechanism in section 1201(a)(1) requires the 
Librarian of Congress, following a rulemaking proceeding conducted by the Copyright 
Office, to publish any class of copyrighted works as to which the Librarian has 
determined that noninfringing uses by persons who are users of a copyrighted work are, 
or are likely to be, adversely affected by the prohibition against circumvention in the 
succeeding three-year period, thereby exempting that class from the prohibition for that 
period.23  The relatively quick three-year turnover of the exemptions was put in place by 
Congress to allow the rulemaking to be “fully considered and fairly decided on the basis 
of real marketplace developments,”24 and flexible enough to accommodate these market 
developments.  The Librarian’s determination must be based upon the Register of 
Copyrights’ recommendation.25  In making her recommendation, the Register consults 
with the Assistant Secretary for Communications and Information of the Department of 
Commerce, who oversees NTIA.
26   
As explained by the Commerce Committee, “[t]he goal of the proceeding is to assess 
whether the implementation of technological protection measures that effectively 
control access to copyrighted works is adversely affecting the ability of individual users 
to make lawful uses of copyrighted works.”
27  To do this, the Register develops a 
comprehensive administrative record using information submitted by interested parties, 
and makes a recommendation to the Librarian on the basis of that record.28  Based on the 
                                                      
21 Id. 
22 Id.   
23 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1). 
24 Commerce Comm. Report at 36. 
25 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C); H.R. REP. NO. 105-796, at 64 (1998) (“Conference Report”).   
26 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C).   
27 See Commerce Comm. Report at 37.   
28 See Conference Report at 64 (“[A]s is typical with other rulemaking under title 17, and in 
recognition of the expertise of the Copyright Office, the Register of Copyrights will conduct the 
rulemaking, including providing notice of the rulemaking, seeking comments from the public, 
consulting with the Assistant Secretary for Communications and Information of the Department 

[PAGE 14]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
11 
Recommendation, the Librarian promulgates the final rule setting forth any exempted 
classes of works.  
B. Relationship to Other Provisions of Section 1201 and Other Laws 
Temporary exemptions promulgated under section 1201(a)(1) apply only to 
circumventing technological measures that control “access” to copyrighted works.  
Section 1201 also contains provisions prohibiting the manufacturing of or trafficking in 
technologies, products, services, or devices that are primarily designed or produced for 
purposes of circumventing TPMs.  Section 1201(a)(2) restricts trafficking in 
circumvention devices or services used to circumvent technological measures that 
control access to copyrighted works (referred to as “access controls”).
29  Similarly, 
section 1201(b) restricts trafficking in products and services used to circumvent 
technological measures that protect the exclusive rights of the copyright owners in their 
works, including the right to reproduce these works (referred to as “copy controls”).30  
The Register does not have authority to recommend—nor does the Librarian of 
Congress have authority to adopt— exemptions for these anti-trafficking prohibitions as 
part of the triennial rulemaking process.31 
Section 1201’s permanent exemptions permit specific activities, some of which authorize 
both circumvention and trafficking, including:  
• Section 1201(d), which exempts certain activities of nonprofit libraries, 
archives, and educational institutions from the circumvention ban in 
section 1201(a)(1), so that they can “make a good faith determination of 
whether to acquire a copy of [a] work for the sole purpose of engaging in 
conduct permitted under this title.” 
• Section 1201(e), which exempts “any lawfully authorized investigative, 
protective, information security, or intelligence activity” of the federal or 
a state government from the anticircumvention and anti-trafficking 
provisions in section 1201(a)(1), (a)(2), and (b).   
                                                                                                                                                              
of Commerce and any other agencies that are deemed appropriate, and recom mending final 
regulations in the report to the Librarian.”). 
29 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(2). 
30 Id. § 1201(b). 
31 See id. § 1201(a)(1)(E) (“Neither the exception under subparagraph (B) from the applicability of 
the prohibition contained in subparagraph (A), nor any determination made in a rulemaking 
conducted under subparagraph (C), may be used as a defense in any action to enforce any 
provision of this title other than this paragraph.”).   

[PAGE 15]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
12 
• Section 1201(f), which exempts certain “reverse engineering” activities 
from section 1201(a)(1), (a)(2), and (b), “for the sole purpose of identifying 
and analyzing those elements of [a computer] program that are necessary 
to achieve interoperability of an independently created computer 
program with other programs.” 
• Section 1201(g), which exempts certain “encryption research” from 
section 1201(a)(1) and (2) (but not 1201(b)). 
• Section 1201(h), which permits courts, in applying section 1201(a)(1) and 
(2) to a “component or part,” to consider whether the component or part 
is needed to “prevent the access of minors to material on the Internet.” 
• Section 1201(i), which exempts from section 1201(a)(1) circumvention 
carried out “solely for the purpose of preventing the collection or 
dissemination of personally identifying information about a natural 
person who seeks to gain access to the work protected.”  
• Section 1201(j), which exempts certain acts of “security testing” from 
section 1201(a)(1) and (2).  
The Librarian cannot exempt any parties from their duty to comply with other laws, 
including non-copyright statutes or regulations.   
C. Rulemaking Standards 
In adopting the DMCA, Congress imposed legal and evidentiary requirements for the 
section 1201 rulemaking proceeding, as discussed below.  The Office recently analyzed 
the legal and evidentiary standards in its 2017 Section 1201 Report.
32 
1. Burden of Proof 
Historically, the Office has stated that “[t]hose who seek an exemption from the 
prohibition on circumvention bear the burden of establishing that the requirements for 
granting an exemption have been satisfied.”33  In the Section 1201 Report, the Office 
clarified that there are “‘two distinct burdens:  the ‘burden of persuasion,’ i.e., which 
party loses if the evidence is closely balanced, and the ‘burden of production,’ i.e., which 
party bears the obligation to come forward with evidence at different points in the 
proceeding.’”34  The Office noted that practically speaking, 
                                                      
32 See Section 1201 Report at 105–27. 
33 See 2015 Recommendation at 13. 
34 Section 1201 Report at 110 (quoting Shaffer v. Weast, 546 U.S. 49, 56 (2005) (quotation marks and 
alterations omitted)). 

[PAGE 16]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
13 
the burden of production will effectively be on exemption proponents, 
simply because they have greater knowledge of and access to evidence 
demonstrating adverse effects on noninfringing uses.  Although the 
Office has discretion to engage in independent fact-finding and take 
administrative notice of evidence, the primary way that most evidence 
supporting an exemption will get into the record will continue to be 
through the submissions of proponents, who are usually in the best 
position to provide it.
35   
As for the burden of persuasion, the Register will recommend granting an exemption 
only “when the preponderance of the evidence in the record shows that the conditions 
for granting an exemption have been met.”36   
Thus, “[i]n sum, it is the totality of the rulemaking record (i.e., the evidence provided by 
commenters or administratively noticed by the Office) that must, on balance, reflect the 
need for an exemption by a preponderance of the evidence.  Such evidence must, on the 
whole, show that it is more likely than not that users of a copyrighted work will, in the 
succeeding three-year period, be adversely affected by the prohibition on circumvention 
in their ability to make noninfringing uses of a particular class of copyrighted works.”
37 
2. Defining an Exemption Class 
Section 1201(a)(1) specifies that an exemption adopted as part of this rulemaking must 
be based on “a particular class of works.”38  The starting point for any definition of a 
“particular class” is the list of categories appearing in section 102 of title 17, such as 
literary works, musical works, and sound recordings.39  But, as Congress made clear, 
“the ‘particular class of copyrighted works’ [is intended to] be a narrow and focused subset 
of the broad categories of works . . . identified in section 102 of the Copyright Act.”40  For 
example, while the category of “literary works” under section 102(a)(1) “embraces both 
prose creations such as journals, periodicals or books, and computer programs of all 
kinds,” Congress explained that “[i]t is exceedingly unlikely that the impact of the 
prohibition on circumvention of access control technologies will be the same for 
                                                      
35 Id. 
36 Id. at 111–12; see 2015 Recommendation at 13–14 (accord). 
37 Section 1201 Report at 112. 
38 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(B).   
39 STAFF OF H. COMM. ON THE JUDICIARY, 105TH CONG., SECTION-BY-SECTION ANALYSIS OF H.R. 2281 
AS PASSED BY THE UNITED STATES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ON AUGUST 4, 1998, at 7 (Comm. Print 
1998) (“House Manager’s Report”).   
40 Commerce Comm. Report at 38 (emphasis added).   

[PAGE 17]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
14 
scientific journals as it is for computer operating systems.”41  Thus, “these two categories 
of works, while both ‘literary works,’ do not constitute a single ‘particular class’ for 
purposes of” section 1201(a)(1).42   
At the same time, Congress emphasized that the Librarian “should not draw the 
boundaries of ‘particular classes’ too narrowly.”43  Thus, while the category of “motion 
pictures and other audiovisual works” in section 102 “may appropriately be subdivided, 
for purposes of the rulemaking, into classes such as ‘motion pictures,’ [or] ‘television 
programs,’” it would be inappropriate “to subdivide overly narrowly into particular 
genres of motion pictures, such as Westerns, comedies, or live action dramas.”44   
Determining the appropriate scope of a “class of works” for an exemption may also 
consider the adverse effects an exemption may have on the market for or value of 
copyrighted works.  For example, the class might be defined in part by reference to the 
medium on which the works are distributed, or even to the access control measures 
applied to them.  In particular, classes may be refined by reference to the particular type 
of use and/or user to which the exemption will apply.
45  In some cases, “the Office’s 
ability to narrowly define the class is what enable[s] it to recommend the exemption at 
all.”46  
In sum, “[d]eciding the scope or boundaries of a ‘particular class’ of copyrighted works 
as to which the prohibition contained in section 1201(a)(1) has been shown to have had 
an adverse impact is an important issue” to be determined based upon the law and facts 
developed in the proceeding.47  Accordingly, the Register will look to the specific record 
before her to assess the proper scope of the class for a proposed exemption. 
3. Evidentiary Standards 
In considering whether to recommend an exemption, the Register inquires:  “Are users of 
a copyrighted work adversely affected by the prohibition on circumvention in their ability to make 
noninfringing uses of a class of copyrighted works, or are users likely to be so adversely affected 
in the next three years?”
48  This test breaks down into several elements. 
                                                      
41 House Manager’s Report at 7.   
42 Id. 
43 Id. 
44 Id. 
45 2015 Recommendation at 17–18; Section 1201 Report at 26. 
46 See Section 1201 Report at 109. 
47 House Manager’s Report at 7.   
48 Section 1201 Report at 114–15; see 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 

[PAGE 18]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
15 
a. Copyrightable Works at Issue 
The first requirement for an exemption is that the class includes at least some works 
protected by copyright.49  This requirement comes directly from the statute, which refers 
to a “class of copyrighted works” and provides that the circumvention ban applies only 
to a TPM that controls access to “a work protected under this title.”50 
b. Noninfringing Use 
The second requirement is that the proposed uses are noninfringing under title 17.51  
Past proceedings have considered a variety of noninfringing bases when evaluating 
proposed uses, including fair use (section 107), the exceptions for libraries and archives 
(section 108), and certain adaptations of computer programs (section 117).  As the Office 
has explained: 
The Register will look to the Copyright Act and relevant judicial 
precedents when analyzing whether a proposed use is likely to be 
noninfringing.  The statutory language requires that the use is or is likely 
to be noninfringing, not merely that the use might plausibly be 
considered noninfringing.  As the Register has indicated previously, there 
is no “rule of doubt” favoring an exemption when it is unclear that a 
particular use is a fair or otherwise noninfringing use.  Thus, [the record] 
must show more than that a particular use could be noninfringing.  
Rather, the [record] must establish that the proposed use is likely to 
qualify as noninfringing under relevant law.
52  
While “this standard does not require ‘controlling precedent directly on point,’” “the 
rulemaking is not an appropriate venue for breaking new ground in fair use 
jurisprudence.”
53  Proponents must therefore provide sufficient detail so that the 
proposed uses are cognizable for the Register to evaluate them and determine whether 
they are likely to be noninfringing under relevant statutory and case law. 
c. Causation 
The third requirement is that the statutory prohibition on circumventing access controls 
is the cause of the adverse effects.54  “ Adverse impacts that flow from other sources, or 
                                                      
49 Section 1201 Report at 115; see 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(A), (a)(1)(C). 
50 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(A). 
51 Section 1201 Report at 115–17; see 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 
52 2015 Recommendation at 15; see Section 1201 Report at 115–16. 
53 Section 1201 Report at 116–17 (quoting 2010 Recommendation at 12). 
54 Id. at 115, 117; see 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 

[PAGE 19]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
16 
that are not clearly attributable to implementation of a technological protection measure, 
are outside the scope of the rulemaking.”55  For example, adverse effects stemming from 
“marketplace trends, other technological developments, or changes in the roles of 
libraries, distributors or other intermediaries” are not cognizable harms under the 
statute.56 
d. Adverse Effects and the Statutory Factors 
The final requirement is that users are either adversely affected, or are likely to be 
adversely affected, in their ability to make noninfringing uses during the next three 
years.57  Proponents must show a need for circumvention to avoid any alleged adverse 
effects.  This element is analyzed in reference to section 1201(a)(1)(C)’s statutory factors: 
(i) the availability for use of copyrighted works; 
(ii) the availability for use of works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and 
educational purposes;  
(iii) the impact that the prohibition on the circumvention of technological 
measures applied to copyrighted works has on criticism, comment, news 
reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research;  
(iv) the effect of circumvention of technological measures on the market for or 
value of copyrighted works; and  
(v) such other factors as the Librarian considers appropriate.
58   
In applying these factors, the Register “balances ‘[t]he harm identified by a proponent of 
an exemption . . . with the harm that would result from an exemption.’”59  Weighing 
these factors may also require consideration of the benefits that the technological 
measure brings with respect to the overall creation and dissemination of works in the 
marketplace, in addition to any negative impact.  As Congress explained, “the 
rulemaking proceedings should consider the positive as well as the adverse effects of 
these technologies on the availability of copyrighted materials.”60 
Congress stressed that the “main focus of the rulemaking proceeding” should be on 
whether a “substantial diminution” of the availability of works for noninfringing uses is 
                                                      
55 Commerce Comm. Report at 37; House Manager’s Report at 6 (similar). 
56 House Manager’s Report at 6. 
57 Section 1201 Report at 115; see 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 
58 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C); see Section 1201 Report at 115, 118. 
59 Section 1201 Report at 118 (alteration and omission in original) (quoting Exemption to 
Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 
76 Fed. Reg. 60,398, 60,403 (Sept. 29, 2011)). 
60 House Manager’s Report at 6. 

[PAGE 20]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
17 
“actually occurring” in the marketplace.61  To prove the existence of adverse effects, it is 
necessary to demonstrate “distinct, verifiable and measurable impacts” occurring in the 
marketplace, as exemptions “should not be based upon de minimis impacts.”62  Thus, 
“mere inconveniences” or “individual cases” do not satisfy the rulemaking standard.63   
To the extent a proponent relies on claimed future impacts rather than existing impacts, 
such future adverse impacts must be “likely.”64  An exemption may be based upon 
anticipated, rather than actual, adverse impacts “only in extraordinary circumstances in 
which the evidence of likelihood of future adverse impact during that time period is 
highly specific, strong and persuasive.”
65  
In sum, for a finding of adverse effects, the evidence in the record “cannot be 
hypothetical, theoretical, or speculative, but must be real, tangible, and concrete.  
Ultimately, the evidence must show that adverse effects are not merely possible, but 
probable (i.e., more likely than not to be occurring or likely to occur in the next three 
years).”66 
D. Streamlined Renewal Process 
Following a comprehensive policy study, and in response to stakeholder feedback, for 
this seventh triennial proceeding, the Copyright Office introduced a streamlined process 
to renew section 1201 exemptions adopted during the 2015 rulemaking.67  Previously, in 
recognition of legislative history stating that the basis of an exemption should be 
established de novo in each triennial proceeding,
68 the Office had required the factual 
record be developed anew in each rulemaking.69  In its Section 1201 Report, the Office 
evaluated the possibility of a renewal process, noting a “broad consensus in favor of 
streamlining the process for renewing exemptions to which there is no meaningful 
opposition.”70  As described in further detail in that report, the Office ultimately 
                                                      
61 Id. 
62 Commerce Comm. Report at 37. 
63 House Manager’s Report at 6.  
64 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(B), (C).   
65 House Manager’s Report at 6. 
66 Section 1201 Report at 120–21. 
67 Id. at 127–28. 
68 See Commerce Comm. Report at 37 (explaining that for every rulemaking, “the assessment of 
adverse impacts on particular categories of works is to be determined de novo”).  
69 Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted Works, 82 Fed. Reg. 
29,804, 29,805 (June 30, 2017) (“NOI”). 
70 Section 1201 Report at vi. 

[PAGE 21]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
18 
concluded that “the statutory language appears to be broad enough to permit 
determinations to be based upon evidence drawn from prior proceedings, but only upon 
a conclusion that this evidence remains reliable to support granting an exemption in the 
current proceeding.”71  The Office further concluded that renewal may be sought only 
for exemptions in their current form, without modification, and that the Register “must 
apply the same evidentiary standards in recommending the renewal of exemptions as 
for first-time exemption requests.”72   
The Office detailed the renewal process in its notices for this proceeding.73  Streamlined 
renewal is based upon a determination that, due to a lack of legal, marketplace, or 
technological changes, the factors that led the Register to recommend adoption of the 
exemption in the prior rulemaking are expected to continue into the forthcoming 
triennial period.74  That is, the same material facts and circumstances underlying the 
previously-adopted regulatory exemption may be relied on to renew the exemption.75  
Because the statute itself requires that exemptions must be adopted upon a fresh 
determination concerning the next three-year period, the fact that the Librarian 
previously adopted an exemption creates no presumption that readoption is 
appropriate.  Instead, the Office first solicited petitions summarizing the basis for 
claiming a continuing need and justification for the exemption, and petitioners signed a 
declaration stating that, to the best of their personal knowledge, there had not been any 
material change in the facts, law, or other circumstances set forth in the prior rulemaking 
record such that renewal of the exemption would not be justified.
76  
Next, the Office solicited comments from participants opposing the readoption of the 
exemption.  Opponents were required to provide evidence that would allow the Acting 
Register to reasonably conclude that the prior rulemaking record and any further 
information provided in the petitions are insufficient for her to recommend renewal 
without the benefit of a further developed record.  For example, a change in case law 
might affect whether a particular use is noninfringing, new technological developments 
might affect the availability for use of copyrighted works, or new business models might 
                                                      
71 Id. at 143. 
72 Id. at 142, 145. 
73 NOI at 29,805–07; Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted 
Works, 82 Fed. Reg. 49,550, 49,552 (Oct. 26, 2017) (“NPRM”). 
74 NOI at 29,806; NPRM at 49,552. 
75 Section 1201 Report at 143–44; NOI at 29,806; NPRM at 49,552. 
76 NPRM at 49,552. 

[PAGE 22]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
19 
affect the market for or value of copyrighted works.77  If the appropriateness of renewing 
an exemption was meaningfully contested by requiring a material change in the relevant 
law or facts—as detailed below, none wer e—that exemption would have been 
automatically treated as a petition for a new exemption instead.  That is, it would be 
fully noticed for written comment and public hearing to generate an updated 
administrative record for the Register to evaluate whether to recommend readoption, 
modification, or elimination of that exemption to the Librarian.78 
Separately, as in prior rulemakings, the Office solicited petitions proposing that the 
Acting Register recommend new exemptions for activities not included in the 2015 final 
rule.  Petitions seeking to expand upon a current exemption to include activities that 
were not included in the 2015 rulemaking were considered as petitions for new 
exemptions, since a sufficient administrative record had not yet been created to consider 
such additional activities.
79  In considering requests to expand exemptions, however, the 
Acting Register will consider the relevance, if any, of the prior administrative record 
where it has been established that there have been no material changes in the facts or 
law.  For example, the enduring presence of TPMs on some models of 3D printers was 
established through the streamlined renewal process for the 2015 3D printing 
exemption, and need not be independently demonstrated when considering whether to 
modify that regulatory language to permit a broader range of activities, in connection 
with Class 12 below.  
The streamlined process elicited favorable responses during the 2018 rulemaking 
hearings.
80  As detailed below, as a result of this new process, the Acting Register was 
able to recommend renewal of all exemptions adopted in the 2015 rulemaking, and 
subsequently consider whether some of them should be modified to accommodate 
additional new uses through the development of an expanded administrative record.  
                                                      
77 See Tr. at 200:19–201:10 (May 19, 2016) (Sheffner, MPAA).  Transcripts of the hearings are 
available at https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2018/hearing-transcripts/.  Exhibits introduced at 
the hearings are available at https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2018/exhibits-043018/. 
78 See NPRM at 49,554 (stating that if a renewal petition is meaningfully opposed, “the exemption 
would be considered pursuant to the more comprehensive rulemaking process (i.e., three rounds 
of written comment, followed by public hearings)”). 
79 NOI at 29,806. 
80 See, e.g., Tr. at 7:08–13 (Apr. 13, 2018) (Weinberg) (“I really appreciate the structure of this 
process this time around.”); Tr. at 5:24–6:05 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Reid, ATSP) (“The work that you did 
to do the streamline process that avoided us having to rebuild the record from scratch.  That was 
a major reduction in burden on some organizations that needed it.”). 

[PAGE 23]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
20 
III. History of Seventh Triennial Proceeding 
In this rulemaking, the Copyright Office used the phased comment structure introduced 
in the last proceeding, to best facilitate a clear and thorough record.  As promised in its 
Section 1201 Report,81 the Office also created video tutorials explaining the rulemaking 
process, issued the NPRM earlier to give parties more time to participate, and offered 
increased opportunities for participant input, including through an established 
procedure for transparent ex parte meetings. 
The Office initiated the seventh triennial rulemaking proceeding through a NOI on June 
30, 2017,
82 two and a half months earlier than in the sixth rulemaking to better 
accommodate participation by student legal clinics.  The NOI requested petitions for 
renewals, petitions in opposition to renewal, and any petitions for new exemptions.  In 
response, the Office received thirty-nine renewal petitions, five comments regarding the 
scope of the renewal petitions, and one comment in opposition to renewal of a current 
exemption.
83  The Office also received twenty-three petitions for new exemptions, 
including seventeen seeking to expand certain current exemptions, and six petitions for 
new exemptions.  
On October 26, 2017, the Office issued its NPRM identifying the existing exemptions for 
which the Acting Register intended to recommend renewal, and outlined the proposed 
classes for new exemptions (including proposed expansions of previously-adopted 
exemptions), for which three rounds of public comments were initiated.
84  Those classes 
were organized into twelve classes of works.  Seven of the twelve proposed exemptions 
seek expansions of existing exemptions, while five propose new exemptions.  The Office 
received 181 total submissions in response to the NPRM, substantially fewer than the 
approximately 40,000 submissions received in the last rulemaking. 
After analyzing the written comments, the Office included seven days of hearings in 
Washington, D.C. (April 10–13) and Los Angeles, California (April 23–25).  For the first 
time, the roundtables at both locations held audience participation panels and were live 
streamed online.  Video recordings for these roundtables are available through the 
Office’s website and YouTube pages.85  In total, the Office heard testimony from seventy-
                                                      
81 Section 1201 Report at 149–51. 
82 NOI at 29,804. 
83 The submissions received in response to the NOI are available at https://www.copyright.gov/
1201/2018/.  References to these submissions are by party name (abbreviated where appropriate) 
followed by either “Renewal Pet.,” class number and “Pet.,” or “Renewal Comment,” as 
applicable.   
84 NPRM at 49,550. 
85 See https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2018/ and https://www.youtube.com/uscopyrightoffice/.  

[PAGE 24]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
21 
seven individuals.  After the hearings, the Office issued questions to hearing participants 
in four proposed classes and received eighteen responses.86  Subsequently, the Office 
received an unsolicited letter from CCIPS regarding proposed Class 10, and the Office 
solicited comments from Class 10 participants in response.87  
As noted in its NPRM, the Office determined that further informal communications with 
non-governmental participants might be beneficial in limited circumstances.88  The 
Office thus established guidelines for ex parte meetings, noting that the Office will not 
consider or accept any new documentary materials at these meetings, and requiring 
participants to provide a letter summarizing the meeting for the Office to include in the 
rulemaking record.
89  The Office held nine ex parte meetings with participants 
concerning five proposed classes.90 
As required by section 1201(a)(1), the Acting Register consulted with NTIA during this 
rulemaking.  NTIA provided input at various stages and participated in the public 
hearings held in Washington, D.C. and Los Angeles.  NTIA formally communicated its 
views on each of the proposed exemptions to the Acting Register on September 25, 2018.  
The Office addresses NTIA’s substantive views on the proposed classes below. 
  
                                                      
86 Participants’ post-hearing letter responses are available at https://www.copyright.gov/1201/
2018/post-hearing/answers/. 
87 Letter from John T. Lynch, Jr., Chief, Computer Crime & Intellectual Property Section, Criminal 
Division, U.S. Department of Justice, to Regan A. Smith, General Counsel & Associate Register of 
Copyrights, U.S. Copyright Office (June 28 , 2018), https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2018/USCOletters/USDOJ_Letter_to_USCO.pdf (“CCIPS Letter”). 
88 NPRM at 49,563; see Section 1201 Report at 150–51 (documenting stakeholder desire for such a 
process). 
89 NPRM at 49,563. 
90 See U.S. Copyright Office, Ex Parte Communications (last visited Sept. 27, 2018), 
https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2018/ex-parte-communications.html.  

[PAGE 25]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
22 
IV. Renewal Recommendations 
As set forth in the NPRM, the Acting Register received petitions to renew every one of 
the exemptions adopted pursuant to the sixth triennial rulemaking.  To the extent any 
renewal petition proposed uses beyond the current exemption, the Office disregarded 
those portions of the petition for purposes of considering the renewal of the exemption, 
and instead focused on whether it provided sufficient information to warrant readoption 
of the exemption in its current form.91  While a single party filed an opposition to 
renewal of one existing exemption, the Acting Register concluded that its opposition was 
not sufficiently meaningful to undermine the conclusion that the record and legal 
reasoning from the prior rulemaking supported renewal.92   
The Acting Register now finalizes the NPRM’s proposal to recommend renewal of these 
exemptions based on the information provided in the renewal petitions and the lack of 
opposition, which demonstrated that the conditions that led to adoption of the 
exemptions are likely to continue during the next triennial period.  The existing 
exemptions, and the bases for the recommendation to readopt each exemption in 
accordance with the streamlined renewal process, are briefly summarized below.  Where 
noted, these exemptions serve as a baseline in considering subsequent requests for 
expansion.  The recommended regulatory language for all exemptions in this 
rulemaking (including “straight renewals,” expanded exemptions, and wholly new 
exemptions, is set forth in the Appendix. 
Literary works distributed electronically – assistive technologies.  Multiple organizations 
petitioned to renew the exemption for literary works distributed electronically (i.e., ebooks), for use with assistive technologies for persons who are blind, visually impaired, 
or have print disabilities.
93  No oppositions were filed against readoption of this 
exemption.  The petitions demonstrated the continuing need and justification for the 
exemption, stating that individuals who are blind, visually impaired, or print disabled 
are significantly disadvantaged with respect to obtaining accessible e-book content 
because TPMs interfere with the use of assistive technologies such as screen readers and 
refreshable Braille displays.94  In addition, the petitioners demonstrated personal 
                                                      
91 See, e.g., NPRM at 49,554.   
92 Id. at 49,554; see also NOI at 29,807 (describing “meaningful opposition” standard).  
93 Am. Found. for the Blind (“ AFB”), Am. Council of the Blind (“ ACB”), Samuelson-Glushko Tech. 
Law & Policy Clinic at Colo. Law (“Samuelson-Glushko TLPC”) & Lib. Copyright Alliance 
(“LCA”) Renewal Pet.; Univ. of Mich. Lib. Copyright Office (“UMLCO”) eBooks Renewal Pet.; see 
37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(2) (2016). 
94 AFB, ACB, Samuelson-Glushko TLPC & LCA eBooks Renewal Pet. at 3; UMLCO eBooks 
Renewal Pet. at 3.  

[PAGE 26]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
23 
knowledge and experience with regard to the assistive technology exemption; they are 
all organizations that advocate for the blind, visually impaired, and print disabled.95 
Literary works – compilations of data generated by implanted medical devices – to access personal 
data.  Hugo Campos, a member of the Coalition of Medical Device Patients and 
Researchers, petitioned to renew the exemption covering access to patient data on 
networked medical devices.
96  No oppositions were filed against the petition to renew 
this exemption.  Mr. Campos’s petition demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption, stating that patients continue to need access to data 
output from their medical devices to manage their health.
97  Mr. Campos demonstrated 
personal knowledge and experience with regard to this exemption, as he is a patient 
needing access to the data output from his medical device, and is a member of the 
Coalition of Medical Device Patients and Researchers, a coalition whose members 
research, comment on, and examine the effectiveness of networked medical devices.
98  
Computer programs – “unlocking” of cellphones, tablets, mobile hotspots, or wearable devices.  
Multiple organizations petitioned to renew the exemption for computer programs that 
operate cellphones, tablets, mobile hotspots, or wearable devices (e.g., smartwatches), to 
allow connection of a used device to an alternative wireless network (“unlocking”).99  
No oppositions were filed against renewal of this exemption.  The petitions demonstrate 
the continuing need and justification for the exemption, stating that consumers of the 
enumerated products continue to need to be able to unlock the devices so they can 
switch network providers.  For example, the Institute of Scrap Recycling Industries, Inc. 
(“ISRI”) stated that its members continue to purchase or acquire donated cell phones 
and tablets, and try to reuse them, but that wireless carriers still lock devices to prevent 
them from being used on other carriers.100  In addition, the petitioners demonstrated 
personal knowledge and experience with regard to this exemption:  CCA, Owners’ 
Rights Initiative (“ORI”), and ISRI represent companies that rely on the ability to unlock 
cellphones.  A number of the petitioners also participated in past section 1201 triennial 
rulemakings relating to unlocking lawfully-acquired wireless devices. 
This existing exemption serves as the baseline in assessing whether to recommend any 
expansions in Class 5.  
                                                      
95 See AFB, ACB, Samuelson-Glushko TLPC & LCA eBooks Renewal Pet. at 1; UMLCO eBooks 
Renewal Pet. at 3. 
96 Campos Compilations of Data Renewal Pet.; see 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(10) (2016). 
97 Campos Compilations of Data Renewal Pet. at 3.  
98 Id. at 3.  
99 See Competitive Carriers Ass’n Unlocking Renewal Pet.; Consumers Union Unlocking Renewal 
Pet.; ISRI Unlocking Renewal Pet.; ORI Unlocking Renewal Pet.; see 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(3) (2016). 
100 ISRI Unlocking Renewal Pet. at 3. 

[PAGE 27]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
24 
Computer programs – “jailbreaking” of smartphones, smart TVs, tablets, or other all-purpose 
mobile computing devices.  Multiple organizations petitioned to renew the exemptions for 
computer programs that operate smartphones, smart TVs, tablets, or other all-purpose 
mobile computing devices, to allow the device to interoperate with or to remove 
software applications (“jailbreaking”).101  The petitions demonstrate the continuing need 
and justification for the exemption, and that petitioners had personal knowledge and 
experience with regard to this exemption.  Specifically, the petitions state that, absent an 
exemption, TPMs applied to the enumerated products would have an adverse effect on 
noninfringing uses, such as being able to install third-party applications on a 
smartphone or download third-party software on a smart TV to enable 
interoperability.
102  For example, the Electronic Frontier Foundation’s (“EFF’s”) petition 
outlined its declarant’s experience searching current mobile computing device markets 
and technologies, working as a software engineer, and participating in four prior section 
1201 rulemakings.103  Similarly, the Libiquity petition was submitted by a person who 
“work[s] with the operating system and many of the system libraries that lie at the core 
of the firmware systems of a large majority of smartphones, portable all-purpose mobile 
computing devices, and smart televisions.”
104  In a brief two-page comment, BSA | The 
Software Alliance (“BSA”) opposed the readoption of this exemption, stating that 
“alternatives to circumvention exist,” and that “jailbreaking can undermine the integrity 
and security of a platform’s operating system in a manner than facilitates copyright 
infringement and exposes users to heightened risks of privacy violations.”105   
In the NPRM, the Office concluded that BSA’s opposition was not sufficient to draw the 
conclusion that the past rulemaking record is no longer reliable, or that the reasoning 
adopted in the Register’s 2015 Recommendation cannot be relied upon for the next 
three-year period.
106  Specifically, the Office stated that BSA’s comment largely rearticulated a general opposition to a jailbreaking exemption, and noted that the past 
three rulemakings have adopted some form of an exemption for jailbreaking certain 
types of mobile computing devices.
107  The Office also found that BSA had failed to 
                                                      
101 EFF Jailbreaking Renewal Pet.; Libiquity Jailbreaking Renewal Pet.; New Media Rights 
(“NMR”) Jailbreaking Renewal Pet.; Software Freedom Conservancy (“SFC”) Jailbreaking 
Renewal Pet.; see 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(4)–(5) (2016). 
102 EFF Jailbreaking Renewal Pet. at 3–4; Libiquity Jailbreaking Renewal Pet. at 3, 5; NMR 
Jailbreaking Renewal Pet. at 3, 5; SFC Jailbreaking Renewal Pet. at 3, 5. 
103 EFF Jailbreaking Renewal Pet. at 3. 
104 Libiquity Jailbreaking Renewal Pet. at 3. 
105 BSA Jailbreaking Renewal Comment at 1–2. 
106 NPRM at 49,554 (citing NOI at 29,807). 
107 Id. (citing Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for 
Access Control Technologies, 80 Fed. Reg. 65,944, 65,952–53 (Oct. 28, 2015) (“2015 Final Rule”); 

[PAGE 28]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
25 
identify any specific circumvention alternatives, changes in case law, new technological 
developments, or new issues that had not already been considered and evaluated in 
granting the exemption previously.108   
This existing exemption109 serves as the baseline in assessing whether to recommend an 
expansion in Class 6. 
Computer programs – diagnosis, repair, and lawful modification of motorized land vehicles.  
Multiple organizations petitioned to renew the exemption for computer programs that 
control motorized land vehicles, including farm equipment, for purposes of diagnosis, 
repair, and modification of the vehicle.
110  The petitions demonstrated the continuing 
need and justification for the exemption to prevent owners of motorized land vehicles 
from being adversely impacted in their ability to diagnose, repair, and modify their 
vehicles as a result of TPMs that protect the copyrighted computer programs on the 
electronic control units (“ECUs”) that control the functioning of the vehicles.  For 
example, the Auto Care Association (“ Auto Care”), Consumer Technology Association 
(“CTA”), iFixit, and ORI stated that “approximately 20 percent of American consumers 
buy automotive parts and products to maintain and repair their own vehicles.”111  
American Farm Bureau Federation similarly remarked that many agricultural vehicles 
are now “equipped with computers that monitor and control vehicle function,” and 
many agricultural equipment manufacturers have adopted TPMs that restrict access to 
such computer software.112  Indeed, the Motor & Equipment Manufacturers Association 
(“MEMA”), which during the sixth triennial rulemaking initially opposed any 
exemption that would impact the software and TPMs in vehicles, now supports the 
exemption as striking “an appropriate balance between encouraging marketplace 
competition and innovation while mitigating the impact on safety, regulatory, and 
                                                                                                                                                              
Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, 77 Fed. Reg. 65,260, 65,263–64 (Oct. 26, 2012) (“2012 Final Rule”); Exemption to 
Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 
75 Fed. Reg. 43,825, 43,828–30 (July 27, 2010)). 
108 NPRM at 49,554. 
109 After the Acting Register delivered her Recommendation to the Librarian on October 5, 2018, 
the Federal Register provided the Office with non-substantive corrections to the regulatory text to 
ensure compliance with the Code of Federal Regulations’ formatting requirements.  The 
regulatory text provided in this Recommendation has been updated to reflect those edits.  
110 Auto Care, CTA, iFixit & ORI Repair Renewal Pet.; Am. Farm Bureau Fed’n (“ AFBF”) Repair 
Renewal Pet.; EFF Repair Renewal Pet.; MEMA Repair Renewal Pet.; Intellectual Prop. & Tech. 
Law Clinic, Univ. of S. Cal. Repair Renewal Pet.; see 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(6) (2016). 
111 Auto Care, CTA, iFixit & ORI Repair Renewal Pet. at 3. 
112 AFBF Renewal Pet. at 3. 

[PAGE 29]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
26 
environmental compliance.”113  The petitioners demonstrated personal knowledge and 
experience with regard to this exemption; each either represents or gathered information 
from individuals conducting repairs or businesses that manufacture, distribute, and sell 
motor vehicle parts, and perform vehicle service and repair.  
This existing exemption serves as the baseline in assessing whether to recommend any 
expansions in Class 7.  
Computer programs – security research. Multiple organizations and security researchers 
petitioned to renew the exemption for purposes of good-faith security research.114  The 
petitioners demonstrated the continuing need and justification for the exemption, and 
personal knowledge and experience with regard to this exemption.  For example, 
Professors Bellovin, Blaze, and Heninger stated that they have conducted their own 
security research in reliance on the existing exemption, and that they “regularly engage” 
with other security researchers who have similarly relied on the exemption.115  They 
provided an example of a recent computer security conference in which thousands of 
participants relied on the existing exemption to examine and test electronic voting 
devices—the results of which were rep orted to election officials to improve the security 
of their voting systems.116  
This existing exemption serves as the baseline in assessing whether to recommend any 
expansions in Class 10.  
Computer programs – 3D printers.  Michael Weinberg and ORI jointly petitioned to renew 
the exemption for computer programs that operate 3D printers to allow use of 
alternative feedstock.117  No oppositions were filed against readoption of this exemption.  
The petition demonstrated the continuing need and justification for the exemption, and 
the petitioner demonstrated personal knowledge and experience.  Specifically, Mr. 
Weinberg petitioned for the existing exemption and “continued to participate in the 
review of that exemption . . . in his personal capacity.”
118  In addition, the petition states 
                                                      
113 MEMA Repair Renewal Pet. at 3. 
114 Bellovin, Blaze & Heninger (collectively, “Joint Security Researchers”) Security Research 
Renewal Pet.; Campos Security Research Renewal Pet.; Ctr. for Democracy & Tech. (“CDT”) 
Security Research Renewal Pet.; Felten, Halderman & ORI Security Research Renewal Pet.; 
Libiquity Security Research Renewal Pet.; see 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(7) (2016). 
115 Joint Security Researchers Security Research Renewal Pet. at 3. 
116 Id. 
117 Weinberg & ORI 3D Printers Renewal Pet.; see 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(9). 
118 Weinberg & ORI 3D Printers Renewal Pet. at 3. 

[PAGE 30]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
27 
that printers continue to restrict the use of third-party feedstock, thereby requiring 
renewal of the exemption.119  
This existing exemption serves as the baseline in assessing whether to recommend any 
expansions in Class 12.  
Video games requiring server communication – for continued individual play and preservation of 
games by libraries, archives, and museums.  Multiple organizations petitioned to renew the 
exemption for video games for which outside server support has been discontinued.120  
The petitions stated that libraries and museums continue to need the exemption to 
preserve and curate video games in playable form.121  In addition, the petitioners 
demonstrated personal knowledge and experience with regard to this exemption 
through past participation in the section 1201 triennial rulemaking relating to access 
controls on video games and consoles, and/or representing major library associations 
with members that have relied on this exemption.   
This existing exemption serves as the baseline in assessing whether to recommend any 
expansions in Class 8.  
Audiovisual works – educational and derivative uses.  Multiple individuals and organizations 
petitioned to renew an exemption containing multiple subparts covering use of short 
portions of motion pictures for various educational and derivative uses.
122  No 
oppositions were filed.  Petitions to renew the various subparts of the exemption are 
discussed below.  The existing exemption and its various subparts collectively serve as 
the baseline in assessing whether to recommend any expansions in Class 1.  
Audiovisual uses – educational uses – colleges and universities. Multiple individuals and 
organizations petitioned to renew the exemption’s subpart covering use of motion 
pictures for educational uses by college and university instructors and students.123  No 
oppositions were filed against readoption.  The petitions demonstrated the continuing 
                                                      
119 Id. 
120 EFF Video Game Renewal Pet.; LCA Video Game Renewal Pet.; UMLCO Video Game Renewal 
Pet.; see 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(8). 
121 See UMLCO Video Game Renewal Pet. at 3. 
122 See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1).  In the 2015 rulemaking, this recommended regulatory language 
was the result of consideration of seven proposed classes of works.  See 2015 Recommendation at 
24–28. 
123 Decherney, Sender, Carpini, ICA, Dep’t of Commc’n Studies at the Univ. of Mich. (“DCSUM”), 
Soc’y for Cinema & Media Studies (“SCMS”) (collectively, “Joint Educators”) AV Univ. Renewal 
Pet.; AAUP & LCA AV Univ. Renewal Pet.; Hobbs & Nat’l Ass’n for Media Literary Educ. 
(“NAMLE”) AV Univ. Renewal Pet.; UMLCO AV Univ. Renewal Pet.; see 37 C.F.R. 
§ 201.40(b)(1)(iv). 

[PAGE 31]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
28 
need and justification for the exemption, and personal knowledge and experience with 
regard to the exempted use.  For example, Joint Educators, the American Association of 
University Professors (“AAUP”), and LCA stated that courses on video essays (or 
multimedia or videographer criticism), now taught at many universities, would not be 
able to exist without relying on this exemption.124  Without this exemption, Joint 
Educators, AAUP,  and LCA assert that educators would be “unable to provide an 
enriching and accurate description and analysis of cinematic or other audiovisual works 
when prevented from accessing such works due to TPM[s]”
125—and their declarant, 
Professor Decherney, has personally relied upon this exemption to teach a course on 
multimedia criticism.126  Similarly, Professor Hobbs, who represents more than 17,000 
digital and media literacy educators, and NAMLE, an organization devoted to media 
literacy with more than 3,500 members, stated that “sometimes teachers must 
circumvent a DVD protected by the Content Scramble System when screen-capture 
software or other non-circumventing alternatives are unable to produce the required 
level of high-quality content.”
127 
Audiovisual works – educational uses – primary and secondary schools (K-12).  Multiple 
organizations petitioned to renew the exemption’s subparts covering use of motion 
picture clips for educational uses by K-12 instructors and students.128  No oppositions 
were filed against readoption.  The petitions demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption, stating that K-12 instructors and students continue to 
rely on excerpts from digital media for class presentations and coursework, and must 
sometimes use screen-capture technology.129  In addition, the petitioners demonstrated 
personal knowledge and experience with regard to the exempted use through 
representation of thousands of digital and literacy educators and/or members 
supporting K-12 instructors and students, combined with past participation in the 
section 1201 rulemaking.130  
Audiovisual works – educational uses – massive open online courses (“MOOCs”).  Joint 
Educators, SCMS, and LCA petitioned to renew the exemption’s subpart covering use of 
motion picture clips for educational uses in MOOCs.131  No oppositions were filed 
                                                      
124 Joint Educators, AAUP & LCA AV Univ. Renewal Pet. at 3. 
125 Id. 
126 Id. 
127 Hobbs & NAMLE AV Univ. Renewal Pet. at 3. 
128 LCA AV K-12 Renewal Pet.; Hobbs & NAMLE AV K-12 Renewal Pet.; see 37 C.F.R. 
§ 201.40(b)(1)(vi). 
129 LCA AV K-12 Renewal Pet. at 3; Hobbs & NAMLE AV K-12 Renewal Pet. at 3. 
130 LCA AV K-12 Renewal Pet. at 3; Hobbs & NAMLE AV K-12 Renewal Pet. at 3. 
131 Joint Educators & LCA MOOCs Renewal Pet.; see 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1)(v). 

[PAGE 32]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
29 
against readoption.  The petition demonstrated the continuing need and justification for 
the exemption, stating that instructors continue to rely on the exemption to develop, 
provide, and improve MOOCs, as well as increase the number of (and therefore access 
to) MOOCs in the field of film and media studies.132  In addition, declarant Professor 
Decherney, demonstrated personal knowledge by describing his reliance on the 
exemption to teach MOOCs on film and media studies, as well as his past participation 
in the section 1201 rulemaking, along with other petitioners.133  
Audiovisual works – educational uses – educational programs operated by libraries, museums, 
and other nonprofits.  Multiple organizations petitioned to renew the exemption’s subpart 
covering use of motion picture clips for educational uses in digital and literacy programs 
offered by libraries, museums, and other nonprofits.134  No oppositions were filed 
against readoption.  The petitions demonstrated the continuing need and justification for 
the exemption, and demonstrated personal knowledge and experience with regard to 
the exempted use.  For example, LCA stated that librarians across the country have 
relied on the current exemption and will continue to do so for their digital and literacy 
programs.135  In addition, Professor Hobbs and NAMLE stated that librarians will 
continue to rely on this exemption for their digital and literacy programs and to advance 
the digital media knowledge of their patrons.136 
Audiovisual works – derivative uses – multimedia e-books offering film analysis.  A professor 
and two organizations collectively petitioned to renew the subpart of the exemption 
covering the use of motion picture clips for multimedia e-books offering film analysis.137  
No oppositions were filed against readoption.  The petition demonstrated the continuing 
need and justification for the exemption, attesting that the availability of video necessary 
for authors to undertake film analysis in e-books continues to be “limited to formats 
encumbered by technological protection measures.”
138  In addition, the petitioners 
demonstrated personal knowledge through Professor Buster’s continued work on an ebook series based on her lecture series, “Deconstructing Master Filmmakers: The Uses of 
Cinematic Enchantment,” and Authors Alliance’s feedback that its members continue to 
desire authoring e-books that incorporate film for the purpose of analysis.
139  
                                                      
132 Joint Educators & LCA AV MOOCs Renewal Pet. at 3. 
133 Id. 
134 LCA AV Nonprofit Renewal Pet.; Hobbs & NAMLE AV Nonprofit Renewal Pet.; see 37 C.F.R. 
§ 201.40(b)(1)(viii). 
135 LCA AV Nonprofit Renewal Pet. at 3. 
136 Hobbs & NAMLE AV Nonprofit Renewal Pet. at 3. 
137 Buster, Authors All. & AAUP AV eBooks Renewal Pet.; see 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1)(iii).  
138 Buster, Authors All. & AAUP AV eBooks Renewal Pet. at 3. 
139 See id. 

[PAGE 33]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
30 
Audiovisual works – derivative uses – documentary filmmaking.  Multiple organizations 
petitioned to renew the subpart of the exemption covering the use of motion picture 
clips for uses in documentary films.140  No oppositions were filed against readoption.  
The petitions summarized the continuing need and justification for the exemption, and 
the petitioners demonstrated personal knowledge and experience with regard to the 
exempted use. For example, Film Independent (“FI”), the International Documentary 
Association (“IDA”), Kartemquin Educational Films, Inc. (“KEF”), Center for 
Independent Documentary (“CID”), and Women in Film and Video (“WIFV”)— which 
represent thousands of independent filmmakers across the nation— stated that TPMs 
such as encryption continue to prevent filmmakers from accessing needed material, and 
that this is “especially true for the kind of high definition motion picture material 
filmmakers need to satisfy both distributors and viewers.”141  In addition, FI, IDA, and 
KEF have participated in multiple triennial rulemakings.  Petitioners state that they 
personally know many filmmakers who have found it necessary to rely on this 
exemption, and will continue to do so.
142 
Audiovisual works – derivative uses – noncommercial remix videos.  Two organizations 
petitioned to renew the subpart of the exemption covering the use of motion picture 
clips for uses in noncommercial videos.143  No oppositions were filed against readoption.  
The petitions demonstrated the continuing need and justification for the exemption and 
personal knowledge and experience with regard to the exempted use.  For example, the 
Organization for Transformative Works (“OTW”) has advocated for the noncommercial 
video exemption in past triennial rulemakings, and has heard from “a number of 
noncommercial remix artists” who have used the exemption and anticipate needing to 
use it in the future.144  Similarly, NMR stated that it has spoken to a number of 
noncommercial video creators who have relied on this exemption, and intend to do so in 
the future.145  
                                                      
140 FI, IDA, KEF, CID & WIFV AV Documentary Renewal Pet.; NMR AV Documentary Renewal 
Pet.; see 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1)(i). 
141 FI, IDA, KEF, CID & WIFV AV Documentary Renewal Pet. at 3. 
142 Id.; NMR AV Documentary Renewal Pet. at 3. 
143 NMR AV Noncommercial Videos Renewal Pet.; OTW AV Noncommercial Videos Renewal Pet.; 
see 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1)(ii). 
144 OTW Renewal Pet. at 3.   
145 NMR AV Noncommercial Videos Renewal Pet. at 3. 

[PAGE 34]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
31 
V. Discussion of New Proposed Classes 
A. Proposed Class 1: Audiovisual Works—Criticism and Comment  
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption 
Five petitions seek expansion of an existing exemption allowing circumvention of access 
controls protecting excerpts of motion pictures on DVDs, Blu-Ray discs, and digitally 
transmitted video.  The current exemption, codified at 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1) (2016), 
permits circumvention for purposes of comment and criticism by various users, 
including college and university faculty and students, kindergarten through twelfth 
grade educators, faculty of MOOCs, filmmakers, and multimedia e-book authors.  
Because the new proposals raise some shared concerns, including the impact of TPMs on 
the alleged noninfringing uses of motion pictures and whether alternative methods of 
accessing the content could alleviate potential adverse impacts, the Office grouped these 
petitions into one class.  This approach also accounts for a joint petition, which proposes 
an “overarching exemption that would embrace multiple audiovisual classes”146 and 
collapse (essentially) all of the subparts for the existing exemption to eliminate 
limitations on the types of user or use—and instead allow circumvention so long as the 
purpose is for criticism and comment.   
i. Single Overarching Exemption for Purposes of Comment and 
Criticism 
EFF, NMR, and OTW propose permitting circumvention to make use of motion picture 
excerpts so long as the purpose is for criticism and comment.  The petition includes the 
following suggested language: 
Motion Pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in 17 
U.S.C. 101, where circumvention is undertaken solely in order to make 
use of short portions of the works for the purpose of criticism or 
comment, where the motion picture is lawfully made and acquired on a 
DVD protected by the Content Scrambling System, on a BluRay disc 
protected by the Advanced Access Content System, via a digital 
transmission protected by a technological measure, or a similar 
technological protection measure intended to control access to a work, 
where the person engaging in circumvention reasonably believes that 
                                                      
146 EFF, NMR & OTW Class 1 Initial at 3.  

[PAGE 35]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
32 
non-circumventing alternatives are unable to produce the required level 
of high-quality source material.147 
The National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers (“NACDL”), BYU, FI, IDA and 
KEF filed comments supporting EFF, NMR, and OTW’s proposal.148  This petition was 
opposed by Joint Creators II, DVD Copy Control Association (“DVD CCA”), and the 
Advanced Access Content System Licensing Administrator ( “A A C S  L A” ), who also 
opposed the remaining proposals to expand this exemption.149 
ii. Universities and K-12 Educational Institutions 
As noted above, the 2015 rulemaking resulted in the adoption of exceptions in the 
existing exemption to permit the circumvention of access controls protecting excerpts of 
motion pictures on DVDs, Blu-Ray discs, and digitally transmitted video by educators 
and students for purposes of comment and criticism under varying conditions.150  BYU 
filed a petition to consolidate and expand this language and create a single exemption 
that would permit circumvention for nonprofit educational purposes in accordance with 
sections 110(1) and 110(2), and eliminate distinctions based on the user, the “criticism 
and comment” limitation, and references to screen-capture technology.
151  BYU proposes 
the following language: 
Motion Pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in 17 
U.S.C. § 101, where circumvention is undertaken solely in order to 
facilitate noninfringing performances of the works for nonprofit 
educational purposes, in accordance with 17 U.S.C. § 110(1) or § 110(2).152 
iii. Massively Open Online Courses (“MOOCs”) 
Professors Decherney, Sender, and Carpini, the Department of Communications at the 
University of Michigan, the International Communication Association, and the Society 
for Cinema and Media Studies (collectively, “Joint Educators”) request an expansion to 
allow faculty of MOOCs153 to circumvent for “all online educational offerings” by 
removing certain TEACH Act restrictions referenced in the existing exemption.154   
                                                      
147 Id. at 2.  
148 BYU Class 1 Initial at 2; FI, IDA & KEF Class 1 Initial at 3; NACDL Class 1 Initial at 2.  
149 See AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n; DVD CCA Class 1 Opp’n; Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n. 
150 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1)(iv), (vi)–(viii) (2016). 
151 BYU Class 1 Initial at 2.   
152 Id. 
153 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1)(v) (2016). 
154 Joint Educators Class 1 Initial at 3.  

[PAGE 36]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
33 
Although Joint Educators’ written comments request elimination of all references to the 
TEACH Act, their representative made clear during the hearing that they primarily are 
seeking expansion to MOOCs offered by unaccredited and for-profit educational 
institutions.155  Accordingly, the proposed expansion would retain other existing 
references to section 110(2) limitations, such as the obligation to limit transmissions to 
officially enrolled students and to institute copyright policies and apply TPMs that 
reasonably prevent unauthorized further dissemination of a work to others. 
iv. Filmmaking 
FI, IDA, KEF, the Independent Filmmaker Project, the University of Film and Video 
Association, and the Alliance for Media Arts + Culture (collectively, “Joint Filmmakers”) 
seek expansion of the current exemption to permit circumvention for use of motion 
picture clips in all types of films (i.e., remove the “documentary” limitation).156  Joint 
Filmmakers also propose removing the requirement that “the person engaging in 
circumvention reasonably believes that screen-capture software or other noncircumventing alternatives are unable to produce the required level of high-qualify 
content.”157  They propose the following language: 
Motion pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in 17 
U.S.C. 101, where circumvention is undertaken solely in order to make 
use of short portions of the motion pictures for the purpose of criticism or 
comment for use in filmmaking, where the motion picture is lawfully 
made and acquired on a DVD protected by the Content Scramble System, 
on a Blu-ray disc protected by the Advanced Access Content System, or 
via a digital transmission protected by a technological measure.158 
v. Multimedia E-Books 
Authors Alliance, AAUP, the Organization for Transformative Works, the Interactive 
Fiction Technology Foundation, and Professor Buster (collectively, “Authors Alliance et 
al.”) seek expansion of the current exemption to permit circumvention for use of motion 
picture clips in fiction multimedia e-books and nonfiction multimedia e-books beyond 
those offering film analysis.159  Specifically, they propose removing the nonfiction 
                                                      
155 Tr. at 283:15–21 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Decherney, Joint Educators) (“[W]e haven’t asked to remove 
all section 110(2) limitations.  We would like to expand the exemption so that it includes for-profit 
institutions and unaccredited institutions . . . [b]ut we are still okay with limiting access to 
registered students and to reasonable prevention of downstream misuse.”). 
156 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1)(i) (2016). 
157 Id. § 201.40(b)(1)(i)(B); see Joint Filmmakers Class 1 Initial at 8–9, 21. 
158 Joint Filmmakers Class 1 Initial at 4. 
159 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1)(iii) (2016). 

[PAGE 37]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
34 
limitation, and deleting the “offering film analysis” limitation and references to screencapture technology.160  They propose the following language: 
Motion pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in 17 
U.S.C. § 101, where circumvention is undertaken solely to make use of 
short portions of the motion pictures for the purpose of criticism or 
comment in multimedia e-books where the motion picture is lawfully 
made and acquired on a DVD protected by the Content Scramble System, 
on a Blu-ray disc protected by the Advanced Access Content System, or 
via a digital transmission protected by a technological measure.
161 
b. Overview of Issues 
The petitions share the desire to circumvent TPMs employed on DVDs and Blu-ray 
discs, and by various online streaming services, to protect motion pictures.  The current 
proposals describe an array of uses of motion pictures that proponents contend are 
noninfringing and are likely to be adversely affected in the next three years by section 
1201(a)(1)’s prohibition on circumvention of TPMs.  While the proposed uses are more 
specifically discussed below, the record reveals certain commonalities. 
With the exception of BYU’s proposal (which, as discussed below, seeks use of fulllength works), the proposed expansions are limited to uses of short portions of “motion 
pictures,” including television shows and videos.162  Under section 101 of the Copyright 
Act, “motion pictures” are a broad subset of “audiovisual works” that includes 
television shows, online videos, news, commercials, and other works “consisting of a 
series of related images which, when shown in succession, impart an impression of 
motion, together with accompanying sounds, if any.”  Participants did not request a 
need to circumvent TPMs on audiovisual works that are not “motion pictures.”  
In addition, the proposed expansions implicate the same types of TPMs regardless of 
proposed noninfringing use, namely CSS-protected DVDs, AACS-protected Blu-ray 
discs, and various TPMs applicable to online distribution services.
163   
                                                      
160 Authors All. et al. Class 1 Initial at 1.  
161 Id. 
162 ATSP et al. Class 2 Pet. at 1.   
163 Authors All. et al. Class 1 Initial at 5–6; BYU Class 1 Initial at 2; EFF, NMR & OTW Class 1 
Initial at 3; Joint Educators Class 1 Initial at 4; Joint Filmmakers Class 1 Initial at 9 –10.  The record 
in the 2015 proceeding confirmed “that CSS is a technological measure that controls acces s to 
motion pictures on DVDs, and that AACS is a measure that controls access to motion pictures on 
Blu-ray discs.”  2015 Recommendation at 69.  In addition, in 2015 the Register concluded that “a 
significant number of platforms that offer digitally transmitted motion pictures, both for digital 

[PAGE 38]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
35 
i. Screen-Capture Technology 
In the 2015 rulemaking, the Register concluded that certain uses of motion picture clips 
for criticism and comment do not require access to higher-quality content, and that 
screen-capture technology may be an alternative to circumvention—but that it can be 
unclear to users as to whether screen-capture technology may in fact involve 
circumvention.164  Accordingly, the existing exemption includes a screen-capture 
provision to address the possibility of circumvention when using this technology.165  In 
addition, where the Register determined that screen capture was not an adequate 
alternative because higher-quality content was required, the exemption allows 
circumvention for certain uses “where the person engaging in circumvention reasonably 
believes that screen-capture software or other non-circumventing alternatives are unable 
to produce the required level of high-quality content.”
166 
Proponents now seek to remove all references to screen-capture technology, arguing that 
it is not a viable alternative because it does not permit the proposed use,167 or else results 
in degraded-quality (and thus unusable) content.168  They contend that the dual 
references to screen-capture technology are confusing.169  In response, opponents argue 
that screen-capture technology remains an adequate alternative to circumvention.170 
                                                                                                                                                              
downloads and for streaming, constitute technological measures controlling access to those 
works under section 1201(a)(1).”  Id. 
164 2015 Recommendation at 99. 
165 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1)(i)(A), (ii)(A), (iii)(A), (iv)(A), (v)(A), (vi)(A), (vii)–(viii) (2016). 
166 Id. § 201.40(b)(1)(i)(B), (ii)(B), (iii)(B), (iv)(B), (v)(B), (vi)(B). 
167 Tr. at 253:03–06 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Band, LCA) (stating that screen capture does not reasonably 
permit teachers to add subtitles and/or commentary to assist with their teaching).  
168 Authors All. et al. Class 1 Initial at 28 (stating that screen capture results in “dropped frames, 
frame rate issues, insufficient resolution, and artifacting,” rendering “the resulting images 
unusable to use for criticism and commentary”); EFF, NMR & OTW Class 1 Reply at 7 (stating 
that “screen capture generally doesn’t work for the classes of uses”); Joint Filmmakers Class 1 
Initial at 21 (“[A]ll screen capture software programs of which we are aware create dropped 
frames and loss of audio sync, among other defects.”); Tr. at 18:15–19 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Rosenblatt, 
OTW) (stating that some users who try to use screen capture with Netflix end up with just a black 
screen rather than any visual); Tr. at 26:23–24 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Neill, NMR) (stating filmmakers 
may be asked to go back and obtain the source material if the clips are not of sufficient quality) . 
169 BYU Class 1 Initial at 5; Tr. at 42:16–18 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Rosenblatt, OTW). 
170 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 37–38 (stating that screen capture is an alternative to 
circumvention); Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 26 (stating that proponents have “not 
submitted any evidence to demonstrate that screen-capture is no longer a viable alternative”). 

[PAGE 39]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
36 
ii. Universities and K-12 Educational Institutions 
In the 2015 rulemaking, parties submitted multiple petitions seeking exemptions relating 
to uses by college and university faculty and students, and by kindergarten through 
twelfth-grade educators.171  The Register found it appropriate, based on that record, to 
distinguish between educational purposes requiring close analysis of film and media 
excerpts (where circumvention would be necessary) and more general educational uses 
(where screen capture would be a sufficient alternative).172  Specifically, the Register 
found that the “record for proposed uses in connection with K-12 students and media 
literacy after-school or adult education programs was not well developed” and did not 
demonstrate that screen capture could not meet those needs.173  The Register thus 
recommended a screen-capture exemption for those categories.174  Regarding K-12 
educators, the record was more robust and included examples where high school 
educators relied upon DVD excerpts to facilitate classroom analysis of films.175  The 
Register accordingly recommended the current exemption to allow access by K-12 
instructors to DVDs or digitally distributed material for purposes of close analysis.176  
Finally, for college and university educators and students, the Register found that the 
record demonstrated that access to Blu-ray discs may occasionally be required to engage 
in close analysis in cinema studies or similar courses if DVD or other standard-definition 
materials are insufficient to accomplish the desired analysis of visual or sonic details.177 
Now, BYU proposes to eliminate distinctions based on education level and type of 
educational course because “[i]nstructors and pupils regularly make noninfringing 
performances of motion pictures in a wide range of educational settings,”178 and they 
should be able to make these uses “as long as they satisfy the statutory conditions set 
forth in Section 110(1) or 110(2).”179  In addition, BYU maintains the existing exemption 
should not continue to “lump[] in” educational uses with uses for multimedia e-books 
and filmmaking, as the statute gives special preference to non-profit educational users.180 
                                                      
171 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access 
Control Technologies, 79 Fed. Reg. 73,856, 73,859 (Dec. 12, 2014). 
172 The history of the MOOCs exemption is discussed in the next section. 
173 2015 Recommendation at 101. 
174 Id. 
175 Id. at 102. 
176 Id. 
177 Id. 
178 BYU Class 1 Initial at 4.   
179 Id. at 5. 
180 Tr. at 224:15–225:07 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Midgley, BYU); see also 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(ii)–(iii). 

[PAGE 40]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
37 
iii. Massively Open Online Courses (“MOOCs”) 
As described during the 2015 rulemaking, MOOCs “typically consist of pre-recorded 
lectures that may be illustrated, as appropriate, with short clips and still images from 
audiovisual works.”181  In 2015, the record consisted of examples showing MOOCs 
provided by accredited nonprofit educational institutions (though sometimes through 
third-party platforms).182 
In the 2015 rulemaking, the Register determined that section 110(2)— which provides an 
exception in copyright law for certain uses of copyrighted works by nonprofit educators 
in distance education183—offers meaningful guidance on balancing “pedagogical needs 
in distance learning with copyright owners’ concerns of harmful impact.”184  The 
Register thus recommended the incorporation of section 110(2)’s requirements “that 
uses be limited to nonprofit educational institutions, that transmissions be limited to 
enrolled students, and that the transmitting body institute policies regarding copyright 
protection.”185  The Register also recommended requiring MOOCs making use of the 
exemption “to employ TPMs that reasonably prevent the retention and unauthorized 
dissemination of copyrighted content, as provided in section 110(2).”186  
Now, Joint Educators assert that the Acting Register should broaden the exemption to 
include “all online courses,” including courses offered by for-profit and unaccredited 
educational institutions, so that “all online learners and teachers have the same access to 
effective educational methods.”187  Proponents assert that “the development of new and 
innovative educational opportunities is currently and will continue to be constrained if 
learners cannot access a full range of online education settings that can access the same 
audiovisual content that is now available in the conventional classroom and in 
qualifying MOOCs.”
188  Further, proponents argue that the TEACH Act “clings to the 
outmoded notion” that for-profit and non-profit educational institutions should be 
treated differently.189   
                                                      
181 2015 Recommendation at 31 (citation omitted). 
182 Id. at 74–75. 
183 17 U.S.C. § 110(2); see also U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, REPORT ON COPYRIGHT AND DIGITAL 
DISTANCE EDUCATION 77–84 (1999), http://www.copyright.gov/reports/de_rprt.pdf. 
184 2015 Recommendation at 102. 
185 Id. 
186 Id. 
187 Joint Educators Class 1 Initial at 3, 5. 
188 Id. at 12.  
189 Id. at 9–10.  

[PAGE 41]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
38 
iv. Filmmaking 
Joint Filmmakers request to broaden the exemption by covering all types of films, 
including narrative (or fictional) films,190 a request which the Register rejected in 2015.191  
At that time, proponents asserted that there was “no clear dividing line between 
documentary and narrative filmmaking for purposes of determining whether the uses 
are likely to be fair and that the categories should therefore be treated the same with 
respect to the question of noninfringing use.”
192  But the Register noted that with 
narrative films, there was “no presumption that their primary purpose is to offer 
criticism or commentary,” as opposed to entertainment, and found a “significant 
countervailing concern” that uses might supplant the robust market for motion picture 
clips.
193  The Register considered whether there might be an appropriate way to limit the 
types of narrative films to which the exemption might conceivably apply, but was 
unable to draw sound distinctions based on the then-existing record.194  In the end, the 
Register recommended that the then-existing exemption for documentary films be 
continued, but determined that the record did not support a finding that the use of 
motion picture clips in narrative films was, as a general matter, likely to be 
noninfringing.195 
Proponents now argue that the exemption should be expanded because defining a 
“documentary” film is difficult, as many films that are not traditionally classified as a 
“documentary” contribute to educational and social commentary.196  Proponents assert 
that many filmmakers do not know whether they are permitted to use the exemption.197  
In support, Joint Filmmakers’ submission discusses a number of films that they say 
reflects an increasingly “hybrid” approach to fictional/documentary filmmaking.198  
v. Multimedia E-Books 
In the 2015 rulemaking, the Register found that proponents had sufficiently 
demonstrated that some meaningful portion of the proffered uses for multimedia e-
                                                      
190 Joint Filmmakers Class 1 Initial at 8. 
191 2015 Recommendation at 102–03. 
192 Id. at 41. 
193 Id. at 79. 
194 Id. at 80 (discussing lack of consensus around meaning of terms like “biopic,” “based on a true 
story,” docudrama,” “inspired by” and “films that portray real events”). 
195 Id. at 102–03. 
196 Joint Filmmakers II Class 1 Initial at 7.  
197 FI, IDA & KEF Class 1 Reply at 12.  
198 Joint Filmmakers Class 1 Initial at 7. 

[PAGE 42]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
39 
books were likely to be fair, such as seeking to incorporate motion picture excerpts in ebooks analyzing techniques in motion picture sound editing or cinematography.199  The 
Register found, however, that the record lacked evidence demonstrating a need to 
include uses in fictional e-books or for purposes beyond close analysis of the underlying 
work.200  Because the record contained no evidence of proposed uses in e-books that 
were not offering “film analysis,” the Register retained language from the 2012 
rulemaking limiting uses of motion picture excerpts to nonfiction multimedia e-books 
offering film analysis.201 
Currently, Authors Alliance et al. argue that the Register’s previous fair use analysis 
should not change based on whether the content is fictional and/or not directed to film 
analysis.202  Proponents assert that fictional multimedia e-books and nonfiction 
multimedia e-books beyond film analysis are often noninfringing, and suggest that 
fanfiction would benefit from the proposed exemption.203  Proponents suggest that 
expanding the existing exemption to include fiction would be consistent with the 
existing exemption for noncommercial videos, and that multimedia e-book authors 
would merely be using a different medium (i.e., e-books) to engage in criticism and 
comment.204 
2. Discussion 
a. AACS2 and Ultra HD Content 
Before considering the specific proposals in this class, the Acting Register first addresses 
an argument by opponents that the exemption should not be expanded to include 
AACS2 technology, which is employed to protect ultra-high-definition or “4K” content 
distributed on Ultra HD Blu-ray discs.205  Opponents maintain that none of the petitions 
expressly sought extension to AACS2,206 and AACS LA notes that the current exemption 
does not extend to AACS2, as that technology did not exist at the time of the 2015 
                                                      
199 2015 Recommendation at 77. 
200 Id. at 77, 100.  
201 Id. at 100. 
202 Authors All. et al. Class 1 Initial at 3.  
203 Id. at 7–15. 
204 Authors All. et al. Class 1 Reply at 14.  In the context of discussing multimedia e-books, OTW 
raised the issue of podcasters desiring to circumvent motion pictures to acquire high -quality 
audio.  Tr. at 72:06–09, 73:03–12 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Rosenblatt, OTW).  The record does not include, 
however, any examples of podcasters needing to circumvent a motion picture, or explain why 
alternatives to circumvention are inadequate.  
205 AACS LA Opp’n at 2. 
206 Id. at 6–8; Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 5, 24. 

[PAGE 43]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
40 
rulemaking.207  AACS LA contends that AACS2 technology differs from AACS1 
technology in that “Blu-ray players incorporating only AACS1 Technology will not play 
Ultra HD Blu-ray discs protected with AACS2 Technology and cannot be ‘upgraded’ to 
play such discs,” and that the “two systems exist in parallel, serving two different 
markets.”208  Accordingly, opponents seek to exclude AACS2 from proposed Class 1.   
In response, proponents assert that the Acting Register should extend the proposed 
exemption to AACS2 technology.209  Joint Educators, Associate Professor Anderson, and 
Professor Aufderheide maintain that “ AACS2 is different in form but it is fundamentally 
the same in function,”210 and EFF, NMR, and OTW state that section 1201 does not 
require temporary exemptions to identify the specific types of TPMs at issue in addition 
to the category of works exempted.211  In their view, “more flexibility” should be 
allowed with regard to the relevant TPMs.212  FI, IDA and KEF state that “[m]any if not 
most filmmakers now film in 4K; this is quickly becoming the standard,” and ask that 
this rulemaking “allow modifications that permit the § 1201 exemption to keep pace 
with technological development.”213   
Proponents do not claim that Class 1 petitions identified AACS2 as a TPM requiring 
circumvention to eliminate adverse effects of the section 1201 prohibition; nor do they 
argue that AACS2 technology is sufficiently similar to AACS1 technology such that the 
exemption already covers AACS2 technology.  In past rulemakings, the Register has 
declined to include new technology where the record did not demonstrate a need,214 and 
exemptions to permit circumvention of new technology have been adopted only upon 
showings of a need to access works protected by that specific technology.  For example, 
the 2015 rulemaking recommended an exemption to circumvent AACS technology for 
the first time, only after concluding that DVDs and digitally transmitted material were, 
in some instances, insufficient to serve as alternatives to content accessible only on Bluray discs.215  Here, in contrast to the detailed record regarding CSS, AACS, and access 
controls on digitally transmitted content, there is very little in the record regarding 
                                                      
207 AACS LA Opp’n at 4–6. 
208 Id. at 3. 
209 EFF, NMR & OTW Class 1 Reply at 12; Joint Educators Class 1 Reply at 8–9.   
210 Joint Educators Class 1 Reply at 9. 
211 EFF, NMR & OTW Class 1 Reply at 12. 
212 Id. at 12. 
213 FI, IDA & KEF Class 1 Reply at 5. 
214 See 2012 Recommendation at 135 (finding “the record [did] not reflect a substantial adverse 
impact due to the inability to use motion picture materials contained on Blu- ray discs”). 
215 See 2015 Recommendation at 89–92. 

[PAGE 44]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
41 
AACS2.216  Opponents contend that “[n]o one has released a universal hack to all Ultra 
HD films protected by AACS2,” explaining that its integrity is “especially important” to 
the thriving ecosystem for motion pictures.217  Proponents do not contest this.   
Accordingly, the Acting Register finds the record insufficient to support extending the 
proposed class to AACS2.  None of the petitions expressly seek expansion to AACS2, 
and the record does not support a finding that such technology is adversely affecting 
noninfringing uses or that it is sufficiently similar to AACS1 to be covered by the current 
exemption.  Proposed Class 1 thus addresses only TPMs employed on DVDs and Bluray discs, and by various online streaming services to protect motion pictures.   
b. Single Overarching Exemption for Purposes of Comment and 
Criticism 
As noted above, EFF, NMR, and OTW propose replacing the existing exemption, which 
consists of multiple subparts relating to use of motion picture clips, with a single 
overarching exemption for purposes of criticism and comment.218  EFF, NMR, and OTW 
do not dwell on specific examples of proposed noninfringing uses or analyze such 
proposed uses under the 1201 statutory factors,219 but rather focus on “the value of 
adopting a simple overarching exemption that would embrace multiple audiovisual 
classes” for purposes of criticism and comment.220  The factual record for this proposal 
largely relies on submissions by other parties seeking to expand the existing audiovisual 
exemption.221  Accordingly, the Acting Register generally addresses EFF, NMR, and 
OTW’s comments here, and more specifically in the context of the other parties’ 
proposed uses below.  
EFF, NMR, and OTW maintain that the legislative history of section 1201 indicates that 
preserving fair use should be paramount in this rulemaking, but that unnecessary 
                                                      
216 Authors All. et al. Class 1 Initial at 5–6, App. A (detailing WebM, DVR, HDCP, HTML 5, 
WebCrypto API, MPEG-DASH, EME, and Widevine encryption technologies); Joint Educators 
Class 1 Initial at 4–5 (detailing Protected Streaming on Adobe, Microsoft PlayReady, and Apple 
FairPlay); Joint Filmmakers Class 1 Initial at 9–10. 
217 Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 24.  In contrast, both prior and current rulemakings disclose 
the methods of circumvention for the access controls covered by the present exemption.  See, e.g. , 
EFF, NMR & OTW Class 1 Initial at 3 (referencing MacTheRipper 4.1, DVD Decrypter, Mac 
DVDRipper Pro, Handbrake, MakeMKV, and Aunsoft). 
218 EFF, NMR & OTW Class 1 Initial at 2–3.  
219 Id. at 3. 
220 Id. 
221 See id. 

[PAGE 45]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
42 
complexities in the existing exemption undermine fair use.222  While noting that the 
Copyright Office’s 2006 decision to define some classes by reference to the use and user 
introduced “valuable and much-needed flexibility” into the rulemaking process, they 
note that to determine whether the exemption applies, a user needs to analyze both the 
intended use, as well as his or her status as a type of user— requirements that they 
believe go beyond the requirements of fair use.
223  They assert that the existing language 
is “practically unreadable” due to their complexities,224 and “a challenge for clients and 
attorneys alike to apply in practice.”225  For example, EFF, NMR, and OTW explain that 
in 2013, the USC Intellectual Property and Technology Law Clinic developed a process 
to help documentary filmmakers determine how to make use of the exemption, and the 
process required seven steps.
226 
Moreover, EFF, NMR, and OTW assert that their proposed exemption is sufficiently 
narrow, as the sole limitations it would remove from the current exemption are the 
references to particular types of users.227  They note that their proposal incorporates and 
consolidates well-established limitations from the current exemption— namely, those 
limiting its scope to “(1) short portions, (2) of motion pictures, (3) on particular physical 
or digital media, (4) for purposes of commentary or criticism, (5) only where the person 
engaging in circumvention reasonably believes that non-circumventing alternatives are 
unable to produce the required level of high-quality source material and (6) only where 
the use is a fair use.”228  They also note that opponents did not challenge any of this 
language in the existing exemption when it was petitioned for renewal.229  According to 
EFF, NMR, and OTW, their proposed exemption ties the class definition to key fair use 
factors (criticism and comment, and the amount used).230  They suggest that some valid 
uses are not included by the current exemptions, such as the use of film clips to illustrate 
                                                      
222 Id. at 3–5. 
223 Id. at 6.  
224 Id. at 7.   
225 Id. (stating this result is “contrary to the Office’s well-justified goal of crafting regulations that 
ordinary people can understand and apply”); see also Section 1201 Report at vii (describing 
Office’s commitment to “simplified regulatory language”), 151 (“[D]rafting the section 1201 
regulatory language in plain language is a worthy goal, echoing efforts from the Legislative and 
Executive Branches to promote clear communication to the public.”).  
226 EFF, NMR & OTW Class 1 Initial at 9. 
227 EFF, NMR & OTW Class 1 Reply at 3. 
228 Id. 
229 Id. 
230 EFF, NMR & OTW Class 1 Initial at 10. 

[PAGE 46]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
43 
legal principles to jurors.231  Finally, they assert that opponents have never demonstrated 
that the wording of the exemption “affects the behavior of those who engage in unfair 
uses or traffic in decryption technologies.”232 
In response, opponents contend that this request overstates the complexity of the 
existing exemption,233 and that the proposed expansion eliminates “carefully drawn 
distinctions among potential users of motion picture content.”234  DVD CCA and AACS 
LA note that the proposed expansion “would enable anyone to circumvent TPMs in 
order to use short portions of otherwise protected motion pictures for the purpose of 
criticism or comment, regardless of who the user is, the specific use to be enabled, or the 
context in which the activity would occur.”235  
Opponents state that in enacting section 1201, Congress purposely created specific and 
narrow exemptions (e.g., section 1201(j) permits an exemption for security research, 
provided it is conducted in good faith), and that creating broad categories of exemptions 
would undermine the effectiveness and intent of the section 1201(a)(1) prohibition.
236  
And to be appropriately narrow, opponents contend that exemptions should identify the 
specific persons who will be adversely affected in their abilities to make noninfringing 
uses by the section 1201 prohibition.
237  Joint Creators II note, however, that they are 
open to simplifying the language in principle, so long as the relevant limitations are 
maintained; they submit proposed language that is one-third the length of the current 
exemptions.238 
After consideration, the Acting Register declines to adopt EFF, NMR, and OTW’s 
proposed language, finding it overly broad for purposes of section 1201, and given the 
rulemaking record upon which the current exemption has been adopted.239  Although 
                                                      
231 Id. (describing use of three clips from The Town to illustrate bank robbery techniques, as well as 
other courtroom uses of fictional film clips).  The record does not, however, demonstrate that 
circumvention would be required to engage in such uses, or that screen capture would not be an 
adequate alternative to circumvention. 
232 Id. at 7. 
233 Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 8. 
234 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 5. 
235 Id. at 8. 
236 Id. at 6. 
237 Id. at 7–8. 
238 Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 8–9. 
239 See 2015 Recommendation at 100 (“ A mere requirement that a use be ‘noninfringing’ or ‘fair’ 
does not satisfy Congress’s mandate to craft ‘narrow and focused’ exemptions.  . . .  An 
exemption should provide reasonable guidance to the public in terms of what uses are permitted, 
while at the same time mitigating undue consequences for copyright owners.”) (citations 

[PAGE 47]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
44 
the proposal retains some of the limitations in the existing exemption, by removing the 
references to specific users and uses, the context in which the criticism and comment are 
being made would be eliminated.  Courts evaluate fair use claims on a case-by-case 
basis, and the context in which use of the work is being made is a significant part of that 
inquiry (e.g., commercial versus noncommercial use).240  To be sure, the 1201 rulemaking 
is distinct, insofar as it requires a prospective determination whether a larger category of 
uses are, on the whole, likely to be fair use.  But to ensure alignment with the case law, 
the Register’s analysis has been aided by considering the type of user, as well as the type 
of use, to define classes to recommend exemptions.241  As one proponent noted, in the 
context of the section 1201 policy report, this approach “brings the idea of a class much 
more in line with fair use, which is about use and users.”
242  The proposed language 
would eliminate these legally important distinctions.  Consistent with this fair use 
evaluation, the Register has also previously decided not to exempt certain uses, 
ostensibly also for criticism and comment, given the lack of factual support in the record 
demonstrating that they were likely to be noninfringing.
243   
In addition, the Acting Register notes that the nature of the use affects more than the 
infringement analysis:  the fourth section 1201 factor requires examination of the effect 
of circumvention on the market for or value of the copyrighted works.  Without a fuller 
understanding of the context of the proposed use, not least whether it is intended to be 
commercialized, it would be difficult for the Register to evaluate market effects. 
                                                                                                                                                              
omitted); 2006 Recommendation at 18 (“Typically, the impetus for an exemption is the 
demonstration of sufficient evidence proving that a particular noninfringing use, one that warrants 
an exemption, has been adversely affected by the prohibition, e.g., the noninfringing use cannot 
be accomplished without circumvention.  Thus, the application of an exemption to all 
noninfringing uses or users will in many cases be broader than is justified by the evidence.”); 
2003 Recommendation at 84 (rejecting proposal because “proponents of an exemption for ‘all 
works’ have utterly failed to propose ‘a particular class of copyrighted works’”).  
240 See Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 585 (1994). 
241 See, e.g., Cambridge Univ. Press v. Patton, 769 F.3d 1232, 1264 (11th Cir. 2014) (“[W]e must 
consider not only the nature of the user, but the use itself.”); Am. Geophysical Union v. Texaco Inc., 
60 F.3d 913, 921–22 (2d Cir.1994) (“[A] court’s focus should be on the use of the copyrighted 
material and not simply on the user, [although] it is overly simplistic to suggest that the ‘purpose 
and character of the use’ can be fully discerned without considering the nature and objectives of 
the user.”). 
242 Section 1201 Report at 109 (citing Tr. at 95:13–96:07 (May 19, 2016) (Decherney, Univ. of Pa.).   
243 See, e.g., 2015 Recommendation at 77 (declining to expand the multimedia e- books exemption 
to fictional e-books, as “the record lack[ed] evidence demonstrating a need” for expansion, “as no 
examples of such uses were submitted”).  

[PAGE 48]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
45 
That said, the Copyright Office remains dedicated to simplified regulatory language 
where possible, particularly in cases where the exemption is intended for individual 
users.  Here, however, there’s some suggestion that significant clarification may not be 
needed:  the survey referenced by EFF, NMR, and OTW appears to suggest that, when 
presented with the actual regulatory language, users of the existing exemption are “both 
accurate and confident” in applying the exemption to proposed uses.244  The Acting 
Register appreciates EFF, NMR, and OTW’s point of view and considers various ways to 
consolidate and reorganize the regulatory text in discussing the other proposed 
expansions below.   
c. Works Protected by Copyright 
With respect to the requirement that the relevant TPMs control access to copyrightable 
works, this class again involves the use of motion pictures for purposes of criticism, 
comment, or educational uses.  Therefore, like the 2015 rulemaking, the Acting Register 
finds that at least some works included in the proposed expanded class are protected by 
copyright. 
d. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Proponents claim that a significant number of the proposed uses fall within the favored 
purposes of criticism and commentary referenced in the preamble of section 107 and are 
therefore likely to be fair.245  While otherwise analyzing each set of proposed uses 
separately below, the Register notes that the second and third factors governing the fair 
use analysis under section 107 remain relatively constant across the proposed uses.  
Under factor two—the nature of the copyrighted work — it is well established that 
motion pictures are creative and thus at the core of copyright’s protective purposes.246  
But in the case of uses involving a favored purpose under the law, the second factor may 
be of relatively limited assistance to evaluate whether a use is fair.247  As in 2012 and 
2015, the Acting Register concludes that the second fair use factor slightly disfavors the 
proposed expansion, but is not especially relevant to most of the proposed uses.248 
Under the third factor—the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to 
the copyrighted work as a whole—the Acting Register conclu des that with the exception 
                                                      
244 Patricia Aufderheide, The Right to Decrypt Media Needs to Be More User-Friendly, CTR. FOR MEDIA 
& SOC. IMPACT (Dec. 16, 2017), http://cmsimpact.org/general/right-decrypt-media-needs-userfriendly/; see EFF, NMR & OTW Class 1 Initial at 8 n.16 (citing same). 
245 See 17 U.S.C. § 107. 
246 See 2015 Recommendation at 70; 2012 Recommendation at 128. 
247 See Campbell, 510 U.S. at 586. 
248 See 2015 Recommendation at 70; 2012 Recommendation at 128. 

[PAGE 49]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
46 
of BYU’s proposal, the limitation to circumvention for uses of “short portions” of motion 
pictures is integral to the various proposals.249  While recognizing that the extent of 
permissible copying may vary, for purposes of this class, the “short portions” limitation 
provides useful guidance as to what is generally likely to be a fair use without imposing 
a wholly inflexible rule as to length.  As a general matter, longer uses are less likely to be 
considered fair because they are more likely to usurp the market for a work. 
i. Universities and K-12 Educational Institutions 
BYU contends that its proposed activities— performances of full-length motion pictures 
under section 110(1) and short portions thereof under section 110(2) for nonprofit 
educational purposes—are noninfringing because section s 110(1) and 110(2) allow for 
such public performances of motion pictures by nonprofit educational institutions.250  
BYU acknowledges, however, that digital copies would need to be made and stored to 
facilitate the proposed uses.251  Proponents contend that any server copies or other 
reproductions made would be covered either under section 112(f)’s exception for 
nonprofit educational institutions to make copies when making transmissions 
authorized under section 110(2), or under section 107 as fair use.252 
1) Sections 110(1) and 110(2) 
BYU argues that its proposed performances of full-length motion pictures are 
authorized under section 110(1).  That provision allows for the public performance and 
display of copyrighted works for educational purposes, subject to certain conditions:  
the performance must be made by instructors or pupils in the course of face-to-face 
teaching activities of a nonprofit educational institution, in a classroom or similar place 
devoted to instruction, and not knowingly using lawfully made copies.253  Because 
section 110(1) does not restrict the amount of the motion picture that can be used, either 
short clips or an entire motion picture may be shown within a classroom, subject to the 
other conditions.254 
                                                      
249 See 2015 Recommendation at 70; 2012 Recommendation at 128. 
250 BYU Class 1 Initial at 3–4. 
251 See id. at 4 (“In many cases, such circumvention may necessitate that a copy of the moti on 
picture be stored on a media server or similar device.  Such reproduction and storage would be 
subject to the conditions for ephemeral recordings, as provided in 17 U.S.C. § 112(f).”).  
252 Tr. at 233:03–07 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Midgley, BYU). 
253 17 U.S.C. § 110(1) (the performance or display of certain works in certain educational settings 
does not constitute infringement “unless, in the case of a motion picture . . . the performance . . . 
is given by means of a copy that was not lawfully made under this title, and that the person 
responsible for the performance knew or had reason to believe was not lawfully made”).   
254 See id. 

[PAGE 50]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
47 
Section 110(2), also referred to as the TEACH Act, also provides an exception for certain 
uses of copyrighted works by nonprofit educators, but in distance education.255  Section 
110(2) has a number of requirements.  First, the transmitter must be “a governmental 
body or an accredited nonprofit educational institution.”256  Second, the use must be 
made at the direction of an instructor teaching a class session as “a regular part of the 
systematic mediated instructional activities”—and for motion pictures, only in a 
“reasonable and limited portion[].”257  Third, as with 110(1), any copies involved in 
transmitting the performance must be lawfully made and acquired.258  Fourth, the 
reception of the transmission must be limited, to the extent feasible, to students officially 
enrolled in the course.
259  Fifth, the transmitting educational institution must institute 
policies and provide notice regarding copyright protection to students, faculty, and 
relevant staff members.260  Finally, the transmitting body must apply technological 
measures that limit the retention and unauthorized further dissemination of the work in 
accessible form.
261 
Because section 110(1) provides “no limitations or restrictions” on the length of motion 
picture performances in face-to-face teaching, BYU argues that “instructors or pupils can 
perform even full-length motion pictures in class, and such performances are 
unquestionably noninfringing, provided that they satisfy the remaining conditions set 
forth in the statute.”262  In addition, BYU contends that “[i]nstructors have requested the 
ability to queue up a series of clips from a film, and add comments, annotations, 
interactions, questions, or other customization to the playback of the video to enhance or 
individualize the viewing assignment,” and they “should be enabled to make such uses, 
as long as they satisfy the statutory conditions set forth in Section 110(1) or 110(2).”263 
Proponents provide multiple examples of proposed educational uses, including teachers 
creating compilations of clips from foreign language films with and without subtitles;264 
teachers showing full-length motion pictures in foreign language courses “to provide 
students with opportunities to hear a given foreign language as spoken in film and 
                                                      
255 Id. § 110(2); see also U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, REPORT ON COPYRIGHT AND DIGITAL DISTANCE 
EDUCATION (1999), http://www.copyright.gov/reports/de_rprt.pdf. 
256 17 U.S.C. § 110(2). 
257 Id. 
258 Id. 
259 Id. § 110(2)(C)(i). 
260 Id. § 110(2)(D)(i). 
261 Id. § 110(2)(D)(ii)(I). 
262 BYU Class 1 Initial at 3. 
263 Id. at 4–5. 
264 Tr. at 242:17–23, Hearing Ex. 1-E (Apr. 11, 2018) (Midgley, BYU). 

[PAGE 51]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
48 
television programs from a given country or region”;265 the use of clips from the film 
Alone in the Wilderness to instruct students on the steps involved in building a house, and 
then to make their own how-to videos;266 students using the animated film Gnomeo and 
Juliet to “visually map the characters, the rising action, the conflict and identify the 
culminating point in the narrative” of the tragedy Romeo and Juliet;267 teachers captioning 
popular movies to enhance reading skills;268 students captioning motion pictures to 
strengthen listening comprehension and writing skills;269 students preparing videos for 
competitions, such as National History Day;270 students remixing motion picture clips in 
non-film courses;271 and a law professor using audiovisual examples in classes to 
illustrate legal concepts.272  
Opponents note that although section 110(1) allows certain public performances of 
complete motion pictures in classrooms without obtaining licenses, it does not allow 
those performances to be made from unauthorized copies.273  Opponents also note that 
sections 110(1) and 110(2) provide exceptions only to public performance and display 
rights, not rights of reproduction or distribution, and that the proposed uses thus do not 
fall solely under them.
274  Specifically, opponents note that the proposed exemption 
would “involve making copies of full-length films in a librarying context,” thereby 
“giv[ing] effect not just to classroom instructions or distance education implicating the 
performance right permitted under sections 110 but also would implicate the 
reproduction and distribution rights to the work.”
275   
The Acting Register finds that the thrust of the proposed exemption implicates the rights 
of reproduction and distribution rather than public performance or display—
circumvention is required to make copies, not to show a film in a classroom from a 
lawfully acquired disc.  To use proponents’ own example, BYU likely already can rely 
                                                      
265 BYU Class 1 Initial at 4. 
266 Tr. at 241:07–20 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Hobbs, Media Educ. Lab). 
267 Tr. at 255:02–17 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Hobbs, Media Educ. Lab). 
268 Media Educ. Lab Class 1 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2 (June 10, 2018). 
269 Id. 
270 Id. 
271 Authors All. et al. Class 1 Post-Hearing Resp. at 4 (June 11, 2018). 
272 EFF, NMR, & OTW Class 1 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2 (June 11, 2018). 
273 Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 22. 
274 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 12; Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 22. 
275 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 12; see also Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 22 (“If 
Congress wanted educational institutions to be exempt from purchasing complete copies of 
works, it would have included an exception to the reproduction right within § 110 —which it 
clearly did not.”). 

[PAGE 52]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
49 
on section 110(1) to show Moana in a foreign language classroom; what it seeks to do 
now is circumvent the TPMs preventing it from copying and storing that film on a 
server, so it can show it in multiple classrooms without purchasing additional copies or 
equipment.276  Section 110 cannot, by itself, establish that this action is likely to be 
noninfringing, since any performances of motion pictures under sections 110(1) and 
110(2) must originate from lawfully acquired copies.277  Accordingly, the Acting Register 
cannot conclude that the proposed uses are likely noninfringing without first 
determining whether the copies made and used to facilitate the motion picture 
performances are themselves noninfringing under section 112(f) and/or fair use. 
2) Section 112(f) 
BYU agrees that the proposed exemption “may necessitate that a copy of the motion 
picture be stored on a media server or similar device,” but asserts that this reproduction 
and storage is noninfringing under section 112(f).
278  Section 112(f), which authorizes 
copies created in making transmissions under section 110(2), states: 
[I]t is not an infringement of copyright for a governmental body or other 
nonprofit educational institution entitled under section 110(2) to transmit 
a performance . . . to make copies . . . of a work that is in digital form . . . 
to be used for making transmissions authorized under section 110(2), if— 
(A) such copies . . . are retained and used solely by the body or 
institution that made them, and no further copies . . . are 
reproduced from them, except as authorized under section 110(2); 
and  
(B) such copies . . . are used solely for transmissions authorized under 
section 110(2).279 
Accordingly, on its face, section 112(f) does not permit nonprofit educational institutions 
to make copies to facilitate performances under section 110(1).280  
                                                      
276 See Tr. at 303:24–304:01 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Midgley, BYU). 
277 17 U.S.C. § 110(1)–(2). 
278 BYU Class 1 Initial at 4. 
279 17 U.S.C. § 112(f)(1)(A)–(B) (emphasis added). 
280 Id. § 112(f)(1)(B); see also H.R. REP. NO. 107-687 at 3 (“The [TEACH Act] also amends section 112 
. . . to permit storage of copyrighted material on servers in order to permit the performances and 
displays authorized by section 110(2) to be made asynchronously in distance education 
courses.”). 

[PAGE 53]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
50 
The Acting Register thus finds BYU’s reliance on section 112(f) unhelpful to support its 
request to make copies to facilitate performances in face-to-face teaching under section 
110(1).  Section 112(f) does support a conclusion that making and temporarily storing 
digital copies of motion pictures to perform “reasonable and limited portions” in 
distance teaching would be noninfringing, assuming the other requirements of section 
110(2) are met.  This appears already covered, however, by the existing exemption. 
3) Fair Use 
Alternatively, proponents assert that the copying and reproduction of motion pictures 
under the proposed exemption for purposes of sections 110(1) and 110(2) is 
noninfringing under the doctrine of fair use.
281  Proponents cite Authors Guild, Inc. v. 
HathiTrust and Authors Guild v. Google (“Google Books”) for the contention that such 
copying constitutes fair use if it is for noninfringing purposes under sections 110(1) or 
110(2).
282  In response, opponents distinguish the proposed use from HathiTrust and 
Google Books, noting that proponents’ “copying is not for the primary purpose of 
indexing and data analysis, but rather for the specific purpose of performing the works 
themselves.”283  Opponents also argue that proponents seek to engage in space 
shifting—when a work is transferred from one storage medium to another 284—stating 
that “no court has held that space-shifting constitutes fair use.”285   
The participants largely focus on the proposed use of showing full length (or at least 
more than short portions of) motion pictures in face-to-face teaching under section 
110(1).  There is less discussion on the use of short portions of motion pictures in face-toface education (and no specific examples of proposed use for distance education apart 
from the separate MOOC category), presumably because the existing exemption permits 
circumvention in many such instances.286  However, as noted, the exemption’s subparts 
relating to educational uses vary by type of access control (Blu-ray, DVD, access controls 
on digitally transmitted content), user (teacher versus student), and use (close analysis 
compared to general education).  BYU’s examples also appear to include uses beyond 
                                                      
281 BYU Class 1 Initial at 4. 
282 See id.; Tr. at 232:18–234:02 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Midgley, BYU) (“I would just point to . . . Google 
Books and HathiTrust as examples of cases where full copies of millions of works reside, right 
now, on servers hosted by a for-profit, private company, and the court has ruled in that specific 
instance that those full copies that exist are fair, because they enable the transf ormative use that 
researchers need to make downstream.”); Authors Guild, Inc. v. HathiTrust, 755 F.3d 87, 97 (2d Cir. 
2014); Authors Guild v. Google, Inc., 804 F.3d 202 (2d Cir. 2015) (“Google Books”). 
283 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 12 n.15. 
284 2015 Recommendation at 107 (citation omitted). 
285 Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 21. 
286 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1)(iv), (vi) (2016).   

[PAGE 54]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
51 
criticism and comment, a limitation of the current exemption.  Accordingly, the Acting 
Register will evaluate whether expansion for “short portions” likely constitutes fair use, 
before considering whether making a copy to show a full length film in face-to-face 
teaching constitutes fair use. 
Regarding the use of short motion picture clips in face-to-face teaching, the Acting 
Register concludes that the record demonstrates that a significant number of the 
proposed uses are likely to be fair, largely following the reasoning of past 
rulemakings.287  In addition to the extensive record of uses for commentary and criticism 
considered in the 2015 rulemaking, proponents introduced multiple additional examples 
that may not fall neatly within an existing exemption.288  These included, for example, 
teachers’ use of short film clips to create compilations from foreign language films with 
and without subtitles,289 and students captioning motion pictures to strengthen listening 
comprehension and writing skills; in such cases, the teaching or scholarship activities are 
still favored purposes under section 107, but may not qualify under the existing 
exemption for “comment or criticism.”290   
Each of these uses is favored under the preamble of section 107 and generally appears to 
be transformative or otherwise favored.  In addition, because only “short portions” are 
involved, they are more likely to be fair use.291  Finally, when the use of a work is for 
criticism or commentary, it is presumed to be less likely to compete with the market for 
the underlying work.292  Notably, opponents do not contest that short, educationally 
oriented uses in face-to-face or distance teaching are likely to be fair use, nor have they 
introduced evidence that the intended uses of excerpts by faculty and students are likely 
to undermine the value of copyright-protected motion pictures.   
While the record demonstrates that many of these uses of short motion picture clips for 
educational purposes are likely to be fair, it also suggests that the current regulatory 
language does not fully cover all of these uses, while the complexity of the existing 
                                                      
287 See, e.g., 2015 Recommendation at 71–72. 
288 See earlier discussion of section 110(1). 
289 Tr. at 242:17–23, Hearing Ex. 1-E (Apr. 11, 2018) (Midgley, BYU). 
290 Media Educ. Lab Class 1 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2 (June 10, 2018); see also Authors All. et al. 
Class 1 Post-Hearing Resp. at 4 (discussing students remixing motion picture clips in non -film 
courses); Media Educ. Lab Class 1 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2 (discussing students preparing videos 
for competitions, such as National History Day); Tr. at 241:07–20 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Hobbs, Media 
Educ. Lab) (discussing the use of clips from the film Alone in the Wilderness to instruct students on 
the steps involved in building a house, and then make their own how-to videos).  
291 Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 22 (agreeing that uses of short portions are “more 
compatible” with fair use). 
292 2015 Recommendation at 71. 

[PAGE 55]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
52 
exemption is difficult for teachers and students to follow.  BYU suggests that the 
language is “needlessly complex and difficult to interpret, especially for teachers and 
educational administrators without formal legal training.”293  Professor Hobbs similarly 
testifies that the exemption is “extremely confusing for teachers.”294  In sum, this points 
toward adopting an expanded exemption with simplified language for educational uses, 
including eliminating distinctions between types of courses, and distinctions between 
students and faculty at K-12 educational institutions and universities and colleges. 
The same logic does not extend, however, to the copying of full motion pictures for 
performances in face-to-face teaching.  The Register has previously found the “short 
portions” limitation to be “critical” in recommending exemptions for audiovisual 
works.
295  BYU’s written comments are generally focused on the practical need for a 
broader exemption for educational uses (which it characterizes as aligned with sections 
110(1) and 110(2)’s educational performances exceptions), and the declining popularity 
of DVD players in the marketplace.  But it does not point to case law supporting the 
notion generally that ripping and librarying copies for educational uses are likely to be 
fair under section 107, save for referencing HathiTrust and Google Books.296  Those 
opinions, however, distinguished the proposed uses of indexing and data analysis, from 
performing the works themselves, and carefully considered the risk that those 
circumscribed uses might act as market substitutes.
297  In this case, however, full length 
copies of motion pictures to facilitate performances under section 110(1) are supposed to 
substitute for the original works in disc form.   
Moreover, the Supreme Court has noted “the mere fact that a use is educational and not 
for profit does not insulate it from a finding of infringement.”298  While section 110(1)’s 
                                                      
293 BYU Class 1 Reply at 2–3; see Tr. at 216:13–217:02 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Midgley, BYU) (proposing 
recognizing educational users “as a group, in the same way that the statute does.”); Tr. at 218:04 –
220:17 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Band, LCA) (testifying as to need for a simplified exemption for varied 
educational uses). 
294 Tr. at 220:12–221:07 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Hobbs, Media Educ. Lab). 
295 2012 Recommendation at 138–39; see 2015 Recommendation at 30 (citing same). 
296 BYU Class 1 Initial at 4. 
297 Google Books, 804 F.3d at 224–25 (finding that even though the search function allowed the user 
to view “snippets” of the book in which the search term appears in the book, it did not effectively 
substitute for the original works because viewers were seeing such a small percentage of the 
book); HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 101 (finding that a full-text search function did not serve as a 
substitute for the original books because the search results did not display any text from the 
underlying works). 
298 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 584; see also Cambridge Univ. Press, 769 F.3d at 1263–64 (“[C]opyright has 
always been used to promote learning, . . . allowing some leeway for educational fair use furthers 
the purpose of copyright by providing students and teachers with a means to lawfully access 

[PAGE 56]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
53 
protection for performances of full works by educational institutions demonstrates the 
importance of enabling educational performances, it notably does not include exceptions 
to the rights of reproduction and distribution.  As prior rulemakings have noted, current 
law “does not guarantee access to copyrighted material in a user’s preferred format.”299  
Moreover, proponents do not address Joint Creators II’s contention that the exemption 
would essentially requisition the creation of complete copies of works “in the clear,” to 
be circulated around campuses, perhaps online, which may threaten the market for 
those works.300   
Based on the relevant case law, the Acting Register cannot conclude as a general matter 
that the contemplated uses of full length motion pictures are likely to be fair use. 
ii. MOOCs 
The 2015 rulemaking identified fair use as the noninfringing basis for this exempted use, 
and the proposed expansion to “all online courses” is evaluated on the same grounds.301  
First, however, the question of how to define “online course” needs to be addressed.  
Joint Educators contend that the colloquial definition is evolving, and that an enrollment 
component need not be a feature of an “online course.”302  But Media Education Lab 
suggests defining an “online course” by whether users have to register for the course, 
such as through a Facebook login.303  For their part, opponents recommend preserving 
                                                                                                                                                              
works in order to further their learning in circumstances where it would be unreasonable to 
require permission.  But, as always, care must be taken not to allow too much educational use, 
lest we undermine the goals of copyright by enervating the incentive for authors to create the 
works upon which students and teachers depend.”) (citation omitted); Sony Corp. of Am. v. 
Universal City Studios, Inc., 464 U.S. 417, 450 (1984) (“Even copying for noncommercial purposes 
may impair the copyright holder’s ability to obtain the rewards that Congress intended him to 
have.”). 
299 2015 Recommendation at 109 (citing 2012 Recommendation at 163); see also 2010 
Recommendation at 224; 2006 Recommendation at 74; 2003 Recommendation at 132.   
300 Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 23. 
301 See generally Joint Filmmakers Class 1 Initial at 10–15; FI, IDA & KF Reply 7–10. 
302 Tr. at 299:14–300:06 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Decherney, Joint Educators); see also Tr. at 295:13–20 (Apr. 
11, 2018) (Decherney, Joint Educators) (“But what is an online course is something tha t’s 
obviously changing and expanding through places like edX and Coursera and Udacity.  They’re 
actually expanding in the other direction now, offering larger, full online degree programs.  They 
are also offering smaller and more modular courses, things that are shorter, that might only take 
a week rather than a full semester.”). 
303 Tr. at 297:07–08 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Hobbs, Media Educ. Lab). 

[PAGE 57]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
54 
the existing limit to officially enrolled students at accredited non-profit educational 
institutions, and suggest that would exclude registration through Facebook.304   
While acknowledging the growth and importance of online education, in granting the 
existing exemption in 2015 the Register agreed that an “‘unbounded exemption’ where 
‘[a]nybody can declare that they’re teaching a MOOC’ and ‘anyone can be a student’” 
would be “anathema to the exemption process as envisioned by Congress.”
305  As in 
2015, Joint Educators’ current “broadly framed proposal would seemingly encompass 
any online video that could be characterized as an educational experience.”306  
Moreover, the record is very sparse on examples of “online courses” that lack enrollment 
features and/or could not be considered a MOOC, but also use motion picture clips.307  
Accordingly, the record does not justify expansion to “all online courses.”  
Considering more narrowly whether the exemption should be expanded to include 
MOOCs offered by for-profit and unaccredited educational institutions, Joint Educators 
contend that the proposed additional uses are fair because they are identical to those 
under the existing MOOCs exemption.308  Specifically, they reference two MOOCs 
currently developed by Professor Decherney at University of Pennsylvania and 
Professor Abulor at Princeton University, and note that although the existing exemption 
permits circumvention to offer these MOOCs at accredited nonprofit institutions, it does 
not allow these same MOOCs to be offered at unaccredited or for-profit institutions.
309  
In response, DVD CCA and AACS LA argue that Joint Educators failed to support their 
assertion that including for-profit and unaccredited educational institutions likely 
                                                      
304 Tr. at 298:22–299:13 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II); Tr. at 300:24–301:01 (Apr. 11, 
2018) (Taylor, DVD CCA).  Whether a student is “officially enrolled” in a MOOC depends upon 
an institution’s enrollment policies and is thus a factual determination.  Although the Acting 
Register agrees that a MOOC by definition is “massive,” she makes no judgment as to whe ther 
any particular form of enrollment constitutes “enrollment.” 
305 2015 Recommendation at 72 (citing Tr. at 119:18–121:16 (May 27, 2015) (Turnbull, DVD CCA & 
AACS LA); Tr. at 129:03–130:24 (May 27, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators)). 
306 2015 Recommendation at 102.  For example, Joint Educators repeatedly reference models, like 
Khan Academy, which popularize videos through YouTube.  See Joint Educators Class 1 Initial at 
2, 5, 7–8.  There is no record, however, suggesting those models desire or need to incorpo rate 
motion picture clips originally created for entertainment value in their educational offerings. 
307 Joint Educators Class 1 Initial at 7.  Joint Educators also reference a Harvard University 
professor maintaining a “webpage” that “contains a collection of YouTube clips of popular 
movies and television episodes” to illustrate mathematical concepts.  Id.  As DVD CCA and 
AACS LA note, the Harvard professor does not appear to be offering his “webpage” as a MOOC.  
DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 32 n.79. 
308 Joint Educators Class 1 Initial at 10. 
309 Id. at 7. 

[PAGE 58]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
55 
constitutes fair use.310  They suggest the record lacks any examples of for-profit or 
unaccredited educational institutions wanting to offer MOOCs, suggesting the 
expansion would cover only speculative uses.311  Finally, they suggest that Joint 
Educators II do not themselves represent the interests of for-profit and/or unaccredited 
educational institutions in this rulemaking, noting that the entities named by proponents 
(e.g., University of Phoenix, Full Sail University, Strayer College, Khan Academy, and 
Lynda) did not participate in the rulemaking.312  Proponents do not offer any additional 
examples of proposed uses in their reply. 
The Acting Register agrees that the record lacks examples sufficient to evaluate or 
recommend expansion to for-profit or unaccredited educational institutions.  In the 2015 
rulemaking, a group of educators similarly argued that for-profit uses are not 
necessarily precluded from being fair uses,313 but the then-existing record— similar to 
this current rulemaking—did not include examples of proposed uses in connection with 
MOOCs operated on a for-profit basis.314  Accordingly, the Register limited the fair use 
assessment to MOOCs offered by nonprofit accredited educational institutions, and 
similarly limited the current temporary exemption.315  Just as the 2015 record did not 
support the inclusion of MOOCs offered by for-profit and/or unaccredited institutions, 
neither does the current record. 
iii. Filmmaking 
The 2015 rulemaking identified fair use as the noninfringing basis for this exempted use, 
and the proposed expansion is evaluated on the same grounds.316  Proponents now 
provide multiple examples of non-documentary films using short motion picture clips 
for parody or for the clip’s biographical or historical significance, ostensibly to provide 
criticism or commentary.  These include a film combining a script with live public 
presentations to explore the struggles of Jewish artists in 1930s and 1940s Germany and 
those of contemporary artists (using clips of the featured artists’ performances);317 a film 
“commenting on the historical world as it is perceived by a person living in 
                                                      
310 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 32. 
311 Id. (citing Joint Educators Class 1 Initial at 10).   
312 See id. at 31. 
313 2015 Recommendation at 37 (citing Dercherney, et al. 2015 Class 3 Reply at 6–7). 
314 Id. at 37. 
315 Id. at 75–76.  DVD CCA and AACS LA observe that “uses made by commercial enterprises are 
evaluated differently in determining whether a use is fair when the activity is for alleged 
educational purposes.”  DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 32 n.80. 
316 See generally FI, IDA & KF Reply 7–10; Joint Filmmakers Class 1 Initial at 10–15. 
317 Joint Filmmakers Class 1 Initial at 17. 

[PAGE 59]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
56 
contemporary times” (using footage of Adolf Hitler);318 a dramatic film regarding the 
historical attempted assassination of President Reagan, from the viewpoint of the 
shooter’s family and lawyers (using clips from Taxi Driver, which influenced John 
Hinckley, Jr.’s assassination attempt);319 a biographical film regarding Steve Jobs (using a 
clip of the “1984” Apple computer advertisement, which played a “key role” in the 
film);320 a dramatic film regarding the serial killer Richard Ramirez (using historical 
news footage);321 and a parody of the 1993 classic Mrs. Doubtfire purporting to show the 
“absurdity of the film’s premise” (using clips from Mrs. Doubtfire).322  In addition, Joint 
Filmmakers provide numerous other examples of narratives films for which filmmakers 
desire to engage in criticism and comment.
323   
Proponents contend that in evaluating the proposed uses, the focus should be on the 
specific use of the clip— and not the genre of film in which the clip appears—as clips can 
be used to provide comment or criticism in a transformative way, even if the film’s 
overall purpose is for entertainment.324  Proponents observe that “nondocumentary films 
are created for reasons other than just entertainment,” such as raising social 
awareness.
325  Proponents point to parody as a transformative use of motion picture 
clips in non-documentaries, noting also that although commerciality may weigh against 
a finding of fair use, it does not presumptively do so.326  In addition, proponents observe 
                                                      
318 FI, IDA & KEF Class 1 Reply at 9. 
319 Joint Filmmakers Class 1 Initial at App. F. 
320 Id. at 11; see also The Wrap, How ‘Steve Jobs’ Used Apple’s Super Bowl Ad without Permission, 
STARTRIBUNE (Oct. 13, 2015), http://m.startribune.com/variety/movies/332251172.html?
section=/variety.  
321 Joint Filmmakers Class 1 Initial at App. O. 
322 Id. at 16, App. G. 
323 Id. at 16–20, Apps. C–L, N–P, R; FI, IDA & KEF Class 1 Reply at 8–10.  FI, KF, and IDA list 
many of these examples in chart form.  Tr. at 116:08–12, Hearing Ex. 1-J at 2–4 (Apr. 24, 2018) (FI, 
KF & IDA) (appendix of adverse effects). 
324 Joint Filmmakers Class 1 Initial at 12–13 (citing Wade Williams Distrib., Inc. v. Am. Broad. Co., 
2005 WL 774275 at *9 (S.D.N.Y. Apr. 5, 2005)); see also FI, IDA & KEF Class 1 Reply at 7 (“the 
overall purpose of a film genre is not determinative of a filmmaker’s ability to comment and 
critique”); Tr. at 92:12–16 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Donaldson, Joint Filmmakers) (noting that in last three 
years his law firm worked on sixty-five non-documentary films engaging in fair use, being 
insured, and released to public). 
325 FI, IDA & KEF Class 1 Reply at 13–14 (discussing examples of Spotlight (depicting journalists 
exposing abuse by Catholic priests), the 1977 miniseries Roots (depiction and impact of slavery), 
and Philadelphia (discrimination against individuals living with AIDS)). 
326 Joint Filmmakers Class 1 Initial at 13 (citing Campbell, 510 U.S. at 570); see also Campbell, 510 U.S. 
at 579, 584 (noting “parody has an obvious claim to transformative value” and discussing how 
some commercial uses may nonetheless be fair) . 

[PAGE 60]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
57 
that the Register has previously found that noncommercial videos frequently make 
noninfringing use of fictional content, and “[s]imilarly, narrative filmmakers want to use 
motion picture clips to make their works transformative.”327  Finally, proponents note 
the growing genre of “hybrid” films, which incorporate documentary and fictional 
elements, suggesting that such blending makes it more difficult to identify true 
“documentaries” in which use of motion picture clips would constitute fair use.
328  For 
example, Professor Aufderheide identified the film The Act of Killing as a hybrid film,329 
which examines how after the Indonesian government was overthrown by the military 
in 1965, Anwar Congo and his friends went from “small-time gangsters” to death squad 
leaders helping the army target and kill more than one million communists, ethnic 
Chinese, and alleged leftists.330  The real-life Anwar Congo and his friends developed 
fictional scenes for the film about their experience of the killings—writing the scripts 
themselves, and playing themselves and their victims in the film—and  adapted the 
scenes to their favorite film genres “not to provide testimony for a documentary,” but to 
“star in the kinds of films they most love.”331   
Opponents maintain that proponents have failed to develop a record of likely 
noninfringing uses to support extension of the exemption to non-documentary films.332 
They contend that proponents’ examples seem not to be for criticism or comment, but 
rather to “provide theme,”333 “provide scope and assist in portraying the age,”334 
“provide historical context,”335 “flesh out [characters’] motivations,”336 or “further the 
story line.”337  For example, opponents suggest the Mrs. Doubtfire parody example “is 
actually a satire” and thus infringing, as it pokes fun not so much at Mrs. Doubtfire but 
                                                      
327 FI, IDA & KEF Class 1 Reply at 13. 
328 See Tr. at 175:04–14 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Welsh, FI); Tr. at 136:10–19 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Aufderheide, 
Am. Univ.); see also Filmmaker Staff, Cinema Eye Honors Announces 2016 Heterodox Award 
Nominees, FILMMAKER MAGAZINE (Nov. 18, 2015), https://filmmakermagazine.com/tag/heterodoxaward/ (discussing Heterodox Award, created to recognize “narrative fiction film that 
imaginatively incorporates nonfiction strategies, content and/or modes of production”).   
329 Tr. at 136:13–19 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Aufderheide, Am. Univ.). 
330 Synopsis, THEACTOFKILLING.COM, http://theactofkilling.com/synops/ (last visited Sept. 27, 
2018). 
331 Id. 
332 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 13; Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 11–12. 
333 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 16. 
334 Id. 
335 Id. 
336 Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 11. 
337 Id. 

[PAGE 61]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
58 
the absurdity of the characters and their relationship.338  Opponents observe that the 
Register previously determined that use of short motion picture clips in nondocumentaries is “less likely to warrant a finding of fair use.”339  Finally, DVD CCA and 
AACS LA argue generally that the examples of proposed uses are not transformative 
because they are for entertainment purposes,340 while Joint Creators II acknowledge that 
use of motion picture clips in “entertaining, scripted films” may sometimes constitute 
fair use.341  
After careful review of this expanded record, the Acting Register observes that a number 
of examples of uses offered by proponents for non-documentaries appear to be related 
to criticism or comment, similar to uses in documentary films.  Although the use of 
motion picture clips in non-documentaries “diverges from educational uses and uses in 
documentaries because there is no presumption that their primary purpose is to offer 
criticism or commentary, as opposed to being included for entertainment purposes,”
342 
that distinction does not bar a finding of fair use.343  In 2015, while noting that it may be 
possible for narrative films to incorporate motion picture clips for purposes of criticism 
and comment, the Register concluded that the then-existing record failed to support the 
contention that the proposed uses in non-documentary films were likely to be 
noninfringing.
344  In this proceeding, however, proponents have provided many 
additional examples of non-documentaries where uses of clips appear favored.  Given 
                                                      
338 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 15. 
339 Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 9 (citing 2015 Recommendation at 79; 2012 Recommendation 
at 130). 
340 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 14, 17. 
341 Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 10 n.8. 
342 2015 Recommendation at 79. 
343 See, e.g., Arrow Prods. v. Weinstein Co. LLC, 44 F. Supp. 3d 359 (S.D.N.Y. 2014) (finding fair use 
where four minutes of film used in recreating scenes to provide behind -the-scenes depiction of 
film); Wade Williams Distrib., Inc., 2005 WL 774275, at *12 (finding fair use where three-second 
movie clip used in episode of “Good Morning America” discussing alien films as transformative 
comment on how filmmakers have portrayed aliens); Sofa Entm’t, Inc. v. Dodger Prods., Inc., 709 
F.3d 1273 (9th Cir. 2013) (finding fair use where seven-second clip of Ed Sullivan’s introduction of 
the Four Seasons on “The Ed Sullivan Show” was used in a musical about the Four Seasons, 
because its use was transformative in evidencing the band’s enduring prominence in American 
music despite “British Invasion”).  But see TCA Television Corp. v. McCollum, 839 F.3d 168, 180 (2d 
Cir. 2016) (“[T]he focus of inquiry is not simply on the new work, i.e., on whether that work 
serves a purpose or conveys an overall expression, meaning, or message different from the 
copyrighted material it appropriates.  Rather, the critical inquiry is whether the new work uses 
the copyrighted material itself for a purpose, or imbues it with a character, dif ferent from that for 
which it was created.”) (finding use was not fair). 
344 2015 Recommendation at 79. 

[PAGE 62]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
59 
the changed record and testimony regarding emerging genre trends, the Acting Register 
concludes that this factor ultimately weighs in favor of fair use.  As discussed further 
below, and like the current exempted uses for documentary films and noncommercial 
remix videos, however, this conclusion is tailored to those films that use clips for 
purposes of criticism and comment specifically, and does not constitute a statement 
about the incorporation of motion picture clips into other films more generally.345   
Addressing the second fair use factor, proponents assert that it “is not dispositive of fair 
use.”346  As noted above, the Acting Register agrees that the second factor is of limited 
value.  Even though motion pictures are creative and thus at the core of copyright’s 
protective purposes, because a number of proponents’ examples of proposed use 
advance a favored purpose, the second factor carries little weight.347   
Regarding the third fair use factor, because the proposed exemption would not 
eliminate the “short portions” limitation, proponents maintain that this factor weighs in 
favor of fair use.348  The Acting Register agrees. 
Turning to the fourth factor, proponents argue that expansion of the exemption to nondocumentaries will not negatively affect the market for motion pictures.  Joint 
Filmmakers note that “the Register has previously concluded that ‘use of a motion 
picture clip for purposes of documentary commentary or criticism is unlikely to interfere 
with the primary or derivative markets for the underlying work’”—and assert that 
“[t]here is no reason that this would be any different in a non-documentary context.”349   
Proponents state that “rightsholders do not have the right to the market for 
transformative uses of their works” because such uses constitute fair use.350  
Accordingly, proponents assert that “licensors have no right to whatever business 
would be ‘lost’ in such a scenario” because the use constitutes fair use (i.e., a license 
should not be necessary).351  Proponents thus maintain that expanding the exemption 
                                                      
345 Cf. id. at 82–83 (finding “a substantial number, though not all” of noncommercial remix videos 
were likely noninfringing and cautioning that “several of the videos provided as examples may 
be insufficiently transformative to support a determination of fair use”).  
346 Joint Filmmakers Class 1 Initial at 14. 
347 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 579; see also  2015 Recommendation at 70, 78; 2012 Recommendation at 
128. 
348 Joint Filmmakers Class 1 Initial at 14–15. 
349 Id. at 15; see 2015 Recommendation at 78. 
350 Joint Filmmakers Class 1 Initial at 15 (citing Campbell, 510 U.S. at 591). 
351 FI, IDA & KEF Class 1 Reply at 5; see also Tr. at 151:10–12 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Lerner, Joint 
Filmmakers) (“If I make fair use and I do it appropriately, . . . a rights holder does not have the 
right to say [I] need a license to that.”). 

[PAGE 63]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
60 
will not affect the licensing market.352  In addition, proponents state that they “are not 
aware of any evidence, or even a single allegation, that the [current documentary] 
filmmakers’ exemption has resulted in any harm to the market for copyrighted motion 
pictures,”353 and that opponents have “never offered evidence that the exemption has 
affected that market in any way” despite consistently warning of abuses.354  
Finally, as discussed further below in connection with adverse effects, Joint Filmmakers 
dispute that there is a licensing market for many of the proposed uses, particularly for 
individual users or smaller budget projects.
355  They point out that Universal Studios 
needed to rely on fair use to use the well-known “1984” Apple computer advertisement, 
which played a key role in the film Steve Jobs, because the Jobs heirs “hated” the 
direction the film was taking.356  Similarly, Joint Filmmakers submit an appendix with 
eight redacted examples of standard clip licensing agreements with studios or 
production companies including Sony, Fox, CBS, ABC, and NBC Universal, and 
Miramax that contain non-disparagement clauses limiting the manner in which the 
licensed clip can be used.
357  Such clauses, according to proponents, may prevent 
filmmakers from transforming, manipulating, or changing the clip.358  For example, 
proponents note that a licensing agreement used by Miramax Media Group “prohibits 
the licensee, after having paid exorbitant fees, from being critical of anything 
surrounding the clip, or in other words, from making fair use.”359   
In response, opponents assert that the proposed uses would negatively impact the clip 
licensing market for motion pictures because “unlicensed uses harm that market.”360  
Opponents maintain that licenses are “readily available for using short portions of 
motion pictures,”
361 and point to websites offered by Universal, Paramount, CNN, and 
                                                      
352 Joint Filmmakers Class 1 Initial at 25.  
353 Id. at 15. 
354 FI, IDA & KEF Class 1 Reply at 5. 
355 EFF, NMR & OTW Class 1 Reply at 6. 
356 FI, IDA & KEF Class 1 Reply at 6; Joint Filmmakers Class 1 Initial at 11, App. S. 
357 Joint Filmmakers Class 1 Initial at App. T (e.g., “none of the [licensed] Footage will be used in a 
manner which would be derogatory to or critical of the program from which the Footage was 
taken or to the persons involved with the production of the program from which the Footage was 
taken”).   
358 FI, IDA & KEF Class 1 Reply at 9–10; see also Tr. at 169:06–14 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Wertheimer,  
Authors All. & OTW). 
359 FI, IDA & KEF Class 1 Reply at 7. 
360 Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 12; see also DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 17. 
361 Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 14. 

[PAGE 64]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
61 
NBCUniversal through which clips may be licensed.362  Opponents contend that “MPAA 
members actively exploit the market for licensing film clips for these types of uses,” and 
“license, collectively, thousands of clips for use in a variety of works, including TV 
shows, fictional films, and documentaries.”363  Opponents also maintain that “[c]lip 
licensing remains a growing segment of creators’ derivative market for their copyrighted 
works,”364 that the “market for clip licensing has even attracted new entrants including 
public television stations,” and that “it is clear that unlicensed uses harm that market.”365  
The Acting Register concludes that this factor does not preclude a limited expansion of 
the exemption.  While opponents have demonstrated that there is an active clip-licensing 
market for motion pictures, the class includes many examples appearing to be critical 
uses of motion picture clips in non-documentaries for parody or to comment upon a 
clip’s biographical or historical significance.  Requiring a filmmaker “who is making fair 
use of a work to obtain a license is in tension with the Supreme Court’s holding that 
rightsholders do not have an exclusive right to markets for criticism or comment of their 
copyrighted works.”
366  By that token, the record indicates that in many cases where 
clips would be used for comment or criticism, there may be no effective market for 
licensed clips, due to concerns over the context in which the clip would be used (i.e., 
criticism).  As with the first factor, however, this conclusion would not extend to the use 
of clips in a manner that infringes the copyright owner’s derivative rights, which would 
entitle that owner to license—or decline to license —a clip, even at a high price.
367 
On balance, the analysis reveals that the proposed expansion to include uses of short 
clips for parody or for their biographical or historically significant nature are likely 
noninfringing.  While the Acting Register makes no judgment as to whether any 
particular uses submitted by the proponents are in fact fair, the record demonstrates that 
many of the uses suggested by proponents appear to be for purposes of criticism and 
comment and thus likely fair.  In 2012 and 2015, the rulemaking records lacked examples 
of non-documentaries making use of preexisting material for purposes of comment in a 
                                                      
362 Id. at 13. 
363 Id. at 12. 
364 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 17–18. 
365 Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 12. 
366 2015 Recommendation at 84. 
367 See Fox News Network, LLC v. TVEyes, Inc., 883 F.3d 169, 180 (2d Cir. 2018) (“It is of no moment 
that [defendant] allegedly approached [plaintiff] for a license but was rebuffed: the failure to 
strike a deal satisfactory to both parties does not give [defendant] the right to copy [plaintiff’s] 
copyrighted material without payment.”), petition for cert. filed, No. 18-321 (U.S. Sept. 12, 2018) ; 
Campbell, 510 U.S. at 579, 584 (“Evidence of substantial harm to [the market for the original] 
would weigh against a finding of fair use, because the licensing of derivatives is an important 
economic incentive to the creation of originals.”).  

[PAGE 65]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
62 
transformative way.368  For this rulemaking, however, proponents have presented many 
examples of non-documentary films engaging uses of motion picture clips for criticism 
and comment in manners that may be fair.  In addition, the growing genre of “hybrid” 
films further distinguishes the current record from those in prior rulemakings.   
iv. Multimedia E-Books 
The 2015 rulemaking identified fair use as the noninfringing basis for this exempted use, 
and the proposed expansion is evaluated on the same grounds.369  Proponents assert that 
the uses of clips for comment or criticism in nonfiction multimedia e-books beyond 
those offering film analysis, as well as fictional multimedia e-books, are transformative 
and thus fair.370  Proponents contend that the Register’s prior analysis should not change 
“simply because an e-book is fictional and/or not directed at film analysis.”371   
Regarding the first fair use factor, proponents assert that the criticism and comment 
limitation ensures that nonfiction multimedia e-books generally would give “new 
meaning” to works and thus be transformative; they suggest “most [would] alter 
audiovisual material in such a way to give it new meaning.”372  Proponents point to 
specific examples of nonfiction multimedia e-books, including an e-book critiquing how 
pregnancy and questions of fertility have been portrayed in a television series (using 
clips from the television series);373 an e-book about “the psychology used in certain TV 
shows” (using clips from the television shows);374 an e-book titled Show Sold Separately, 
which “critiques the phenomenon of how audiences are interacting with movies and TV 
shows based on preconceived notions before that material is released” (using video clips 
and imbedded imaged);375 and an e-book titled Digital Dubliners, which is a guide to 
James Joyce’s collection of stories depicting life in Dublin in the early twentieth century 
titled Dubliners, and “uses film clips and other still images to provide historical and 
cultural context.”376 
Regarding fictional multimedia e-books, proponents argue these uses are often 
transformative because they add meaning or expression to the original work, even if 
                                                      
368 2015 Recommendation at 81; 2012 Recommendation at 130. 
369 See generally Joint Filmmakers Class 1 Initial at 10–15; FI, IDA & KF Reply 7–10. 
370 Authors All. et al. Class 1 Initial at 7–15. 
371 Id. at 3. 
372 Id. at 11–12 (providing example regarding literary professors). 
373 Id. at 19. 
374 Id. at 20. 
375 Tr. at 118:20–119:09 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Schofield, Authors All.). 
376 Tr. at 119:10–18 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Schofield, Authors All.). 

[PAGE 66]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
63 
they describe imaginary events or characters.377  According to proponents, these authors 
“often present characters or a setting from an original work,” but will “often splice clips 
together in such a way that a new story is being told” to transform the work.378  
Proponents assert that “[f]anfiction is an example of types of fictional e-books that 
would benefit from the proposed exemption,” and is “a transformative form of 
expression that fits into the fair use doctrine.”
379  Proffered examples include author 
Holdt’s multimedia e-book, which would take characters from one movie and put them 
in a different movie “universe”;380 author Kirby Ferguson’s multimedia e-book “about 
the hidden forces that shape our lives”;381 and a multimedia e-book based on an “inuniverse” musical written by a character in the television series Supernatural.382  In 
addition, proponents suggest that including fictional e-books would be consistent with 
the existing exemption for noncommercial videos, which includes fictional works.383 
Finally, in recognizing that the excepted uses for e-books under the existing exemption 
differ from those for noncommercial remix videos in that they include commercial uses, 
proponents state that “[t]he Register noted that even though many multimedia e-books 
tend to have a commercial aspect, the short excerpts used for criticism and comment 
transformed the work to have new meaning enough to satisfy fair use.”
384 
In response, opponents maintain the record lacks evidence of actual use of a motion 
picture clip in a fictional e-book or in an “other nonfiction” e-book, and that “[i]n the 
absence of actual use, evaluating the use is all but impossible.”385  Regarding nonfictional 
uses, opponents assert that many of the alleged additional uses would qualify under the 
current “film analysis” limitation.386  Regarding fictional uses, opponents maintain that 
the fair use analysis is similar to that for filmmaking, and that the creation of fan fiction 
multimedia e-books “would frequently infringe the right to prepare derivative 
works.”387 In support, Joint Creators II cite a variety of court opinions concluding that 
                                                      
377 Authors All. et al. Class 1 Initial at 11–12. 
378 Id. at 12. 
379 Id. at 9. 
380 Id. at 18. 
381 Id. at 17. 
382 Id. at 20–21. 
383 Authors All. et al. Class 1 Reply at 13–14; see also Tr. at 104:21–105:15 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Tandy, 
OTW) (suggesting noncommercial videos exemption would not encompass inclusion of remix 
videos within a multimedia e-book); Tr. at 122:03–08 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Reid, Authors All.). 
384 Authors All. et al. Class 1 Initial at 11 (citing 2012 Final Rule at 65,260, 65,268). 
385 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 21; see also Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 16. 
386 Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 16. 
387 Id. at 15. 

[PAGE 67]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
64 
the incorporation of copyrighted material into other fictional works resulted in 
unauthorized derivative works.388 
The reasoning under the second and third factors to exempt the existing e-books uses 
follows that of this class, generally.  Regarding the fourth factor, proponents assert that 
the expansion “will not disrupt the market of the original borrowed work because the 
audiovisual clips included in the e-books will be short and will not supplant the original 
copyrighted work.”389  Proponents also maintain that eliminating the screen-capture 
references does not alter the fair use analysis, because use of screen-capture technology 
results in a lower-quality video, such that “readers may be deterred from exploring and 
acquiring the original work.”390   
In response, opponents assert that as with the proposed filmmaking expansion, there 
will be harm to the clip licensing market if the proposed e-books uses are exempted.391  
At the same time, however, DVD CCA and AACS LA maintain that no market currently 
exists for multimedia e-books.392  But they claim that “if the multimedia e-book market 
were to ever materialize, other creators such as the studios or even public television 
would also seek to exploit this market as an opportunity to license their works.”393 
Regarding nonfiction multimedia e-books beyond “film analysis,” the Acting Register 
concludes that the record sufficiently demonstrates additional proposed uses that are 
likely fair.  Proponents’ examples show a variety of uses of short excerpts in nonfiction 
multimedia e-books to provide criticism or commentary beyond film analysis.  While it 
is true that a couple of the uses arguably fall under the existing exemption, it appears 
that these authors would likely not characterize their e-books as involving “film 
analysis.”  When considering the inclusion of clips in works of nonfiction comment or 
criticism, the brevity and transformative nature of the proposed uses favor an exemption 
because the proposed users are unlikely to substitute for the original work—and indeed 
                                                      
388 Id. at 15–16 (collecting cases). 
389 Authors All. et al. Class 1 Initial at 14. 
390 Id. at 15. 
391 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 30.  Similarly, Joint Creators II assert that “[t]here is 
clearly a market for licensing footage from motion pictures, and it is clear that unlicensed uses 
harm that market.”  Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 12. 
392 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 23.  Authors Alliance responds that the multimedia ebooks market is, in fact, growing and expected to steadily improve.  Authors All. et al. Class 1 
Reply at 4 (providing examples). 
393 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 30; see also Tr. at 174:07–08 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Turnbull, 
AACS LA) (stating e-book market is “a potential or likely to be developed market”). 

[PAGE 68]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
65 
opponents did not identify any proposed use that has in the past harmed, or is likely in 
the future to harm, the market for or value of any copyrighted motion pictures.394   
Regarding the proposed fictional uses, however, the Acting Register finds that the 
record lacks evidence demonstrating a need to expand the current exemption.  To be 
sure, this issue is somewhat difficult to evaluate, as the record includes few examples of 
fictional e-books.395  But the Register has previously determined that “[t]he use of an 
earlier work to flesh out characters and motivations in a new work, or to develop a 
storyline, does not inherently serve the purpose of criticism or comment on the existing 
work.”
396  Proponents’ testimony indicates that many of the proposed fictional uses 
serve precisely these purposes.397  The proposed fictional e-books appear to involve “in 
universe” scripts and/or “mashups,” which can constitute unauthorized derivative 
works, depending upon the work.398  While it may be possible in some circumstances for 
fan-fiction e-books to incorporate motion picture clips in a transformative way, here, 
                                                      
394 See 2015 Recommendation at 77. 
395 Authors All. et al. Class 1 Initial at 18, 21; Tr. at 116:08–12, Hearing Ex. 1-I at 2 (Apr. 24, 2018) 
(Authors All. et al.); Tr. 72:10–73:12 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Rosenblatt, OTW) (“[T]here are a lot of 
questions about this rather than concrete examples.”). 
396 2012 Recommendation at 130. 
397 See Authors All. et al. Class 1 Initial at 12 (“By using the clips to merely present a setting[,] 
authors can then introduce new characters or plots to an old world, creating new meaning and 
adding new expression.”); Tr. at 108:24–109:02 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Tandy, OTW) (testifying that 
authors want to use clips for purposes of mise-en-scene, to flesh out a narrative, or show 
something that happened in the past). 
398 Authors All. et al. Class 1 Initial at 18, 21; see also Lucasfilm Ltd. LLC v. Ren Ventures Ltd., No. 
3:17-cv-07249-RS, slip op. at 9 (N.D. Cal. June 29, 2018) (order granting in part and denying in 
part motion for partial summary judgement) (finding that defendants’ use of Star Wars images 
and dialogue to promote a game app mimicking a fictional card game appearing in Star Wars did 
not constitute fair use; noting that “[m]ovie franchise owners routinely license intellectual 
property rights to other businesses to develop movie-related merchandise and products,” and 
that defendants did not produce evidence to show lack of market harm from their unlicensed 
use); Dr. Seuss Enterprises, L.P. v. ComicMix LLC, No. 16-CV-2779, 2017 WL 6059130 (S.D. Cal. Dec. 
7, 2017) (finding no fair use where defendants created a book combining aspects of Dr. Seuss’s 
works with elements from Star Trek; defendants’ work was a “mash-up,” that while 
transformative, could adversely affect potential market for literary mash-ups including Dr. 
Seuss’s works); Paramount Pictures Corp. v. Axanar Prods., Inc., No. 2:15-cv-09938, 2017 WL 83506 
(C.D. Cal. Jan. 3, 2017) (finding “prequel” for Star Trek movie was not fair use); Warner Bros. 
Entm’t Inc. v. RDR Books, 575 F. Supp. 2d 513 (S.D.N.Y. 2008) (finding no fair use where defendant 
sought to publish an “encyclopedia” of details from the Harry Potter series) .  The Acting Register 
concludes that the record lacks sufficient information to evaluate Kirby Ferguson’s multimedia ebook “about the hidden forces that shape our lives” under fair use.  See Authors All. et al. Class 1 
Initial at 17. 

[PAGE 69]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
66 
particularly because the proposed class primarily concerns unedited clips, the Acting 
Register cannot conclude as a categorical matter that the uses likely would be found 
transformative.399  Finally, although proponents maintain that “most” fanfiction e-books 
are noncommercial,400 both proponents and opponents resisted having any proposed 
expansion to fictional e-books limited to noncommercial uses.401  Accordingly, the 
commercial nature of the proposed uses does not aid a finding that the uses are likely 
fair.402  Considering the fourth factor specifically, the Acting Register has previously 
determined that “use of an earlier work or works as the basis for a new work could give 
rise to a concern that the new use might supplant the derivative market for the existing 
work.”403   
It is important to note, however, that inserting a noncommercial remix video into a 
(noncommercial) multimedia e-book— where the remix video itself complies with the 
existing noncommercial video exemption—would merely be using a different medium 
in which to deliver these remix videos.404  The Acting Register finds the exempted use 
for noncommercial videos in the current exemption may thus be sufficiently broad to 
cover this proposed use, assuming all requirements of the existing noncommercial video 
exemption are met. 
After considering the factual record and relevant law, the Acting Register concludes that 
many of the proposed uses of motion picture clips for purposes of criticism or comment 
in nonfiction multimedia e-books beyond those offering film analysis are likely to be a 
fair use, but that the same conclusion does not extend to fictional multimedia e-books. 
                                                      
399 This is in contrast to the existing exemption for noncommercial remix videos, where the videos 
themselves are altered in a transformative manner, and the uses are uniformly noncommercial. 
400 Authors All. et al. Class 1 Reply at 13. 
401 See Tr. at 124:14–125:11 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Lerner, Authors All. & OTW) (stating that adding a 
noncommercial limitation for fiction multimedia e-books would disincentivize creators); Tr. at 
143:22–24 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II) (“there could be all kinds of uses that are 
non-commercial that would still harm . . . and that would still be infringing uses”).  
402 TVEyes, 883 F.3d at 178 (citing Campbell, 510 U.S. at 579, 585) (“The commercial nature of a 
secondary use weighs against a finding of fair use . . . especially when . . . the transformative 
character of the secondary use is modest.”); Harper & Row, Publrs. v. Nation Enters. , 471 U.S. 539, 
562 (1985) (stating that the “fact that a publication [is] commercial as opposed to nonprofit is a 
separate factor that tends to weigh against a finding of fair use”). 
403 2012 Recommendation at 130. 
404 See Authors All. et al. Class 1 Reply at 14; see also Tr. at 104:21–105:15 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Tandy, 
OTW); Tr. at 122:03–08 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Reid, Authors All.). 

[PAGE 70]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
67 
e. Causation 
The Acting Register finds that proponents have met their burden of showing that the 
statutory prohibition on circumvention of access controls limits their ability to engage in 
the proposed uses.  But for the prohibition, users likely could gain lawful access to the 
copyrighted motion pictures for those purposes. 
To be sure, in the case of multimedia e-books specifically, DVD CCA and AACS LA 
contend that technological limitations on file size and digital storage capacity— not 
TPMs—are preventing the creation of multimedia e -books.405  As noted by the Register 
in 2015, however, any “technical limitations of the medium (i.e., maximum file sizes) will 
seemingly limit the uses of the excerpted works to relatively brief segments,”406 but not 
bar the creation of multimedia e-books completely. 
f. Asserted Adverse Effects and Statutory Factors 
i. Universities and K-12 Educational Institutions 
Proponents argue that the statutory factors set forth in section 1201(a)(1) favor the 
expanding the exemption.  But as with their fair use arguments, proponents focus 
mostly on proposed uses under section 110(1) that would allow for the full-length 
performances of motion pictures in face-to-face teaching.  Specifically, proponents assert 
that “instructors and pupils are adversely affected in their ability to make noninfringing 
uses of more than ‘short portions’ of motion pictures under the classroom exemption” 
due to the language of the current exemption.
407   
With respect to first factor, BYU states that “to make noninfringing performances under 
the classroom exception, instructors or pupils must have access to licensed decryption 
and playback devices in the classroom.”
408  Proponents maintain, however, that “fewer 
and fewer classrooms will be equipped with such licensed decryption and playback 
devices”409 because the “unmistakable industry trend” is moving away from DVD and 
Blu-ray discs (and thus optical readers), and towards streaming media and digital 
downloads.410  For example, BYU has decided not to replace licensed decryption and 
                                                      
405 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 25–26; see also Tr. at 189:20, Hearing Ex. 1-B (Apr. 11, 
2018) (DVD CCA) (demonstrating that multimedia e-books created with iBooks Author cannot 
exceed two gigabytes). 
406 2015 Recommendation at 77. 
407 See BYU Class 1 Initial at 3.  
408 Id.  
409 Id. 
410 BYU Class 1 Reply at 7; see also Public Knowledge Class 1 Reply at 2.  

[PAGE 71]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
68 
playback devices as “they age out over the next several years.”411  Proponents contend 
that even if optical readers are available in the marketplace, the cost to purchase “a Bluray player for each classroom is prohibitive and would be an extreme hardship.”412 
Regarding shorter uses of motion pictures, proponents maintain that relying on DVD 
and Blu-ray discs to play motion pictures in a classroom comes with a “social cost” of 
wasted time while the teacher has to “cue up” the motion picture.413  LCA states that 
“having the clip compilation will make it much faster to navigate, as opposed to trying 
to zip back and forth” within a DVD.
414  
Proponents reject screen capture technologies, lower forms of images, and licensed uses 
as viable alternatives to circumvention.  For example, they argue that screen capture, 
because it results in a static recording, does not allow teachers to add subtitles and/or 
commentary to assist with their teaching.415  As noted above, BYU suggests that the 
references to screen-capture technologies in the existing exemption relating to 
educational uses are confusing and sometimes contradictory, and should thus be 
eliminated.
416  BYU suggests that streaming media providers do not offer the “obscure” 
motion pictures needed for classroom use, and streaming services permit only personal 
use (not public performances in educational settings).417  
In response, opponents argue that the basis for proponents’ request is not caused by 
TPMs, but rather by BYU’s own decision to stop supplying its classrooms with optical 
readers.418  Opponents  dispute that optional readers are not available in the 
marketplace, stating that a “quick” marketplace check shows DVD players and Blu-ray 
players available for as low as $29.99 and for $69.99, respectively.419  They note that BYU 
would need to possess at least some players and disc drives to circumvent CSS or AACS 
technology.420  Opponents also observe that because BYU’s decision not to replace 
optical readers will “apparently not be implemented for ‘several years,’” BYU has failed 
                                                      
411 BYU Class 1 Initial at 3–4. 
412 BYU Class 1 Reply at 10–11; see Tr. at 272:20–25 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Hobbs, Media Educ. Lab). 
413 Tr. at 268:04–14, 268:22–269:03 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Midgley, BYU). 
414 Tr. at 252:13–17 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Band, LCA). 
415 Tr. at 253:03–06 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Band, LCA). 
416 BYU Class 1 Initial at 5; see 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1)(iv)–(viii) (2016). 
417 BYU Class 1 Reply at 12; see also Tr. at 303:24–304:01 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Midgley, BYU) (stating 
that movie Moana is not available through Netflix in Tahitian). 
418 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 9 (“[A]ll that is necessary is a DVD or Blu-ray player 
and a television screen. No circumvention is necessary.”); Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 21. 
419 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 12. 
420 Id.; Tr. at 275:02–09 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Turnbull, AACS LA). 

[PAGE 72]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
69 
to identify “a substantial adverse effect that is likely to occur within the next three 
years.”421 
Moreover, opponents maintain that BYU has “failed to establish a record to demonstrate 
there is any content that can only be accessed via discs,”422 and note that a variety of 
ways exist in the marketplace for accessing digital copies, such as redeem codes; digital 
copies available for rental or long-term access; access through Movies Anywhere and 
UltraViolet; streams available through Hulu, Netflix, Amazon Video, YouTube Red; and 
permanent downloads available through Apple iTunes and Google Play.
423 
The Acting Register concludes that the record shows that a limited expansion likely 
would increase the availability of copyrighted works for certain uses of motion picture 
clips.  For example, proponents gave the example of teachers creating compilations of 
clips from foreign language films with and without subtitles.424  Further, as in prior 
rulemakings, the testimony shows a need for educators to compile clips in advance, to 
maximize classroom time and avoid attention lagging when queuing up clips.  The 
record also demonstrates that screen capture may not be an adequate alternative for 
certain educational uses
425 and that modern students use media differently and have 
higher expectations of digital media.426  In addition, the Acting Register notes that 
confusion over whether the exemption applies, if it results in teachers opting not to use 
motion picture clips for educational purposes, may adversely affect teaching and 
education.427  Overall, the first factor supports expanding educational use under the 
exemption.   
                                                      
421 Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 21. 
422 Id. 
423 Id. at 23. 
424 Tr. at 242:10–20, Hearing Ex. 1-E (Apr. 11, 2018) (Midgley, BYU). 
425 See Tr. at 253:03–06 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Band, LCA) (stating that screen capture does not 
reasonably permit teachers to add subtitles and/or commentary to assist with their teaching).  
426 See Tr. at 273:15–20 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Hobbs, New Media Lab) (stating that modern students “are 
using create-to-learn pedagogies, where they’re not just watching, they’re actually remixing and 
creating.  As part of the learning experience, they’re manipulating image, language, and sound”); 
Tr. at 273:09–11 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Hobbs, New Media Lab) (“[T]he expectation is, all of the digital 
resources that we need to use should be at our fingertips.”); Tr. at 286:20–23 (Apr. 11, 2018) 
(Midgley, BYU) (“[O]ne of the goals of this proceeding should be to try to match what’s 
happening on the ground, what the expectations are of modern students and instructors are 
when they arrive on campus.”). 
427 See BYU Class 1 Reply at 2–3 (noting that the language is “needlessly complex and difficult to 
interpret, especially for teachers and educational administrator without formal legal training”); 
Tr. at 220:21–221:05 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Hobbs, Media Educ. Lab) (stating that if teachers do not 

[PAGE 73]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
70 
The conclusion is different regarding the use of full-length motion pictures.  The Acting 
Register agrees that DVD and Blu-ray players are still widely available on the market.  
According to a report cited by proponents, disc sales accounted for $4.7 billion in 2017.428  
Extending the exemption to such uses thus could ultimately decrease the availability of 
motion pictures by undermining the value of the market for works in those formats.  
Regarding proponents’ argument that it would be costly for educational institutions to 
re-purchase digital versions of lawfully acquired physical audiovisual works, as 
previously noted, “the 1201 exemption process is meant to ensure that users have access 
to copyrighted works; it is not meant to guarantee consumers the ability to access 
content through their preferred method or format.”429   
Regarding the availability for use of works for educational purposes, and the impact on 
teaching, scholarship, or research, BYU states that without a more user-friendly 
expansion, teachers will remain confused as to whether an existing exemption applies to 
them, and such uncertainty will deter teachers from using motion picture clips, to the 
detriment of teaching and education.
430  Proponents also state that the existing 
exemption prevents teachers who teach on multiple educational levels from using 
motion pictures in all of their educational efforts, since the exemption distinguishes who 
may circumvent based on level of education.431  Opponents assert that while the existing 
exemption “could benefit from some clarification,” “proponents greatly exaggerate the 
regulations’ complexity.”432 
                                                                                                                                                              
know whether they can circumvent, this will “impact . . . how the next generation of teachers is 
taught how to use audio-visual resources effectively for purposes of teaching and learning”). 
428 BYU Class 1 Reply at 7 (citing Ricardo Lopez, Disc Sales Decline Deepens in Annual Home 
Entertainment Spending Report, VARIETY (Jan. 9, 2018), http://variety.com/2018/digital/news/homeentertainment-spending2017-1202658638/ (citing Digital Entertainment Group, DEG Year End 
2017 Home Entertainment Report (Jan. 8, 2018), https://degonline.org/portfolio_page/deg -year-end-
2017-home-entertainment-report/)). 
429 2015 Recommendation at 124. 
430 See Tr. at 220:21–221:05 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Hobbs, Media Educ. Lab) (stating that if teachers do 
not know whether they can circumvention, this will “impact . . . how the next generation of 
teachers is taught how to use audio-visual resources effectively for purposes of teaching and 
learning”); see also Tr. at 218:02–15 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Band, LCA) (“[T]he existing system is just so 
complicated that a lot of people just kind of throw their hands up into the air . . . the right 
approach is to figure out how do we make it easier for people to comply with the law . . . .”). 
431 Tr. at 220:21–23 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Hobbs, Media Educ. Lab) (stating that it is “very common for a 
high-school teacher, a middle-school teacher, to teach also in a university context”). 
432 Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 8. 

[PAGE 74]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
71 
The Register previously determined that the third factor is a “critical consideration” in 
relation to educational uses.433  Because the proposed uses seek to enable the listed 
statutory purposes, this factor weighs in favor of properly crafted exemption to foster 
such uses. 
Regarding the fourth factor, as noted above, brief, educational uses are unlikely to 
undermine the value of copyright-protected motion pictures.  As also noted above, the 
use of full-length motion pictures, however, would affect the digital motion pictures 
market. 
ii. MOOCs  
Joint Educators maintain that without expanding the exempted use of MOOCs, “there is 
no ability for unaccredited, for-profit, or for-credit online educational offerings to embed 
noninfringing audiovisual works into their courses or modules without licensing from 
the copyright owner.”434  In support, they reference two courses currently developed by 
Professor Decherney at University of Pennsylvania and Professor Abulor at Princeton 
University, and note that they cannot be offered at unaccredited or for-profit 
institutions.435  Joint Educators, Associate Professor Anderson, and Professor 
Aufderheide suggest that “traditional universities offering professional training or 
certificate programs through fee-for-service branches are unsure” whether their 
activities are covered, and such uncertainly “may lead to risk-averse choices that 
compromise potential learning opportunities.”436   
Regarding the second and third statutory factors, Joint Educators assert that expansion 
of the existing exemption “would continue to encourage the innovative, high quality 
online teaching that continues to evolve at a rapid pace.”437  Joint Educators maintain 
that the nonprofit and unaccredited limitations in the existing exemption “decrease 
access to high quality education for students and undermine[] opportunities for 
professors to collaborate and innovate with varied institutions.”438   
Considering the potential effect on the market for copyrighted works, Joint Educators 
maintain:  
                                                      
433 See 2015 Recommendation at 94. 
434 Joint Educators Class 1 Initial at 13. 
435 Id. at 7. 
436 Joint Educators, Anderson & Aufderheide Class 1 Reply at 3. 
437 Joint Educators Class 1 Initial at 6. 
438 Id. at 7. 

[PAGE 75]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
72 
Clips copied from works in this context are to be used exclusively for 
educational purposes, and it is unlikely that those accessing them for 
other purposes would reuse them.  Should it occur, however, reuse of 
short clips would be unlikely to affect the value of the work from which 
the clip was sampled, as the clips are limited in duration and not likely to 
serve as a substitute for the entire work.
439   
As noted above, opponents suggest that proponents have failed to identify any 
unaccredited or for-profit institution wanting, but unable, to offer a MOOC because of 
section 1201.440  Opponents assert that none of the institutions named by proponents as 
allegedly harmed have come forward to “provide evidence that any of its activities is 
harmed by the circumvention prohibition.”441  DVD CCA and AACS LA acknowledge 
proponents’ example of Professor Decherney being unable to offer his MOOC on 
Hollywood to a film society,442 but note that Joint Educators do “not identify a particular 
film society that would actually offer this course if the exemption were modified.”443  
The Acting Register agrees the record does not demonstrate that section 1201 is 
inhibiting the use of motion pictures in online education offered by for-profit and/or 
unaccredited educational institutions.  Indeed, proponents note that online education 
has been growing rapidly notwithstanding the prohibition on circumvention.444  There is 
little to suggest that for-profit or unaccredited institutions wish to offer additional 
content in MOOCs that they are unable to license.445  Further, the two proffered 
examples appear both de minimis and speculative.  The record indicates that Professor 
Abulor has not yet finished creating his MOOC, so questions as to whether he “was to” 
offer his MOOC through a for-profit and/or unaccredited educational institution446 
remain purely hypothetical.  Professor Decherney’s inability to offer his Hollywood 
MOOC as part of a film society website or through another unaccredited or for-profit 
institution is also unpersuasive— it appears he can already offer the class to a “wider 
                                                      
439 Id. at 13. 
440 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 32 (citing Joint Educators Class 1 Initial at 10) (“Joint 
Educators concede they have not proffered any examples of use of a motion picture by any other 
type of MOOC than those offered by accredited nonprofit educational institu tions . . . .”). 
441 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 31. 
442 Joint Educators Class 1 Initial at 10. 
443 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 31. 
444 Joint Educators Class 1 Initial at 5–6. 
445 See Tr. at 290:10–24 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Decherney, Joint Educators) (confirming that Joint 
Educators have not communicated with for-profit and/or unaccredited educational institutions to 
see if they share a need for circumvention to offer MOOCs). 
446 Joint Educators Class 1 Initial at 7. 

[PAGE 76]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
73 
range of learners” by making it “massively” available to the public through the 
University of Pennsylvania’s MOOC, including by linking to this MOOC on the film 
society’s website.447   
Ultimately, just as the 2015 record did not support the inclusion of MOOCs offered by 
for-profit and/or unaccredited institutions, neither does the current record.
448 
iii. Filmmaking  
Proponents state that a majority of motion pictures are currently protected by copyright 
and protected by TPMs and are “thus unavailable to a significant portion of filmmakers 
for criticism and commentary.”
449  They argue that the rise of digitally transmitted video 
therefore makes circumvention of encryption measures necessary to access news clips 
and other high-quality content to meet the requirements of distributors.450   
Proponents dispute that either clips created using non-circumventing screen capture 
technology, or clips obtained via licensing are viable alternatives for the proposed uses.  
They assert that “all screen capture software programs of which we are aware create 
dropped frames and loss of audio sync, among other defects.”451  According to 
proponents, these defects cannot be fixed by the use of film editing software.452  For 
example, dropped frames “cannot be recovered and are often grounds for automatic 
disqualification when submitting films.”453  Allegedly, some users who try to use screen 
capture with Netflix end up with just a black screen rather than any visual content.454   
In addition, proponents contend that screen-capture technology requires significant 
time, resources, and special hardware, and is “not financially feasible for many 
filmmakers,”455 as “[f]ree trials have time limits and a filmmaker cannot be constrained 
                                                      
447 Joint Educators, Anderson & Aufderheide Class 1 Reply at 3. 
448 As noted above, the request to exempt “all online courses” is too vague to support a conclusion 
that the uses are likely noninfringing.  This language also potentially implicates the market or 
value for copyrighted works in ways unanticipated by the current MOOC exemption. 
449 Joint Filmmakers Class 1 Initial at 10.  
450 Id. at 20–21.   
451 Id. at 21; see also Tr. at 8:17–23 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Turk, Univ. of Minn., Morris). 
452 FI, IDA & KEF Class 1 Reply at 10–11 (filmmakers “cannot work with the varying frame rates, 
unpredictability, and inconsistency that screen capture technologies suffer from”).  
453 Id.; see also Tr. at 194:19–21 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Morrissette, FI) (“Filmmakers today have even more 
gatekeepers and high technical requirements from distributors than ever before.”). 
454 Tr. at 18:15–19 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Rosenblatt, OTW). 
455 Joint Filmmakers Class 1 Initial at 21.  

[PAGE 77]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
74 
to make their feature film within a time limit as short as thirty days.”456  Moreover, when 
considering film distribution requirements, filmmakers may be asked to go back and 
obtain the source material if the clips are not high enough quality.457 
Finally, EFF, NMR and OTW note that screen-capture technologies are not a “safe 
harbor,” as copyright owners have asserted section 1201 claims against “technologies 
that appear very similar to those discussed in these proceedings.”458  
As for obtaining authorization, proponents maintain that licensing clips is not a 
reasonable alternative because licenses are too difficult to obtain.459  In addition to 
contesting that a license for critical commentary should or could be obtained given nondisparagement clauses or other denials, proponents dispute the practical feasibility of 
licensing for smaller uses, generally.  EFF, NMR and OTW note that Universal’s clip 
licensing site “clearly states on its front page that it is a ‘business to business’ site,”
460 
seemingly making clip licenses unavailable to individuals.   
Opponents respond that both licensing and screen capture technologies serve as valid 
alternatives to circumvention.  MPAA notes that all six of the motion picture studios it 
represents license motion picture clips, which can be done online, and they can be 
contacted via email or over the phone.461  Opponents also assert that “motion pictures 
are even more broadly available today than they were three years ago for . . . licensing 
uses.”462  MPAA states that the studios license several thousand clips each year, and 
maintains that none its members have a policy against licensing clips to remix artists, ebook authors, fiction and nonfiction filmmakers, and for educational purposes.463  Joint 
Creators II acknowledge, however, that licensing may not always be a feasible 
alternative.
464  Finally, MPAA contends that if the ability to circumvent TPMs protecting 
                                                      
456 FI, IDA & KEF Class 1 Reply at 11; see also EFF, NMR & OTW Class 1 Reply at 5. 
457 Tr. at 26:23–24 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Neill, NMR); see also FI, IDA & KEF Class 1 Reply at 11–12. 
458 EFF, NMR & OTW Class 1 Reply at 6–7.  The Acting Register notes that the case referenced 
does not appear to involve screen capture technology, as it involved a service that converted 
YouTube videos to mp3 (audio) or mp4 (video) files, and allowed users to download them for 
free by copying the URL for the YouTube video into the converter and clicking convert button.  
Complaint at ¶ 1, UMG Recordings v. PMG Technologies, 2:16-cv-07210 (C.D. Cal. Sept. 26, 2016); 
YTMP3 Video Converter, YTMP3, https://ytmp3.cc (last visited Sept. 27, 2018). 
459 Tr. at 137:01–06 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Aufderheide, Am. Univ.). 
460 EFF, NMR & OTW Class 1 Reply at 6. 
461 Tr. at 80:22–81:02 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Sheffner, MPAA). 
462 Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 4. 
463 Tr. at 83:13–14, 87:07–10 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Sheffner, MPAA). 
464 Tr. at 172:07–11 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II) (acknowledging example of 
Universal Studios being refused a license for clip of “1984” Apple computer advertisement, and 

[PAGE 78]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
75 
motion pictures is expanded more and more, the less effective section 1201 becomes in 
protecting copyrighted works, and the less willing movie studios may be to engage in 
new licensing practices.465 
Regarding screen capture, Joint Creators II assert that proponents have “not submitted 
any evidence to demonstrate that screen-capture is no longer a viable alternative.”466  
DVD CCA and AACS LA maintain that screen-capture products “offer a suite of 
features” and “are offered at various price points,” with some being free or having free 
trial periods, such as OBS Studio.467  DVD CCA and AACS LA further assert that 
advances in screen capture technologies “should better serve users of recorded DVD 
playback that complained about picture quality and frame-loss,”468 and that film editing 
software can improve video imaging with “filters or tools that provide you with options 
for cleaning up ‘pixilation’ or ‘mosaic noise.’”469  In addition, they maintain that 
screencasting (i.e., digital recording of computer screen output) can be used to “create 
sophisticated, information-rich multimedia presentations.”470   
The Acting Register concludes that the record indicates that the overall availability of 
copyrighted works will not be lessened with an appropriately tailored expansion.471  The 
current record suggests that licensing of motion picture clips is not always viable.472  As 
in 2015, the content available for clip licensing is far from complete and, in any event, 
such licensing is not practicable in many cases, whether due to difficulties in locating the 
rightsholders, overly lengthy negotiations that preclude planned uses, or denials where 
the would-be licensor disapproves of the noninfringing use.473  In addition, the record 
again supports the conclusion that screen-capture technology is at times inadequate for 
                                                                                                                                                              
stating “I’m not saying that licensing is always a feasible alternative.  Clearly, in that case where 
the license was denied, you can’t say that a license was available to be had.”); see also Tr. at 81:26–
83:01 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Sheffner, MPAA); Tr. at 106:24–107:02 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Lerner, OTW) 
(contesting availability of licenses to smaller users). 
465 Tr. at 92:18–25 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Sheffner, MPAA); see also Tr. at 94:03–22 (Apr. 24, 2018) 
(Sheffner, MPAA) (discussing “normalization” of circumventing TPMs protecting motion 
pictures). 
466 Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 26. 
467 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 38. 
468 Id. 
469 Id. at 39 (citation omitted). 
470 Id. at 37 (citation omitted). 
471 See 2015 Recommendation at 94. 
472 See id. at 84. 
473 Id. 

[PAGE 79]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
76 
the expanded set of filmmaking uses.  While screen-capture or screencasting technology 
has improved, the record generally demonstrates that consumer devices and 
expectations have at the same time increased.   
Joint Filmmakers assert that the proposed expansion would benefit nonprofit archival, 
preservation, and educational purposes, and criticism, comment, news reporting, 
teaching, scholarship, or research because “[f]ilms not traditionally classified as 
‘documentary’ often serve educational purposes and serve an increasingly important 
role in educational and social commentary.”474  Following the reasoning of the 2015 
rulemaking, the Acting Register concludes that because the proposed uses seek to enable 
the listed statutory purposes, these factors weigh in favor of a properly crafted 
exemption to foster such uses.475   
Noting that opponents did not oppose the renewal of the current filmmaking 
exemption,
476 proponents maintain that the record lacks evidence showing negative 
effects on the market for motion pictures, stating that there “has been no effect on sales, 
no link to privacy [sic], no effect on a legitimate licensing market, and certainly no effect 
on public perception of the business model other than to make it seem less untenable.”477  
Proponents also assert that the “rightsholders have no claim on the derivative market for 
criticism of their works because rightsholders are unlikely to desire an additional work 
criticizing the original work, and have no incentive to develop such markets.”478  Rather 
than preventing filmmakers from engaging in fair use in non-documentaries through an 
expanded exemption, proponents suggest that the appropriate remedy for erroneous 
claims of fair use would be to sue for copyright infringement.479  Proponents also 
suggest that advice of counsel and review by media liability insurance underwriters will 
prevent infringing uses of motion picture clips.480   
                                                      
474 Joint Filmmakers Class 1 Initial at 24 (non-documentaries may “serve as teaching tools in the 
classroom because of their portrayal of important historical and contemporary events . . .”); see id. 
(films may “educate the public on important moments in history that would otherwise remain 
relatively obscure”). 
475 See 2015 Recommendation at 94 (“[T]he impact the prohibition on circumvention has on 
criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, and research, is a critical consideration 
in relation to . . . filmmaking . . . offering film criticism . . . .”). 
476 FI, IDA & KEF Class 1 Reply at 5. 
477 Joint Filmmakers Class 1 Initial at 23. 
478 Id. at 25 (citing Campbell, 510 U.S. at 564).  
479 FI, IDA & KEF Class 1 Reply at 6. 
480 Id. at 7. 

[PAGE 80]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
77 
In response, opponents acknowledge that they did not oppose the readoption of the 
existing exemption, but did not do so because they respected the Office’s conclusions, 
not because no harm is taking place.481 
For the same reasons discussed above in reference to the fourth fair use factor, the 
Acting Register finds that expanding the exemption to include the use of short clips for 
parody or to comment upon the clip’s biographical or historical significance is unlikely 
to adversely affect the market for or value of the motion pictures in the proposed class.  
The Acting Register concludes that the use of small portions in contexts involving 
comment or criticism is consistent with principles of fair use and is unlikely to supplant 
the market for motion pictures.  As the Register stated in the 2015 rulemaking, however, 
filmmakers “must be carefully focused on noninfringing uses so as not to undermine 
copyright owners’ ability to license portions of motion pictures and other derivative uses 
outside of the parameters of fair use, including through clip licensing services.”
482  This 
observation is particularly important for this class, where there is an established and 
robust market for licensing of motion picture clips for general storytelling or other 
entertainment uses that would not be covered by the proposed expansion.  The Acting 
Register accordingly finds that restricting the exemption to the use of clips for parody or 
for their biographical or historically significant nature to be an important limitation. 
iv. Multimedia E-Books 
Proponents observe that in 2015 the Register recognized that an exception to circumvent 
DVDs and Blu-ray Discs would not decrease the availability of copyrighted works, and 
maintain that expanding the exemption beyond nonfiction e-books offering film analysis 
likewise will not decrease the availability of copyrighted works.483  Proponents assert 
that without the requested expansion, multimedia e-book authors will be prevented 
from obtaining material intended for lawful use because the protected motion pictures 
are not available in formats without TPMs.484   
Proponents also maintain that sufficient alternatives to circumvention, such as screen 
capture and licensing, do not exist.485  Similar to arguments against screen capture in the 
context of filmmaking, proponents assert that screen capture results in “dropped frames, 
frame rate issues, insufficient resolution, and artifacting,” rendering “the resulting 
images unusable to use for criticism and commentary.”
486  They claim that “licensing 
                                                      
481 Tr. at 162:05–11 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II). 
482 2015 Recommendation at 95. 
483 Authors All. et al. Class 1 Initial at 26 (citing 2015 Recommendation at 93–94). 
484 Id. at 25, 27. 
485 Id. at 27. 
486 Id. at 24, 28. 

[PAGE 81]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
78 
[motion picture clips] is not a viable alternative due to exorbitant fees, difficulties in 
locating the rightsholders[,] and the delays caused by protracted negotiations.”487   
In response, opponents assert that “[e]ven if . . . TPMs are causing harm to the ability to 
use motion pictures in multimedia e-books, there is insufficient evidence of such harm” 
because the harm must be “‘distinct, verifiable’ and measurable,” and based on more 
than de minimis impacts.488  Opponents also observe that the proffered prospective ebook uses from the 2015 rulemaking, such as the book proposed by Bobette Buster, still 
have not been made.
489  Finally, opponents suggest that proponents’ expectation to 
obtain a license within one business day may be unreasonable.490 
For similar reasons as with the filmmaking exemption, the Acting Register concludes 
that expanding the exemption for nonfiction e-books beyond those offering film analysis 
is unlikely to harm, and may increase, the availability of copyrighted works.  The record 
indicates that, in many cases, neither screen capture technology nor the licensing of 
motion picture clips are viable alternatives for the uses proposed for criticism and 
comment.491  As noted above, while screen-capture technology has improved, the record 
generally demonstrates that consumer devices and expectations have at the same time 
increased.  Similarly, as many of the nonfiction examples seemingly involve pointed 
commentary on specific portrayals in television shows or movies, it is not clear that 
these transformative uses need to be licensed, or that licenses even could be obtained. 
Considering the second and third statutory factors, Authors Alliance et al. state that 
“[m]ultimedia e-books have the ability to provide great educational value to classroom 
settings,” noting that many “are created specifically as a teaching tool and . . . can be 
used as a reference and resource, similar to their paper counterparts.”
492  Authors 
Alliance et al. also point to the example of the multimedia e-book Digital Dubliners as an 
example showing that the use of video clips in an e-book can “enhance” the study of 
literature or history.493  They admit that fictional multimedia e-books “offer a lesser 
degree of educational value but still spur the imagination and promote creativity when 
used in the classroom”; they accordingly suggest that the second factor “should be 
                                                      
487 Id. at 4–5; see also Tr. at 114:10–16 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Tandy, OTW) (regarding delay in licensing 
negotiations). 
488 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 27, 29 (citing Commerce Comm. Report at 37). 
489 Id. at 27.  Mr. Lerner, representing Authors Alliance, testified that Bobette Buster is still 
working on the multimedia e-book she proposed creating during the 2015 rulemaking.  Tr. at 
209:07–11 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Lerner, Authors All. & OTW). 
490 Tr. at 116:04–07 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II). 
491 2015 Recommendation at 84. 
492 Authors All. et al. Class 1 Initial at 28. 
493 Authors All. et al. Class 1 Reply at 16. 

[PAGE 82]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
79 
found neutral to favorable in regard to the proposed modification.”494  Finally, they 
observe that in past rulemakings, the Register found the third factor to be “a critical 
consideration” for the existing multimedia e-book exemption, as it seeks to enable 
criticism, comment, teaching and/or scholarship.495  Therefore, they argue, this factor 
weighs “strongly in favor of appropriately tailored exemptions to foster such uses.”496   
The Acting Register concludes that these factors weigh in favor of an expansion for 
nonfiction multimedia e-books more generally because the proposed uses will facilitate 
criticism, comment, teaching and/or scholarship, including as incorporated into 
educational pedagogy.  But the same logic does not hold for fanfiction or other fictional 
e-books, which the record suggests are typically consumed for entertainment value.497  
The second and third statutory factors therefore do not favor an exemption covering 
such works. 
Finally, proponents argue that expansion will not negatively impact the market for or 
value of copyrighted works because the inclusion of clips for purposes of comment or 
criticism are “transformative uses” of the original work that will not serve as a “market 
substitution.”498  Proponents maintain that fanfiction works are intended to “offer a new 
perspective on popular narratives.”499  Because it would be necessary to understand the 
underlying work before reading the fanfiction work, Authors Alliance et al. state that “it 
is extremely unlikely that consumers will buy less of the original work because 
fanfiction of it exists.”
500   
In response, opponents maintain that expanding the existing exemption to fictional ebooks would “harm the creation of a market to license clips of motion pictures to 
multimedia e-book creators,”501 and that creating fanfiction multimedia e-books “would 
frequently infringe the right to prepare derivative works.”502   
For nonfiction proposed uses, the Acting Register concludes that the brevity and nature 
of the proposed uses favor an expansion because they are unlikely to substitute for the 
                                                      
494 Authors All. et al. Class 1 Initial at 29. 
495 Id. (citing 2015 Recommendation at 94; 2012 Recommendation at 136). 
496 Id. 
497 Authors Alliance et al. speculate that future classrooms may study fan-fictional multimedia ebooks; while this case may be, it does not support a general conclusion that these factors favor an 
exemption for fan-fiction uses.  See id. at 26.  
498 Id. at 30; see Campbell, 510 U.S. at 592–94.  
499 Authors All. et al. Class 1 Reply at 13. 
500 Id. 
501 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 30. 
502 Joint Creators II Class 1 Opp’n at 15. 

[PAGE 83]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
80 
original work.  Regarding the proposed fictional uses, however, because the examples in 
the record appear likely to use an earlier work or works as the basis for a new work—
which might supplant the derivative market for the existing work503— the uses could 
substitute for the emerging market for clip licensing in multimedia e-books.504  
Therefore, the fourth statutory factor weighs against an exemption for those works. 
Based on the foregoing, the Acting Register concludes that proponents have 
demonstrated that the prohibition on circumvention is causing an adverse effect on their 
ability to make noninfringing uses of motion picture clips in nonfiction multi-media ebooks beyond those offering film analysis.  The Acting Register does not reach such a 
conclusion with respect to fictional e-books. 
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA recommends renewing the current exemption covering educational and derivative 
uses, and expanding those exempted uses in several respects.  Regarding the proposal of 
a single, overarching exemption for purposes of criticism and comment, NTIA rejects the 
elimination of all limitations on the types of users or uses because “eliminating all of the 
categories of specific users . . . would stray too far from the statutory requirement of 
specificity.”
505 
NTIA does recommend, however, consolidation of exempted educational uses by 
college and university faculty and students, K-12 educators, K-12 students, and 
educators and participants in nonprofit digital and media literacy programs.506  NTIA 
asserts that “distinction[s] among educational uses in the regulations ha[ve] no basis in 
the Copyright Act,”507 and that an “educator’s needs are the same and the students’ 
needs are the same no matter the level of education.”508  NTIA proposes that the 
exempted educational uses be expanded to include “teaching” in addition to criticism 
and comment, in alignment with section 107.509  Although NTIA acknowledges that “no 
petitioner requested specifically to modify the exemption for digital and media literacy 
educational programs,” it nevertheless suggests that the expanded educational uses 
                                                      
503 2012 Recommendation at 130. 
504 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 30. 
505 Letter from David J. Redl, Assistant Sec’y for Commc’ns & Info. & Adm’r, Nat’l Telecomms. & 
Info. Admin., U.S. Dep’t of Commerce, to Karyn A. Temple, Acting Register of Copyrights and 
Dir., U.S. Copyright Office, at 10 (Sept. 25, 2018) (“NTIA Letter”). 
506 Id. 
507 Id. 
508 Id. at 11. 
509 Id. at 9. 

[PAGE 84]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
81 
should include these programs.510  As noted below, the Acting Register cannot 
recommend expanding the exemption beyond examples supported by the legal or 
factual record. 
With respect to BYU’s proposed educational uses, NTIA recommends allowing 
circumvention for colleges and universities to make use of entire motion pictures.511  It 
contends that that the “primary reason for universities to [circumvent TPMs on motion 
pictures] is to be able to continue to play motion pictures in the classroom as universities 
face the ramifications of obsolescence and discontinued use of optical drives.”512  In 
NTIA’s view, the storage of a copy “in a central secured server available only for 
transmission to the institution’s classrooms,” is “not fundamentally different from the 
uses allowed by the existing exemption” for purposes of the fair use analysis.513  As 
support, it relies on the HathiTrust and Google Books decisions, describing those cases as 
holding “that it might be necessary to copy the entire copyrighted work, such as to 
enable full-text searches of books.”
514  NTIA urges the Office to “consider the TEACH 
Act as a guide when determining the parameters of this proposed exemption” and to 
incorporate various conditions— for example, that circumvention be supervised by 
university intellectual property rights offices or general counsel, that copies are stored 
on a closed university secured central server, and that the institution use industry 
licenses if available.515  
The Acting Register cannot agree with this analysis of copyright law.  As discussed 
above, the use of “short portions” of motion pictures presents significantly different 
issues under the fair use inquiry than does the use of such works in their entirety.  
Indeed, the cases cited by proponents and NTIA carefully distinguish the copying of 
whole works from performing or displaying those works.  Both HathiTrust and Google 
Books emphasized that the digital copies at issue did not effectively substitute for the 
originals because the search functions displayed either none of the books’ text or only 
small snippets.
516  BYU’s proposed uses are not so limited.  Further, the relevance of the 
                                                      
510 Id. at 11. 
511 Id. at 17. 
512 Id. at 18. 
513 Id. at 18, 24. 
514 Id. at 20. 
515 Id. at 22–23. 
516 Google Books, 804 F.3d at 224 (finding that even though the search function allowed the user to 
view “snippets” of the book in which the search term appears in the book, it did not effectively 
substitute for the original works because viewers were seeing such a small portion of the book); 
HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 100 (finding that a full-text search function did not serve as a substitute for 
the original books because the search results did not display any text from the underlying 
works). 

[PAGE 85]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
82 
TEACH Act to those uses is slight given that it applies only to reasonable and limited 
portions of motion pictures, is limited to distance learning, and does not permit the 
copying of full-length works.   
Regarding the proposed expansion for MOOCs, NTIA recommends expansion to forprofit educational institutions,517 but not to unaccredited educational institutions.518  It 
concludes that “there is sufficient evidence in the record to expand the exemption 
beyond non-profit educational institutions—the record shows examples of legitimate 
educational uses by accredited for-profit educational institutions.”519  In the Acting 
Register’s view, however, such evidence is inadequate, as there is no suggestion that forprofit institutions wish to offer additional content that they are unable to license.520 
As to multimedia e-books, NTIA proposes expanding the exempted use to include all 
nonfiction multimedia e-books (i.e., eliminating the “offering film analysis” limitation), 
but rejects expansion to fictional multimedia e-books.521  NTIA also addresses the scope 
of the exemption, stating that “the petitioner described media that would, if the petition 
[were] granted, appear to broaden the definition of e-book beyond what is the common 
understanding of this term.”522  In its view, proponents “appear to contend that the 
Copyright Office could consider a website or a blog to be an e-book.”523  NTIA expresses 
concern that this proposal “could allow essentially all authors of websites to circumvent 
TPMs to insert short audiovisual clips into their sites.”524  The Acting Register, however, 
does not understand proponents to necessarily be requesting an expansion of the 
definition of “multimedia e-book.”  Rather, the Acting Register understands proponents’ 
comments as seeking to clarify whether inserting a noncommercial remix video into a 
(noncommercial) multimedia e-book format (e.g., Kindle) would be covered by the 
existing exemption, assuming the remix video itself complies with the existing 
noncommercial video exemption.525  As noted above, the Acting Register finds that the 
                                                      
517 NTIA Letter at 25–26. 
518 Id. at 26. 
519 Id. at 25–26. 
520 See Tr. at 290:10–24 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Decherney, Joint Educators) (confirming that Joint 
Educators have not communicated with for-profit and/or unaccredited educational institutions to 
see if they share a need for circumvention to offer MOOCs). 
521 NTIA Letter at 12–13. 
522 Id. at 11. 
523 NTIA Letter at 13. 
524 Id. 
525 See Authors All. et al. Class 1 Reply at 14; see also Tr. at 104:21–105:15 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Tandy, 
OTW); Tr. at 122:03–08 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Reid, Authors All.). 

[PAGE 86]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
83 
exempted use for noncommercial videos in the current exemption may be broad enough 
to cover such use, provided the existing noncommercial video exemption is satisfied. 
Concerning the proposed filmmaking expansion, NTIA contends that the existing 
exemption should be expanded to all films (i.e., by removing the “documentary” 
limitation).  NTIA maintains that the record supports a finding that in many instances 
the use of short portions of motion pictures is likely a noninfringing fair use.526  
Specifically, NTIA states that “[n]on-documentary filmmakers could take material from 
the original work and transform it to add new expression or meaning,”527 and concludes 
that opponents have failed to demonstrate the expansion to non-documentaries would 
cause market harm.528  As noted, however, the Acting Register finds that the record does 
not support expansion to all films generally.  While proponents provided multiple 
examples of non-documentaries using short motion picture clips to provide criticism or 
commentary, those examples generally involve situations where the use is for parody or 
for the clip’s biographical or historical significance.  Moreover, NTIA acknowledges that 
there remains an active clip licensing market, generally, and the Acting Register 
concludes it is prudent to tailor the recommended exemption accordingly to better 
reflect the record and avoid disrupting the legitimacy of this market.  
Finally, as a general matter, NTIA recommends removing all references to screen 
capture, maintaining that they are “confusing and contradictory.”529  The Acting Register 
believes, however, that expressly permitting the use of screen-capture technology is 
useful to users who may be uncertain as to whether such use involves circumvention— a 
question on which NTIA does not take a position.530  As discussed below, the Acting 
Register does recommend eliminating the current exemption’s additional requirement 
that a user “reasonably believes that screen-capture software or other non-circumventing 
alternatives are unable to produce the required level of high-quality content,” in favor of 
language suggested by EFF/NMR/OTW, which simply requires that the user reasonably 
believe that “non-circumventing alternatives” are unable to produce such content.531  
Overall, the Acting Register generally agrees with NTIA that the existing exemption for 
uses of motion picture excerpts should be expanded in certain respects, though not as 
broadly as NTIA proposes, largely due to the limitations of the record. 
                                                      
526 NTIA Letter at 14–15. 
527 Id. at 15. 
528 Id. at 16. 
529 Id. at 28. 
530 Id. 
531 EFF, NMR & OTW Class 1 Initial at 1. 

[PAGE 87]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
84 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
As detailed above, proponents seeking expansions for filmmaking, multimedia e-books, 
and certain educational uses have demonstrated that various technological measures 
interfere with their ability to make additional desired uses of motion pictures and that a 
number of those uses are likely noninfringing.  The Acting Register thus recommends 
that the current exemption be expanded in certain limited ways to reflect this additional 
record.  
But first, a few general observations.  A number of commenters urged that the 
exemption be simplified to be more accessible for users.  The Acting Register generally 
agrees, and has adopted suggestions to condense regulatory language where possible.  
As noted, the Acting Register declines to recommend a single, overarching exemption, 
finding the descriptions of intended users or uses useful in establishing the evidentiary 
basis to recommend an exemption.
532  The recommended language does, however, 
restructure the exemption components in a manner intended to be more reader-friendly.  
Specifically, it provides prefatory language setting forth generally applicable 
requirements and then groups the various provisions into two subcategories addressing 
(1) criticism and comment and (2) educational uses.  The end result is language that 
totals 435 words, compared to 958 words in the 2015 exemption. 
In addition, in the provisions addressing criticism and comment, and those addressing 
uses by educators and students in college, university, and K-12 institutions, the 
exemption maintains the requirement that users consider non-circumventing 
alternatives.  It does so by incorporating EFF/NMR/OTW’s suggested phrase, “where the 
person engaging in circumvention reasonably believes that non-circumventing 
alternatives are unable to produce the required level of high-quality content.”533  The 
Acting Register finds it appropriate to continue to distinguish between purposes 
requiring high-quality motion picture clips and more general purposes that do not.  The 
evidence again demonstrates that non-circumventing alternatives can serve as an 
adequate substitute to circumvention in certain cases for criticism, commentary, or other 
pedagogical uses, but not in others.
534  The Acting Register believes that a requirement 
                                                      
532 The Register also declines to remove the reference to the specific TPMs, a suggestion 
EFF/NMR/OTW made in its reply comment, a change from its initially-proposed language.  See 
EFF, NMR & OTW Class 1 Reply at 12.  Indeed, the rulemaking focuses on the effect of specific 
technological measures.  See, e.g., Commerce Comm. Report at 38; House Manager’s Report at 6 
(stating that “the rulemaking proceedings should consider the positive as well as the adverse 
effects of these technologies on the availability of copyrighted materials”). 
533 EFF, NMR & OTW Class 1 Initial at 1. 
534 See, e.g., Tr. at 242:06–07 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Hobbs, Media Educ. Lab) (noting that screen capture 
may be an alternative to circumvention for educational purposes in the Alone in the Wilderness 
project); Tr. at 37:18–22 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Rosenblatt, OTW) (“So, for multimedia e-books, I think it 

[PAGE 88]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
85 
that users consider whether it is really necessary to engage in circumvention before 
doing so is consistent with the aims of the rulemaking.535 
Second, for all categories of uses, the regulatory text expressly permits the use of screencapture technology.  The Acting Register recommends retaining a screen-capture 
provision to address the possibility that use of this technology could be deemed to 
involve circumvention.  Inclusion of this provision can give a user comfort that if he or 
she uses technology that was marketed as a non-circumventing screen-capture tool, then 
the user can use the technology without fear of violating section 1201 regardless of its 
actual technological operation.536  Indeed, the parties expressed uncertainty during the 
hearing if screen-capture technologies circumvent or not.537   
Third, opponents suggest the exemption should include a digital rights management 
requirement to reduce the likelihood of downstream piracy.538  With the exception of the 
existing MOOCs language, which expressly imports a digital rights management 
requirement and other requirements from section 110(2), the Acting Register declines to 
add this limitation to the existing exemption, and notes that there has been no evidence 
introduced suggesting that exempted users do not take adequate precautions to reduce 
the likelihood of downstream piracy to avoid liability.  
Turning to the proposed expansions for educational uses, the Acting Register 
recommends an expansion that recognizes the needs for K-12 and university faculty and 
students to engage with motion picture excerpts of high quality.  Proponents have 
introduced multiple examples of uses for commentary and criticism beyond film studies 
or other courses requiring close analysis of excerpts, as well as for teaching or 
scholarship more generally.  These latter uses included, for example, teachers’ use of 
short film clips to create compilations from foreign language films with and without 
subtitles,
539 and students captioning motion pictures to strengthen listening 
comprehension and writing skills.540  While the Acting Register makes no judgment as to 
whether any particular uses of short motion picture clips are in fact fair, the record 
                                                                                                                                                              
depends entirely on what you are doing.  There are probably some uses for which screen capture 
is absolutely adequate.  And there are some for which it is not.”). 
535 See Commerce Comm. Report at 35–36. 
536 See Tr. at 200:18–24 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II). 
537 See Tr. at 199:12–16 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Reid, Authors All.); Tr. at 18:07–09 (Apr. 24, 2018) 
(Rosenblatt, OTW) (“In response to the question that does screen capture require or involve 
circumvention of technological protection measures, nobody knows.”). 
538 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 30. 
539 Tr. at 242:17–23, Hearing Ex. 1-E (Apr. 11, 2018) (Midgley, BYU). 
540 Media Educ. Lab Class 1 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2 (June 10, 2018). 

[PAGE 89]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
86 
demonstrates that many of the uses suggested by proponents appear likely to be 
noninfringing and warrant expansion of the existing exemption.  The same conclusion 
cannot be made as to the contemplated uses of full-length motion pictures, and thus the 
Register recommends against expansion to the use of full-length motion pictures. 
Further, while participants continue to acknowledge that many of these uses can be 
made without circumvention,541 the record also indicates that as high-quality video 
permeates daily life, for a variety of uses, it is increasingly important for these users to 
incorporate high-quality clips to effectively achieve their pedagogical ends.542  
Accordingly, while the recommended exemption retains the requirement that a person 
must reasonably believe that non-circumventing alternatives are unworkable, the 
recommended language removes the references to “film studies or other courses 
requiring close analysis” and eliminates distinctions between K-12 and universities and 
colleges, as well as between faculty and students.  The Acting Register recommends, 
however, that the exemption require K-12 students to act under the direct supervision of 
K-12 educators.  Finally, the Acting Register observes that the recommended language 
relating to college and university faculty and students, and kindergarten through 
twelfth-grade educators appears broad enough to encompass exempted uses under 
sections 110(1) and 110(2) (i.e., face-to-face and distance teaching).  While the Acting 
Register determines that specific references to section 110(1) and 110(2) are not 
necessary, BYU and other educational users should have comfort that the proposed 
language encompasses uses permitted under sections 110(1) and 110(2), subject to the 
short portions limitation. 
In evaluating the proposed MOOCs expansions, the Register finds that the record lacks 
support to expand the existing exemption to for-profit and/or unaccredited educational 
institutions.  Moreover, proponents’ broadly framed proposal seeking to encompass “all 
online courses” would seemingly encompass any online video that could be 
characterized as an educational experience.  The Register therefore recommends that the 
MOOCs language from the existing exemption be adopted without substantive changes.   
Regarding circumvention currently permitted by educators and participants in nonprofit 
digital and media literacy programs offered by libraries, museums, and other nonprofit 
entities with an educational mission, the record lacks any evidence warranting 
expansion (and indeed it appears that parties did not directly provide comments 
                                                      
541 Tr. at 242:06–07 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Hobbs, Media Educ. Lab); see also 2015 Recommendation at 
101. 
542 See, e.g., Authors All., Joint Educators, LCA & OTW Class 1 Post-Hearing Resp.; EFF, NMR & 
OTW Class 1 Reply at 7–10; Media Educ. Lab Class 1 Post-Hearing Resp.; see also BYU Class 1 
Post-Hearing Resp. (detailing examples where screen-capture technology is unworkable). 

[PAGE 90]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
87 
regarding this use).  The Register therefore recommends that the existing language for 
this use be adopted without substantive changes.   
As to the proposal to expand the filmmaking exemption beyond documentaries, based 
on the extensive record, the Register recommends that the existing exemption for 
documentary films be expanded to include a subset of fictional (e.g., narrative) films.  
The Acting Register finds that the desire to engage in criticism or commentary is a 
critical factor in recommending to expand the existing exemption.543  In considering the 
expanded examples of non-documentary films, the Acting Register concludes that the 
record supports a finding that the use of motion picture clips in non-documentary films 
for purposes of criticism and comment, where the clip is used for parody or its 
biographical or historically significant nature, is likely to be noninfringing.  As the 2015 
Recommendation acknowledged, some fictional filmmaking may offer criticism and 
commentary through parody or “present information and commentary meant to educate 
and analyze real events,” and this expansion is intended to encompass such uses.
544  As 
Joint Filmmakers acknowledge, the existing exemption is limited to criticism and 
comment, which is narrower than fair use generally;545 the expanded exemption retains 
this important limitation.  Moreover, the Acting Register notes that uses deemed to be 
more than “short portions” would not be subject to the exemption and would need to be 
licensed.  In addition, should evidence emerge that the expanded exemption has 
resulted in abuse, the expansion can be reconsidered in the next rulemaking. 
Finally, concerning the proposed multimedia e-books expansion, the record contains no 
evidence of proposed uses in fictional e-books that appear likely to be noninfringing, 
and the Acting Register therefore sees no reason to expand the exemption to fictional ebooks.  The record does, however, support expansion to nonfiction multimedia e-books 
beyond film analysis.  The Acting Register finds that the desire to engage in criticism or 
commentary is a critical factor in deciding to expand the existing exemption to 
nonfiction multimedia e-books beyond film analysis.546 
Accordingly, the Register recommends that the following classes of works be exempt 
from the prohibition on circumvention for the next three years: 
Motion pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in 
17 U.S.C. 101, where the motion picture is lawfully made and acquired 
                                                      
543 See 2015 Recommendation at 100. 
544 Id. at 79 (citing 2015 Joint Filmmakers Supp. at 5). 
545 Tr. 93:24–94:01 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Donaldson, Joint Filmmakers) (“The exemption is much 
narrower than the fair use exemption as described by the courts.  And that is the exemption we 
have to live with.”). 
546 See 2015 Recommendation at 100. 

[PAGE 91]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
88 
on a DVD protected by the Content Scramble System, on a Blu-ray disc 
protected by the Advanced Access Content System, or via a digital 
transmission protected by a technological measure, and the person 
engaging in circumvention under paragraph (b)(1)(i) and (b)(1)(ii)(A) 
and (B) of this section reasonably believes that non-circumventing 
alternatives are unable to produce the required level of high-quality 
content, or the circumvention is undertaken using screen-capture 
technology that appears to be offered to the public as enabling the 
reproduction of motion pictures after content has been lawfully 
acquired and decrypted, where circumvention is undertaken solely in 
order to make use of short portions of the motion pictures in the 
following instances:  
(i) For the purpose of criticism or comment:  
(A) For use in documentary filmmaking, or other films where 
the motion picture clip is used in parody or for its biographical 
or historically significant nature;  
(B) For use in noncommercial videos (including videos 
produced for a paid commission if the commissioning entity’s 
use is noncommercial); or 
(C) For use in nonfiction multimedia e-books. 
(ii) For educational purposes:  
(A) By college and university faculty and students or 
kindergarten through twelfth-grade (K-12) educators and 
students (where the K-12 student is circumventing under the 
direct supervision of an educator), including of accredited 
general educational development (GED) programs, for the 
purpose of criticism, comment, teaching, or scholarship;  
(B) By faculty of massive open online courses (MOOCs) offered 
by accredited nonprofit educational institutions to officially 
enrolled students through online platforms (which platforms 
themselves may be operated for profit), in film studies or other 
courses requiring close analysis of film and media excerpts, for 
the purpose of criticism or comment, where the MOOC provider 
through the online platform limits transmissions to the extent 
technologically feasible to such officially enrolled students, 
institutes copyright policies and provides copyright 

[PAGE 92]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
89 
informational materials to faculty, students, and relevant staff 
members, and applies technological measures that reasonably 
prevent unauthorized further dissemination of a work in 
accessible form to others or retention of the work for longer 
than the course session by recipients of a transmission through 
the platform, as contemplated by 17 U.S.C. 110(2); or 
(C) By educators and participants in nonprofit digital and media 
literacy programs offered by libraries, museums, and other 
nonprofit entities with an educational mission, in the course of 
face-to-face instructional activities, for the purpose of criticism 
or comment, except that such users may only circumvent using 
screen-capture technology that appears to be offered to the 
public as enabling the reproduction of motion pictures after 
content has been lawfully acquired and decrypted. 
B. Proposed Class 2: Audiovisual Works—Accessibility  
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption 
Proposed Class 2 would allow circumvention of technological measures protecting 
motion pictures for disability services professionals at educational institutions to create 
accessible versions of motion pictures for students with disabilities.547  The Association 
of Transcribers and Speech-to-Text Providers ( “AT S P ” ), Association of Research 
Libraries, American Library Association, American Library Association Video Round 
Table, Association of College and Research Libraries, and Association on Higher 
Education and Disability (collectively, “ ATSP et al.”) submitted a petition seeking this 
exemption so that disability services professionals can “fulfill their legal and ethical 
obligations to make digital works accessible for students with disabilities . . . without 
uncertainty about the intersection of their activities and [s]ection 1201.”
548  
Specifically, proponents request an exemption to permit:  
disability services offices, organizations that support people with 
disabilities, libraries, and other units at educational institutions that are 
responsible for fulfilling those institutions’ legal and ethical obligations to 
make works accessible to people with disabilities to circumvent 
technological protection measures for motion pictures (including 
                                                      
547 ATSP et al. Class 2 Initial at 2, 5–6. 
548 Id. at 2.   

[PAGE 93]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
90 
television shows and videos), where circumvention is undertaken for the 
purpose of making a motion picture accessible to people with disabilities, 
including through the provision of closed and open captions and audio 
description.549   
“Captioning” is “the process of converting the audio content” of audiovisual material, 
such as a motion picture, “into text and displaying the text on a screen, monitor, or other 
visual display system.”550  Captioning “not only display[s] words as the textual 
equivalent of spoken dialogue or narration, but . . . also include[s] speaker identification, 
sound effects, and music description.”551  By contrast, “audio description” is a narration 
added to the soundtrack of audiovisual material, such as a motion picture, to describe 
significant visual details (e.g., descriptions of new scenes, settings, costumes, body 
language) for individuals with sight impairments.552 
Proponents’ comments include testimony from multiple disability service 
professionals.553  In addition, FSF submitted brief comments in support of ATSP et al.’s 
petition.554  Class 2 was opposed by DVD CCA and AACS LA and Joint Creators I.555 
b. Overview of Issues 
Proponents explain that “nearly all educational institutions” are subject to disability 
laws such as the Americans with Disabilities Act (“ADA”), section 504 of the 
Rehabilitation Act (“Section 504”), and the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act 
(“IDEA”), which require educational institutions to “foster a learning environment that 
accommodates students with disabilities.”
556  Proponents maintain that accommodating 
students with disabilities often means providing accessible versions of motion pictures 
                                                      
549 ATSP et al. Class 2 Pet. at 3. 
550 What is Captioning?, National Ass’n of the Deaf, https://www.nad.org/resources/technology/
captioning-for-access/what-is-captioning/ (last visited Sept. 27, 2018).   
551 Id.  “Closed captions” are “visible only when selected and activated,” whereas “open captions” 
“cannot be selected or activated, such as when they are permanently embedded in the 
audiovisual material.”  Id. 
552 The Audio Description Project, AM. COUNCIL OF THE BLIND, http://www.acb.org/adp/ad.html (last 
visited Sept. 27, 2018).  Audio description may also be referred to as “video description” or 
“descriptive narration.”  Id. 
553 ATSP et al. Class 2 Initial at 17–19 (appendix containing testimonials of unidentified disability 
service professionals). 
554 FSF Class 2 Initial at 2 (stating that “all users have a legitimate right to circumvent controls on 
audiovisual works, regardless of the medium or the particular use involved”). 
555 Joint Creators I Class 2 Opp’n at 3–21; DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 2 Opp’n at 2–6. 
556 ATSP et al. Class 2 Initial at 8.  

[PAGE 94]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
91 
available to other students.557  Indeed, as ATSP et al. note, the Department of Justice 
(“DOJ”) “has the authority to censure and initiate legal action against educational 
institutions where disability service professionals decline or are unable to make content 
accessible to people with disabilities.”558   
Proponents observe that nearly 48 million Americans are deaf or hard of hearing, and 
approximately 77,000 students with hearing disabilities require support from disability 
services offices.559  They also note that nearly 24 million Americans are blind, visually 
impaired, or print-disabled, and that more than 60,000 students with visual disabilities 
require assistance from disability services offices.560  According to proponents, disability 
services offices can receive “daily” requests,561 adding up to “hundreds per semester,” to 
reconfigure videos into accessible formats, generally by adding captions or audio 
description.562   
Proponents maintain that creating accessible versions is necessary because inaccessible 
motion pictures remain prevalent in the video industry and that copyright owners fail to 
retroactively make motion pictures accessible or grant permission to disability services 
offices to make those works accessible, even when contacted directly.
563  In addition, 
proponents assert that it is “unrealistic and unduly costly” to expect disability service 
professionals to search for new and accessible versions of motion pictures, and that it 
would be “wholly inconsistent with the principles established in the ADA to mitigate 
the costs associated with retroactively making content accessible.”564 
Opponents Joint Creators I “understand that accessibility is an important issue,” and 
note that, since 2011, “nearly all” digital releases by MPAA members have been 
captioned and audio described, but believe the proposed class is “far too broad.”565  
Similarly, DVD CCA and AACS LA state that they are “open to a reasonable exemption 
that facilitates the proposed activities in circumstances where the market has not yet 
                                                      
557 Id. at 9.   
558 ATSP et al. Class 2 Reply at 10 (citing Letter from Rebecca B. Bond, Chief, Disability Rights 
Section, Department of Justice, to Nicholas B. Dirks, Chancellor, Univ. of Cal. Berkeley 10 (Aug. 
20, 2016), https://www.ada.gov/       briefs/uc_berkley_lof.pdf). 
559 ATSP et al. Class 2 Initial at 3. 
560 Id. at 4. 
561 Id. at 3. 
562 Id. at 5, 7, 17 (testimony of unidentified West Virginia University disability services 
professional). 
563 Id. at 12. 
564 ATSP et al. Class 2 Reply at 10. 
565 Joint Creators I Class 2 Opp’n at 3. 

[PAGE 95]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
92 
provided accessibility.”566  They maintain, however, that the proposed exemption is 
overbroad because it does not take into account “the extent to which DVDs and [Blu-Ray 
discs] already include closed captions and audio description.”567 
Specifically, Joint Creators I suggest the proposed exemption is overbroad because 
“petitioners do not explain precisely the conduct in which they seek to engage,” raising 
questions regarding, inter alia, the initial acquisition of the works, and how the accessible 
versions of works would be distributed or protected.568  They analogize to the 2012 
rulemaking, where the Register recommended, and the Librarian granted, an exemption 
for conducting research and development for the purpose of creating players capable of 
making motion pictures accessible through audio or visual captioning.
569  At the same 
time, however, the Register concluded that there was insufficient factual information 
regarding the proposed uses and technology to recommend a broader exemption for 
captioning or audio descriptions, generally.
570 
While some of these potential ambiguities raised by Joint Creators I are discussed 
further below, overall, the Acting Register finds that proponents have sufficiently 
described the proposed exemption.  The record is more robust than in 2012, and the 
request is limited to circumvention by personnel at educational institutions.  Proponents 
assert that to create accessible versions of motion pictures, disability services 
professionals at such institutions must circumvent technological measures protecting 
motion pictures on DVDs, Blu-Ray discs, or via digital transmissions to add captions 
and/or audio description.
571  Specifically, for captioning, a disability services professional 
first manually creates a transcript of the motion picture, including speaker identification 
and sound effects.572  The disability services professional would then circumvent the 
technological measure protecting the motion picture, compress the work into an MP4 or 
similar format, and import the file into a captioning program such as MovieCaptioner.573  
                                                      
566 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 2 Opp’n at 2. 
567 Id. 
568 Joint Creators I Class 2 Opp’n at 10. 
569 Id. at 7–10, 13–14; see 2012 Recommendation at 148–51 (expressing concern over “broad 
generalization” of intended uses but finding the record more developed for research and 
development). 
570 2012 Recommendation at 155. 
571 ATSP et al. Class 2 Reply at 12; see also Tr. at 7:02–08, Hearing Ex. 2-A (Apr. 12, 2018) (ATSP); 
Tr. at 11:09–21 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Reid, ATSP). 
572 ATSP et al. Class 2 Reply at 12; see also Tr. at 7:02–08, Hearing Ex. 2-A (Apr. 12, 2018) (ATSP); 
Tr. at 11:22–12:14 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Cowling, ATSP & Kent State Univ.).   
573 See Tr. at 7:02–08, Hearing Ex. 2-A (Apr. 12, 2018) (ATSP); Tr. at 12:07–14 (Apr. 12, 2018) 
(Cowling, ATSP & Kent State Univ.).  Proponents offer testimony that “[t]he process to caption 

[PAGE 96]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
93 
Using the captioning software, the transcriber plays a short segment of the motion 
picture in a loop, and manually types in the captions for that segment, which is recorded 
along with the time code for that segment.574  The process is repeated for the remaining 
segments until the captioning is completed.  To add audio description to a motion 
picture, a disability services professional would use a similar process after manually 
creating a narrative describing what is taking place in the motion picture, using 
describing software.575   
In the alternative, proponents explain that instead of creating the transcript or 
description of the motion picture themselves, disability services professionals may 
outsource the addition of captioning and/or audio description to a commercial vendor 
specializing in accessible works, such as 3Play Media or VITAC.576  Circumvention of 
technological measures protecting motion pictures on DVDs, Blu-Ray discs, and via 
digital transmissions would still be required for outsourcing, as the vendor would need 
to receive the motion picture in an MP4 or similar format file.577  Relatedly, Joint 
Creators I express concern that the proposed exemption would cover “the provision of 
circumvention services” and perhaps also “the creation and circulation of circumvention 
tools,” in violation of the anti-trafficking provisions.
578  It is not clear, however, that these 
vendors would themselves need to engage in the circumvention, rather than simply 
process files provided by the educational institution.579   
There was also some disagreement as to the intended beneficiaries of the proposed 
exemption.  Although the petition refers to making motion pictures accessible to “people 
with disabilities,”580 throughout their written submissions and testimony proponents 
refer to the need for students to have accessible versions (or their educators);581 the record 
                                                                                                                                                              
videos take upwards of 7 hours for each hour of video captioned (often more).”  ATSP et al. Class 
2 Initial at 17 (testimony of unidentified West Virginia University disability services professional). 
574 ATSP et al. Class 2 Reply at 12; see also Tr. at 7:02–08, Hearing Ex. 2-A (Apr. 12, 2018) (ATSP); 
Tr. at 12:07–14 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Cowling, ATSP & Kent State Univ.).   
575 ATSP et al. Class 2 Reply at 12–13; Tr. at 18:12–16 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Cowling, ATSP & Kent State 
Univ.); see also Tr. at 7:02–08, Hearing Ex. 2-A (Apr. 12, 2018) (ATSP); Tr. at 12:07–14 (Apr. 12, 
2018) (Cowling, ATSP & Kent State Univ.). 
576 ATSP et al. Class 2 Reply at 13. 
577 Id. 
578 Joint Creators I Class 2 Opp’n at 20. 
579 See ATSP et al. Class 2 Reply at 13 (noting that vendors must “receive media in the form of an 
MP4 or similar format, which requires circumvention of TPMs beforehand”) (emphasis added). 
580 ATSP et al. Class 2 Pet. at 3 (emphasis added). 
581 See, e.g., ATSP et al. Class 2 Initial at 2–4 (“This exemption is necessary so that when disability 
services professionals must circumvent technological protection measures to fulfill their legal and 

[PAGE 97]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
94 
does not describe others who might be entitled to receive these accessible versions of 
motion pictures under relevant laws.  Next, opponents maintain that because the 
examples from proponents’ written submissions are limited to the university context (as 
opposed to kindergarten through twelfth grade students), the proposed exemption 
should be limited to college and university students, and that the Office should ignore 
information submitted in response to a post-hearing question.582  To be sure, the NPRM 
instructed proponents to “present their complete affirmative case for an exemption 
during the initial round of public comment, including all legal and evidentiary support 
for the proposal.”
583  Proponents’ initial comment, however, references the IDEA 
multiple times, which specifically applies to public elementary and secondary schools 
(i.e., not to colleges and universities), and neither the petition nor initial comments were 
otherwise limited to post-secondary educational institutions.
584  In addition, proponents 
testified that kindergarten through twelfth-grade students have the same accessibility 
needs as students in higher education, and thus would be similarly adversely affected 
should the exemption not be granted.585  Opponents do not dispute these claims.  The 
Acting Register concludes that proponents sufficiently developed the record to include 
kindergarten through twelfth-grade students in addition to students at colleges and 
universities (and not the public at large) in consideration of whether to grant the 
proposed exemption.
586  
                                                                                                                                                              
ethical obligations to make digital works accessible for students with disabilities.”) (emphasis 
added); Tr. at 58:12–23 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Reid, ATSP) (confirming that students would be 
beneficiaries of proposed exemption); see also Tr. at 23:04–10 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Cowling, ATSP & 
Kent State Univ.) (confirming that accessible versions may be made available to educators in 
cases where the entire class, consisting of students with and without disabilities, watches a 
motion picture together). 
582 Joint Creators I Class 2 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1 (contending that any examples provided in 
response to the Office’s post-hearing letter should be disregarded). 
583 NPRM at 49,558. 
584 ASTP et al. Class 2 Initial at 3, 4, 8; see also ASTP et al. Reply at 16; 20 U.S.C. § 1400(d)(1)(A) 
(“[One purpose] of this chapter [is] to ensure that all children with disabilities have a vailable to 
them a free appropriate public education that emphasizes special education and related services 
designed to meet their unique needs and prepare them for further education, employment, and 
independent living.”).   
585 See Tr. at 59:13–20, 66: 06–15 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Band, LCA).  While proponents acknowledged 
that most of their evidentiary examples concerned secondary institutions, they maintain that an 
exemption should be broad enough to encompass K-12 institutions who have a growing need to 
engage in circumvention to fulfill their legal mandates.  Tr. at 58:20–59:23 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Reid, 
ATSP; Band, LCA).   
586 In its post-hearing letter, the Office solicited “illustrative examples of kindergarten through 
twelfth-grade educational institutions needing to circumvent motion pictures,” and asked 

[PAGE 98]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
95 
2. Discussion 
a. Works Protected by Copyright 
This class concerns a request to circumvent access controls protecting audiovisual works 
contained on DVDs, Blu-ray discs, or transmitted through streaming services.  There is 
no dispute that at least some of these works are protected by copyright. 
b. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Proponents submit that adding captions and/or audio description to motion pictures for 
the purpose of making them accessible to students with disabilities constitutes fair use.  
Proponents point to the House Report for the 1976 Act, which states: 
Another special instance illustrating the application of the fair use 
doctrine pertains to the making of copies or phonorecords of works in the 
special forms needed for the use of for blind persons.  These special forms 
. . . are not usually made by the publishers for commercial distribution . . . 
the making of a single copy or phonorecord by an individual as a free 
service for a blind persons [sic] would properly be considered a fair use 
under section 107.587 
According to proponents, “the legislative history . . . makes clear that converting works 
into formats that are accessible to people with sensory disabilities is a quintessential 
example of fair use.”588  In addition, proponents cite a footnote in Sony v. Universal City 
Studios, in which the Supreme Court references the same House Report and notes that 
“[m]aking a copy of a copyrighted work for the convenience of a blind person is 
expressly identified by the House Committee Report as an example of fair use, with no 
suggestion that anything more than a purpose to entertain or to inform need motivate 
the copying.”
589 
For their part, Joint Creators I suggest that the scope of the intended uses is insufficiently 
delineated for the Acting Register to form a basis that the uses are fair, and suggests that 
                                                                                                                                                              
whether the needs of K-12 institutions differed from the factual testimony regarding university 
and college disability services officers.  Class 2 Post-Hearing Letter.  Based on the prior testimony 
concerning the needs of K-12 institutions, the Office views this as directed at clarifying the 
record, rather than soliciting new evidence. 
587 H.R. REP. NO. 94-1476, at 73, as reprinted in 1976 U.S.C.C.A.N. 5659, 5687 (1976); S. REP. NO. 94-
473, at 66 (1975). 
588 ATSP et al. Class 2 Initial at 9 (citing H.R. REP. NO. 94-1476, at 73, reprinted in 1976 U.S.C.C.A.N. 
at 5687). 
589 ATSP et al. Class 2 Initial at 9 (quoting Sony, 464 U.S. at 455 n.40). 

[PAGE 99]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
96 
proponents have not cited any authority holding that captioning or audio describing 
motion pictures qualifies as a noninfringing use.590   
In addition, the participants specifically address the four fair use factors.  Regarding the 
purpose and character of the use, proponents cite Authors Guild, Inc. v. HathiTrust and 
argue that “[c]onverting an inaccessible copyrighted motion picture into an accessible 
format clearly serves a broad public benefit and results in direct, tangible benefit for 
many students who are blind, visually impaired, deaf, or hard of hearing,” such that 
providing accessible formats to individuals with disabilities “serves ‘a valid purpose 
under [fair use] factor one.’”
591  Proponents assert that Congress’s commitment to 
individuals with disabilities further evidences the “valid purpose” of converting 
inaccessible versions of motion pictures into accessible formats by adding captioning 
and/or audio description.
592  Specifically, proponents reference disability laws such as 
the ADA, as well as the Chafee Amendment, the latter of which provides that it is not an 
infringement of copyright “for an authorized entity to reproduce or to distribute copies 
or phonorecords of a previously published, nondramatic literary work if such copies or 
phonorecords are reproduced or distributed in specialized formats exclusively for use 
by blind or other persons with disabilities.”
593  Proponents argue that the Chafee 
Amendment “illustrates Congress’s intent that copyright law make appropriate 
accommodations for the blind, visually impaired, or print disabled.”594   
Joint Creators I assert that proponents’ reliance on HathiTrust is misplaced insofar as it 
concerned making “text-to-speech” versions of literary works for the print disabled.595  
They argue the result of altering a motion picture—such as by adding captioning and/or 
audio description—“is likely a derivative work that involves a creative interpretation of 
the underlying work,” and thus is more comparable to creating a foreign language 
translation, which is an exclusive right of the copyright owner.596  Joint Creators I also 
note that the Chafee Amendment “applies only to non-dramatic literary works” (i.e., not 
motion pictures), and that it includes multiple limitations that the proposed exemption 
lacks, including that copies must be made and distributed “exclusively for use by blind 
or other persons with disabilities,” and “only [] in specialized formats.”
597 
                                                      
590 Joint Creators I Class 2 Opp’n at 13. 
591 ATSP et al. Class 2 Initial at 10 (citing HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 102). 
592 Id.  
593 17 U.S.C. § 121(a). 
594 ATSP et al. Class 2 Initial at 10 (quoting HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 102). 
595 Joint Creators I Class 2 Opp’n at 16. 
596 Id. at 15–16 (citing HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 101; Radji v. Khakbaz, 607 F. Supp. 1296, 1300 (D.D.C. 
1985)). 
597 Id. at 17–18 (citations omitted). 

[PAGE 100]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
97 
Finally, Joint Creators I assert that the Register determined during the 2012 rulemaking 
that neither Sony nor the 1976 Act House Report “suggest[] a rule that all reproduction, 
adaptation and distribution for the purpose of accessibility is fair use.”598  Specifically, 
they note that, in deciding to recommend an exemption for the purpose of engaging in 
research and development aimed at developing players capable of rendering captions 
and descriptive audio, “the Register expressly stated that she was not concluding that 
captioning or audio describing a motion picture qualifies as a fair use.”599 
Considering the present request in light of this precedent, including the 2014 HathiTrust 
opinion, the Acting Register finds that the first factor weighs in favor of fair use.  In 
HathiTrust, the Second Circuit found that although creating a database of millions of text 
and image files of books for the purpose of providing access to individuals with 
disabilities is not “transformative,” “providing access to the print-disabled is still a valid 
purpose” under the first fair use factor.600  The court equated the creation of an accessible 
format with that of a translation or other derivative work, but noted that even absent a 
finding of transformative use, a defendant may still satisfy the first fair use factor.
601  
And the court did not limit its holding to individuals with disabilities relating to sight 
impairments, thereby implying that creating accessible formats for individuals with 
other types of disabilities also constitutes a “valid purpose.”602 
Applying that logic, adding captions or audio description to a motion picture for 
purposes of creating accessible versions for students with disabilities, in compliance 
with disability laws, is a “valid purpose,” weighing in favor of fair use.  Indeed, the 
passage of the ADA, IDEA, and Section 504 demonstrate Congress’s desire to provide 
meaningful access to students with other types of disabilities.  As noted by the Register 
in her 2015 Recommendation regarding accessibility for e-books, “[t]he need for and 
desirability of access to such works by those with impairments—access that might 
otherwise be denied— present a quintessential case for an exemption to the prohibition 
on circumvention.”603  The 2015 Recommendation noted that the legislative history of the 
1976 Copyright Act, the Chafee Amendment, and a 2014 congressional hearing on 
exceptions for the visually impaired all supported a conclusion of fair use.604  Congress 
                                                      
598 Id. at 13 (citing 2012 Recommendation at 146, 149). 
599 Id. 
600 HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 102. 
601 Id. at 101–02. 
602 See id. at 103 (noting that “other disabled patrons, whose physical i mpairments prevent them 
from turning pages or from holding books, may also be able to use assistive devices to view all of 
the content contained in the image files for a book”). 
603 2015 Recommendation at 133. 
604 Id. at 134 (citing H.R. REP. NO. 94-1476, at 73, reprinted in 1976 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 5687); 142 CONG. 
REC. 21796 (1996) (statement of Sen. Chafee) (the Amendment “sought to ‘end the unintended 

[PAGE 101]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
98 
has demonstrated the same “commitment to ameliorating the hardships” faced by 
persons with sensory disabilities in enacting the ADA, IDEA, and other laws.605 
Turning to the second factor, proponents allow that the proposed exemption “would 
cover access to motion pictures, which come in many formats and genres.”606  
Proponents assert, however, that under HathiTrust, this does not prevent a finding of fair 
use.607  
As the Register noted in 2015, “[u]nder factor two, it is well established that motion 
pictures are generally creative and thus at the core of copyright’s protective 
purposes.”
608  The Acting Register finds that this factor weighs against fair use, but given 
the valid purpose of the use and lack of negative impact on the market, it does not 
preclude a finding of fair use under the other factors.609   
Proponents assert that the third factor weighs in favor of fair use because “[c]onverting a 
motion picture into an accessible format requires only a partial replication of the original 
copyrighted work,” as adding captions and/or audio description uses only the audio or 
visual components, respectively.
610  The Acting Register disagrees; although a disability 
services professional may arguably use only the aural or visual component, the entire 
motion picture is copied and imported into the captioning or describing software to add 
the captions or audio description to the motion picture.611  For some purposes, however, 
“it may be necessary to copy the entire copyrighted work,” and in such cases, the third 
                                                                                                                                                              
censorship of blind individuals’ access to current information’ by allowing groups that produce 
specialized formats for persons who are blind, visually impaired, or print disabled to do so 
without first having to gain permission from copyright owners”); Copyright Issues in Education and 
for the Visually Impaired: Hearing Before the Subcomm. on Courts, Intellectual Property, and the Internet 
of the H. Comm. on the Judiciary, 113th Cong. 3–4 (2014) (statement of Rep. Bob Goodlatte, 
Chairman, H. Comm. on the Judiciary) (“[T]he visually impaired community has the expectation 
and the right to participate in our community and the copyrighted works created within it.”) ); see 
also S. REP. NO. 115-261 at 2 (noting that, in amending section 121, the Marrakesh Treaty 
Implementation Act aims to ensure that, “with appropriate safeguards, [] copyright restrictions 
should not impede the creation and distribution of such accessible format copies”). 
605 See HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 102. 
606 ATSP et al. Class 2 Initial at 11. 
607 Id. 
608 2015 Recommendation at 70. 
609 See HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 102 (finding second factor weighed against fair use, but did not 
preclude a finding of fair use under the other factors). 
610 ATSP et al. Class 2 Initial at 11.   
611 ATSP et al. Class 2 Reply at 12; see also Tr. at 7:02–08, Hearing Ex. 2-A (Apr. 12, 2018) (ATSP); 
Tr. at 12:07–14 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Cowling, ATSP & Kent State Univ.). 

[PAGE 102]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
99 
factor “does not weigh against a finding of fair use.”612  In HathiTrust, the Second Circuit 
determined that it was reasonable to retain both text and image files of books, because 
the text files were required to create text-to-speech capabilities, and the image files 
provided additional ways for individuals with disabilities to access the works.613  
Similarly, the Acting Register concludes that it is necessary to copy the entire motion 
picture because disability services professionals are potentially adding captions and/or 
audio description to the entire length of the motion picture.   
Fourth, proponents assert that making motion pictures accessible to students with 
disabilities would not negatively affect the market or value of copyrighted works.614  
Proponents allege that the same market failure for accessibility of e-books noted in 
HathiTrust plagues the video programming market, and state that “[b]ecause the market 
conditions do not support retroactively converting works into an accessible format, 
converting motion pictures to accessible formats has little effect on the potential market 
for converting works.”615  Proponents reference litigation by disability advocacy groups 
against content distributors such as Netflix and Hulu as evidence of the market’s failure 
to distribute films in an accessible format unless forced to do so.616 
Further, proponents would limit the distribution of accessible versions to students by 
“uploading the accessible video and accompanying timed-text caption file or described 
audio to Kaltura, Kanopy Streaming or a similar private distribution platform.”617  
Proponents also note that commercial vendors used to create captioning and/or audio 
description “specify in their terms of agreement that no confidential information will be 
compromised—i.e ., that the video will not be disseminated— in the course of captioning 
or audio describing, consistent with similar agreements those vendors strike with 
copyright holders when they caption their content.”618  Moreover, accessible versions 
would be created only from authorized versions of motion pictures.619   
                                                      
612 HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 98; see also Campbell, 510 U.S. at 586–87 (“extent of permissible copying 
varies with the purpose and character of the use”). 
613 HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 103. 
614 ATSP et al. Class 2 Initial at 11–13.   
615 Id. at 13; see also ATSP et al. Reply at 18. 
616 ATSP et al. Class 2 Initial at 12.   
617 ATSP et al. Class 2 Reply at 13. 
618 Id.; Tr. at 61:07–15 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Band, LCA). 
619 ATSP et al. Class 2 Reply at 11 (“The proposed exemption would only enable disability 
services professionals to add accessibility features to motion pictures obtained through a lawful 
chain of distribution.”). 

[PAGE 103]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
100 
Although raised more in the context of the market effect under the section 1201 statutory 
factors, DVD CCA and AACS LA assert that the proposed exemption is overbroad 
because it does not “account [for] the extent to which DVDs and [Blu-Ray discs] already 
include closed captions and audio description.”620  Joint Creators I raise a similar 
concern.621  Joint Creators I also assert that the record requires more detail to assess fair 
use generally (and factor four specifically).622  Those concerns are discussed below in the 
context of alternatives to circumvention.  In addition, Joint Creators I express concern 
that proponents “do not address whether the exemption would allow permanent copies 
of motion pictures to be made from streaming subscription services that typically do not 
allow for permanent downloads.”623  As litigation against content distributors such as 
Netflix shows, however, legal obligations to provide accessible formats extend beyond 
permanent downloads.624 
This factor weighs in favor of fair use, despite the seemingly more varied marketplace 
availability of accessible formats for motion pictures than in the e-books context.  While 
opponents persuasively demonstrate that the motion picture industry has made great 
strides towards providing more accessible content,625 proponents submit equally 
compelling evidence that the overall market has not yet adequately met the needs of 
individuals with disabilities by retroactively offering catalog videos in accessible 
formats, and that in some cases, new works are not being issued in accessible formats.626  
When an accessible version is not available in the marketplace, the proposed use is less 
likely to interfere with the primary or derivative markets for the motion picture.627  The 
record also reflects that the accessible versions would be created from authorized 
versions of motion pictures628 and would typically be disseminated through a passwordprotected mechanism—as is traditionally done by disability service professionals when 
                                                      
620 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 2 Opp’n at 2. 
621 Joint Creators I Class 2 Opp’n at 3. 
622 See id. at 10–12. 
623 Id. at 11. 
624 See Complaint at ¶¶ 47–55, Nat’l Ass’n of the Deaf v. Netflix, Inc., No. 3:11-cv-30168 (D. Mass. 
June 16, 2011) (asserting ADA claim against Netflix for failure to provide content with 
captioning).  
625 See Joint Creators I Class 2 Opp’n at 4 (citing Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Disability by 
Public Accommodations-Movie Theaters; Movie Captioning and Audio Description, 79 Fed. Reg. 
44,976, 44,989 (Aug. 1, 2014)). 
626 See ATSP et al. Class 2 Initial at 12–13; ATSP et al. Class 2 Reply at 9. 
627 See HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 103. 
628 ATSP et al. Class 2 Reply at 11. 

[PAGE 104]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
101 
providing accessible materials629—thereby reducing the likelihood of negatively 
affecting the market for the copyrighted motion pictures.   
Overall, the Acting Register concludes that proponents have provided sufficient detail to 
assess whether the proposed uses are likely to constitute fair use.  As noted above, the 
present request is more tailored and the evidence submitted is more specific than past 
exemption requests.630  Proponents have explained how captions and audio descriptions 
would be created and added to motion pictures.631  Citing the legislative history of the 
1976 Copyright Act, the Chafee Amendment, the HathiTrust decision, and other existing 
disability laws, Class 2 proponents offer credible support for their claim that converting 
motion pictures into accessible formats for students with disabilities by adding captions 
and/or audio description is a noninfringing fair use. 
In sum, the Acting Register finds that for purposes of this rulemaking, proponents have 
made a compelling case that making motion pictures accessible to students with 
disabilities by adding captions and/or audio description is likely noninfringing. 
c. Causation 
The Acting Register finds that proponents have met their burden of showing that the 
statutory prohibition on circumvention of access limits their ability to add captions or 
audio description to motion pictures for purposes of providing accessible versions to 
students with disabilities.  But for the prohibition, users likely could gain lawful access 
to the copyrighted motion pictures for that purpose. 
d. Asserted Adverse Effects  
In discussing the purported adverse effects and addressing the section 1201 statutory 
factors, proponents combined discussion of the first three factors because “the 
prohibitions on circumvention have a similar impact under each factor.”632  Specifically, 
proponents assert that without the proposed exemption, disability services professionals 
are “inhibited from making works available for students with disabilities,” which 
“restrict[s] the availability of works for educational purposes” and “ha[s] a negative 
                                                      
629 Id. at 13; see also Tr. at 18:05–16 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Cowling, ATSP & Kent State Univ.). 
630 Compare 2012 Recommendation at 149 (noting “[m]ost of the uses relating to the creation of 
captions and descriptive audio proposed by the proponents [were] so general that it [was] 
impossible to evaluate whether such uses would be noninfringing.”); Section 1201 Report at 87 –
88 (stating that there has been “very little in the records from prior rulemaking proceedings 
regarding other entertainment products such as . . . motion pictures”). 
631 ATSP et al. Class 2 Reply at 12–13. 
632 ATSP et al. Class 2 Initial at 14. 

[PAGE 105]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
102 
impact on teaching and scholarship.”633  Proponents identified examples of motion 
pictures either lacking accessibility features or it being unclear whether captions and/or 
audio description are available.634  In addition, proponents identified over a dozen 
examples where K-12 educators requested captioning or audio descriptions to make 
accessible versions for students with disabilities.635   
Regarding the fourth statutory factor, proponents argue that not allowing circumvention 
will negatively affect the market for the copyrighted motion pictures because 
educational institutions will not use content that they cannot easily convert into an 
accessible format.
636  For example, the University of California, Berkeley responded to a 
letter from the DOJ regarding its alleged failure to make free course and lecture content 
accessible by stating that DOJ’s requested remedial measures were too costly, and that it 
therefore “might not be able to continue to provide free public content under the 
conditions laid out by the Department of Justice to the extent [it had] in the past.”
637 
Proponents also assert that viable alternatives to circumvention do not exist.  According 
to proponents, copyright owners have in some cases failed to respond to or grant 
requests by disability services professionals for permission to make motion pictures 
accessible;
638 in other cases, they note, locating the actual copyright owner is 
confusing.639  Proponents maintain that sourcing accessible format versions that a school 
or library does not already possess is burdensome and unworkable, particularly because 
disability services professionals must provide accessible versions in a timely manner, 
and that requiring educational institutions to repurchase them, “simply because the 
content creators and distributors did not make those films accessible at the outset is not 
                                                      
633 Id. at 1. 
634 See ATSP et al. Class 2 Reply at 3 (stating that 70% of the more than 28,000 DVDs at Emory 
Heilbrun Music & Media Library lack accessibility features), 19–20 (appendix of exemplary 
inaccessible materials). 
635 ATSP et al. Class 2 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2. 
636 ATSP et al. Class 2 Initial at 15–16; see also id. at 18 (testimony of unidentified Kent State 
University disability services professional). 
637 A Statement on Online Course Content and Accessibility, UC BERKELEY (Sept. 13, 2016), 
http://news.berkeley.edu/2016/09/13/a-statement-on-online-course-content-and-accessibility 
(noting the “department’s findings do not implicate the accessibility of educational opportunities 
provided to our enrolled students”).  Proponents note that other universities, such as Harvard 
and MIT, have been sued for similarly not making accessible versions of content available.  ATSP 
et al. Class 2 Reply at 9. 
638 ATSP et al. Class 2 Initial at 12, 18. 
639 Id. at 17–18 (testimony from University of Illinois disability services professional that “it is 
hard to determine who is the actual copyright holder in many of the cases where we have old 
videos or a documentary where the publishing company has gone under ”). 

[PAGE 106]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
103 
only economically infeasible, but would contravene the ADA’s principles against 
imposing unnecessary costs to improve accessibility for people with disabilities.”640 
In addition, proponents claim that other non-circumventing alternatives—such as 
creating transcripts of a motion picture— are burdensome because they “often must be 
supplemented with real-time interpreting or a transcriber summary,” and may be 
“considered inadequate accommodation for students with disabilities.”641  Proponents 
also claim that captioning provided through YouTube is “poor” and thus not an effective 
accommodation.
642   
Neither Joint Creators I nor DVD CCA and AACS LA contest the importance of making 
works available to students with disabilities on an equal basis.  But opponents generally 
contend that the wide availability of versions with captioning and/or audio description 
already in the market constitutes a viable alternative to circumvention.  They note that 
“[n]early all optical disc media (DVD, Blu-ray, and Ultra HD) released by MPAA 
members are distributed with captions,” and that the Federal Communications 
Commission (“FCC”) requires (with some exceptions) television programming 
distributed on or after January 1, 1998 to have captions.
643  The FCC also requires 
captioned online video when it previously appeared with captions on U.S. television 
after certain dates.644  Joint Creators I note that the MPAA and its members in particular 
have been commended by the DOJ for efforts to provide closed captioning and audio 
description for motion pictures.645  DVD CCA and AACS LA similarly state that 
proponents “have failed to allege a single DVD or Blu-ray title that lacks captioning and 
audio description.”646  Opponents also note an online list of motion pictures available 
                                                      
640 ATSP et al. Class 2 Reply at 4, 10; see also Tr. at 37:09–12 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Reid, ATSP). 
641 ATSP et al. Class 2 Initial at 16. 
642 Id. at 17 (testimony of unidentified West Virginia University disability services professional).   
643 Joint Creators I Class 2 Opp’n at 5 (citing 47 C.F.R. § 79.1(b)(1)). 
644 47 C.F.R. § 79.4(b)(1); see also Joint Creators I Class 2 Opp’n at 5 (“Nearly 100% of content 
streamed by Hulu, Netflix, Amazon Video, and other online services that publicly perform 
MPAA members’ works is captioned.”), 6 (“many motion pictures are now available with audio 
descriptions”), 7 (“iTunes now offers over 600 movies with audio description tracks” and “Netflix 
offers description for over 500 original shows, documentaries, TV series, and children’s 
programming”) (citations omitted). 
645 Joint Creators I Class 2 Opp’n at 4–5 (citing Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Disability by 
Public Accommodations-Movie Theaters; Movie Captioning and Audio Description, 79 Fed. Reg. 
44,976, 44,989 (Aug. 1, 2014) (“[M]ovie studios appear committed to making their movies 
accessible to individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing or blind or have low vision, and the 
Department commends their efforts.”)). 
646 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 2 Opp’n at 3. 

[PAGE 107]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
104 
with audio descriptions maintained by the American Council for the Blind,647 and 
observe that movie theatres are required to provide access to both captioning and audio 
description, when available.648 
Still, opponents acknowledge that “not every motion picture is available in accessible 
formats,”649 and the record reflects this unavailability, for example, regarding certain 
user-generated content and many back catalog works.650  Moreover, the record reveals 
that while closed captioning is significantly available for video content, audio 
description lags behind.651 
The Acting Register concludes that the statutory factors favor an exemption.  As the 
Register noted in 2012, “[g]enerally, public policy favors removing impediments to 
access for individuals with disabilities.”652  An exception to promote accessibility “is not 
merely a matter of convenience, but is instead intended to enable individuals [with 
disabilities] to have meaningful access to the same content that individuals without such 
impairments are able to perceive.”653  The proposed exemption is aimed at allowing the 
wide range of motion pictures that are available to the general population to be accessed 
and enjoyed by students with disabilities.  For these students, the exemption may 
represent the difference between having and not having access to the works available to 
other students.  Indeed, the U.S. government has expressed that students with 
disabilities “must receive an equal opportunity to participate in and benefit” from the 
                                                      
647 Id.; Joint Creators I Class 2 Opp’n at 6. 
648 Joint Creators I Class 2 Opp’n at 6.  During a meeting with the Office, Joint Creators I asserted 
that available market technologies—including those used within a movie theater, such as closed -
captioning glasses, or headsets for listening to audio description tracks— are viable alternatives to 
circumvention that could be used for educational purposes.  Joint Creators I Class 2 Ex Parte 
Meeting Summary at 1 (July 24, 2018).  The record is far too sparse, however, to conclude 
whether such technologies are or are not reasonable alternatives. 
649 Joint Creators I Class 2 Opp’n at 4.   
650 See Tr. at 29:21–30:17 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Band, LCA) (noting the exemption is not for “new content 
that is being released,” but rather “older films, foreign films, some of the independent films . . . 
older documentaries . . . not [the] sort of current releases that have all of these features built into 
them”); Tr. at 13:05–12 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Reid, ATSP) (stating that although “YouTube has 
captioning services that can be invoked by the owner of a video that is posted on YouTube,” 
“[t]he rub is that, in general, the owner has to approve the captions being included in the file”).  
651 Joint Creators I Class 2 Opp’n at 6–7 (noting “marketplace improvements” for audio 
description, but generally describing more limited availability). 
652 2012 Recommendation at 21 (citing 42 U.S.C. § 12101(a)(7) (“[T]he Nation’s proper goals 
regarding individuals with disabilities are to assure equality of opportunity, full participation, 
independent living, and economic self-sufficiency for such individuals.”); 17 U.S.C. § 121. 
653 2015 Recommendation at 136; 2012 Recommendation at 22. 

[PAGE 108]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
105 
goods and services offered by colleges and universities, and that colleges and 
universities are prohibited from offering students with disabilities aids, benefits, and 
services that are “unequal to the opportunity afforded others.”654 
Importantly, however, the recommendation must also take into account that for a 
significant number of feature films and other audiovisual works, the market already 
provides accessible versions, which may alleviate the need to circumvent certain works.  
In that respect, the market for audiovisual works appears different than that of ebooks.655  The legislative history for section 1201 states that in assessing the impact of the 
prohibition on the ability to make noninfringing uses, the Register and the Librarian 
“should take into consideration the availability of works in the particular class in other 
formats that are not subject to technological protections.”656  Searches for the motion 
pictures given as examples lacking accessibility features657 resulted in locating a 
significant number with captioning, and two with audio description.  Indeed, out of the 
thirty-five DVDs described as not having closed captions submitted in proponents’ reply 
comment, eleven were advertised as available with closed captioning on Amazon.com; 
the same was true of twelve of the fourteen videos described as inaccessible for K-12 
uses.658  Certain titles were also available through other mainstream platforms including 
                                                      
654 Dep’t of Justice, Civil Rights Div. & U.S. Dep’t of Educ., Office for Civil Rights, Joint “Dear 
Colleague” Letter: Electronic Book Readers 1–2 (June 29, 2010), https://www2.ed.gov/about/
offices/list/ocr/letters/colleague-20100629.pdf. 
655 During the 2015 rulemaking, the Association of American Publishers (“ AAP”) acknowledged 
that despite the proliferation of e-book readers, the market “do[es] not yet offer inherent 
accessibility across such platforms or in the commercially-available versions of such works for 
consumers with print disabilities.”  2015 Recommendation at 133 (citing AAP 2015 Class 9 Initial 
at 1 (comments in support of a class for literary works distributed electronically for assis tive 
technologies)). 
656 House Manager’s Report at 7. 
657 See ATSP et al. Class 2 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2; ATSP et al. Class 2 Reply at 19–20. 
658 Compare ATSP et al. Class 2 Reply at 19–20, with, e.g., The Accused, Amazon, 
https://www.amazon.com/Accused-Tara-Timpone/dp/B074J5PRMJ/; Black Robe, AMAZON, 
https://www.amazon.com/Black-Robe-Lothaire-Bluteau/dp/1573623903/; Breaker Morant, 
AMAZON, https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00A5IXZXQ; Chasing Freedom, AMAZON, 
https://www.amazon.com/Chasing-Freedom-Juliette-Lewis/dp/B0009XT8VA; Days of Heaven, 
AMAZON, https://www.amazon.com/Days-Heaven-Richard-Gere/dp/B001KT3JQ2/; Inside Job, 
AMAZON, https://www.amazon.com/Inside-Job-Matt-Damon/dp/B0041KKYBA; The Marquise of 
O..., AMAZON, https://www.amazon.com/Marquise-Edith-Clever/dp/B010ONY5B2; Perceval, 
AMAZON, https://www.amazon.com/Perceval-Fabrice-Luchini/dp/B00004U0FN/.  The other titles 
searched were Michael Clayton, Varsity Blues, Through Deaf Eyes, Lewis and Clark Great Journey West 
(National Geographic), The Men Who Built America (History Channel series), The Presidents 
(History Channel), The Star of Bethlehem (Mpower Pictures), Iron Jawed Angels, The Lip Reader 
(Seinfeld episode), Switched at Birth, Before the Flood, The War of 1812 (History Channel), Platoon, 

[PAGE 109]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
106 
Netflix or Google Play.  As proponents themselves acknowledge, the motion picture 
industry has adjusted to meet the needs of individuals with disabilities by offering 
accessible versions,659 and proponents in fact hope circumvention becomes unnecessary 
in the future as the market more fully meets disability needs.660  Accordingly, as detailed 
below, the Acting Register recommends tailoring an exemption to take into account and 
further incentivize the marketplace offerings, including by requiring a reasonable 
market check for usable copies, while balancing the legitimate needs of disability 
services offices to create accessible versions. 
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA recommends that the proposed exemption allow “disability services offices and 
equivalent units” to “circumvent TPMs on audiovisual works in educational settings to 
add accessibility features” to motion pictures,661 including “through the provision of 
closed and open captions and audio description.”662  Its proposal thus would extend to 
“accessibility features” generally,663 despite proponents limiting their arguments to 
captioning and audio description.  In agreement with the Acting Register, NTIA believes 
that the exemption should apply “regardless of grade level” of the student,664 and apply 
to both non-profit and for-profit educational institutions required by disability laws to 
make motion pictures accessible to students with disabilities.665  NTIA also recommends 
that the exemption incorporate “a broad, good-faith based definition of ‘individual with 
disability.’”666 
Regarding whether to require the educational institution to conduct a reasonable market 
check before circumventing, NTIA maintains that “preconditioning circumvention on 
disability rights offices searching the market for an accessible copy would be 
impracticable,”
667 and could perhaps result in a student not being able to watch the 
                                                                                                                                                              
Front of the Class: How Tourette Syndrome Made Me the Teacher I Never Had, and America & Lewis 
Hine. 
659 ATSP et al. Class 2 Ex Parte Meeting Summary at 2 (July 24, 2018). 
660 See id.; Tr. at 40:02–04 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Reid, ATSP). 
661 NTIA Letter at 30. 
662 Id. at 36. 
663 Id. at 30. 
664 Id. at 35. 
665 Id. at 31. 
666 Id. at 35–36. 
667 Id. at 34. 

[PAGE 110]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
107 
motion picture when needed.668  But as discussed below, the record suggests that these 
searches are already occurring.  The Acting Register believes that NTIA’s concerns can 
be addressed through regulatory language providing that educational institutions may 
circumvent to add captions or audio description if an accessible version cannot be 
obtained in a timely manner. 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
The Acting Register is sensitive to the need to ensure that access controls do not prevent 
students with disabilities from gaining meaningful access to motion pictures distributed 
in electronic formats.
669  After careful consideration of the evidentiary record and 
relevant legal authorities, the Acting Register concludes that the prohibition on 
circumvention is adversely affecting the ability of educational institutions to offer 
accessible formats of motion pictures on an equal basis in conformance with their legal 
responsibilities.  The Acting Register recommends that an exemption be granted, with a 
few adjustments to the language outlined in the petition.  
First, the Acting Register recommends that the exemption be available for units of an 
educational institution engaged in and/or responsible for the provision of accessible 
options.  The petition language includes “disability services offices, organizations that 
support people with disabilities, libraries, and other units at educational institutions that 
are responsible for fulfilling those institutions’ legal and ethical obligations to make 
works accessible to people with disabilities.”
670  The Acting Register recognizes that 
educational institutions may offer disability services from different (or multiple) 
locations within an institution, depending on their configuration, and it is important that 
certain educational institutions are not excluded merely because of which structural 
component offers disability services.671  Structuring the exemption this way is intended 
to recognize these varied approaches to offering disability services.672   
The Acting Register declines the suggestion to limit the exemption to “nonprofit 
organizations or governmental agencies with a primary mission related to assisting 
persons with disabilities,” which is how the Chafee Amendment defines an “authorized 
entity” entitled to reproduce or to distribute certain copies in specialized formats 
                                                      
668 Id. at 35. 
669 This concern is reflected in prior exemptions for accessibility.  See 2015 Recommendation at 
137; 2012 Recommendation at 24–25; 2006 Recommendation at 37; 2003 Recommendation at 64. 
670 ATSP et al. Class 2 Pet. at 3. 
671 See Tr. at 57:16–58:11 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Reid, ATSP); ASTP et al. Initial at 19 (addressing 
accessibility requires “multiple departments” working together). 
672 See Tr. at 62:09–63:13 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Reid, ATSP). 

[PAGE 111]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
108 
exclusively for use by the blind or other persons with disabilities.673  The Chafee 
Amendment is not limited to providing accessible formats in the educational context, as 
is the proposed exemption.  Moreover, for-profit educational institutions are also subject 
to the ADA.674  The Acting Register thus believes that the proposed exemption should 
apply to for-profit and nonprofit educational institutions, specifically kindergarten 
through twelfth-grade institutions, colleges, and universities. 
Second, there was discussion of how to define “disabilities.”  Proponents note that the 
ADA, IDEA, and Section 504 define “disabilities” differently, and ask that the exemption 
be tied “to circumvention behavior performed with a good faith intent to comply with a 
federal or state disability law or otherwise serve the educational needs of a student with 
a disability recognized under federal or state disability law.”675  Proponents also ask that 
an exemption not be limited by “the legal classification of students who might 
ultimately view an accessible version of the video,” as the accessible version “might be 
viewed by disabled and non-disabled students alike in a classroom context” and should 
not be required to be distributed separately from the non-accessible version (resulting in 
different treatment of students rather than equal access).676  Proponents request that the 
exemption allow an educational institution to undertake proactive accessibility efforts to 
“comply with the terms of a settlement of a disability law claim, to meet in advance the 
terms of an Individual Education Plan for a student with a disability, or simply on the 
institution’s own ethical initiative.”677  Taking into account these concerns, the 
recommended exemption permits circumvention where the accessible version is created 
as a necessary accommodation for a student or students with disabilities under a federal 
or state disability law, such as the ADA, IDEA, or Section 504.  
Third, the proposed exemption would allow circumvention only after the educational 
institution has conducted a reasonable market check and determined that an accessible 
version is not available, not available at a fair price, or not available in a timely way.678  
While ASTP objects that it would be “unrealistic and unduly costly” to require a search 
for readily available accessible copies, the record suggests that these searches are already 
                                                      
673 See Joint Creators I Class 2 Opp’n at 20–21 (proposing limit); see also 17 U.S.C. § 121(d)(1). 
674 See 42 U.S.C. § 12181(7)(J) (stating that for purposes  of the ADA, a private “nursery, 
elementary, secondary, undergraduate, or postgraduate private school, or other place of 
education” are “considered public accommodations”). 
675 ASTP et al. Class 2 Post-Hearing Resp. at 4. 
676 Id. 
677 Id. 
678 Determining whether an accessible version can be obtained in a “timely” manner will depend 
on whether it can be received in time to serve the student with disabilities as a necessary 
accommodation.   

[PAGE 112]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
109 
occurring, and section 1201 requires taking into account the wide availability of 
accessible versions—particularly closed captioned  versions—available in the market. 679  
Requiring a market check is not foreign to copyright law.  Under the section 108 
exception for libraries and archives, the institution must expend a “reasonable effort” to 
search for an “unused” replacement at a “fair price” before making a copy for 
replacement purposes.
680  In its Section 108 Discussion Document, the Office proposed 
retaining the market check requirement because it “will prevent replacement copies 
being made for popular and available works.”681  In response to concerns about it being 
difficult to conduct market checks on a large scale, the Office concluded that “market 
checks themselves will not be onerous because of institutions’ networks of providers 
and easily searchable online sales platforms offering access to new and used items.”682   
In this case, proponents acknowledge that even without a formal requirement, disability 
services professionals typically conduct some type of de facto market check by 
investigating “the most economic decision,” which could mean making an accessible 
version, or just purchasing one, depending on the circumstances.
683  As one participant 
explained, “it’s a lot of work” to create an accessible version, and “if someone else has 
done it . . . that’s what you want; you don’t want to have to go to that effort.”
684  And 
regardless of whether a decision is made to create an accessible version, outsource the 
creation of an accessible version, or purchase an accessible version, the educational 
institution would incur a cost.  By adding a “reasonable” market check requirement, the 
Acting Register does not expect disability services professionals to scour the market, 
spend exorbitant fees, or wait months for an accessible version to arrive from a seller.  If 
an institution determines, after a reasonable search of available platforms such as 
                                                      
679 To that end, while a reasonable market check is not incorporated into the ex isting temporary 
exemption for e-books and assistive technologies, 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(2) (2016), it would not 
make sense to do so because the record indicated that only a “fraction of e -book titles are 
currently available in accessible formats.”  2015 Recommendation at 135.  As noted above, the 
market for e-books differs from that for motion pictures.  Id. at 133 (citing 2015 AAP Class 9 Initial 
at 1 (comments in support of a class for literary works distributed electronically for assistive 
technologies)).   
680 17 U.S.C. § 108(c)(1). 
681 U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, SECTION 108 OF TITLE 17 28 (2017), https://www.copyright.gov/
policy/section108/discussion-document.pdf (“Section 108 Discussion Document”). 
682 Section 108 Discussion Document at 34. 
683 See Tr. at 33:08–15 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Galleher, ATSP). 
684 Tr. at 29:21–30:10 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Band, LCA) (also suggesting that as a practical matter, a 
limited market check requirement will not be burdensome); see also Tr. at 44:02–05 (Apr. 12, 2018) 
(Reid, ATSP) (“nobody in a disability services office is particularly interested in re-captioning or 
re-describing a program”). 

[PAGE 113]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
110 
Amazon.com or Netflix, that it must create an accessible version as a necessary 
accommodation for a student with disabilities, then it may proceed.  In this way, the 
market check requirement seeks to prevent copies being made of works already 
available in accessible formats, while supporting the motion picture industry’s effort to 
further expand the availability of accessible versions in the marketplace.  
Fourth, the recommended exemption would require the accessible versions to be 
provided to students and stored by the educational institution in a manner that 
reasonably prevents unauthorized further dissemination of the work.  This reflects the 
record testimony that accessible versions of motion pictures are made available to 
students in the same manner as that for students without an accommodation; that is, 
either shown in the classroom or distributed to students through a private distribution 
platform such as Kaltura or Kanopy Streaming.
685   
The Acting Register therefore recommends an exemption to permit circumvention of 
technological measures protecting motion pictures (including television shows and 
videos) on DVDs, Blu-Ray discs, and via digital transmissions to add captions and/or 
audio description for students with disabilities.  Accordingly, the Acting Register 
recommends that the Librarian designate the following class: 
(i) Motion pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in 17 
U.S.C. 101, where the motion picture is lawfully acquired on a DVD protected 
by the Content Scramble System, on a Blu-ray disc protected by the Advanced 
Access Content System, or via a digital transmission protected by a 
technological measure, where: 
(A) Circumvention is undertaken by a disability services office or other 
unit of a kindergarten through twelfth-grade educational institution, 
college, or university engaged in and/or responsible for the provision 
of accessibility services to students, for the purpose of adding captions 
and/or audio description to a motion picture to create an accessible 
version as a necessary accommodation for a student or students with 
disabilities under an applicable disability law, such as the Americans 
With Disabilities Act, the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, 
or Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act; 
                                                      
685 ATSP et al. Class 2 Reply at 13; see Joint Creators I Class 2 Opp’n at 11–12 (questioning planned 
dissemination of works).  The Office cautions against the mishandling of circumvented motion 
pictures, which could create infringement liability.  See Google Books, 804 F.3d at 229 (while 
recognizing that the creation of digital copies of books for libraries to make fair use does not itself 
constitute infringement, noting that “libraries might incur liability by negligent mishandling of, 
and failure to protect, their digital copies, leaving them unreasonably vulnerable to hacking”). 

[PAGE 114]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
111 
(B) The educational institution unit in paragraph (b)(2)(i)(A) of this 
section has, after a reasonable effort, determined that an accessible 
version cannot be obtained at a fair price or in a timely manner; and 
(C) The accessible versions are provided to students or educators and 
stored by the educational institution in a manner intended to 
reasonably prevent unauthorized further dissemination of a work.  
(ii) For purposes of this paragraph (b)(2), “audio description” means an oral 
narration that provides an accurate rendering of the motion picture. 
C. Proposed Class 3: Audiovisual Works—Space -shifting 
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption 
Proposed Class 3 would allow circumvention of technical measures protecting motion 
pictures and other audiovisual works to engage in “space-shifting.”  As the 2015 
rulemaking described the Copyright Office’s understanding, “‘[s]pace-shifting’ occurs 
when a work is transferred from one storage medium to another, such as from a DVD to 
a computer hard drive.”686  In this proceeding, Chris De Pretis petitioned for an 
exemption to allow circumvention by individuals to create a personal digital backup of 
content for private use.687  This proposal is similar to those sought in previous 
rulemakings.688   
The Copyright Office also received a petition from OmniQ, a corporate entity, proposing 
an exemption to allow so-called “non-reproductive” space-shifting, including for 
commercial uses.  Specifically, OmniQ requested an exemption to: 
[P]ermit the circumvention of technological protection measures that 
control access to [1] Audiovisual Works, specifically Motion Pictures, that 
[2] have been reproduced in digital Copies lawfully made when the 
works were Fixed by embodying the work via digital information in an 
optical disc, such as a DVD or blu-ray disc.  The works need to be 
accessed [3] for the purpose of space-shifting the work Fixed in that 
                                                      
686 2015 Recommendation at 107 & n.645. 
687 De Pretis Class 3 Pet. at 2 (requesting “to permit private owners of Movies and Television on 
DVD and Blu Ray Discs, to allow circumventing protection in order to create a personal digital 
backup of content for private use in order to save the content in the event that something 
happens to the original, fragile disc as well as to play the content on tools that do not play discs 
(newer computer; iPads; iPhones; etc.)”).   
688 See, e.g., 2015 Recommendation at 107. 

[PAGE 115]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
112 
particular material object (an optical disc such as a DVD or blu-ray disc) 
to a more useful material object so that [4] users who do not own or have 
access to the Device, Machine or Process needed to privately perform the 
work (i.e., needed to watch the movie) may still enjoy private 
performances of the work from that lawfully made copy, shifted to a 
usable strata.  Such viewers may include persons who do not own or have 
reasonable access to a DVD player, whose latest laptop computer follows 
the trend of not including an optical disc drive, or whose DVD player no 
longer functions. . . .689 
While both petitions seek to space-shift content from disc media to facilitate private 
performances, OmniQ claims that its request encompasses “non-reproductive spaceshifting,” which it distinguishes from the De Pretis petition, calling it “radically 
different, in that no back-up or convenience copies are made at all.”690   
With regard to its proposal, OmniQ does not seek an exemption tied to its own 
technology, but rather “an exemption to use any method now known or later developed 
of moving the fixation from the disc to something else, without reproduction.”691 
A third proponent, SolaByte Corporation, filed a one-page comment in support of 
OmniQ.692  At the public hearing, SolaByte elaborated that it seeks to make use of the 
exemption for its own space-shifting activities.  SolaByte stated at the hearing that it 
wishes to grant a user access to master cloud copies of audiovisual works that can be 
streamed on a user’s personal device after SolaByte authenticates that the user has the 
same content on disc media.
693  SolaByte said that it seeks to create a library of works 
that would be offered to its users as “replacements” for their disc copies.694  While 
                                                      
689 OmniQ Class 3 Pet. at 2 (bracketed numbers in original) (citation omitted). 
690 OmniQ Class 3 Initial at 2–3. 
691 Id. at 19.  OmniQ’s comments also suggest it supports an exemption even if the reproduction 
right is implicated by space-shifting activities.  Id. at 31. 
692 SolaByte Class 3 Reply at 2. 
693 Tr. at 8:08–14:08, Hearing Ex. 3-A at 5 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Chatfield, SolaByte); Tr. at 10:18–12:03 
(Apr. 11, 2018) (Chatfield, SolaByte). 
694 Tr. at 8:08–14:08, Hearing Ex. 3-A at 6 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Chatfield, SolaByte) (“We ask Librarian 
to authorize an exemption to allow the creation of replacement content to support this 
service[.]”); Tr. at 45:22–46:01 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Chatfield, SolaByte).  SolaByte appears to still be 
developing the details of its business.  During an ex parte communication, SolaByte described a 
different model whereby a customer would access a private cloud copy of a work space -shifted 
by SolaByte from the customer’s own disc, as opposed to streaming from a master cloud copy not 
made from the customer’s disc and that multiple customers would access.  SolaByte suggested 
that limited simultaneous streams from that copy would still be permitted.  SolaByte also 
elaborated that under either model its customers would be charged a monthly subscription fee t o 

[PAGE 116]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
113 
SolaByte’s testimony at the hearing is untimely insofar as it can be interpreted as seeking 
an exemption tailored to its specific technology, the Acting Register considers the 
testimony to the extent it supports the proposal outlined in the NPRM. 
In addition, Consumers Union and Free Software Foundation, Inc. (“FSF”) filed 
comments generally supporting this exemption, but did not provide any evidence or 
substantive argument regarding the merits of the specific proposals.  Class 3 was 
opposed by DVD CCA, AACS LA, and Joint Creators II. 
b. Overview of Issues 
In prior rulemakings, while past Registers have “recognize[d] the consumer and policy 
appeal”695 of an exemption for space-shifting, they have regularly declined to 
recommend such an exemption.  As the Register summarized in the last triennial 
proceeding: 
The Register has declined to recommend an exemption for such uses in 
the past four rulemakings because the proponents have failed to establish 
a legal or factual record sufficient to establish that the space-shifting 
and/or format-shifting of audiovisual works, e-books, and other 
copyrighted works constitutes a noninfringing use.  When considering 
space- or format-shifting for the transfer of copyrighted works to 
different devices or the creation of back-up copies, the Register has 
consistently found insufficient legal authority to support the claim that 
these activities are likely to constitute fair uses under current law.  
In particular, the Register has previously noted that “no court has held 
that ‘space-shifting’ is a fair use,” and that current law “does not 
guarantee access to copyrighted material in a user’s preferred format.”  In 
the 2012 rulemaking, the Register found that proponents had not 
adequately demonstrated that space-shifting was a transformative use as 
opposed to “simply a means for an individual consumer to access content 
for the same entertainment purpose as the original work.”  While the 
Register has acknowledged that judicial interpretation of fair use could 
someday evolve to include certain space-shifting activities, as stated in 
the last proceeding, “the Section 1201 rulemaking process is not the 
forum in which to break new ground on the scope of fair use.”
696 
                                                                                                                                                              
maintain access to the space-shifted copies.  Both models have been considered by the Acting 
Register.  SolaByte Class 3 Ex Parte Meeting Summary at 2–6 (Sept. 10, 2018). 
695 2015 Recommendation at 119. 
696 Id. at 108–09 (citations omitted). 

[PAGE 117]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
114 
In 2015, the Register again declined to recommend an exemption for space-shifting, 
explaining that she “does not find any fair use precedent that sanctions broad spaceshifting or format-shifting,” and that the proponents had failed to “sufficiently 
demonstrate[] that services, including online download or streaming services, disc-todigital services, digital rights lockers systems, ‘TV Everywhere’ or similar on-demand 
services, do not provide reasonable alternatives to circumvention.”697 
Regarding OmniQ specifically, and as addressed further below, the company claims to 
have a patent-pending method of space-shifting that is non-reproductive, and therefore 
noninfringing, because the copyright owner’s exclusive right to reproduce the 
copyrighted work under 17 U.S.C. § 106(1) is purportedly not implicated.698  OmniQ 
describes its space-shifting technology as “a scanner combined with a shredder.”699  
While OmniQ lacks a working prototype,700 the Acting Register understands that the 
technology will supposedly work essentially as follows:  (1) a small segment of the data 
on a DVD or Blu-ray disc within which a copyrighted motion picture is embodied is 
copied into a computer’s volatile memory; (2) that segment of the disc is destroyed; (3) 
the data in volatile memory is copied into the computer’s non-volatile memory; (4) the 
data in volatile memory is destroyed; (5) the process is repeated for the next small 
segment of data on the disc until all of the data on the disc has been transferred to the 
computer’s hard drive, leaving the disc unusable.701  If the exemption is granted, OmniQ 
intends to create an online video store by space-shifting copies of motion pictures from 
DVDs and Blu-ray discs and then selling or renting the copies by space-shifting them 
from OmniQ’s server to its customers’ devices (and back again in the case of rentals).702   
OmniQ participated in the 2015 rulemaking and advanced similar contentions.  The 
Register determined that she could not credit OmniQ’s arguments about its technology 
being non-reproductive because OmniQ “fail[ed] to establish that the technology it 
advocates has actually been developed.”703  Moreover, the Register found OmniQ’s legal 
arguments on the matter unavailing.704 
                                                      
697 Id. at 120, 124. 
698 See OmniQ Class 3 Initial at 2–5. 
699 Tr. at 22:10–11 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Mitchell, OmniQ). 
700 See Tr. at 40:22–41:10 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Mitchell, OmniQ); OmniQ Class 3 Initial at 17–20. 
701 See OmniQ Class 3 Initial at Exs. 1, 3; Tr. at 20:20–21:18 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Mitchell, OmniQ). 
702 See Tr. at 14:14–20:12, Hearing Ex. 3-B at 7 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Mitchell, OmniQ); OmniQ Class 3 
Initial at Exs. 2, 4; Tr. at 75:12–77:12 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Mitchell, OmniQ). 
703 2015 Recommendation at 123. 
704 Id. (“In any event, the cases on which OmniQ seeks to rely for its assertions involve physical 
rather than digital copies of copyrighted works.  The most closely analogous case appears instead 
to be Capitol Records v. ReDigi, which concluded that transferring digital files from one location to 

[PAGE 118]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
115 
2. Discussion 
a. Works Protected by Copyright 
The proposals in this class concern audiovisual works contained on DVDs and Blu-ray 
discs.  There is no dispute that at least some of these works are protected by copyright. 
b. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Proponents allege three bases upon which the proposed uses would be noninfringing:  
(i) that allegedly “non-reproductive” uses would not implicate any rights protected by 
copyright under section 106; (ii) that the uses are private performances also protected by 
the first sale doctrine; and (iii) that the uses are fair use under section 107. 
i. Non-Reproductive Use 
OmniQ’s primary argument is that the use does not result in a reproduction of a 
copyrighted work under section 106(1) of the Copyright Act.  Although OmniQ 
seemingly admits that its process creates a copy within the meaning of the Act,
705 it 
contends that “[a]ny process that, once complete, has generated no more copies than 
when the process began, is not a reproduction.”706  OmniQ asserts that “[t]he 
reproduction right attaches to the work, not the copy” and “[w]hether the material 
object in which the work is fixed is substituted for another material object is 
inconsequential for purposes of the reproduction right.”707  In its view, “[a]lthough the 
term ‘reproduce’ is not defined in the [Copyright] Act, it is clear that Congress intended 
to follow the plain English meaning of the term, which is to say, to ‘reproduce’ is to 
‘produce again’ or ‘produce another.’”708  OmniQ further alleges that the intermediate 
data segments in volatile memory created during its space-shifting process are not 
                                                                                                                                                              
another implicates the reproduction right and is therefore infringing, even where the original 
copy is contemporaneously or subsequently deleted.” (citations omitted)).  
705 See 17 U.S.C. § 101 (defining “[c]opies” as “material objects . . . in whi ch a work is fixed”); see 
also Tr. at 26:24–27:03 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Mitchell, OmniQ) (agreeing “that the destination [hard] 
drive . . . that the content is going to from the disc is a material object in which the work has been 
fixed”). 
706 OmniQ Class 3 Initial at 24; see also OmniQ Class 3 Reply at 17 (“[E]ven if the OmniQ method 
met the fixation requirement after the original has been un-fixed, there is still only one fixation in 
existence, and therefore, no reproduction of the work into an additional copy.”); Tr. at 27:04–14 
(Apr. 11, 2018) (Mitchell, OmniQ). 
707 OmniQ Class 3 Initial at 26. 
708 Id. at 29. 

[PAGE 119]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
116 
reproductions because they do not exist for a sufficiently long enough period of time to 
constitute fixed copies within the meaning of the Copyright Act.709   
In support, OmniQ relies primarily on two cases—one applying Canadian law —that 
each found that there was no reproduction where a special process was applied to a 
printed image that enabled physical ink comprising the image to be peeled off of its 
original paper backing and then adhered to a new backing material (e.g., canvas or a 
ceramic plaque), like a decal.710   
OmniQ attempts to distinguish the technology at issue in Capitol Records, LLC v. ReDigi 
Inc.,711 which the Register relied upon in rejecting OmniQ’s proposal in the 2015 
rulemaking.712  OmniQ appears to agree that ReDigi’s process created a reproduction, 
but asserts that its own technology is different because it deletes the original while it 
makes the new copy—as opposed to deleting it after the fact —such that two complete 
usable copies of the work never exist at the same time.713 
Opponents disagree, arguing that OmniQ’s technology would reproduce works because 
“[t]he copy resident on the new machine after OmniQ delivered it to a consumer would 
be physically distinct from the copy deleted from the disc,” i.e., “[i]t would constitute an 
entirely new thing, consisting of different electrons, that is capable of enabling 
                                                      
709 See Id. at Ex. 3 (“[T]he space-shifting process reads these chunks into volatile memory that is 
insufficiently permanent or stable to permit it to be perceived, reproduced, or otherwise 
communicated for a period of more than transitory duration.”); Tr. at 24:02 –11 (Apr. 11, 2018) 
(Mitchell, OmniQ) (“We definitely will stay within that window— that I guess it was Cablevision—
of less than 1.2 seconds but certainly not minutes.”). 
710 See OmniQ Class 3 Initial at 24–26 (citing Théberge v. Galerie d’Art du Petit Champlain inc., [2002] 
2 S.C.R. 336 (Can.) and C.M. Paula Co. v. Logan, 355 F. Supp. 189 (N.D. Tex. 1973)).  OmniQ also 
cites Lee v. Deck The Walls, Inc., 925 F. Supp. 576 (N.D. Ill. 1996), aff’d sub nom. Lee v. A.R.T. Co., 125 
F.3d 580 (7th Cir. 1997), which found that purchasing notecards and remounting them onto 
ceramic tiles and reselling them did not infringe the derivative work or distribution rights of the 
works embodied in the notecards. 
711 934 F. Supp. 2d 640 (S.D.N.Y. 2013) (finding that because the unauthorized transfer and sale of 
digital music files on the internet was a reproduction under the Copyright Act, even where the 
original copy was deleted, neither fair use nor the first sale doctrine applied), appeal docketed, No. 
16-2321 (2d Cir. July 1, 2016). 
712 See 2015 Recommendation at 123. 
713 See OmniQ Class 3 Initial at 26; Tr. at 30:07–31:08 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Mitchell, OmniQ) (stating 
“the fundamental difference here is that we don’t take that interim step of making a copy and 
then deleting it,” that is, ReDigi is “reproduc[ing] and delet[ing]” whereas OmniQ is 
“reproduc[ing] while delet[ing]”) (emphases added). 

[PAGE 120]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
117 
perception of the same work (i.e., a copy).”714  Opponents contend that OmniQ’s 
technology is “distinguishable from transferring physical copies of images onto new 
objects,”715 arguing that the case cited by OmniQ “involved very different technology 
from a different era.”716  Opponents also disagree with OmniQ’s characterization of 
ReDigi, explaining that “[t]he [court’s] reasoning really turned on whether the copy in 
the end user’s home is a new copy that is resident in a new material object and whether 
that violates the reproduction right without regard to what you do with the original 
copy, whether you delete it instantaneously while you’re copying it, before or after.”717 
Having considered the relevant comments and testimony, the Acting Register finds that 
under current law, OmniQ’s self-described process is likely to be an unauthorized 
reproduction in violation of section 106(1).  As in 2015, the most relevant case 
interpreting the reproduction right in this context still appears to be ReDigi.  In the 2015 
rulemaking, the Register rejected OmniQ’s claims, explaining that the ReDigi court 
“concluded that transferring digital files from one location to another implicates the 
reproduction right and is therefore infringing, even where the original copy is 
contemporaneously or subsequently deleted.”
718  
The Acting Register finds no basis to depart from the determination made in the 2015 
proceeding.  Section 106(1) of the Copyright Act provides for the exclusive right of 
copyright owners “to reproduce the copyrighted work in copies.”719  “Copies” are 
defined as “material objects, other than phonorecords, in which a work is fixed by any 
method now known or later developed, and from which the work can be perceived, 
reproduced, or otherwise communicated, either directly or with the aid of a machine or 
device.”720  Under section 101, “[a] work is ‘fixed’ in a tangible medium of expression 
when its embodiment in a copy . . . is sufficiently permanent . . . .”721  The legislative 
history of the Copyright Act further explains: 
                                                      
714 Joint Creators II Class 3 Opp’n at 14; see Tr. at 28:21–29:07 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Williams, Joint 
Creators II). 
715 Joint Creators II Class 3 Opp’n at 13–14. 
716 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 3 Opp’n at 4. 
717 Tr. at 31:10–32:16 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II); see Joint Creators II Class 3 
Opp’n at 13–14. 
718 See 2015 Recommendation at 123 (citing ReDigi, 934 F. Supp. 2d at 650 (“It is beside the point 
that the original phonorecord no longer exists.  It matters only that a new phonorecord has been 
created.”)). 
719 17 U.S.C. § 106(1). 
720 Id. § 101. 
721 Id. 

[PAGE 121]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
118 
Read together with the relevant definitions in section 101, the right “to 
reproduce the copyrighted work in copies or phonorecords” means the 
right to produce a material object in which the work is duplicated, 
transcribed, imitiated [sic], or simulated in a fixed form from which it can 
be “perceived, reproduced, or otherwise communicated, either directly or 
with the aid of a machine or device.”722 
From this, the ReDigi court found that “the plain text of the Copyright Act makes clear 
that reproduction occurs when a copyrighted work is fixed in a new material object,” and 
that the legislative history “bolsters this reading.”723  The court held that to “reproduce” 
a work simply means to make a “copy” of it within the meaning of section 101.724  The 
court further held that even where a new copy replaces the original (either 
contemporaneously or subsequently), an infringement of the reproduction right has 
occurred; there is no additional requirement that a copy must increase the total number 
of copies available for use for that copy to be a reproduction.725   
Thus, it appears OmniQ’s process would likely result in an unauthorized reproduction 
because its method creates a new copy of the work.726  Indeed, as the Register previously 
stated, “a digital file transfer creates a new copy or phonorecord on the transferee’s 
computer.”727  To paraphrase the ReDigi court, “the fact that a file has moved from one 
material object— the [DVD or Blu-ray disc]—to another —the [OmniQ] server —means 
that a reproduction has occurred.”728  It matters not that the original copy is destroyed.729 
                                                      
722 H.R. REP. NO. 94-1476, at 61, reprinted in 1976 U.S.C.C.A.N. 5659, 5675; S. REP. NO. 94-473, at 58 
(1975). 
723 ReDigi, 934 F. Supp. 2d at 648–49. 
724 Considering a dictionary definition of “reproduction,” the court also noted “[s]ignificantly, it is 
not defined as ‘to produce again while the original exists.’”  Id. at 650. 
725 See id. at 650 (“[I]t is the creation of a new material object and not an additional material object 
that defines the reproduction right.”). 
726 See, e.g., Tr. at 26:24–27:03 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Mitchell, OmniQ). 
727 U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, THE MAKING AVAILABLE RIGHT IN THE UNITED STATES 22 n.94 (2016) 
(“Making Available Report”); U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, DMCA SECTION 104 REPORT 79 & n.272 
(2001) (“Section 104 Report”) (“The ultimate product of one of these digital transmissio ns is a 
new copy in the possession of a new person. . . .  [T]he recipient obtains a new copy, not the same 
one with which the sender began.”); see also ReDigi, 934 F. Supp. 2d at 649 (“[As] confirmed by the 
laws of physics[, i]t is simply impossible that the same ‘material object’ can be transferred over 
the Internet.”). 
728 ReDigi, 934 F. Supp. 2d at 650. 
729 See id. 

[PAGE 122]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
119 
OmniQ’s reliance upon physical ink cases is inapposite.  Besides the fact that one is a 
Canadian case, the other was decided under the 1909 Copyright Act, and neither case 
concerns the digital world, the cases do not support OmniQ’s contention that “where the 
owner of a lawfully made copy transfers the fixation of a work from one material object 
to another, without altering the work or causing more copies to be created, there is no 
infringement of the exclusive right to reproduce the work into copies.”730  In both of 
these cases, the work was originally fixed in ink that was then removed from one 
backing and adhered to another.731  While there was substitution of the backing, there 
was no substitution of the material object in which the work was fixed (i.e., the ink).732  
This is markedly different from the digital realm where transferring a work requires 
fixing it in a new material object—i.e., making a new copy. 733  In any event, ReDigi is the 
more analogous and persuasive precedent. 
ii. Private Performance and First Sale Doctrine 
In further support of its exemption proposal, OmniQ points to the importance and 
public benefits of preserving private performances
734 and the ability to freely alienate 
copies of works pursuant to the first sale doctrine under section 109 of the Copyright 
Act.
735  As OmniQ appears to premise consideration of these policy arguments on its 
technology making no reproduction,736 this is unpersuasive.  With regard to private 
performances, the Register has repeatedly determined that “space-shifting for 
noninfringing private performance is insufficient grounds for an exemption if the spaceshifting also requires a reproduction.”737  The Copyright Office has similarly concluded 
                                                      
730 See OmniQ Class 3 Initial at 27. 
731 See ReDigi, 934 F. Supp. 2d at 650–51 (discussing facts at issue in C.M. Paula Co. v. Logan). 
732 See C.M. Paula Co., 355 F. Supp. at 191 n.4 (“The rationale upon which the Court’s holding is 
based makes it immaterial whether the paper backing is peeled away or not, since either process 
uses the original print.”); Théberge, [2002] 2 S.C.R. at 358 (“[W]e are talking here about moving the 
same physical layer of inks around different blank substrates.”). 
733 See Making Available Report at 22 n.94; Section 104 Report at 79 & n.272.   
734 See OmniQ Class 3 Initial at 5, 21, 35. 
735 See id. at 8–9 (“If we do not allow a comparable manifestation of the principles underlying the 
first sale doctrine to evolve alongside the technological evolution, we risk losing the important 
benefits of the doctrine.”); see also id. at 5–13, 22–23, 31, 39–44; OmniQ Class 3 Reply at 10–16.  But 
despite devoting considerable time to discussing the first sale doctrine, OmniQ confusingly states 
that its petition “has nothing to do directly with the first sale doctrine.”  See OmniQ Class 3 Initial 
at 9. 
736 See, e.g., OmniQ Class 3 Initial at 5, 21. 
737 See 2015 Recommendation at 123–24 n. 773 (citing 2006 Recommendation at 70). 

[PAGE 123]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
120 
that the first sale doctrine does not apply to digital transfers of copies of works.738  In any 
event, it is only a defense to an infringement of the distribution right under section 
106(3), not the reproduction right under section 106(1).739   
iii. Fair Use 
Proponents offer little argument in support of their space-shifting activities being fair 
use.  There were no substantive comments submitted squarely in support of the personal 
space-shifting exemption sought by the De Pretis petition, although Consumers Union 
and FSF voiced generic support for the exemption.  In fact, OmniQ’s initial comment 
identifies reliance upon the fair use doctrine as a “fundamental weakness” of the De 
Pretis petition, preferring instead to emphasize its assertion, addressed above, that its 
own technology avoids making reproductions.
740  But OmniQ does appear to contend in 
the alternative that its business model would constitute fair use.  While admitting its 
technology is not “transformative,” it asserts that under the fourth factor, “there is no 
‘market for providing access’ that is cognizable” and that “the ‘unfettered personal 
copying’ that might have occurred in the case of ‘unfettered’ backup or convenience 
‘personal use’ copies is not present here.”741  Similarly, SolaByte asserts that its proposed 
commercial technology would permit “the consumer [to] exercise their fair use 
rights.”742  While SolaByte did not analyze each of the fair use factors, it claimed that 
“[t]he consequences . . . from a fair use perspective [are] low” because “we keep the 
content in a secure form” and thus “reduce the consequence or the risk of piracy.”743   
                                                      
738 See Section 104 Report at 78–80 (“We therefore conclude that section 109 does not apply to 
digital transmission of works.”); see also Making Available Report at 22 n.94 (reaffirming that 
there is no digital first sale doctrine); DEP’T OF COMMERCE INTERNET POLICY TASK FORCE, WHITE 
PAPER ON REMIXES, FIRST SALE, AND STATUTORY DAMAGES 4 (2016) (“ Amending the law to extend 
the first sale doctrine to digital transmissions of copyrighted works is not advisable at this 
time.”); ReDigi, 934 F. Supp. 2d at 655 (finding that the first sale doctrine does not apply to digital 
transfers because  “the statute protects only distribution by ‘the owner of a particular copy or 
phonorecord . . . of that copy or phonorecord,” and in the digital context, it is “impossible for the 
user to sell her ‘particular’ phonorecord”) (omission in original) (quoting 17 U.S.C. § 109(a)). 
739 17 U.S.C. § 109(a); see also ReDigi, 934 F. Supp. 2d at 655; Section 104 Report at 80 (“[W]hen the 
owner of a lawful copy of a copyrighted work digitally transmits that work in a way that 
exercises the reproduction right without authorization, section 109 does not provide a defense to 
infringement.”). 
740 OmniQ Class 3 Initial at 4 (“In the absence of any reproduction, there is no need to apply fair 
use analysis to justify it.”). 
741 OmniQ Class 3 Reply at 20. 
742 Tr. at 45:22–46:01 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Chatfield, SolaByte). 
743 Tr. at 46:02–08 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Chatfield, SolaByte). 

[PAGE 124]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
121 
In opposition, Joint Creators II contend that recent case law developments demonstrate 
that it is “not only the case that it is unlikely that space-shifting is a fair use—it is clear 
that space-shifting is not a fair use.”744  Joint Creators II also claim that analyzing the 
section 107 factors demonstrates that space-shifting is unlikely to be fair use.745  They 
disagree that having a single encrypted copy at the end of a space-shifting process 
meaningfully alters the analysis.746 
In 2015, the Register recognized the consumer and policy appeal of the proposed 
exemptions, as consumers who purchase a movie in one format can experience 
frustration when they are unable to watch that film in a different format on another 
device.
747  She noted, however, that “the section 1201 rulemaking is a carefully tailored 
proceeding that is designed to incorporate, not replace, the determinations of Congress 
and the courts.”748  After careful review, the Register did “not find any fair use precedent 
that sanctions broad space-shifting or format shifting.”749  Since then, the Ninth Circuit, 
in Disney Enterprises, Inc. v. VidAngel, Inc., rejected the contention that space-shifting is a 
“paradigmatic example of fair use,” noting that “[t]he reported decisions unanimously 
reject the view that space-shifting is fair use under § 107.”
750  In doing so, the court 
credited the Register’s conclusion in the last rulemaking that “‘the law of fair use, as it 
stands today, does not sanction broad-based space-shifting or format-shifting.’”751  The 
court ultimately concluded more narrowly that “even assuming space-shifting could be 
fair use, [the defendant’s] service is not personal and non-commercial space-shifting.”752   
With regard to personal space-shifting, in light of the lack of record and in the absence of 
clear supporting precedent, the Acting Register finds no basis to depart from the fair use 
                                                      
744 Joint Creators II Class 3 Opp’n at 3, 17 (citing Disney Enters., Inc. v. VidAngel, Inc., 869 F.3d 848, 
862 (9th Cir. 2017)); Tr. at 61:01–05 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II). 
745 Joint Creators II Class 3 Opp’n at 18–19 (asserting that all of the factors weigh against fair use). 
746 Tr. at 68:19–70:10 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II). 
747 2015 Recommendation at 119. 
748 Id. at 120. 
749 Id. 
750 VidAngel, 869 F.3d at 862 (citing A&M Records, Inc. v. Napster, Inc., 239 F.3d 1004, 1019 (9th Cir. 
2001) and UMG Recordings, Inc. v. MP3.com, Inc., 92 F. Supp. 2d 349, 351 (S.D.N.Y. 2000).  Notably, 
the court considered, but did not credit, Recording Indus. Ass’n of Am. v. Diamond Multimedia Sys., 
Inc., 180 F.3d 1072, 1079 (9th Cir. 1999), as supporting the contention that space-shifting is fair 
use.  See id. 
751 VidAngel, 869 F.3d at 862 (quoting 2015 Final Rule at 65,960).   
752 See id.  

[PAGE 125]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
122 
analysis and ultimate conclusion reached in the 2015 proceeding, where “the Register 
[was] unable to determine that the proposed uses [were] noninfringing.”753   
As to OmniQ and SolaByte, the commercial nature and potential market effects of their 
business models complicate the fair use analysis, and not in their favor. 
Specifically, the first factor does not favor them, as they seek to reproduce, or enable 
others to reproduce, audiovisual works for the same entertainment purposes as 
originally intended;754 OmniQ itself admits that its uses are not transformative.755  
Moreover, it is undisputed that both OmniQ and SolaByte are commercial enterprises.756  
Indeed, OmniQ intends “to build the world’s biggest video store.”757  The second and 
third factors heavily disfavor fair use, as the proposals would encompass motion 
pictures and television programs that are likely to be highly creative in nature and at the 
core of copyright’s protective purpose,758 and because the proposals are predicated on a 
desire to reproduce entire copyrighted works.759 
With regard to the fourth factor, the record suggests that OmniQ’s and SolaByte’s 
businesses may negatively impact the market for or value of copyrighted works.  Joint 
Creators II provide substantial evidence of extensive markets for internet-based 
distribution services for copyrighted audiovisual works, including digital rentals (e.g., 
iTunes, GooglePlay, Amazon Video, Vudu), online streaming and over-the-top services 
(e.g., Hulu, Netflix, Amazon Video), and on-demand cable and satellite television 
offerings (e.g., Comcast, Verizon Fios, AT&T U-verse, DIRECTV, DISH Network).760  Joint 
Creators II also highlight disc-to-digital services, like Vudu, and digital locker services, 
like Movies Anywhere and Ultraviolet, that allow users to access content initially 
                                                      
753 See 2015 Recommendation at 122–24; see also 2012 Recommendation at 162–65. 
754 See 2015 Recommendation at 122; 2012 Recommendation at 164. 
755 See OmniQ Class 3 Reply at 20 (“[I]t is true that the non-reproductive space-shifting is not 
transformative of the work . . . .”) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
756 Tr. at 75:12–77:12 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Mitchell, OmniQ); Tr. 45:14–21 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Chatfield, 
SolaByte). 
757 OmniQ Class 3 Initial at Ex. 4.  While OmniQ’s comments suggest that it might permit others 
to use its technology in different ways at some point in the future, these contentions are 
speculative and do not change the purpose of the commercial uses OmniQ itself seeks to make 
and for which it is asking an exemption, which is primarily to create a content library for its 
online video store. 
758 See 2015 Recommendation at 122–23; 2012 Recommendation at 164. 
759 See 2015 Recommendation at 123; 2012 Recommendation at 165. 
760 Joint Creators II Class 3 Opp’n at 3–11; see also Tr. at 163:11–164:04, 167:24–168:06 (Apr. 25, 
2018) (Gilford, Movies Anywhere).  

[PAGE 126]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
123 
purchased in a disc medium through an online platform (or across online platforms).761  
Finally, they introduce evidence that DVDs and Blu-ray discs bundled in “bonus packs,” 
which include access to a separate online or downloadable copy, are sold at a higher 
price point than is charged for just the disc by itself.762  Opponents assert that the 
proposed exemption, which could permit “unfettered personal copying” as well as 
commercial competitors to these services, will harm these distribution models.763 
Proponents’ arguments to the contrary are not persuasive.  They contend that their 
space-shifting would produce a single, encrypted copy of the work and, in OmniQ’s 
case, that only one customer could watch that copy at a time.764  OmniQ further argues 
that its space-shifting can “restore the benefits” of the first sale doctrine, but the 
Copyright Office has previously concluded that the first sale doctrine should not apply 
to digital transfers.765  In light of proponents’ avowed intent to substitute their own nontransformative, commercial services for the many preexisting licensed models identified 
by opponents—including but not only by serving as “the w orld’s largest video rental 
store”— the Acting Register concludes that the fourth factor disfavors proponents.766 
In balancing the section 107 factors, Acting Register finds that the non-transformative, 
commercial uses proposed by OmniQ and SolaByte are disfavored.767  Further, while the 
law may one day clarify whether certain space-shifting uses, such as those of a purely 
personal and noncommercial nature, are fair use, the record as submitted does not 
support that conclusion currently.  In sum, based on the relevant record, the Acting 
                                                      
761 Joint Creators II Class 3 Opp’n at 7–9; Tr. at 162:04–180:13, Hearing Ex. 3-C (Apr. 25, 2018) 
(Gilford, Movies Anywhere). 
762 Joint Creators II Class 3 Opp’n at 6. 
763 Id. at 19. 
764 See OmniQ Class 3 Reply at 20; Tr. at 45:22–46:08 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Chatfield, SolaByte). 
765 See OmniQ Class 3 Initial at 31; Section 104 Report at 80–101.   
766 See TVEyes, 883 F.3d at 180 (“Since the ability to re-distribute Fox’s content in the manner that 
TVEyes does is clearly of value to TVEyes, it (or a similar service) should be willing to pay Fox for 
the right to offer the content.  By providing Fox’s content to TVEyes clients without payment to 
Fox, TVEyes is in effect depriving Fox of licensing revenues from TVEyes or from similar 
entities”); cf. MP3.com, 92 F. Supp. 2d at 352 (“ Any allegedly positive impact of defendant’s 
activities on plaintiffs’ prior market in no way frees defendant to usurp a further market that 
directly derives from reproduction of the plaintiffs’ copyrighted works.”). 
767 In fact, SolaByte’s business model, at least as presented in this proceeding, appears similar to 
one that was found to not qualify as fair use.  See MP3.com, 92 F. Supp. 2d at 350–53 (finding no 
fair use where a service created unauthorized copies of sound recordings from CDs on its 
computer servers and then permitted subscribers to listen to those copies over the internet after 
the service authenticated that the subscriber already owned a CD copy of the particular sound 
recording).  

[PAGE 127]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
124 
Register does not conclude that proponents’ space-shifting activities are likely 
noninfringing under current law. 
c. Causation 
As discussed above, the Acting Register cannot conclude that the proposed uses are 
likely noninfringing and, as discussed below, the record does not support a finding of 
any cognizable adverse effects due to the prohibition on circumvention.  As a result, she 
cannot conclude that proponents’ inability to engage in their proposed uses are “clearly 
attributable to implementation of a technological protection measure.”
768  Specifically as 
to OmniQ’s contention that the availability of works on the secondary market (e.g., for 
resale, rental, lending, or gifting) is being diminished by a shift from ownership of 
copies to a “permissions-based,” “access economy,” assuming this is the case, the record 
is insufficient to establish that section 1201 is the cause of any such purported harm.769  
Instead, the record may suggest that any contraction of the secondary market is the 
result of an increasing consumer preference for online access over physical media.770 
d. Asserted Adverse Effects 
Even if the Acting Register could conclude that the proposed uses are likely 
noninfringing, there is not a sufficient record of cognizable adverse effects resulting 
from section 1201 to warrant granting an exemption.  
Under the first statutory factor, proponents argue that the overall availability of works 
for public use is shrinking because the hardware and software needed to play disc media 
are becoming less available in the marketplace.771  They argue that online content 
distribution platforms, taken in the aggregate, only offer a small and always-changing 
fraction of the titles historically available on DVD and Blu-ray disc, and that the costs of 
these services are unacceptable, especially where users already own the content in disc 
form.772 
Opponents, as discussed above, provide evidence of alternatives to circumvention in the 
form of a substantial number of online distribution platforms for accessing copyrighted 
                                                      
768 2015 Recommendation at 16 (quoting Commerce Comm. Report at 37); see House Manager’s 
Report at 6. 
769 See OmniQ Class 3 Reply at 11; see also OmniQ Class 3 Initial at 1–2, 5–13. 
770 See Joint Creators II Class 3 Opp’n at 2–11. 
771 See OmniQ Class 3 Initial at 39, 42–44; Tr. at 83:04–13 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Chatfield, SolaByte); Tr. 
at 8:08–14:08, Hearing Ex. 3-A at 10 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Chatfield, SolaByte). 
772 See OmniQ Class 3 Initial at 32–33, 39, Ex. 4; OmniQ Class 3 Reply at 10–15; Tr. 81:06–82:22 
(Apr. 11, 2018) (Chatfield, SolaByte); Tr. at 8:08–14:08, Hearing Ex. 3-A at 9 (Apr. 11, 2018) 
(Chatfield, SolaByte). 

[PAGE 128]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
125 
audiovisual works, the vast majority of which they claim exist as viable business models 
only because of the ability to employ TPMs to protect the content from unauthorized 
uses.773  Joint Creators II disagree that movies are less available than before the rise of 
digital distribution, or that proponents have established that there is actually any 
content that can only be accessed on DVDs or Blu-ray discs.
774  They relatedly assert that 
disc media remains readily accessible through available peripheral devices.775  Joint 
Creators II contend that the licensed online distribution platforms not only provide 
many of the benefits of the first sale doctrine, but also offer additional benefits, such as 
“portability, cross-platform compatibility, the ability to share multiple copies with 
family or friends, the availability of cloud storage, and the ability to re-download copies 
of purchased titles in the event of loss or even for convenience of storage.”776  Joint 
Creators II argue that space-shifting would directly compete with these existing online 
distribution models, decreasing revenue from lawful sales of digital content and 
ultimately threatening the viability of creative output made available commercially.777   
Based on the record, the Acting Register does not find that section 1201 is negatively 
impacting the availability for use of copyrighted works.  First, the record does not 
indicate that hardware and software to play DVDs and Blu-ray discs are no longer 
reasonably available on the market.  Second, the record suggests that the services cited 
by Joint Creators II are reasonable alternatives to circumvention.  While some services 
individually may have fewer titles than what is available on disc media, the record does 
not support a finding that all of these services do.  OmniQ seems to suggest that about 
30,000 titles would be reasonable, as that is the number of titles it says one of the largest 
video stores used to carry.
778  But at least one of the services listed by Joint Creators II, 
Vudu, appears to have over 100,000 titles available for purchase or rental.779  With regard 
to the potential cost to consumers to repurchase content originally procured on disc 
media, as the Register explained in the 2015 proceeding, “the 1201 exemption process is 
meant to ensure that users have access to copyrighted works; it is not meant to 
                                                      
773 See DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 3 Opp’n at 3; Joint Creators II Class 3 Opp’n at 2–11, 19–20. 
774 See Joint Creators II Class 3 Opp’n at 11–12, 20. 
775 See id. at 20–21. 
776 Id. at 25. 
777 See id. at 4–6, 21–22 (warning that in such a case, “copyright owners would be less likely to 
make available lower priced options that limit the number of copies a consumer might make, or 
which restrict platforms through which a work could be accessed”); see also Tr. at 67:10–68:16 
(Apr. 11, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II) (“[I]t’s quite possible that prices would go up in the 
first instance and a lot of these lower-priced offerings wouldn’t be available.”). 
778 See OmniQ Class 3 Initial, Ex. 4; Tr. at 75:24–76:06 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Mitchell, OmniQ). 
779 See About Us, VUDU, https://www.vudu.com/content/movies/aboutus (last visited Sept. 27, 
2018). 

[PAGE 129]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
126 
guarantee consumers the ability to access content through their preferred method or 
format.”780  Certainly, this conclusion applies with at least equal force to SolaByte’s 
desire to avoid securing licenses from copyright owners to build its commercial 
streaming library and compete with an array of licensed platforms offering the same 
content.781  Further, Joint Creators II’s assertions that discs bundled with digital access 
usually are priced at a premium782 suggest that “consumers purchasing DVDs and Bluray discs [without such features] are not necessarily harmed in economic terms.”783 
Regarding the second and third factors, proponents offer few arguments, with OmniQ 
essentially providing examples of a teacher and a film critic seeking to use motion 
pictures in their work.784  OmniQ, however, seems to admit that the works could be 
accessed by alternative means, such as “subscribing to a new monthly subscription 
service,” “purchas[ing] a copy,” or borrowing it from an “inconvenient” source, such as 
a library.
785  The mere inconvenience of obtaining alternative access is generally not an 
adverse effect.786   
Turning to the effect of circumvention on the market for or value of copyrighted works, 
OmniQ argues that its so-called “non-reproductive” space-shifting would have a 
positive effect, because it would expand the secondary market for copies of the work.787  
Joint Creators II, on the other hand, assert that the uses would have a negative impact 
because “space-shifting not only results in the generation of in-the-clear . . . copies that 
can be disseminated widely, but also directly competes with authorized offerings.”788  
The Acting Register concludes that this factor disfavors the exemption.  OmniQ’s claims 
about the secondary market are speculative, and as discussed above, the market 
currently offers consumers myriad online distribution models for accessing copyrighted 
works. 
                                                      
780 2015 Recommendation at 124 (citing 2012 Recommendation at 163).   
781 See Tr. at 44:13–45:13 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Chatfield, SolaByte).   
782 See Joint Creators II Class 3 Opp’n at 6, 21–22. 
783 2015 Recommendation at 124. 
784 See OmniQ Class 3 Initial at 34–36. 
785 See id. at 34. 
786 House Manager’s Report at 6; see Section 1201 Report at 121 (“[W]hether or not something is an 
adverse effect or a mere inconvenience can depend upon the costs and burdens involved in 
making use of reasonable alternatives.”). 
787 See OmniQ Class 3 Initial at 36. 
788 Joint Creators II Class 3 Opp’n at 23 (“OmniQ’s business model would lower the value of 
works because copyright owners who sell access to copies in one format at a particular price 
point would be deprived of the ability to sell access to that work in other formats, or to charge 
higher prices for bundled access to works in multiple formats.”). 

[PAGE 130]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
127 
The Acting Register does not find any of proponents’ other arguments persuasive.  
Accordingly, on the present record, the Acting Register cannot find that the inability to 
engage in the proposed activities is adversely affecting, or in the next three years is 
likely to adversely affect, the ability to make noninfringing uses of copyrighted works. 
3. NTIA Comments 
Unlike in prior rulemakings, where NTIA “supported limited versions of a 
noncommercial space-shifting exemption . . . mainly in the interest of consumer 
protection,”789 NTIA agrees with the Acting Register that an exemption for this class is 
not warranted in the present rulemaking.790  NTIA acknowledges that the “legal status of 
the concept of space-shifting remains a matter of dispute among copyright experts” and 
that it “has not been explicitly established as non-infringing on the basis of the fair use 
doctrine.”791  Examining the four fair use factors, NTIA concludes that the “fair use 
analysis generally weighs against granting the proposed exemptions.”792  NTIA finds the 
first factor to weigh in favor of De Pretis’s personal use but against OmniQ’s commercial 
and non-transformative proposal; it finds the second factor to weigh against both; it 
finds the third factor to either weigh against or be neutral as to both; and it finds the 
fourth factor to weigh against fair use.793 
NTIA adds that “although [it] is sympathetic to the challenges encountered by those 
who own copies of motion pictures in formats no longer compatible with modern 
devices” and “[a]lthough noncommercial space-shifting might be a non-infringing use, 
the proponents have not established in this proceeding that their specific proposal 
would be non-infringing.”794  Moreover, NTIA recognizes that “[p]roponents failed to 
demonstrate that the ‘prevalence of [encrypted digital content] is diminishing the ability 
of individuals to use these works in ways that are otherwise lawful.’”
795 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
Based on the record presented during the proceeding, the Acting Register cannot 
conclude that the space-shifting activities advocated by proponents (and largely for 
commercial purposes) are noninfringing, or that the prohibition on circumvention has, 
or is likely to have, an adverse impact on noninfringing uses of the underlying 
                                                      
789 NTIA Letter at 37 n.184. 
790 Id. at 37–38. 
791 Id. at 37 & n.185. 
792 Id. at 37. 
793 Id. at 37–38. 
794 Id. 
795 Id. at 38 (quoting 2015 Recommendation at 15 (quoting Commerce Comm. Report at 37)).  

[PAGE 131]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
128 
audiovisual works.  The Acting Register therefore declines to recommend granting an 
exemption for this class. 
D. Proposed Class 4: Audiovisual Works—HDCP/HDMI  
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption  
Proposed Class 4 concerns a petition from Andrew “bunnie” Huang (represented by 
EFF) for an exemption “to make noninfringing uses of audiovisual works that are 
subjected to High-bandwidth Digital Content Protection (HDCP).”796  Huang describes 
HDCP as “a protocol used to restrict content sent over High-Definition Multimedia 
Interface (HDMI) cables,”797 or “a standard for video transport from one device to 
another.”798  He explains that “[m]any devices that play video discs and video game 
software encode their output using HDCP” and that “[t]his interferes with capturing the 
output for subsequent noninfringing uses, such as fair use or automated analysis of 
noncopyrightable elements of the content.”
799  Huang seeks an exemption for the “[f]ull 
[r]ange of [n]oninfringing [u]ses of HDCP-[e]ncumbered [w]orks,” “not an exemption 
that identifies a tiny sliver of noninfringing uses while leaving the rest prohibited.”800  
His petition notes that the “types of users who want access are, in the first instance, 
Petitioner bunnie Huang, as well as a range of individuals including scholars, remixers, 
video game enthusiasts, and businesses who use digital video playback devices.”801 
In addition to Huang, FSF filed comments generally supporting this exemption.802  Class 
4 was opposed by Joint Creators II, Digital Content Protection, L.L.C. (“DCP”), 
Entertainment Software Association (“ESA”) and DVD CCA and AACS LA.803 
                                                      
796 Huang Class 4 Pet. at 2. 
797 Id. 
798 Huang Class 4 Initial at 1. 
799 Huang Class 4 Pet. at 2. 
800 Huang Class 4 Reply at 4; see also Huang Class 4 Initial at 5; Tr. at 173:20–21 (Apr. 24, 2018) 
(Walsh, EFF). 
801 Huang Class 4 Pet. at 3. 
802 During the public hearing, the Copyright Office heard from two additio nal individuals 
supporting the exemption.  See Tr. at 209:07–11 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit).  In particular, one 
stated that he has run into problems with HDCP when making video recordings for conferences 
and public meetings, where laptop monitor outputs sometimes “default to having HDCP.”  Tr. at 
209:23–214:06 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Freeman, SaurikIT).  Without a further factual record, the Acting 
Register is unable to appropriately evaluate this concern.  For example, it is not clear whether 

[PAGE 132]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
129 
b. Overview of Issues 
In their comments, opponents provide additional detail about HDCP.  As described by 
Joint Creators II: 
HDCP technologies protect high-value digital transmissions of motion 
pictures, television programs, video games, and audio against 
unauthorized interception and copying while a digital set-top box, disc 
player, video game console, or digital video recorder delivers the content 
to a television or computer for viewing. . . .  The system is also designed 
to prevent HDCP-encrypted content from being played on unauthorized 
devices that expose works to copying, unauthorized viewing or listening, 
and redistribution.  The technology enables a service provider to identify 
whether a particular receiver is authorized to receive the content before 
transmitting encrypted copyrighted works.  If the receiver is an 
authorized device, the transmitter provides the content, but encrypts it to 
prevent interception.  HDCP is recognized as the industry standard by 
content providers and device manufacturers.
804   
DCP—which licenses HDCP—ela borates: 
When a user instructs the Source Device to play content protected by . . . a 
storage or streaming TPM, the Source Device decrypts and decompresses 
the content in preparation to transmitting it to another device.  That 
Device is often a display, such as a high-definition TV (the Sink).  If the 
source TPM requires link protection, HDCP authenticates the Sink.  Then 
HDCP encrypts only small portions of the decrypted-decompressed 
content at a time when that portion is prepared for transmission across an 
HDMI connection to the Sink (an HDTV).  The Sink then decrypts each 
portion when received.  If it has the capability, the Sink can manipulate 
the content, e.g., provide picture-in-picture, overlay with different 
content, etc. . . . HDCP is agnostic as to the content.
805 
                                                                                                                                                              
HDCP is active when the output is being transmitted with the authority of the copyright owner 
(e.g., the presenter who created it). 
803 DCP is a wholly owned subsidiary of Intel Corporation, which developed HDCP.  DCP Class 4 
Opp’n at 3 & n.6. 
804 Joint Creators II Class 4 Opp’n at 5; see also ESA Class 4 Opp’n at 2, 4. 
805 DCP Class 4 Opp’n at 3 (citation omitted); see also DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 4 Opp’n at 3 
(“[I]n the United States all High Definition and Ultra High Definition digital televisions have 
inputs for HDMI transmissions.”). 

[PAGE 133]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
130 
Huang says that the “master key” for HDCP was uploaded to the internet in 2010,806 but 
participants disagreed whether the current version of HDCP has been cracked.807   
Although the Copyright Office has not previously considered the precise issues 
presented here, Huang is a plaintiff in ongoing litigation against the Library of Congress 
and the Copyright Office concerning section 1201.  In that judicial proceeding, Huang—
who resides in Singapore—alleges that he is “the inventor of the ‘NeTV’ devices for 
editing high-definition digital video streams,” which has “a limited ability to 
superimpose pixels onto an HDMI stream, but its functionality is dramatically restricted 
because it is designed not to circumvent HDCP.”808  Huang appears to be developing a 
“NeTV2” which he says will be capable of adding “opaque text overlay” to live 
encrypted video streams “without ever decrypting the video stream,” and on 
unencrypted video feeds, will provide “full access to the entire video stream” to let users 
“arbitrarily manipulate pixels in real time.”809 
According to his complaint, Huang, through his company Alphamax, LLC, also seeks to 
develop and commercially distribute a device called a “NeTVCR,” which would 
circumvent HDCP to, among other things, “save content for later viewing, move content 
to a viewing device of the user’s choice, or convert content to a more useful format.”810  
Huang’s written comments do not mention Alphamax, though his counsel stated that 
the NeTVCR does not yet exist,
811 and when asked, consistently represented that the 
proposal only pertains to the personal uses of individuals.812  This makes sense given 
                                                      
806 Huang Class 4 Initial at 2. 
807 See Tr. at 174:16–175:18 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Walsh, EFF; Burger, DCP; Taylor, DVD CCA & AACS 
LA). 
808 Complaint for Declaratory & Injunctive Relief ¶¶ 6, 89, 98, Green v. U.S. Dep’t of Justice, No. 
1:16-cv-01492-EGS (D.D.C. July 21, 2016); see also Tr. at 159:14–160:05, 170:19–171:05 (Apr. 24, 
2018) (Walsh, EFF) (stating that “because it doesn’t circumvent, it can’t achieve any of the uses 
that we’re talking about here,” such as creating transparent overlays, picture-in-picture, rescaling 
the image, or space-, time-, or format-shifting, but also stating that “it enables a lesser form of 
some of the uses that we’re talking about”).   
809 NeTV2, CROWD SUPPLY, https://www.crowdsupply.com/alphamax/netv2 (last visited Sept. 27, 
2018). 
810 Complaint for Declaratory & Injunctive Relief ¶¶ 90–91, 93, 99–102, Green v. U.S. Dep’t of 
Justice, No. 1:16-cv-01492-EGS (D.D.C. July 21, 2016). 
811 Tr. at 155:21–22 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Walsh, EFF). 
812 See, e.g., Tr. at 158:18–159:05 (“[A] person, to take advantage of the exemption, needs to create 
the technology to do that for their own personal use.  So do you mean would Dr. Huang be able 
to create a device [such as the NeTVCR] for his personal use to take advantage of the exemption?  
The answer is yes.”); Tr. at 155:12–17 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Walsh, EFF) (suggesting that the NeTVCR is 
“outside of the scope of the rulemaking”).  Consequently, the Acting Register does not consider 

[PAGE 134]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
131 
that distributing a device such as the NeTVCR may also be a trafficking violation under 
section 1201(a)(2).  Indeed, an overarching contention from opponents is that the true 
aim of Huang’s proposal is to create a commercial market for his NeTVCR, which they 
argue would enable large-scale piracy of motion pictures.813 
2. Discussion 
a. Scope of the Proposed Class 
Huang seeks an extraordinarily broad exemption for all audiovisual works in any 
medium for all noninfringing uses, the only limitation being that the work be 
encumbered by HDCP when passing over HDMI.  Opponents object, arguing that the 
statute does not permit such a broad exemption.814 
The Acting Register agrees— the proposal is broader than the statute can bear.  To start, 
it does not seem to constitute “a particular class of copyrighted works” within the 
meaning of section 1201(a)(1).815  Congress intended for a class to be “a narrow and 
focused subset of the broad categories of works . . . identified in section 102 of the 
Copyright Act,” but audiovisual works are themselves a section 102 category.816  The 
Office has suggested that while a class “might be defined in part by reference to . . . the 
access control measures applied to them[, d]efining an exemption solely by reference to 
. . . the access control measures applied to a work . . . would be inconsistent with 
Congress’s intent in directing the Register and Librarian to define a ‘particular class’ of 
‘works.’”
817  Regardless, because HDCP is the industry standard for protecting 
                                                                                                                                                              
Huang’s proposal to cover development or distribution of the NeTVCR by his company 
Alphamax. 
813 See DCP Class 4 Opp’n at 13; Joint Creators II Class 4 Opp’n at 4, 15–17; Tr. at 176:09–177:03 
(Apr. 24, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II) (“I think the Office has been hesitant rightly to grant 
exemptions where it almost invites the market to be created for a certain type of tool. . . .  This is 
circulation of a device that could really lead to a lot of unlawful copying, and it’s a device that 
currently doesn’t exist . . . .”); Tr. at 168:01–24 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Burger, DCP) (“This proceeding is 
at odds with the filing in the Federal District Court that all of a sudden we’re magically 
transforming a person who wants to sell a commercial product to do all this to just be doing it for 
himself. . . .  Once you start letting Dr. Huang do this, then I don’t know what we’re going to be 
up against in terms of illegitimate boxes out there that are not permitted by the law.”). 
814 See DCP Class 4 Opp’n at 1–2, 13–14; ESA Class 4 Opp’n at 8; Joint Creators II Class 4 Opp’n at 
4, 10. 
815 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 
816 2015 Recommendation at 17 (omission in original) (emphasis omitted) (quoting Commerce 
Comm. Report at 38).   
817 See id. (citing 2006 Recommendation at 9–10, 15–20). 

[PAGE 135]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
132 
audiovisual works in transit to a display device, limiting the proposal this way does not 
very meaningfully focus the scope beyond the starting point of all audiovisual works.  
For this reason alone, the Acting Register cannot recommend granting the request.   
Huang’s proposal is also overbroad for other reasons.  As the 2015 rulemaking stated: 
A mere requirement that a use be “noninfringing” or “fair” does not 
satisfy Congress’s mandate to craft “narrow and focused” exemptions.  
For this reason, the Register has previously rejected broad proposed 
categories such as “fair use works” or “educational fair use works” as 
inappropriate.  An exemption should provide reasonable guidance to the 
public in terms of what uses are permitted, while at the same time 
mitigating undue consequences for copyright owners.818 
Here, the Acting Register cannot make the statutorily required determination that a 
particular use is likely noninfringing when the record does not sufficiently specify the 
uses; while some examples are supplied, there remain innumerable unspecified 
potential uses.
819  Similarly, the Acting Register cannot determine if a user is being 
adversely affected by the prohibition on circumvention without a fuller description of 
the uses allegedly being prevented.820  Huang himself seems disinterested in curing this 
potential deficiency, rather seeking “the full scope of non-infringing uses.”821   
b. Works Protected by Copyright 
This class concerns audiovisual works, including motion pictures and video games.  
There is no dispute that at least some of these works are protected by copyright. 
c. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Even if the class were limited to the uses described in Huang’s written comments, the 
record does not adequately demonstrate they are likely noninfringing.  Huang’s 
comments list a number of uses that, for the most part, can broadly be categorized as 
relating to text and visual overlays, rescaling and remixing video feeds, content analysis 
                                                      
818 Id. at 100 (internal quotation marks omitted); see also 2006 Recommendation at 17–19; 2003 
Recommendation at 125–26 (rejecting proposed class for “a variety of sometimes unspecified 
claimed fair uses”). 
819 See 2015 Recommendation at 15 (“[T]here is no ‘rule of doubt’ favoring an exemption when it 
is unclear that a particular use is a fair or otherwise noninfringing use.  Thus, a proponent must 
show more than that a particular use could be noninfringing.  Rather, the proponent must 
establish that the proposed use is likely to qualify as noninfringing under relevant law.”) (citation 
omitted). 
820 See Section 1201 Report at 120–21.  
821 Tr. at 173:20–21 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Walsh, EFF); see also Huang Class 4 Reply at 4. 

[PAGE 136]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
133 
and alteration, and time-, space-, and format-shifting.822  Huang contends that they are 
all transformative and thus “unlikely” to cause market harm, involve “works that have 
been previously published and usually widely disseminated,” “do not borrow an undue 
amount from the original [work],” and may “fall within the preamble [uses] of Section 
107.”823  He adds that “[i]n many cases, . . . the rescaled or modified image is displayed 
onscreen and then gone.  There is no possibility of substitution because an authorized 
copy was used as the input and no lasting copy or derivative work results.”824  With 
regard to space- and format-shifting, Huang acknowledges that the Register “previously 
rejected exemption requests to engage in these activities,” but argues that “[t]he 
comments of proponents of [the space- and format-shifting class] in the 2015 
Rulemaking provide an ample legal and factual basis to conclude that” these activities 
are fair use.825 
Opponents strongly disagree.826  For example, Joint Creators II argue that “Huang’s 
cursory discussion of whether his list of hypothetical uses would qualify as fair fails to 
establish that they would,” for “[i]t is not enough to simply assert that everything at 
issue is transformative and thus that no copyright owner would be harmed.”827  ESA 
states that “[i]t simply is not feasible to evaluate whether all the uses that Mr. Huang 
imagines as covered by the proposed exemption are infringing” and that while “[s]ome 
                                                      
822 See Huang Class 4 Initial at 2–3 (providing illustrations of potential uses, including “displaying 
a live political debate rescaled so that the text of a commentator’s live blog is presented alongside 
it,” “rescaling the display of a work so that the text or visual overlay can appear alongside it to 
notify a home owner that a door has opened or remind a person that they need to take their 
medicine, or altering a work in real-time to block visual triggers of epilepsy or trauma,” 
“record[ing] a video gamer’s gameplay and remix[ing] it with audio and visual commentary,” 
“business[es] rescaling the video to display targeted advertisements in the margins,” 
“identify[ing] content inappropriate for minors”); Huang Class 4 Reply at 4 –5 (providing 
illustrations of potential uses, including “eliminat[ing] portions of programming that disturb a 
person with Alzheimer’s who is soothed by other portions of the program,” “engag[ing] in 
realtime subtitling in [Huang’s] preferred languages,” and “space-, time-, and format-shift[ing] 
favorite media to a format that will be reliably supported years from now”). 
823 Huang Class 4 Initial at 3–4; see also Tr. at 121:04–05 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Walsh, EFF). 
824 Huang Class 4 Initial at 4. 
825 Id.; see also Huang Class 4 Reply at 3 (making additional arguments that time-, space-, and 
format-shifting are “[e]stablished [f]air [u]ses wi th a [l]ong [p]edigree”). 
826 See DCP Class 4 Opp’n at 10–11; ESA Class 4 Opp’n at 2, 8–9; Joint Creators II Class 4 Opp’n at 
3, 11–13. 
827 Joint Creators II Class 4 Opp’n at 13; see also DCP Class 4 Opp’n at 10 (calling Huang’s 
statements “blanket,” “conclusory,” and “bare,” and arguing that he “ignores the Supreme 
Court’s explicit call in Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc. for case-by-case analysis of fair use 
claims”). 

[PAGE 137]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
134 
such uses might constitute fair uses,” “Mr. Huang does not put enough parameters 
around his proposal to ensure that would necessarily be the case.”828  DCP analyzes each 
of the four fair use factors, including asserting that the proposed potential uses are not 
transformative, stating that “[n]either adding commercials and subtitles to an 
audiovisual work, nor recording an entire protected-work in the clear, sufficiently alters 
the original work’s meaning or expression.”829  In addition, DCP contends that under the 
fourth factor, “[t]he end result of circumventing HDCP would be an in-the-clear copy of 
entire works originally protected from infringing distribution” and that, “[a]s history 
teaches, once a copy is available in the clear, massive online infringement is inevitable 
and the negative effect on the market for the work will be substantial.”
830  Joint Creators 
II further argue that “at least some of the uses Huang claims he wants to facilitate are 
likely infringing,” such as space-, and format-shifting,831 while others, such as 
identifying content inappropriate for minors and the commercial expression Huang 
seeks to enable are “legally suspect.”832 
The Acting Register largely agrees with opponents.  While some of Huang’s illustrative 
uses may potentially be fair use depending upon factual circumstances, that mere 
possibility is not enough.  Instead, “[t]he statutory language requires that the use is or is 
likely to be noninfringing, not merely that the use might plausibly be considered 
noninfringing.”833  Here, the record lacks the requisite detail and legal support for the 
Acting Register to conclude that the uses listed by Huang are or are likely to be 
noninfringing. 
Even though fair use is a “fact-specific inquiry requiring case-by-case consideration,”
834 
Huang makes no effort to explain why, for example, each of his proposed uses is 
                                                      
828 ESA Class 4 Opp’n at 8–9 (“Mr. Huang describes potential uses in vague and largely 
categorical terms, and provides a few stylized examples within his categories.  This is 
insufficient.”) (citation omitted); see also Tr. at 127: 14–17 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators 
II) (“[T]here’s no real meat on the bones for most of these uses to enable you to analyze whether 
they’re fair or not in all instances.”). 
829 DCP Class 4 Opp’n at 10. 
830 Id. at 11. 
831 Joint Creators II Class 4 Opp’n at 11–12 (first citing 2015 Recommendation at 123; then citing 
VidAngel, 869 F.3d at 862; and then citing 2015 Recommendation at 121).  
832 Id. at 12 (arguing that rescaling video to display advertisements could “involve infringing the 
adaptation right or public performance right” and that with regard to identifyi ng inappropriate 
content, as VidAngel demonstrates, “[u]nderstanding the details of the process he is suggesting 
would be critical to assess whether Huang is describing a lawful use”); see also  Tr. at 156:25–
157:07 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II). 
833 2015 Recommendation at 15. 
834 2012 Recommendation at 40 (citing Campbell, 510 U.S. at 577). 

[PAGE 138]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
135 
transformative.  Instead, he baldly states that they are and notes that “many of the uses 
. . . fall within the preamble of Section 107.”835  It is well established, however, that not 
every use engaged in for one of the purposes listed in the preamble is necessarily a fair 
use.836  Similarly, Huang provides no evidence to support his conclusion that “market 
harm [is] unlikely” for each particular use.837  As the Supreme Court has instructed, a 
“proponent would have difficulty carrying the burden of demonstrating fair use without 
favorable evidence about relevant markets.”838  Huang’s assertion that these wideranging uses “do not usurp the market for the original works”839 fails to consider 
“whether unrestricted and widespread conduct of the sort engaged in by the [proponent 
of fair use] would result in a substantially adverse impact on the potential market for the 
original” work, including “the market for derivative works.”840  Nor is the law 
surrounding Huang’s contention that transformative uses “lie outside of any market that 
copyright owners may legitimately monopolize” as clear cut as he supposes.841 
These deficiencies are best illustrated by way of some specific use cases.  Huang 
proposes to identify and analyze content to then flag, block, alter, and filter it.
842  As 
Disney Enterprises, Inc. v. VidAngel, Inc. demonstrates, the way in which content is filtered 
can be determinative of whether or not it is noninfringing.843  There, the court 
distinguished one company’s method of content filtering, which involved making an 
                                                      
835 Huang Class 4 Initial at 3. 
836 See Harper & Row, 471 U.S. at 561 (finding no fair use despite the use being for the preamble 
purpose of “news reporting”; explaining that the preamble “listing was not intended . . . to single 
out any particular use as presumptively a ‘fair’ use”). 
837 Huang Class 4 Initial at 3–4. 
838 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 590 & n.21 (“Even favorable evidence, without more, is no guarantee of 
fairness.”). 
839 Huang Class 4 Initial at 3–4. 
840 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 590 (internal quotation marks and ellipses omitted). 
841 Huang Class 4 Initial at 4 (citing HathiTrust, 755 F.3d 99).  While in HathiTrust, the Second 
Circuit stated that “any economic ‘harm’ caused by transformative uses does not count because 
such uses, by definition, do not serve as substitutes for the original work,” 755 F.3d at 99, the 
court subsequently explained that “[e]ven if the purpose of the copying is for a valuably 
transformative purpose, such copying might nonetheless harm the value of the copyrighted 
original if done in a manner that results in widespread revelation of sufficiently significant 
portions of the original as to make available a significantly competing substitute,”  Google Books  
804 F.3d at 223–24 (“The question for us is whether [the use], notwithstanding its transformative 
purpose, does that.”).  The Second Circuit later found market harm even where the use was “at 
least somewhat transformative.”  TVEyes, 883 F.3d at 180–81. 
842 See Huang Class 4 Initial at 3; Huang Class 4 Reply at 4. 
843 See 869 F.3d 848 (9th Cir. 2017). 

[PAGE 139]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
136 
infringing reproduction, from another company’s method, which did not make a copy 
but rather involved a noninfringing fast-forwarding device that used video time codes to 
skip scenes or mute audio.844  Notably, the Ninth Circuit found that “[a]lthough 
removing objectionable content may permit a viewer to enjoy a film, this does not 
necessarily” mean that it is a transformative use.
845  Huang provides no details as to 
whether his real-time content flagging, blocking, altering, and filtering uses would 
require the creation of a reproduction and fails to provide specific evidence that such 
uses are likely to constitute fair use or satisfy the conditions of 17 U.S.C. § 110(11).846 
Similarly, Huang proposes to engage in “realtime subtitling in his preferred languages,” 
including for educational or personal reasons.847  But at least one circuit has described 
translations as a “[p]aradigmatic example[] of [a] derivative work[]”848 that “do[es] not 
involve the kind of transformative purpose that favors a fair use finding.”849  While a 
translation might potentially be fair use under the right circumstances, Huang has not 
provided sufficient evidence or argument to that effect.
850   
Huang also relies on comments submitted in the 2015 proceeding to support his 
arguments about space- and format-shifting.851  In doing so, he even acknowledges that 
the Register has previously rejected these arguments.852  By failing to point to any 
intervening change in law, Huang has not made an adequate showing that space- and 
format-shifting are likely noninfringing uses.853   
                                                      
844 See id. at 856–57, 860. 
845 Id. at 861. 
846 See 17 U.S.C. § 110(11) (authorizing “the making imperceptible . . . of limited portions of audio 
or video content of a motion picture” in connection with private home viewing under specified 
conditions). 
847 Huang Class 4 Reply at 5; see Tr. at 145:17–146:03 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Walsh, EFF). 
848 Google Books, 804 F.3d at 215 (quoting HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 95). 
849 Id. at 215; see also Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Inc. v. Comline Bus. Data, Inc., 166 F.3d 65, 72–73 (2d Cir. 
1999) (holding that making and selling English translations of Japanese news articles was not fair 
use, reasoning that despite being “for the purpose of news reporting,” the translations were “not 
in the least transformative,” and “compete[d] with and supersede[d]” the copyright owner’s own 
English versions of its articles) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
850 Cf. Class 2 (discussing lack of markets for re-captioning and re-describing a program). 
851 See Huang Class 4 Initial at 4; Huang Class 4 Reply at 3. 
852 See Huang Class 4 Initial at 4. 
853 See also Class 3.  Moreover, although Huang points to examples noted in Sony Corp. of America 
v. Universal City Studios, Inc., those examples concerned “time shifting,” defined as “record[ing] a 
program [one] cannot view as it is being televised [] to watch it once at a later time.”  2015 
Recommendation at 121 (alterations in original) (quoting Sony, 464 U.S. at 421); see Sony, 464 U.S. 

[PAGE 140]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
137 
As these examples demonstrate, the deficient record and lack of legal support prevent 
the Acting Register from being able to conclude that the myriad uses Huang lists are, as 
a general matter, likely to be noninfringing. 
d. Causation 
The causation element asks whether Huang’s inability to engage in his proposed uses is 
“clearly attributable to implementation of a technological protection measure.”
854  
Opponents argue that because HDCP is a link protection that is agnostic as to what it is 
encrypting, HDCP itself does not prevent the uses Huang seeks.855  Instead, they say, the 
TPMs or functional capabilities on relevant source or display devices are what limit 
Huang’s ability to engage in his desired uses.856  Opponents assert that Huang should 
instead seek exemptions for the source TPMs that control the relevant functionality on 
the devices and become moot if HDCP is circumvented.857  Huang disputes this, stating 
that “[c]ircumventing HDCP is the most logical point to access works for the specified 
uses.”858 
The Acting Register finds the question of whether the alleged impacts on the proposed 
uses are sufficiently attributable to HDCP unnecessary to resolve; as noted, she cannot 
conclude that the proposed uses are likely noninfringing, and the record does not 
support a finding of any cognizable adverse effects.  Because Huang has failed to 
                                                                                                                                                              
at 455 n.40.  Huang, in contrast, seeks to convert his media “to a format that will be reliably 
supported years from now” and for “archiving” purposes.”  Huang Class 4 Reply at 5.  This 
“practice of ‘librarying,’ or maintaining long-term copies of works,” however, is precisely the 
type of activity that, as the Register has repeatedly explained, “[t]he Court declined to address.”  
2015 Recommendation at 121 (citing Sony, 464 U.S. at 422–23, 442); see also 2012 Recommendation 
at 162–63; 2003 Recommendation at 106. 
854 2015 Recommendation at 16 (quoting Commerce Comm. Report at 37). 
855 See DCP Class 4 Opp’n at 2–3, 5 (“HDCP does not impose any restrictions on the content’s use 
that are not otherwise imposed by the source TPM or by the capabilities o f the source or viewing 
device . . . .  Therefore, other than the functions performed by the NeTVCR, which would enable 
the copying and manipulation of content being transmitted via HDMI using HDCP, none of 
Huang’s categories of uses are actually prevented by HDCP itself.”); Joint Creators II Class 4 
Opp’n at 15. 
856 See DCP Class 4 Opp’n at 2–5; ESA Class 4 Opp’n at 4–5 (“[A]ny adverse effects stem from the 
choice of input/output ports and/or functionality implemented in the devices, not from the 
prohibition on circumventing HDCP.”). 
857 See DCP Class 4 Opp’n at 6–7, 14; DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 4 Opp’n at 2–3 
(“[C]ircumventing the HDMI/HDCP downstream link in this chain necessarily means that the 
original protection of the data on the disc has been rendered moo t.”). 
858 Huang Class 4 Reply at 4; see Tr. at 119:11–120:22, 138:13–139:01 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Walsh, EFF).  

[PAGE 141]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
138 
establish legally sufficient adverse effects on a noninfringing use, he cannot satisfy the 
causation requirement in any event. 
e. Asserted Adverse Effects 
Even if the Acting Register could conclude that the proposed uses are likely 
noninfringing, there is not a sufficient record of cognizable adverse effects.  Again, the 
overarching deficiency is that the record is simply too bare, especially on such a broad 
request, to “show that adverse effects are not merely possible, but probable.”859  
Under the first statutory factor, Huang argues that “[s]ince many videos and video 
games are only available in formats subject to TPMs, the exemption is necessary to make 
them available for the uses authorized by copyright and other law.”
860  He further 
contends that “the exemption will not harm market incentives to make works 
available.”
861  Opponents assert that HDCP has been critical to enabling the current 
digital ecosystem that makes works more readily available to consumers, and that 
bypassing HDCP would diminish the availability of works by encouraging infringement 
and by discouraging use of HDMI to provide authorized access to works.
862  They note 
that Huang’s “list [of uses] is not exclusive but ‘includes’ a recitation of general uses 
without demonstrating any specific adverse effects on users.”863  They claim that “[t]he 
majority of the examples that are given in Dr. Huang’s petition and in the reply are free 
to air examples” that “don’t have [a] TPM,” and that “for most of the content that flows 
over HDMI, it’s unencrypted.”864 
Opponents further argue that Huang “ignores many alternatives to circumvention, 
including the existing exemptions for creating criticism and commentary of motion 
pictures; licensed devices that enable consumers to engage in the activity he claims he 
                                                      
859 Section 1201 Report at 120–21. 
860 Huang Class 4 Initial at 4–5. 
861 Id. at 5. 
862 DCP Class 4 Opp’n at 3 (“[HDCP] has played a critical supporting role in facilitating the 
growth of the digital content distribution ecosystem.”); ESA Class 4 Opp’n at 5, 9; Joint Creators 
II Class 4 Opp’n at 6–10 (stating “standards [like HDCP] have led to broader availability of 
content and devices designed for accessing entertaining motion pictures, audio, and video 
games” and providing examples, such as online streaming services and over-the-top services, 
cable and satellite offerings including on-demand and remote access options, and digital rentals). 
863 DCP Class 4 Opp’n at 7; see also Joint Creators II Class 4 Opp’n at 15 (“[Huang] fails to explain 
how HDCP or DCP licensing practices prevent these activities or how he intends to enable them.  
As the Register has concluded in other contexts, it is not enough to speculate about hypothetical 
uses.”). 
864 Tr. at 122:16–123:08 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Burger, DCP). 

[PAGE 142]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
139 
will facilitate; and his own device, the ‘NeTV,’ which appears to enable much of the 
conduct, he claims, without circumvention.”865  For example, Joint Creators II explain 
that “if you’re accessing a streaming service on your laptop . . . and you’re not running a 
cable from your laptop to your TV, that doesn’t implicate HDCP” or “[i]f you’re viewing 
a smart TV and connecting directly to the internet to view a streaming service instead of 
running it through a set-top box and an HDMI cable, that doesn’t implicate HDCP.”
866  
They also suggest that a user might be able to use the existing smart TV jailbreaking 
exemption to create an app that, without circumventing HDCP, can perform certain 
uses, such as real-time translation.867  Another example, raised by multiple participants, 
is that, in addition to numerous televisions that can achieve picture-in-picture or split 
screen uses, individuals can simply watch one thing on TV while using another device, 
like a laptop, smartphone, or tablet, to simultaneously view other content.868  Regarding 
Huang’s desire to “recapture the functionality of VCR machines,”869 opponents assert 
that “[m]any of today’s Digital Video Recorders (‘DVRs’) not only have ‘recaptured’ 
VCR functionality, they have surpassed it.”870  DCP provides a detailed appendix listing 
numerous other purported alternatives to the uses proposed by Huang.871  
In response, Huang argues that “[i]t is not reasonable to require users . . . to acquire new 
display devices to make noninfringing uses that they could achieve with existing 
technology via circumvention.”872  Huang states that “many of the examples involve the 
kind of entertainment works like movies, etc., that by admission are typically 
encumbered by HDCP” and that “many playback devices default to” HDCP which 
“cannot be disabled,” even for “over-the-air” broadcasts.873  Huang contends that “many 
of these features don’t exist,” such as the ability to “connect your home assistant to your 
television and have a blended overlay of information from your home assistant and 
                                                      
865 Joint Creators II Class 4 Opp’n at 4, 13–15 (listing alternatives that purportedly enable a 
number of Huang’s proposed uses); see also ESA Class 4 Opp’n at 3–4, 7 (“Existing alternatives 
can be used to facilitate most or all of the display options that Mr. Huang identifies.”).  
866 Tr. at 158:05–13 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II). 
867 See Tr. at 147:16–21 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II). 
868 See DCP Class 4 Opp’n at Ex. A, at 2; ESA Class 4 Opp’n at 4, 7; Joint Creators II Class 4 Opp’n 
at 14. 
869 Huang Class 4 Initial at 3. 
870 DCP Class 4 Opp’n at 9, Ex. A at 5–6; see also Joint Creators II Class 4 Opp’n at 7, 13. 
871 See DCP Class 4 Opp’n at Ex. A.  DCP noted that there was insufficient market demand for 
some of Huang’s proposed uses.  See Tr. at 149:19–150:26, 182:13–24 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Burger, DCP; 
Williams, Joint Creators II). 
872 Huang Class 4 Reply at 2; see also Tr. at 132:13–25 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Walsh, EFF). 
873 Tr. at 123:19–25, 124:08–10 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Walsh, EFF). 

[PAGE 143]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
140 
whatever you’re trying to watch.”874  Huang also asserts that his NeTV has limited 
functionality and cannot create transparent overlays, rescale the image, or time-, space-, 
or format-shift.875 
Based upon the record, the Acting Register cannot conclude that the overall availability 
for use of copyrighted works has been diminished or is likely to be in the next three 
years absent an exemption.  Opponents set forth a number of concrete examples of 
potential alternatives to circumvention that Huang fails to meaningfully challenge.  For 
example, Huang fails to explain why using an existing laptop, smartphone, or tablet 
while watching TV, or even having multiple windows open on a computer, is an 
inadequate alternative to picture-in-picture, split screen, and certain rescale uses.  While 
Huang argues that his NeTV device cannot create transparent overlays, he fails to 
explain why the opaque overlays that the NeTV does generate are inadequate for many 
of the described uses, such as smart home and home assistant messages, reminders, and 
alerts.  Huang also fails to describe why current DVRs on the market, along with the 
myriad download, rental, streaming, on-demand, disc-to-digital, locker, and remote 
access options offered by copyright owners (discussed in more detail above in Class 3) 
are inadequate for his needs.  In short, Huang has failed to meaningfully demonstrate 
that any burden associated with these alternatives rises above the level of a mere 
inconvenience.   
Given the scope of the request, there is at least a possibility that there may not be 
reasonable alternatives to each and every use listed by Huang.  But even so, the statutory 
analysis does not change.  Huang has sought a broad exemption for numerous uses, 
many of which can be achieved with reasonable alternatives.  The Acting Register is not 
persuaded that the overall availability for use has been or is likely to be diminished in the 
next three years.   
Finally, specifically regarding video games, Huang seeks to record gameplay and remix 
it with commentary, and asserts that some gaming consoles, viz., the PlayStation 3, 
“use[] HDCP that cannot be disabled through the user interface.”
876  Opponents contend 
that modern consoles already permit users to capture, edit, livestream, and share 
gameplay videos, and remix gameplay with audio and visual commentary.877  They note 
that there currently exists a thriving ecosystem for commenting on and sharing 
                                                      
874 Tr. at 144:25–145:04 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Walsh, EFF). 
875 See Tr. at 159:14–160:05, 170:19–171:05 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Walsh, EFF). 
876 Huang Class 4 Initial at 2. 
877 See DCP Class 4 Opp’n at 8, Ex. A, at 4–5; ESA Class 4 Opp’n at 2, 4–7; Joint Creators II Class 4 
Opp’n at 15. 

[PAGE 144]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
141 
gameplay.878  Huang replies that “[t]he very fact that it has become a feature in modern 
consoles demonstrates that gaining DRM-free access to audiovisual works output from 
game consoles is both in demand and broadly acceptable to rightsholders.”879   
The participants seemingly agree that modern consoles permit the uses Huang seeks.880  
When asked whether other consoles beyond the PlayStation 3 do not permit these uses, 
Huang’s counsel could not name any.881  Examining the PlayStation 3, HDMI appears to 
be one of several video output options that also include component and composite 
video.
882  Huang has not demonstrated that using one of these other outputs is not a 
reasonable alternative. 
Regarding the second and third statutory factors, Huang generally claims that HDCP 
constrains various favored uses without providing any concrete evidence that HDCP 
encryption is currently inhibiting those uses from otherwise flourishing.883  Opponents 
contend that a number of favored uses can already be accomplished via existing 
exemptions;884 Huang agrees that at least some of his uses are already covered.885  On 
this record, the Acting Register is not persuaded that an exemption is warranted under 
these factors. 
Turning to the effect of circumvention on the market for or value of copyrighted works, 
Huang argues that because the user “already has the ability to view [the content] on an 
HDCP-enabled playback device,” “[t]he copyright owner has already been 
                                                      
878 See ESA Class 4 Opp’n at 2, 6–7.  Opponents also contend that “in many instances, HDCP is not 
even activated when gameplay is transmitted through the HDMI output of a console.”  Id . at 4. 
879 Huang Class 4 Reply at 4. 
880 See id. 
881 See Tr. at 126:20–25 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Walsh, EFF). 
882 See Huang Class 4 Initial at 2 n.2 (citing James T. Wood, How to Disable HDCP on a PS3, OUR 
PASTIMES (Sept. 15, 2017), https://ourpastimes.com/how-to-disable-hdcp-on-a-ps3-12612586.html 
(describing component and composite outputs on PS3)); Video Output Settings, PL AYSTATION 3 
USER’S GUIDE, http://manuals.playstation.net/document/en/ps3/current/settings/videooutput.html 
(last visited Sept. 27, 2018) (composite video cable supplied with console).  
883 See Huang Class 4 Initial at 5. 
884 See DCP Class 4 Opp’n at 12 (“[T]o the degree source TPMs prevent educational uses . . . 
educators will be able to do so under the existing/renewed education exemptions or new 
exemptions . . . .”) (internal quotation marks omitted); ESA Class 4 Opp’n at 10 (“[P]reservation 
and study of video games is addressed adequately by the existing video game pr eservation 
exemption.”); Joint Creators II Class 4 Opp’n at 13–14; Tr. at 173:25–26 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Williams, 
Joint Creators II) (“I think that some of these activities are clearly covered by the existing 
exemptions.”). 
885 See Tr. at 173:05–22 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Walsh, EFF). 

[PAGE 145]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
142 
compensated.”886  Huang cursorily alleges that circumventing for his listed uses “does 
not harm the market for any copyrighted works,” and would instead “increase the value 
of copyrighted works by enabling new, important uses of those works.”887  Huang 
further asserts that because “HDCP isn’t difficult to circumvent,” it “is not operating to 
prevent people from [engaging in piracy] if they don’t care about adhering to the 
law.”888   
Opponents assert that “HDCP is a critically important component of the secure 
ecosystem through which content is delivered for home entertainment”889 and that it 
“preserves the incentive to develop and disseminate expressive works” through the 
security it offers.890  They contend that this is exactly what section 1201 was intended to 
do—to encourage copyright owners to make their works available digitally and foster 
new means of distribution by providing reasonable assurances against fears of piracy.891  
Opponents argue that Huang’s request “ignores the threat of piracy entirely and brushes 
over the fact that what he seeks to do is to distribute an illegal circumvention tool.”892  
They contend that an exemption “is likely to promote a substantial amount of other 
activity that is infringing” because “users could intercept and reproduce, retransmit, or 
otherwise infringe the copyrights in valuable copyrighted works more readily than is 
currently the case in the secure environments in which HDMI is used.”893  They explain 
that “video-on-demand business models based on charging lower prices for time-limited 
access to movies are undermined when end users can create complete digital copies of 
transmitted works to add them to their permanent digital libraries while paying only for 
temporary access. . . .  This would harm consumers, who benefit from having lowerpriced options available in the marketplace.”
894   
                                                      
886 Huang Class 4 Initial at 5. 
887 Id. 
888 Tr. at 142:26–143:18 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Walsh, EFF). 
889 Joint Creators II Class 4 Opp’n at 15. 
890 ESA Class 4 Opp’n at 4. 
891 See Joint Creators II Class 4 Opp’n at 15–16 (first citing S. REP. NO. 105-190, at 8 (1998); and then 
citing Section 1201 Report at 44); ESA Class 4 Opp’n at 4 (citing H.R. REP. NO. 105-551, pt. 1, at 10 
(1998)).  
892 Joint Creators II Class 4 Opp’n at 4; see also DCP Class 4 Opp’n at 13 (“Huang’s many examples 
. . . are a smoke screen for his real goal: circumventing HDCP to record entire in -the-clear copies 
of high-value works on his NeTVCR.  Once an entire copy of a work is available in the clear and 
placed on the Internet it is not unreasonable to argue the effect will be a substantial negative 
one.”). 
893 ESA Class 4 Opp’n at 3; see also DCP Class 4 Opp’n at 11. 
894 Joint Creators II Class 4 Opp’n at 5–6; see also ESA Class 4 Opp’n at 9. 

[PAGE 146]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
143 
Based upon the record, the proposed activities may well have a negative effect on the 
market for or value of copyrighted works.  Huang’s argument that there is no harm 
because copyright owners have already been compensated for a particular use is 
inapposite where, as here, there is allegedly an overarching threat of piracy.  The Acting 
Register finds Huang’s additional arguments similarly unpersuasive.895   
The record suggests that circumventing HDCP to carry out the proposed uses creates an 
unsecure environment where the work can be copied and manipulated.  Indeed, 
opponents raise a serious concern that the exemption, if granted, could potentially 
compromise a distribution system for audiovisual content that has matured seemingly 
in part due to the protections offered by section 1201.  Huang does not dispute that 
circumvention could permit virtually anything displayable on a modern television 
screen to be recorded in the clear and made available online; meanwhile, creators and 
distributors of these works suggest widespread circumvention could flatten market 
distinctions between live and scheduled broadcasts, subscription and ad-based streams, 
and rentals and purchases because all could be captured, copied, and circulated.  In 
short, Huang has failed to make a sufficiently persuasive demonstration that the 
proposal is unlikely to impair the market for or value of copyrighted works. 
Finally, the Acting Register declines to recommend this exemption because Huang’s 
request seems to be an “individual case[]”896 of “de minimis impact[].”897  Opponents 
argue that there is little or no market demand for many of Huang’s proposed uses and 
that few other than Huang would actually be able to use the exemption because of the 
level of expertise needed to circumvent HDCP and to create a device capable of doing all 
of the things Huang seeks to do.898  Huang counters that while “[i]t might be that there’s 
not a mass market for a display device or an intermediate device that lets you do all of 
the things that Dr. Huang wants to do,” “[t]hat doesn’t mean that he shouldn’t have the 
right to do it.”899 
While “the Register does not decline to recommend exemptions solely because only a 
small number of individuals would benefit from it,” “it certainly may be appropriate to 
weed out edge cases where permitting circumvention broadly may impact the market 
                                                      
895 The fact that licensed devices may permit some proposed uses is not evidence that the uses 
would not damage copyright owners’ interests if made via circumvention.  But see Huang Class 4 
Reply at 2.  When made on a licensed device, the use is carried out within the protected space 
HDCP and related TPMs provide. 
896 2015 Recommendation at 16 (quoting House Manager’s Report at 6). 
897 See id. (quoting Commerce Comm. Report at 37). 
898 See Tr. at 148:23–154:10, 161:09–21, 167:21–169:18, 182:13–24 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Burger, DCP; 
Taylor, DVD CCA & AACS LA; Williams, Joint Creators II); see also DCP Class 4 Opp’n at 6.  
899 Tr. at 154:17–22 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Walsh, EFF). 

[PAGE 147]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
144 
for copyrighted works.”900  Given the above discussion and the lack of concrete evidence 
demonstrating a verifiable need for anyone to circumvent to engage in all of the uses 
sought by Huang, this request is such an “edge case.”  
Further, even the potential impact on Huang’s professed personal uses seems to be de 
minimis.  Huang does not reside in the United States, which means that even if there 
were adverse effects, Huang would only be harmed by them when visiting this 
country—not in his day -to-day life at home in Singapore.901  And Huang has not 
established that he needs to be in the United States to engage in his proposed uses.   
The Acting Register does not find proponents’ other arguments persuasive.  
Accordingly, on the present record, the Acting Register cannot find that the inability to 
engage in the proposed activities is adversely affecting, or in the next three years is 
likely to affect, consumers’ ability to make noninfringing uses of copyrighted works. 
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA agrees with the Acting Register that an exemption for this class is not 
warranted.902  NTIA recognizes that “[p]roponents did not provide sufficient evidence 
on the record about the alleged non-infringing uses,” and that “[w]hile there are several 
examples of potential non-infringing uses that could serve as the basis for an exemption, 
the proponents have not developed the argument in the record here.”903  Rather, NTIA 
observes that the proposed exemption “appears to be for the HDCP TPM itself, which is 
not appropriate for this rulemaking process.”
904  NTIA notes, however, that “some of 
proponent’s sought uses may be supported by other current exemptions that the 
Register has recommend[ed] be renewed, such as the Smart TV exemption.”905 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
Based on the record presented, an appropriate class has not been established.  Moreover, 
the Acting Register cannot conclude that the prohibition on circumvention has, or is 
likely to have, an adverse impact on noninfringing uses of the underlying audiovisual 
works.  The Acting Register declines to recommend an exemption for this class. 
                                                      
900 Section 1201 Report at 121. 
901 Complaint for Declaratory & Injunctive Relief ¶ 6, Green v. U.S. Dep’t of Justice, No. 1:16-cv-
01492-EGS (D.D.C. July 21, 2016); see Tr. at 183:23–26 (Apr. 24, 2018) (Walsh, EFF) (alleging Huang 
spends “significant time” in the U.S.). 
902 NTIA Letter at 39. 
903 Id. 
904 Id. 
905 Id. at 39 n.197; see 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(5) (2016). 

[PAGE 148]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
145 
E. Proposed Class 5: Computer Programs—Unlocking  
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption 
Proposed Class 5 would expand an existing exemption for activity known as unlocking, 
that is, circumvention of access controls on computer programs for the purpose of 
enabling a wireless device to connect to a different mobile network provider.  As noted 
above, the 2015 rulemaking adopted an exemption permitting the unlocking of used 
cellphones, all-purpose tablet computers, portable mobile connectivity devices, such as 
mobile hotspots, and wearable devices, such as smartwatches or fitness devices.
906  In 
this proceeding, ISRI filed petitions for two modifications to this exemption that would 
(1) remove the subcategories and permit circumvention to unlock “any wireless 
device”;907 and (2) eliminate the requirement that a wireless device be “used,” i.e. 
previously activated on a wireless carrier.908  Specifically, ISRI proposed the following 
language: 
Computer programs that enable the following types of wireless devices to 
connect to a wireless telecommunications network, when circumvention, 
including individual and bulk circumvention, is undertaken by the owner 
of any such device, by another person at the direction of the owner, or by 
a provider of a commercial mobile radio service or a commercial mobile 
data service at the direction of such owner or other person, solely in order 
to connect to a wireless telecommunications network and such connection 
is authorized by the operator of such network.
909 
ISRI states that the language referring to “individual and bulk circumvention” at the 
direction of a device owner was meant “purely as clarification.”910  It suggests, however, 
that this change may be unnecessary given that the Office agrees that the current 
exemption permits bulk unlocking.911  Comments supporting the proposed 
modifications were also filed by Consumers Union and the FSF, and iFixit testified in 
support of the proposed class.  No oppositions were filed. 
                                                      
906 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(3) (2016).   
907 ISRI Class 5 Pet. 1 at 2. 
908 ISRI Class 5 Pet. 2 at 2.   
909 ISRI Initial at 5. 
910 Tr. at 135:06–18 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Connelly, ISRI). 
911 Tr. at 135:06–18 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Connelly, ISRI); see 2015 Recommendation at 169 (adverse 
effect finding “includes entities that obtain used cellphones and unlock them in bulk for 
redistribution or resale”). 

[PAGE 149]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
146 
b. Overview of Issues 
As explained in greater detail during the 2015 rulemaking, devices that connect to a 
wireless telecommunication network may contain TPMs to prevent use of the device on 
a different network, even if the telecommunications radios and other hardware in the 
device have the technical capability to operate on another network.912  Wireless carriers 
can do this by preventing devices from accepting a subscriber identity module (“SIM”) 
card from a competing carrier, by requiring input of a special code from the original 
carrier to enable use of competing networks, or by locking a device to operate on a 
subset of the wireless frequencies that it has the hardware to otherwise communicate 
over.
913  Here, Mr. Wiens described the relevant TPM as a lock in the software on a 
device’s baseband chip, which allows the device to communicate with a cellular 
network.914  Circumvention to “unlock” a wireless device for use on other networks can 
occur by inputting special codes or running software to exploit security vulnerabilities 
and remove the software lock.915 
The Copyright Office has received petitions to permit the unlocking of cellphones since 
2006.  In 2015, as directed by the Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition 
Act (“Unlocking Act”),
916 the Register considered whether to expand the exemption to 
additional categories of wireless devices.  Based on the record in that proceeding, the 
Register recommended, and the Librarian granted, an exemption covering the current 
categories of devices.  The Register determined that for some subset of wireless 
customers, unlocking such devices is likely noninfringing under section 117, and that 
“unlocking as a general matter is also likely to be a fair use.”
917  The Register declined, 
however, to recommend a proposal to include all “consumer machines” or “smart 
devices” in the class because she found that its proponents failed to provide “any 
specification information” about the kinds of devices that would be included or the 
noninfringing uses that would be facilitated by circumvention.918 
The current exemption also is limited to used devices.  First adopted in 2010,919 this 
limitation was implemented in response to concerns raised by wireless carriers engaged 
                                                      
912 2015 Recommendation at 138.  
913 Id. at 144–45. 
914 Tr. at 139:01–11 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit) 
915 2015 Recommendation at 144–45; see also Tr. at 140:11–17 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit) (stating 
that circumvention involves “modifying a bit on [the] baseband”). 
916 Pub. L. No. 113-144, § 2(c), 128 Stat. 1751, 1751–52 (2014). 
917 2015 Recommendation at 162. 
918 Id. at 167, 170. 
919 See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(3) (2011). 

[PAGE 150]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
147 
in the business of selling cellphones at substantially discounted prices and recouping 
that investment through the sale of prepaid wireless service.920  These companies feared 
that including new phones in the class could foster illegal trafficking activity, which 
involves “the bulk purchase of unused handsets that have been offered for sale at 
subsidized prices . . . and then unlocking and reselling those unlocked handsets for a 
profit.”
921  In 2015 the wireless provider TracFone filed comments opposing any 
exemption that “could be construed to immunize illegal activities of phone 
traffickers.”922  The Register found “universal agreement” among the parties that “any 
exemption for cellphones should be fashioned so as to exclude trafficking activities that 
seek illegitimately to profit from subsidies offered by prepaid phone providers.”923  As in 
prior rulemakings, she concluded that this could be accomplished through a 
requirement that the devices be used, which the 2015 exemption defines to refer to 
devices that have “previously been lawfully acquired and activated on the wireless 
telecommunications network of a wireless carrier.”924 
Proponents in this proceeding request removal of both the list of covered device 
categories and the limitation to used devices.  As to the former, proponents seek to 
unlock “connected devices of all types, sizes and applications” (i.e., the Internet of 
Things, or “IoT”), noting that all of these devices connect to wireless networks and 
arguing that consumer choice is necessary for them as well.
925  Proponents point to 
NTIA’s 2012 and 2015 submissions supporting a broad exemption for “all wireless 
devices that connect to a wireless network”926 and warn that the rapid pace of innovation 
within the IoT industry makes it impossible to predict the specific categories of wireless 
devices that consumers may need to unlock.
927  In its reply comments, ISRI cites home 
security systems, farming equipment, and car GPS trackers as examples of wireless 
devices presenting such a need.928 
Regarding the “used” limitation, proponents argue that illegal trafficking does not 
implicate copyright interests and that concerns about such activity therefore are outside 
                                                      
920 See 2015 Recommendation at 156. 
921 Id. at 145. 
922 TracFone 2015 Class 11 Opp’n at 3. 
923 2015 Recommendation at 169. 
924 Id. 169–71. 
925 ISRI Class 5 Initial at 5–6. 
926 Id. at 6 (quoting Letter from Lawrence E. Strickling, Assistant Sec’y for Commc’ns & Info., Nat’l 
Telecomms. & Info. Admin., U.S. Dep’t of Commerce, to Maria A. Pallante, Register of Copyrights 
and Dir., U.S. Copyright Office, at 39 (Sept. 18, 2015) (“NTIA 2015 Letter”)).  
927 ISRI Class 5 Initial at 6. 
928 ISRI Class 5 Reply at 4–6. 

[PAGE 151]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
148 
the proper scope of this rulemaking.929  Moreover, they argue, such a limitation is 
unnecessary given that TracFone has successfully sued traffickers on causes of action 
other than section 1201.930  Proponents further suggest a need to unlock unused devices 
not present in 2015, offering examples of corporations acquiring excess devices that are 
never activated but that they later seek to recycle.931   
2. Discussion 
a. Works Protected by Copyright 
This class again involves computer software running on wireless devices, which can 
include TPMs as part of the code itself.  Proponents suggest that the relevant 
copyrighted works for the entire class are the computer programs running on the 
baseband processors in these devices
932 and other software such as operating systems.933  
The Acting Register agrees that in both cases the software constitutes a computer 
program within the meaning of section 101 and therefore finds that at least some works 
included in the proposed expanded class are protected by copyright.934 
b. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
The 2015 rulemaking identified several bases for the proposition that unlocking wireless 
devices is a noninfringing use, including that (1) some methods of unlocking, such as 
inputting unlock codes, do not implicate a section 106 exclusive right; (2) section 117 
privileges some forms of unlocking; and (3) “unlocking as a general matter” is likely to 
be a fair use.935  Proponents appear to be relying on the 2015 rulemaking analysis in 
support of the requested modification and incorporate by reference the 2015 
Recommendation to avoid “undertak[ing] a detailed analysis of those factors.
936  Though 
no opposition comments were filed, the Acting Register has an independent obligation 
to ensure that the proposed uses are likely to be noninfringing.   
                                                      
929 ISRI Class 5 Initial at 4. 
930 Id. (citing NTIA 2015 Letter at 41).   
931 Id. at 4.  According to ISRI, third parties recycling or reselling wireless devices may receive 
“tens of thousands” devices each month, which can be either used or new.  ISRI Class 5 Reply at 
2. 
932 See Tr. at 139:01–20 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit). 
933 ISRI Class 5 Initial at 9; Tr. at 139:17–20, 140:11–17 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit). 
934 See 17 U.S.C. § 101 (definition of “computer program”). 
935 2015 Recommendation at 159–64.   
936 ISRI Class 5 Initial at 7. 

[PAGE 152]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
149 
i. No Prima Facie Infringement 
In the past three rulemakings, the Register has concluded that unlocking often can be 
accomplished “simply by changing variables in the cellphone’s software in a manner 
that is intended by the software’s creator.”937  Such activity, the Register has concluded, 
is noninfringing because it does not involve reproducing the device software or creating 
a derivative work.938  Here, the record suggests that this method of unlocking remains 
possible for some devices.939  Proponents do not, however, argue that all of the 
additional devices they seek to cover under their proposed expansion can be unlocked in 
this manner.  They accordingly must provide an additional legal basis to support a 
finding that their proposed activities likely are noninfringing. 
ii. Section 117 
The Register has previously found that in some cases, the reproduction and adaptation 
of device software for unlocking purposes may be protected under section 117(a).940  
That provision authorizes the owner of a copy of a computer program to make or 
authorize the making of another copy where doing so is “an essential step in the 
utilization of the computer program in conjunction with a machine.”
941  In 2015 the 
Register found “some evidence” that the owner of a wireless device qualifies as the 
owner of the copy of the device software for purposes of section 117(a).942  She 
concluded that those users likely satisfy the legal standards governing ownership under 
section 117(a) because the software is stored on the device itself, device owners have the 
right to use the device software indefinitely, and they have the right to discard or 
destroy the device (including its software).
943  She further found that reproduction or 
adaptation of device software to allow it to operate with a carrier of the user’s choice 
likely constitutes an “essential step” in the utilization of the program within the 
meaning of section 117(a).944 
                                                      
937 2015 Recommendation at 160 (citation omitted); 2012 Recommendation at 90; 2010 
Recommendation at 134.  As noted in 2015, such a system may “not function as a TPM at all,” in 
which case an exemption is not needed.  2015 Recommendation at 160.   
938 2015 Recommendation at 160. 
939 See Tr. at 145:12–146:11 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit) (referring to use of manufacturer’s 
“unlock codes”). 
940 See 2015 Recommendation at 160–62; 2012 Recommendation at 93; 2010 Recommendation at 
138, 167. 
941 17 U.S.C. § 117(a)(1). 
942 2015 Recommendation at 161. 
943 Id. 
944 Id. at 162. 

[PAGE 153]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
150 
The Register’s prior analysis of these issues did not depend on the relevant devices 
being used.  The same factors as indicating ownership of the software copy are equally 
applicable to unused devices (assuming the purchase has been completed and the device 
paid for), as are the Register’s conclusions regarding the “essential step” requirement.  
Moreover, the relevant law has not changed since 2015.945  The Acting Register 
accordingly concludes that the unlocking of unused devices in the categories 
enumerated in the current exemption is likely noninfringing under section 117(a). 
Proponents have not, however, provided evidence that would allow the Acting Register 
to reach the same conclusion with respect to wireless devices generally.  In 2015 the 
Register’s finding that the relevant device owners likely own the embedded software 
copies relied in part on evidence that the manufacturers of mobile operating systems 
“expressly permit the transfer of the software to a third party in connection with the sale 
of a device.”946  Here, no evidence was presented indicating to what extent such software 
transfers are permitted in the context of other devices.  In particular, it is unclear 
whether manufacturers of the software in the large-scale equipment cited by ISRI— for 
example, trucks, trains, “remote weather monitoring stations and seismic monitors,” or 
traffic lights947—maintain transfer policies similar to those governing the very different 
devices covered by the existing exemption, which are largely consumer-facing in nature.  
Indeed, it seems plausible that some of these devices would be leased.  Because 
proponents have failed to demonstrate that owners of additional types of wireless 
devices would qualify as owners of the copies of the software embedded in them, they 
cannot, on this record, establish that unlocking those devices is likely noninfringing 
under section 117(a). 
iii. Fair Use 
1) Unused Devices 
As noted, the Register in 2015 concluded that “unlocking as a general matter is . . . likely 
to be a fair use.”
948  She found that while the first factor was “somewhat mixed,” it 
“tend[ed] to support a finding of fair use” because enabling interoperability has been 
                                                      
945 The only appellate case to consider either holding since the 2015 rulemaking is Adobe Sys. Inc. 
v. Christenson, 809 F.3d 1071 (9th Cir. 2015), where the Ninth Circuit held that failure to disclose 
software license terms during discovery foreclosed the argument that a purchaser of software did 
not own the copy for first sale purposes under section 109.  Id. at 1080. 
946 2015 Recommendation at 161 n.1037. 
947 ISRI Class 5 Initial at 7; Tr. at 178:07–09 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit) (suggesting traffic lights 
have cellular service). 
948 2015 Recommendation at 162. 

[PAGE 154]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
151 
recognized by courts as a favored purpose under the law.949  For the second factor, the 
Register found that the nature of the programs “weigh[ed] strongly” in favor of fair use 
because they are used to connect wireless devices to wireless networks, and thus are 
“highly functional.”950  As to the third factor, the Register found that even if unlocking 
requires significant copying or alteration of software, this factor warrants “only modest 
weight” because the use is necessary to engage in an otherwise legitimate activity.951  
Finally, under the fourth factor, the Register found no evidence that “the market for 
software used to operate cellphones or other wireless devices would be harmed by 
allowing those devices to be unlocked,” except in the case of prepaid cellphones.952  As 
to those devices, she found that the unlocking of “new, carrier-subsidized prepaid 
cellphones . . . may facilitate illicit and commercially harmful activities.”953 
In considering proponents’ current request to expand the exemption to unused devices, 
the Acting Register concludes that the 2015 analysis under the first three factors is 
equally applicable to new devices as it is to used.  Therefore, the relevant question is 
whether, under the fourth factor, extending the exemption to unused devices of the 
types currently covered would adversely affect the market for or value of the embedded 
software used to connect to wireless networks.  Although ISRI does not directly address 
the fair use factors, it suggests that any market harm resulting from illegal trafficking in 
unused devices is not cognizable under factor four because it relates to “protecting a 
particular business model, not [to] protecting the integrity or preventing the copying of 
the underlying software on the phone.”
954 
After considering the arguments and the record in this class, the Acting Register agrees 
that the unlocking of unused devices is unlikely to harm the market for or value of the 
relevant software for purposes of the fourth factor.  Case law regarding this factor 
focuses on whether a use “serve[s] as a market substitute for the original or potentially 
licensed derivatives,” not simply on whether a copyright owner may face any economic 
impact from a proposed use.955  In the case of subsidized prepaid cellphones, a wireless 
provider (e.g., TracFone) purchases devices from the manufacturer and subsequently 
offers them for sale to the public at a substantial discount on the theory that it will 
                                                      
949 Id. at 162–63 (citing Computer Entm’t, Inc. v. Connectix Corp., 203 F.3d 596, 607–08 (9th Cir. 2000), 
and Sega Enters. Ltd. v. Accolade, Inc., 977 F.2d 1510, 1522–23 (9th Cir. 2000), as amended (Jan. 6, 
1993)). 
950 2015 Recommendation at 163. 
951 Id. 
952 Id. at 163–64. 
953 Id. at 164. 
954 ISRI Class 5 Initial at 4. 
955 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 587. 

[PAGE 155]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
152 
recoup its losses through the sale of wireless service.956  Trafficking involves purchasing 
those subsidized phones in bulk, unlocking them, and then reselling them for profit, 
often overseas, thereby denying the wireless provider the opportunity to recover its 
investment.957  Although such activity certainly harms the network provider’s ability to 
sell devices at a discount, and thus perhaps could dissuade the provider from 
purchasing devices from the manufacturer in the first place, any resulting harm to the 
value of the device software is not the result of an infringing product substituting for the 
manufacturer’s software in the marketplace—for example, a competing device utilizing 
the manufacturer’s copyrighted software.  Rather, as described by TracFone, the harm 
results from traffickers “stealing the subsidies that were intended to benefit legitimate 
American consumers” and in turn “denying TracFone sales and business relationships 
[with] potential long-term customers.”958  While such activity should in no way be 
condoned, it does not involve the type of harm with which the fourth fair use factor 
ordinarily is concerned.  Furthermore, as ISRI notes, other causes of action are available 
to address any injury to non-copyright interests.
959 
Based on the foregoing, the Acting Register concludes that unlocking the types of 
devices covered by the current exemption is likely a fair use, regardless of whether the 
devices are new or used.  
2) Additional Device Categories 
In 2015 the Register limited her fair use analysis to the categories of devices for which 
there was specific evidence.  She found the record too sparse to assess whether 
unlocking of “consumer machines” was likely fair, noting that for those works, the 
evidence did not show “whether unlocking would require creation of copies or 
derivative works . . . [or] whether permitting unlocking is likely to adversely impact the 
market for copyrighted works.”
960  Here, the evidence is similarly scant, and proponents’ 
comments do not discuss the application of the fair use factors in this context.  Thus, 
while the Acting Register appreciates there is an argument that unlocking likely is a fair 
use regardless of the type of device involved, she is unable to make that determination 
based on such a limited record.  
                                                      
956 See 2015 Recommendation at 156. 
957 See id. 
958 TracFone 2015 Class 11 Opp’n at 2, 6. 
959 See ISRI Class 5 Initial at 4 (citing NTIA 2015 Recommendation at 41); see also, e.g. , First 
Amended Complaint and Demand for Jury Trial, TracFone Wireless, Inc. v. Mohamed, No. 4:14-cv-
00685-RH-CAS (N.D. Fla. Jan. 3, 2015), ECF No. 10 (alleging unfair competition, unjust 
enrichment, and trademark infringement). 
960 2015 Recommendation at 164. 

[PAGE 156]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
153 
As discussed further below, however, proponents did provide evidence regarding three 
categories of devices:  home security devices, agricultural equipment, and vehicle GPS 
trackers.  The record indicates that these devices are similar to those covered by the 
current exemption in that they appear to be primarily intended for use by individual 
end users.961  Because owners of these devices appear to be similarly situated to owners 
of devices covered by the current exemption, the Acting Register concludes that the 
same fair use analysis should govern.  The Acting Register thus finds that unlocking 
these devices would serve the favored purpose of achieving software interoperability; 
that the relevant software is highly functional in nature; that the reproduction or 
modification of the software likely is necessary to accomplish a legitimate purpose; and 
that unlocking these devices is unlikely to harm the market for or value of the software.  
The Acting Register therefore finds that unlocking these specific categories of devices is 
likely to be a fair use. 
In sum, the Acting Register finds that proponents have met their burden to demonstrate 
that unlocking unused cellphones, tablets, mobile connectivity devices, and wearables, 
as well as unlocking home security devices, agricultural equipment, and vehicle GPS 
trackers, are likely to be noninfringing uses.  This does not end the inquiry, however.  To 
obtain an expanded exemption, proponents still must demonstrate that the bar on 
circumvention is causing, or is likely to cause, an adverse effect on those uses. 
c. Causation 
The Acting Register finds that proponents have met their burden of showing that the 
current qualifying language limits their ability to unlock wireless devices beyond the 
enumerated categories in the current exemption.  In this class, however, the issue of 
causation is intertwined with questions related to whether the specific activities 
described by proponents are in fact being impacted by section 1201.  Therefore, in the 
next section, the Acting Register will address whether proponents have successfully 
established that the prohibition on circumvention is the cause of their asserted adverse 
effects with respect to specific types of devices. 
d. Asserted Adverse Effects  
i. Unused Devices 
ISRI argues the current exemption has an adverse effect on users’ legitimate interest in 
unlocking unused devices.  It notes that while it did not oppose the 2015 exemption’s 
                                                      
961 See ISRI Class 5 Reply at 4–6 (focusing on adverse effects for only these three categories of 
devices, beyond used/new debate); Tr. at 149:23–15:01 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit) (testifying 
that child monitors are similar to security systems). 

[PAGE 157]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
154 
limitation to used devices, the intervening three years have given rise to a need to 
unlock new devices: 
ISRI members now periodically obtain and need to recycle and/or resell 
new devices, particularly wireless handsets.  This may happen in a 
variety of settings.  For example, corporations or other organizations 
often purchase a significant quantity of new phones in order to equip 
numerous employees and/or to maintain a stock of spares, and then end 
up reselling to recyclers or resellers a number of extra devices that have 
gone unused by employees (and are thus still “new” under the definition 
in the 2015 exemption), because the purchase was larger than needed or 
because of an intervening company-wide upgrade or switch to other 
devices.  In such cases, the recycler or reseller will acquire a quantity of 
the phones and need to unlock them for resale, just as they do with used 
phones.
962 
At the hearing, Mr. Wiens indicated that recyclers’ interest in unlocking unused devices 
is not limited to cellphones.  He reported an instance of a recycler in the possession of 
unused smartwatches that cannot be sold for their full value because of the prohibition 
on unlocking.963 
Looking to the statutory factors, the first factor, the availability for use of copyrighted 
works, favors extending the exemption to unused devices.  Proponents have provided 
evidence that unlocking unused devices allows them to be recycled and reused rather 
than discarded or used as scrap.964  Because unlocked devices are more valuable for 
resale, an exemption for unlocking those devices, including unused devices, will expand 
the availability of the copyrighted software within them by enabling them to continue 
their functional use.  There is no evidence in the record suggesting that expanding 
unlocking to unused devices will decrease the availability of copyrighted works.   
The second factor, the availability for use of works for nonprofit archival, preservation, 
and educational purposes, and the third factor, the effect on criticism, comment, news 
reporting, teaching, scholarship and research, are neutral.  As in the last rulemaking, 
                                                      
962 ISRI Class 5 Initial at 4. 
963 See Tr. at 138:04–17 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit); see also Tr. at 172:25–173:05 (Apr. 23, 2018) 
(Connelly, ISRI) (stating that recyclers’ inability to obtain an adequate price for other connected 
devices will become a common program); Tr. at 145:12–20, 146:12–25 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Wiens, 
iFixit; Connelly, ISRI) (stating that recyclers contract with retailers to dispose of returns, which 
are considered new under the definition in the current exemption). 
964 ISRI Class 5 Reply at 1–2; Tr. at 172:09–13, 172:21–24 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Connelly, ISRI). 

[PAGE 158]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
155 
general observations that unlocked devices could serve as tools for these uses are 
insufficient to weigh this factor in either direction.965 
For the fourth factor, the effect of circumvention on the market for copyrighted works, 
the record lacks evidence that expanding the unlocking exemption to cover unused 
devices would harm the market for copyrighted works.  As discussed, such devices have 
been excluded from prior exemptions based on concerns expressed by some wireless 
service providers that allowing the unlocking of unused devices could facilitate 
cellphone trafficking.  As explained above, however, it is not clear that the economic 
harm caused by that activity affects the value of the computer programs allowing 
devices to connect to wireless networks.  And, such harms are separately addressed 
through other laws.  Indeed, it is worth noting that the party advocating in support of 
limiting the exemption to used devices in 2015—TracFone —did not participate in this 
proceeding.  In fact, as noted, no party filed oppositions in this class. 
Moreover, while the evidence indicating a need to unlock unused devices relates 
primarily to cellphones, the record reflects some legitimate interest on the part of users 
in unlocking other types of new devices, particularly in promotion of environmental 
responsibility.  No parties expressed concern regarding trafficking in devices other than 
cellphones, and in fact the references to subsidy theft in the 2012 and 2015 rulemakings 
pertain exclusively to phones.966  The record thus provides no basis to find that the 
requested expansion would adversely affect the market for the other devices 
encompassed by the current exemption.   
The Acting Register does not find any additional factors relevant to the adverse effects 
analysis.  Accordingly, she finds that proponents have demonstrated that absent an 
exemption, they are likely to be adversely affected in their ability to unlock unused 
cellphones, tablets, mobile connectivity devices, and wearable devices. 
ii. All Wireless Devices 
Proponents argue that the adverse effects arising from the inability to unlock devices are 
not limited to the devices covered by the current exemption but are applicable to 
wireless devices generally.  In their view, the pace of innovation in the connected 
devices industry is so swift that limiting unlocking to narrow categories of devices will 
needlessly stifle innovation.
967  Proponents note that NTIA has previously recommended 
this expansion on the ground that there is little practical difference between wireless 
                                                      
965 See 2015 Recommendation at 167–68. 
966 See Cellular Telecomm. Indus. Ass’n 2012 Class 6 Initial at 49–50; TracFone 2015 Class 11 Opp’n 
at 11–12; see also 2015 Recommendation at 163–64; 2012 Recommendation at 87. 
967 ISRI Class 5 Initial at 5–6 (arguing that pace of innovation in connected devices industry makes 
category-based exemptions for unlocking “unrealistic” and “unnecessary”). 

[PAGE 159]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
156 
phones and other devices for purposes of unlocking.968  In support of this broad 
expansion, ISRI’s initial comments cite examples of various smart devices that include 
wireless technology, including child monitors, modems embedded within automobiles, 
agricultural equipment, and animal trackers.969  Proponents seek to illustrate that there 
are numerous devices capable of communicating over wireless networks and that 
owners of such devices likewise should be free to transfer to a different service provider. 
The Acting Register finds this submission insufficient to demonstrate that owners of 
wireless devices of all types are likely to be adversely affected by the bar against 
circumvention.  ISRI’s initial comments offer only “a handful of examples” of wireless 
devices, and those consist entirely of one- or two-sentence descriptions of each.970  They 
do not indicate whether, or to what extent, owners of such devices have sought to 
unlock them and have been deterred by section 1201.  In fact, ISRI acknowledged at the 
hearing that “we don’t have specific examples that demonstrate” consumers seeking to 
unlock automobile GPS trackers or other devices.971  These statements are inadequate to 
enable the Acting Register to assess whether the asserted adverse effects pertaining to 
these devices describe actual or likely harms, or instead are merely speculative.972  This is 
not to suggest that proponents must identify separate adverse effects for every type of 
device for which they seek an exemption.  Here, however, proponents’ comments fail to 
make even a minimal showing that users of many types of wireless devices are similarly 
harmed by the inability to unlock them.
973 
Moreover, in the case of at least some of ISRI’s examples, adverse effects appear 
unlikely.  For example, ISRI concedes that child trackers are “included in the current 
exemption” as wearable devices.
974  Likewise, animal trackers that are “built into 
collars”975 are a type of wearable device covered by the existing exemption.  In addition, 
ISRI refers to vehicle-embedded modems such as OnStar, but provides no evidence to 
                                                      
968 Id. at 6 (quoting NTIA 2015 Letter at 39). 
969 Id. at 6–7. 
970 Id. 
971 Tr. at 158:18–20 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Scher, ISRI); see also Tr. at 180:10–15 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Wiens, 
iFixit) (same for industrial monitoring equipment such as oil pipelines). 
972 See 2012 Recommendation at 8 (“Claims based on ‘likely’ adverse effects cannot be supported 
by speculation alone.”) (citation omitted). 
973 See House Manager’s Report at 7 (suggesting that Register should look to whether the 
prohibition on circumvention affects the availability of works in different categories in the same 
way). 
974 Tr. at 150:09–26 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Connelly, ISRI). 
975 ISRI Class 5 Initial at 7. 

[PAGE 160]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
157 
counter the Register’s 2015 determination that “there are currently no apparent means 
for users to unlock in-vehicle telematics and communications systems.”976 
Subsequently, in its reply comments, ISRI provided more detailed and concrete 
discussion about the functioning and noninfringing use of three categories of devices:  
consumer security systems, farming equipment, and automobile GPS trackers.977  This 
evidence likewise is insufficient to establish that users of all wireless devices will suffer 
adverse effects absent an exemption, but the Acting Register will consider whether 
proponents have made such a showing as to these specific categories. 
Home security systems.  Proponents suggest that the inability to unlock cellular-connected 
home security systems such as Google’s Nest Secure could lead to adverse effects where 
the system is later shut down, or where a consumer’s home has poor wireless 
coverage.
978  At the hearing, Mr. Wiens cited the example of Revolv, a smart home 
security system purchased by Nest and subsequently discontinued.979  In such a 
circumstance, he explained, a recycler may be able to “swap out the SIM cards” from 
hardware units of former subscribers—thereby enabling the devices to connect to a 
different wireless network—and then resell them, presumably to be used with a 
different security provider.980  Similarly, ISRI notes that services such as Nest Secure and 
SimpliSafe have relationships with specific cellular service providers, and it argues that 
consumers in areas with limited connectivity should be free to obtain service from a 
different provider if they so choose.
981 
These examples, the Acting Register concludes, are inadequate to satisfy the statutory 
requirement to demonstrate actual or likely adverse effects resulting from the bar on 
circumvention.  As the Office has noted, for an exemption to issue, the statutory 
prohibition must be the cause of any adverse effects on noninfringing uses.982  Here, 
proponents have failed to demonstrate that it would be possible to connect the 
referenced security devices to other networks even if they were permitted to unlock 
                                                      
976 2015 Recommendation at 158.  In 2015 the Register noted evidence that it is not physically 
possible to switch the carrier for such a device “without destroying your car,” and that, even if it 
were possible to do so, the OnStar system would not operate because its protocols are engineered 
to work through a specific carrier.  Id. at 158–59.  Nothing in the record suggests that these 
conditions have changed. 
977 ISRI Class 5 Reply at 5–6. 
978 Id. at 4–5; Tr. at 144:15–145:08 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit). 
979 Tr. at 144:22–25 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit). 
980 Tr. at 144:15–145:08 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit).   
981 ISRI Class 5 Reply at 4–5. 
982 See Commerce Comm. Report at 37; House Manager’s Report at 6; see also Section 1201 Report 
at 117. 

[PAGE 161]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
158 
them.  In the Revolv example, it is not clear whether any security provider allows its 
customers to obtain service through a device provided by another company, or whether 
such providers instead require use of their own hardware.  Likewise, there is no 
indication that providers like Nest Secure and SimpliSafe will provide service using 
wireless carriers other than those with which they have contractual relationships.  In 
both examples, to the extent the security providers are unwilling or unable to permit the 
arrangements proponents describe, any adverse effect is the product of those policies or 
technical limitations, not section 1201.983  Absent any evidence that such transactions are 
possible, proponents cannot establish a likelihood of adverse effects, as such a showing 
may not be based solely on speculative or hypothetical harms. 
Farming equipment.  Proponents also suggest that farming equipment should be 
unlockable, giving examples of connected devices with agricultural uses that can 
increase productivity and reduce use of natural resources.984  Proponents do not, 
however, offer specific examples of devices that are capable of being unlocked and used 
on different wireless networks.  Instead, they point only to solutions offered directly by 
network providers such as Verizon, AT&T, and Sierra Wireless.985  The websites cited by 
ISRI indicate that these connected devices may be custom-built by the wireless providers 
themselves.  For example, Sierra Wireless states that it offers “custom tracking devices 
[built] from scratch,”
986 and Verizon suggests that its IoT sensors are built with the 
Verizon network in mind.987  To the extent these devices are designed specifically to 
operate on a particular network, it is unclear whether they are capable of use through 
other carriers.  In some cases, moreover, it appears that the devices are “tightly 
integrated” with services offered by the providers, further calling into question whether 
they would function on a different network.
988  On this record, the Acting Register 
                                                      
983 Commerce Comm. Report at 37 (“ Adverse impacts that flow from other sources . . . are outside 
the scope of the rulemaking.”). 
984 ISRI Class 5 Initial at 7; ISRI Class 5 Reply at 5. 
985 See ISRI Class 5 Initial at 7 nn.21–22 (citing links to Verizon and Sierra Wireless pages for asset 
tracking solutions for agriculture); ISRI Class 5 Reply at 5 (citing reports on Verizon and AT&T 
agricultural services). 
986 Benoit Tournier, Tracking Devices for Livestock Increase Farm Profits, SIERRA WIRELESS (Oct. 24, 
2017), https://www.sierrawireless.com/iot-blog/iot-blog/2017/10 / tracking_devices_ for_
 livestock_increase_ farm- _profits/.  
987 How Verizon’s Internet of Things Technology Can Feed a Food Safety Revolution, VERIZON (Dec. 13, 
2017), https://www.verizon.com/about/news/how-verizons-internet-things-technology-can-feedfood-safety-revolution (“You’re talking about a platform that has to scale to literally billions and 
trillions of transactions.  That’s a very good fit for Verizon, because our network accommodates 
that load.  It was built with that in mind for years to come.”). 
988 Benoit Tournier, Tracking Devices for Livestock Increase Farm Profits, SIERRA WIRELESS (Oct. 24, 
2017), https://www.sierrawireless.com/iot-blog/iot-blog/2017/10 / tracking_devices_ for_

[PAGE 162]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
159 
cannot find that the prohibition on circumvention is the cause of any adverse effect on 
users’ ability to obtain wireless service for such devices from a different provider.   
Automobile GPS trackers.  Proponents also offer specific evidence regarding automobile 
GPS trackers, pointing to devices such as Verizon’s Hum service and T-Mobile’s SyncUp 
DRIVE.989  These devices plug into a car’s On-Board Device (“OBD”) port, a 
standardized port for accessing the vehicle’s computer for tasks such as obtaining 
diagnostic data.990  In addition to retrieving information about the car’s performance, 
these vehicle devices include GPS capability and, most relevant to this proceeding, 
wireless radios allowing for hotspot functionality.991 
Proponents warn that vehicle trackers face similar issues as locked cell phones.  They 
argue that users of a device should not have to purchase a new one for use on a 
competing compatible network, and that locked devices limit competition by preventing 
consumers from switching carriers.992  As an example, they note that some insurance 
companies offer lower rates to drivers who install GPS devices in their vehicles to 
monitor data indicative of driving safety.993  If the driver decides to change insurance 
companies, proponents posit, an insurer using a different wireless network could 
                                                                                                                                                              
 livestock_increase_ farm- _profits/ (“Sierra Wireless modules are tightly integrated with our 
connectivity services and AirVantage IoT platform, which makes it easy to get data to the cloud, 
so you can develop value added services that help farmers increase their profits.”); see also M2X, 
AT&T, https://m2x.att.com/iot/industry-solutions/iot-data/agriculture / (last visited Sept. 27, 
2018). 
989 ISRI Class 5 Reply at 6; see Hum by Verizon, VERIZON, https://www.hum.com/products (last 
visited Sept. 27, 2018); SyncUP DRIVE, T-MOBILE, https://www.t-mobile.com/offers/syncup (last 
visited Sept. 27, 2018) (FAQ explaining that “[f]or security reasons, the SyncUP  DRIVE device is 
locked to the T-Mobile network and only accepts legitimate T-Mobile Micro-Sim cards purchased 
from T-Mobile or an authorized T-Mobile dealer”). 
990 See Hum by Verizon, VERIZON, https://www.hum.com/products (last visited Sept. 27, 2018) 
(Hum “receives diagnostic information from your car’s OBD system” and sends alerts); SyncUP 
DRIVE, T-MOBILE, https://www.t-mobile.com/offers/syncup (last visited Sept. 27, 2018) (directing 
owners to plug device into OBD-II port); Tr. at 56:08–25 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit) (stating 
that the OBD port is a “standardized interface” that allows for access of diagnostic information in 
most cars). 
991 See Hum by Verizon, VERIZON, https://www.hum.com/features/wi-fi-hotspot (last visited Sept. 
27, 2018); Tr. at 167:06–12 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit).   
992 ISRI Class 5 Reply at 6.   
993 Tr. at 154:06–18 (Apr. 23, 2017) (Wiens, iFixit). 

[PAGE 163]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
160 
require purchase of a new device that operates on its preferred network, even if the old 
device could capture and deliver the same information to the new insurance company.994 
For the reasons noted above in relation to security systems, the Acting Register 
concludes that these asserted harms are speculative in nature and therefore are 
insufficient to demonstrate adverse effects under the statute.  At the hearing, Mr. Wiens 
acknowledged that he is unaware of any instance of an insurance company refusing to 
allow the use of an alternative device,
995 and ISRI’s evidence of consumer demand in this 
area relates to child monitoring devices, not automobile trackers.996  Moreover, as in the 
case of the security system examples, the harm described by proponents stems not from 
section 1201 but from the insurance carrier’s requirement that its customers utilize the 
company’s own GPS trackers.  An exemption allowing users to unlock trackers provided 
by their former insurer would have no effect on the new carrier’s ability to maintain 
such a policy.  Proponents thus have failed to demonstrate that section 1201 is the cause 
of their asserted adverse effects with respect to these devices. 
In any event, the two specific automobile trackers cited by ISRI appear to be covered 
under the existing exemption as portable mobile connectivity devices.  The Verizon 
Hum and the T-Mobile SyncUp Drive appear to be portable devices that, in addition to 
providing GPS tracking, also function as Wi-Fi hotspots.997  An expansion of the current 
exemption accordingly is unnecessary to allow unlocking of those devices or other 
portable in-vehicle units with the same functionality.998 
In light of the foregoing, the Acting Register concludes that the statutory factors do not 
favor an exemption encompassing additional categories of wireless devices.  Here, the 
most relevant factor is the first—the availability for use of copyrighted works.  While the 
Acting Register adheres to the Office’s prior conclusion that unlocking can promote the 
availability of software by extending the useful life of wireless devices, in this class the 
evidence is insufficient to establish that extending the exemption to the devices cited by 
proponents is likely to have that effect.  As discussed, to the extent those devices are not 
covered by the current exemption, the evidence does not demonstrate that an exemption 
would enable users to connect them to different wireless networks.  The second factor, 
                                                      
994 Tr. at 154:19–26 (Apr. 23, 2017) (Wiens, iFixit). 
995 Tr. at 155:01–14 (Apr. 23, 2017) (Wiens, iFixit). 
996 See ISRI Class 5 Reply at 6 n.30. 
997 See HumX, VERIZON, https://www.hum.com/products/hum-x (last visited Sept. 27, 2018); 
SyncUP DRIVE, T-MOBILE, https://www.t-mobile.com/offers/syncup (last visited Sept. 27, 2018). 
998 These portable in-vehicle devices should be distinguished from hotspots embedded in the 
vehicle, such as OnStar.  As noted, the latter was excluded from the current exemption based on 
evidence that unlocking could not be accomplished without destroying the vehicle and that there 
was a lack of desire on the part of consumers to do so.  See 2015 Recommendation at 158–59.   

[PAGE 164]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
161 
the availability for use of works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational 
purposes, and the third factor, the effect on criticism, comment, news reporting, 
teaching, scholarship and research, have little relevance in this context.999  And while the 
fourth factor ordinarily favors an exemption where, as here, there is no evidence of 
likely harm to the market for copyrighted works, that factor has little significance to this 
request given the lack of evidence of adverse effects attributable to the statutory 
prohibition.  Accordingly, and without prejudice to future consideration of this issue 
upon a different record, the Acting Register concludes that proponents have failed to 
establish that they are, or are likely to be, adversely affected by section 1201 in their 
ability to unlock additional categories of wireless devices. 
3. NTIA Comments 
As it did in 2015, NTIA believes that “proponents have provided sufficient evidence to 
demonstrate that circumvention of TPMs on all lawfully acquired wireless devices is a 
noninfringing use.”
1000  Specifically, NTIA states that proponents have shown that their 
proposed uses “are essentially identical” to the uses permitted under the current 
exemption and that the adverse impacts of the circumvention bar are felt equally by 
“users of all wireless devices.”1001  NTIA finds that the statutory prohibition “limits 
consumer choice of wireless network providers, limits recyclers’ ability to recycle or 
resell wireless devices, and limits competition between wireless network providers.”1002  
NTIA does not, however, point to specific evidence of such effects in the context of 
devices beyond those covered by the current exemption.  Absent such evidence, the 
Acting Register cannot recommend an exemption covering all wireless devices. 
In reaching its conclusion, NTIA suggests that unlocking devices in situations where the 
customer does not contract directly with a wireless carrier (as in the case of OnStar) does 
not threaten copyright infringement and thus does not merit special consideration.
1003  It 
finds “no evidence that merely allowing the cellular radio in a car to communicate with 
a different wireless network would result in the user unlawfully obtaining copyrighted 
material that had only been made available with the initially bundled service (e.g., 
OnStar maps).”
1004  Like the Acting Register, however, NTIA appears to question 
whether changing wireless providers is possible in these circumstances.  It notes, for 
example, that “if a user is able to unlock an OnStar receiver in a car to direct it to connect 
                                                      
999 See id. at 167–68.  
1000 NTIA Letter at 41.   
1001 Id. at 43.   
1002 Id. 
1003 Id. at 42. 
1004 Id.  

[PAGE 165]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
162 
to a different wireless carrier, the user cannot expect that OnStar would continue to 
provide service to the user.”1005 
NTIA echoes the Acting Register’s conclusion that proponents have met their burden 
with respect to unused devices, pointing to evidence that since 2015, “business practices 
have changed, resulting in a need for bulk and individual unlocking of new wireless 
devices.”
1006  NTIA proposes replacing the term “used” in the exemption with “lawfully 
acquired.”1007  The Acting Register agrees that it is appropriate to include that phrase in 
the regulatory text.  Because the regulations implementing the Unlocking Act already 
require that circumvention under this exemption be initiated by the “owner” of the 
relevant device or by a person or service provider at the direction of the owner, the 
Acting Register views this as a technical, rather than a substantive, change.
1008 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
Proponents have met their burden to show that the statutory prohibition is likely to 
cause adverse effects on the ability to unlock unused cellphones, tablets, mobile 
connectivity devices, and wearables.  The Acting Register therefore recommends 
expanding the current exemption by eliminating the requirement that a device be 
“used.”  Proponents have not, however, carried their burden to demonstrate adverse 
effects with respect to other types of mobile devices, and therefore the Acting Register 
does not recommend removal of the exemption’s enumerated device categories. 
The Acting Register accordingly recommends that the Librarian designate the following 
class: 
Computer programs that enable the following types of lawfully acquired 
wireless devices to connect to a wireless telecommunications network, when 
circumvention is undertaken solely in order to connect to a wireless 
telecommunications network and such connection is authorized by the 
operator of such network: 
(i) Wireless telephone handsets (i.e., cellphones); 
(ii) All-purpose tablet computers; 
(iii) Portable mobile connectivity devices, such as mobile hotspots, 
removable wireless broadband modems, and similar devices; and  
                                                      
1005 Id.  
1006 Id. at 42–43 (citing record showing recyclers increasingly receive new devices). 
1007 Id. 
1008 See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(c) (2016). 

[PAGE 166]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
163 
(iv) Wearable wireless devices designed to be worn on the body, such 
as smartwatches or fitness devices.  
F. Proposed Class 6: Computer Programs—Jailbreaking  
1. Background  
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption 
Proposed Class 6 would expand an existing exemption for activity known as 
“jailbreaking”; that is, “the process of gaining access to the operating system of a 
computing device . . . to install and execute software that could not otherwise be 
installed or run on that device, or to remove pre-installed software that could not 
otherwise be uninstalled.”1009  As noted above, the 2015 rulemaking adopted an 
exemption permitting the jailbreaking of smartphones, “portable all-purpose mobile 
computing devices.”1010  In this proceeding, EFF filed a petition seeking to expand the 
current exemption in two respects.  First, EFF proposes adding voice assistant devices 
such as the Amazon Echo and Google Home to the categories of devices covered by the 
exemption.  Second, it requests language expressly allowing jailbreaking not only to 
install, run, or remove software, but also for the purpose of enabling or disabling 
hardware features of the relevant device.  
Specifically, EFF’s petition proposed replacing “portable all-purpose mobile computing 
devices” with “general-purpose portable computing devices,” and defining that term as 
“a portable device that is primarily designed or primarily used to run a wide variety of 
programs rather than for consumption of a particular type of media content, is equipped 
with an operating system primarily designed for use in a general-purpose computing 
device, and is primarily designed to be carried or worn by an individual or used in a 
home.”1011  Consumers Union, FSF, Keeon Jung, and SaurikIT each filed brief comments 
in support of the petition. 
EFF’s subsequent supporting comments, which were joined by ORI and the Association 
of Service and Computer Dealers International, Inc. (“ ASCDI”) (collectively, 
“EFF/ORI/ASCDI”) narrowed the proposed regulatory language.  In lieu of a “generalpurpose portable computing devices” category, proponents now seek to expand the 
exemption only to “voice assistant devices,” which they define as “a device that is 
primarily designed to run a wide variety of programs rather than for consumption of a 
particular type of media content, is designed to take user input primarily by voice, and 
                                                      
1009 2015 Recommendation at 172 (citations omitted). 
1010 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(4) (2016). 
1011 EFF Class 6 Pet. at 2. 

[PAGE 167]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
164 
is designed to be installed in a home or office.”1012  Thus, proponents’ requested 
language is as follows, with proposed additions indicated in bold: 
Computer programs that enable smartphones, voice assistant devices, 
and portable all-purpose mobile computing devices to execute lawfully 
obtained software applications, where circumvention is accomplished 
solely for one or more of the following purposes:  enabling 
interoperability of such applications with computer programs on the 
smartphone or device, or to permit removal of software from the 
smartphone or device, or to enable or disable hardware features of the 
smartphone or device.  For purposes of this exemption, a “portable allpurpose mobile computing device” is a device that is primarily designed 
to run a wide variety of programs rather than for consumption of a 
particular type of media content, is equipped with an operating system 
primarily designed for mobile use, and is intended to be carried or worn 
by an individual.  A “voice assistant device” is a device that is primarily 
designed to run a wide variety of programs rather than for consumption 
of a particular type of media content, is designed to take user input 
primarily by voice, and is designed to be installed in a home or 
office.
1013 
b. Overview of Issues 
Proponents seek to gain access to the computer programs within voice assistant devices 
that are used to “start up the device, control the hardware, and allow the running of 
other programs.”
1014  Such programs are variously referred to as “firmware, operating 
systems, and bootloaders.”1015  Proponents offer a number of reasons for seeking such 
access.  First, they contend that access will enable owners of voice assistant devices to 
improve the device’s functionality— for example, by installing applications developed 
by third parties or by fixing security vulnerabilities that the manufacturer has yet to 
address.1016  Second, they argue that jailbreaking would give users greater control over 
their privacy.  Noting that voice assistant devices “are designed to transmit audio 
commands over the Internet to the manufacturer’s servers for interpretation,” and may 
also transmit sensitive data from connected devices, proponents seek the ability to install 
firewall software to prevent such transmissions, as well as the ability to control the 
operation of particular applications or hardware features such as the microphone or 
                                                      
1012 EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 6 Initial at 2. 
1013 Id. 
1014 Id. at 6. 
1015 Id.  
1016 Id. at 13–14. 

[PAGE 168]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
165 
camera.1017  Finally, proponents argue that jailbreaking will enable users to continue 
using voice assistant devices even if the manufacturer discontinues server support, 
thereby extending the useful life of such devices and mitigating the environmental 
impact of electronics waste.1018 
Proponents assert that gaining such access requires circumvention of TPMs contained in 
the device firmware.  They note that most voice assistant devices, including the Amazon 
Echo and Google Home, run variants of the GNU/Linux operating system, which 
“contains access controls that can be configured to restrict access to nearly any of a 
device’s functions, including the ability to add or remove software from a device.”1019  
Neither Amazon nor Google, they contend, grant such access, and therefore “obtaining 
it requires modifying or replacing the access controls on the device.”1020  The Apple 
HomePod runs the iOS operating system, which “contains cryptographic verification 
that prevents any application from running on a device unless it bears a digital signature 
from Apple.”1021  The system also “contains cryptographic checks at various levels of the 
software stack that prevent modification or replacement of the operating system 
itself.”1022 
Class 6 was opposed by the ACT | The App Association ( “A C T ”), ESA, and Joint 
Creators II and the Recording Industry Association of America (“RIAA”) testified in 
opposition of the proposed class.  Opponents argue that jailbreaking of voice assistant 
devices will contribute to piracy by enabling users to gain unauthorized access to 
subscription-based streaming content, as well as by enabling the installation of 
counterfeit apps or apps offering infringing content.1023  In opponents’ view, jailbreaking 
a voice assistant device carries a greater risk of these harms than exists in the context of 
the devices covered by the current exemption. 
2. Discussion 
a. Scope of the Proposed Class 
The Acting Register first addresses two related issues concerning the scope of the 
request.  First, Joint Creators II argue that the exemption requested in the supporting 
comments of EFF, ORI, and ASCDI should be denied as untimely because it differs from 
                                                      
1017 Id. at 14. 
1018 Id. at 14–15. 
1019 Id. at 6. 
1020 Id. at 6–7. 
1021 Id. at 7. 
1022 Id. 
1023 See, e.g., ACT Class 6 Opp’n at 5. 

[PAGE 169]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
166 
the request in EFF’s petition and was submitted after the petition deadline of September 
13, 2017.  Joint Creators II note that EFF’s petition sought an exemption for “generalpurpose portable computing devices,”1024 while the supporting comments seek to cover 
(in Joint Creators II’s language) “non-portable, in-home or in-office, voice assistants.”1025  
EFF responded that it was clear from its petition that voice assistant devices were 
included; indeed, the petition listed “the Amazon Echo series of products, the Google 
Home, and the forthcoming Apple HomePod” as examples of devices to be covered.1026  
Further, EFF contends that it provided “more focused regulatory language” in its 
comments in response to the NPRM’s request for examples of specific types of devices 
that would be encompassed by the proposed exemption.
1027 
The Acting Register concludes that proponents’ request was timely filed.  The Office’s 
petition request form states that “[p]etitioners need not propose precise regulatory 
language or fully define the contours of an exemption class” and that “a short, plain 
statement describing the nature of the activities the petitioners wish to engage in will be 
sufficient.”1028  As proponents note, EFF’s petition made clear that the proposed 
exemption was intended to include the most well-known examples of voice assistant 
devices.  The proposed regulatory language in proponents’ subsequent comments is 
consistent with that statement; in fact, the latter language is narrower than that of the 
petition, which would have covered not just voice assistant devices but other “general 
purpose portable computing devices,” including by changing the type of operating 
systems relevant to the exemption.1029  Therefore, opponents have not been prejudiced 
by the change in proponents’ language, and the Acting Register accordingly will 
consider the proposal as reflected in the comments. 
Second, some opponents contend that proponents’ definition of “voice assistant device” 
is overbroad.  As noted, the proposed exemption defines that term as “a device that is 
primarily designed to run a wide variety of programs rather than for consumption of a 
particular type of media content, is designed to take user input primarily by voice, and 
is designed to be installed in a home or office.”1030  Joint Creators II argue that this 
definition could sweep in devices such as television set-top boxes and Blu-ray players, 
many of which “are capable of being operated by voice and access multiple forms of 
                                                      
1024 EFF Class 6 Pet. at 2 (emphasis added). 
1025 Joint Creators II Class 6 Opp’n at 4. 
1026 EFF Class 6 Reply at 2 (quoting EFF Class 6 Pet. at 3). 
1027 Id. at 3. 
1028 EFF Class 6 Pet. at 2. 
1029  Id.; see also ESA Class 6 Opp’n at 2 (stating that supporting comments “propos[e] narrower 
regulatory language” than that proposed in petition). 
1030 EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 6 Initial at 2. 

[PAGE 170]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
167 
content.”1031  ACT similarly contends that the definition “could essentially include any 
home computing device operated by voice commands.”1032  Proponents respond that 
they are not seeking to extend the exemption beyond voice assistant devices.  They 
argue that their definition excludes set-top boxes, digital video recorders, universal 
remote controls, and video game consoles on the ground that those devices “are all fully 
functional without using voice commands,” as well as the fact that none of them are 
“designed to run a wide variety of software applications apart from media viewing.”1033 
Based on proponents’ statements, the Acting Register understands the proposed 
expansion to exclude the devices cited by opponents.  The analysis below accordingly 
will consider whether the jailbreaking of this narrower category of voice assistant device 
qualifies for an exemption under section 1201.  If that question is resolved in the 
affirmative, the Acting Register will consider whether proponents’ suggested definition 
appropriately describes the scope of the class or whether alternative regulatory language 
is warranted. 
b. Works Protected by Copyright 
In recommending the current exemption, the Register recognized that the operating 
systems in smartphones and portable all-purpose mobile computing devices constitute 
computer programs within the meaning of the Copyright Act.1034  The same conclusion 
applies to the firmware in voice assistant devices.1035  Therefore, the Acting Register 
finds that at least some works included in the proposed expansion of the class are 
protected by copyright. 
c. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Proponents note that “[j]ailbreaking involves modifying the firmware on one’s device, 
potentially creating a derivative work”1036—a prima facie infringement of the copyright 
owner’s exclusive right to prepare derivative works under section 106(2) of the 
                                                      
1031 Joint Creators II Class 6 Opp’n at 10. 
1032 ACT Class 6 Opp’n at 4. 
1033 EFF Class 6 Reply at 4. 
1034 See 2015 Recommendation at 172 n.1077 (“ Although the terms ‘firmware’ and ‘software’ are 
variously used throughout the Recommendation, both are considered computer programs within 
the meaning of the Copyright Act.” (citing 17 U.S.C. § 101 (definition of “computer program”))). 
1035 See EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 6 Initial at 4 (“Voice assistants from Amazon and Google run 
variants of the GNU/Linux operating system, the same operating system that runs on billions of 
other Internet-connected devices and forms the basis of the Android operating system for mobile 
devices.  The Apple HomePod runs iOS, the same operating system that runs on iPhone and iPad 
devices.”). 
1036 Id. at 8. 

[PAGE 171]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
168 
Copyright Act.  They argue, however, that such activity is noninfringing under the fair 
use doctrine, and that each of the factors weighs in favor of the exemption.1037  In 
proponents’ view, the fair use analysis relied upon by the Register in recommending the 
previous jailbreaking exemptions is equally applicable in the context of voice assistant 
devices.  Opponents do not directly contest these fair use arguments, but the Acting 
Register must assess them regardless. 
Proponents do not provide a separate fair use analysis for the second aspect of their 
request, which seeks to add language expressly permitting circumvention for purposes 
of enabling or disabling hardware features of the relevant device.  Proponents describe 
this request as merely a clarification of the existing exemption language, contending that 
“the ability to enable or disable hardware features is inherent in the ability to install or 
remove software.”
1038  They do not provide further elaboration, however, and Joint 
Creators II do not appear to concede that such activity is currently covered.1039  Given the 
lack of evidence or analysis in the record, the Acting Register declines to opine on the 
question whether this request is properly considered a clarification compared to an 
expansion of the current exemption.  Without more information about the specific 
nature of the activity, the Acting Register cannot determine whether it requires a 
different fair use analysis from that applicable to jailbreaking as defined under the 
current exemption.  The analysis below accordingly is limited to the question of whether 
circumvention of the access controls on voice assistant devices for the purposes 
provided in the current exemption is likely to be a fair use.  
With respect to the first fair use factor, EFF/ORI/ASCDI argue that the purpose and 
character of jailbreaking favor their proposal because “the analysis and modification of 
the functional aspects of software” to make it interoperable with other programs is a 
favored purpose under applicable precedent.
1040  They rely on the Ninth Circuit’s 
decisions in Sega Enterprises Ltd. v. Accolade, Inc. and Sony Computer Entertainment, Inc. v. 
Connectix Corp., which held that reverse engineering video game systems to facilitate the 
                                                      
1037 Id. at 8–13.  Despite its potential relevance, proponents did not rely on section 117, which 
permits the owner of a copy of a computer program to reproduce and adapt the program in 
certain circumstances, as a basis for noninfringing use.   
1038 Id. at 2; see also Tr. at 93:20–94:09 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Stoltz, EFF). 
1039 See Joint Creators II Class 6 Opp’n at 3 n.2 (“Without more information, the Joint Creators and 
Copyright Owners cannot determine whether to oppose this expansion.”); Tr. at 96:19 –24 (Apr. 
12, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II); see also Tr. at 99:07–12 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Hughes, RIAA) (“In 
these devices, it sounds to me that if one of their purposes is to start to turn off hardware 
features, then my concern would be that there’s going to be some unintended consequence 
whereby suddenly music that was licensed for an end-to-end secure distribution is no longer 
secure.”). 
1040 EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 6 Initial at 8. 

[PAGE 172]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
169 
creation of interoperable third-party software was a fair use.1041  Proponents also point to 
the Register’s prior determination that the goal of jailbreaking—“to allow the operating 
system on a device to interact with other programs”— is “a favored purpose under the 
law,”1042 as well as the Register’s finding that the legislative history of section 1201 
“expresse[s] a commitment to permit and encourage interoperability.”1043 
Proponents further argue that jailbreaking is a transformative, noncommercial use.  
Citing Connectix, they contend that “[c]opying and modification of software to render it 
compatible with other, independently created software has been held to be a 
transformative purpose.”1044  Proponents assert that jailbreaking is noncommercial 
because those who jailbreak “do not do so for profit, but to enhance, personalize, and 
secure their devices,” and that that jailbreaking “promotes additional creativity and 
expands access to knowledge by encouraging more software development and 
expanded functionality.”1045 
The Acting Register agrees with proponents that this factor favors fair use.  As 
proponents note, previous Registers have concluded that enabling a device’s operating 
system to interoperate with other programs is a favored purpose under the first fair use 
factor.1046  Indeed, the Acting Register notes the long history of exemptions for 
jailbreaking granted in prior rulemakings.  Nothing in the record suggests that 
jailbreaking a voice assistant device is materially different in purpose and character from 
jailbreaking those other types of devices.  Similarly, with respect to proponents’ 
contention that jailbreaking is transformative, the Register previously found that 
question unnecessary to a determination that the first factor favors fair use.  In 2015 the 
Register noted that even if jailbreaking is not considered transformative, “the first factor 
may nonetheless favor fair use where, as here, the purpose and character of the use is 
‘noncommercial and personal’ and enhances functionality.”
1047  The same conclusion 
applies to the jailbreaking of voice assistant devices.1048 
                                                      
1041 Id. (citing Sega, 977 F.2d at 1514, and Connectix, 203 F.3d at 598–99). 
1042 Id. at 9 (quoting 2015 Recommendation at 188). 
1043 Id. (quoting 2010 Recommendation at 92). 
1044 Id. at 10 (citing Connectix, 203 F.3d at 606–07). 
1045 Id. 
1046 See 2015 Recommendation at 188; see also 2012 Recommendation at 72; 2010 Recommendation 
at 93–95. 
1047 2015 Recommendation at 188; see also 2012 Recommendation at 72; 2010 Recommendation at 
93. 
1048 At the hearing, counsel for Joint Creators II suggested that the Office’s prior analysis under 
this factor should change in light of the Federal Circuit’s decision in Oracle Am., Inc. v. Google LLC, 
886 F.3d 1179 (Fed. Cir. 2018), which was issued after the close of the written comment period.  

[PAGE 173]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
170 
Finally, the Acting Register believes it significant that proponents seek to jailbreak voice 
assistant devices for the additional purpose of safeguarding personal privacy.  Section 
1201(i) provides a permanent exemption that permits circumvention for the “sole” 
purpose and effect of disabling technology that collects or disseminates personally 
identifying information.1049  While proponents’ requested exemption is not fully covered 
by the 1201(i), section 1201(i) reflects Congress’s recognition that the protection of 
privacy is a purpose for which circumvention may be warranted under appropriate 
circumstances.1050  The Acting Register finds that this consideration further tips the first 
factor in favor of fair use.1051 
As to the second factor, proponents rely on the Ninth Circuit’s holdings in Sega and 
Connectix for the proposition that the nature of the work favors fair use where the 
copying of software is necessary to understand its functional aspects.1052  They also note 
                                                                                                                                                              
See Tr. at 157:16–159:21 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II).  In Oracle, the court held that 
Google’s use of Oracle’s application programming interface packages to develop a software 
platform for mobile devices was not transformative.  Oracle, 886 F.3d at 1199.  The court 
distinguished Connectix, where the court found the copying of software code to create a 
compatible product with new code to be “modestly transformative.”  Id. at 1200 (citing Connectix, 
203 F.3d at 606–07).  In contrast, the Oracle court found that Google copied the code verbatim to 
attract programmers to a “new and incompatible platform.”  Id.  (internal quotation marks and 
citation omitted).  Counsel for Joint Creators II argued that jailbreaking more closely resembles 
the latter activity because the copied firmware is used for substantially the same purpose for 
which it was designed.  Tr. at 158:20–159:07 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II).  
Regardless, however, the Office’s analysis does not require a finding that jailbreaking is 
transformative in these circumstances.  See 2015 Recommendation at 188 (“Even if this use is not 
considered transformative in nature—because the computer program is still being used for its  
intended purpose—that is not in and of itself a basis to reject a fair use claim.”).   
1049 17 U.S.C. § 1201(i). 
1050 Id. § 1201(i)(1); see also Tr. at 94:19–21 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Stoltz) (opining that section 1201(i) 
would not cover all aspects of proposed exemption); Tr. at 112:03–14 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Freeman, 
SaurikIT) (similar). 
1051 The Acting Register notes that voice assistant devices recently have been the subject of 
privacy-related concerns.  See, e.g., Letter from U.S. Senators Jeff Flake & Christopher A. Coons to 
Jeff Bezos, Chief Executive Officer, Amazon, Inc. (June 11, 2018), https://www.flake.senate.gov/
public/_cache/files/ef175bd4-d6b4-46eb-9014-bb8942420a63/06.12.18-flake-coons-amazonletter.pdf (requesting information on privacy and data-security issues concerning Amazon Echo); 
Laurel Wamsley, Amazon Echo Recorded and Sent Couple’s Conversation—All Without Their 
Knowledge, NPR (May 25, 2018), https://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2018/05/25/
614470096/amazon-echo-recorded-and-sent-couples-conversation-all-without-their-knowledge. 
1052 EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 6 Initial at 10 & n.56 (citing Sega, 977 F.2d at 1526, and Connectix, 203 
F.3d at 605). 

[PAGE 174]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
171 
that in considering the jailbreaking exemptions requested in prior rulemakings, the 
Register has consistently concluded that this factor favors fair use on the ground that 
firmware is largely functional in nature.1053 
For substantially the same reasons cited in reference to those exemptions, the Acting 
Register concludes that the nature of the software at issue weighs in favor of fair use.  
The record evidence indicates that the firmware in voice assistant devices serves 
primarily to “start up the device, control the hardware, and allow the running of other 
programs”1054—the same functions as the firmware in the smartphones an d other 
devices covered by the existing exemption.  Indeed, the record indicates that voice 
assistant devices run either the same firmware as is used in those devices or a variant of 
such firmware.1055  Because these programs are “largely functional, rather than 
expressive, in nature,”1056 the second factor favors fair use. 
Proponents argue that the third factor requires only that “[t]he amount taken . . . be 
‘reasonable’ and for a legitimate purpose,” and that “the amount of code copied in the 
course of a jailbreak” satisfies that standard.1057  Proponents acknowledge that “the 
amount of code that must be copied and modified varies depending on the device and 
firmware,” but they cite case law in which copying works in their entirety was deemed 
“necessary to achieving a favored purpose.”
1058  Moreover, they argue, “[i]n most cases, 
the portion of the firmware that must be permanently modified to accomplish a jailbreak 
is a very small proportion of the overall code.”1059  Proponents accordingly maintain that 
the third factor either “favors fair use, or is neutral.”1060 
In each of the past three rulemakings, the Register found that this factor has limited 
significance in the context of jailbreaking.1061  Most recently, the Register concluded that 
“while jailbreaking often requires making a complete reproduction of the firmware, in 
                                                      
1053 Id. at 10–11 (citing 2015 Recommendation at 188, 2012 Recommendation at 73, and 2010 
Recommendation at 96).  
1054 Id. at 6. 
1055 Id. at 6–7. 
1056 2015 Recommendation at 188–89. 
1057 EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 6 Initial at 11–12 (quoting Campbell, 510 U.S. at 586). 
1058 Id. at 11 (citing Sega, 977 F.2d at 1526, Connectix, 203 F.3d at 605–06, Kelly v. Arriba Soft Corp., 
336 F.3d 811, 820–21 (9th Cir. 2001), Perfect 10, Inc. v. Amazon.com, Inc., 508 F.3d 1146, 1167–68 (9th 
Cir. 2007), and Google Books, 804 F.3d at 221–22). 
1059 EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 6 Initial at 11. 
1060 Id. at 12. 
1061 See 2015 Recommendation at 188–89; 2012 Recommendation at 74; 2010 Recommendation at 
97. 

[PAGE 175]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
172 
light of the de minimis nature of the modifications ultimately made to the firmware to 
enable jailbreaking, this factor, while not favorable to fair use, is of limited relevance.”1062  
Nothing in the current record suggests that the analysis should differ with respect to 
voice assistant devices, and therefore the Acting Register reaches the same conclusion. 
In considering the fourth factor, proponents argue that jailbreaking of voice assistant 
devices does not harm the market for the sale of device firmware because the firmware 
“is sold along with the devices themselves, not separately.”1063  Noting that “[f]irmware 
upgrades are not sold, but are made available to device owners as a free download,” 
they contend that “jailbreaking does not cause any proliferation of infringing copies, nor 
replace any sales.”1064  Proponents additionally contend that “[j]ailbreaking has not 
harmed sales of other devices.”1065 
On this factor as well, the Acting Register adheres to the analysis from prior 
rulemakings.  In 2010, 2012, and 2015, the Register found no evidence that jailbreaking 
was likely to displace sales of the firmware in the devices at issue.1066  In fact, in the two 
most recent rulemakings, the Register noted evidence that sales of smartphones had 
increased during the period in which the jailbreaking exemption for such devices was in 
effect.
1067  The evidence in this proceeding indicates a similar trend for smartphones.1068  
Moreover, nothing in the record suggests that there has been any harm to the market for 
the firmware in portable all-purpose mobile computing devices since the jailbreaking 
exemption for those devices took effect in 2015.  Nor is there any basis to conclude that a 
different result would obtain if the exemption were extended to voice assistant devices.  
The Acting Register accordingly concludes that this factor favors fair use.
1069 
Based on the foregoing analysis, the Acting Register finds that proponents have met 
their burden of showing that jailbreaking voice assistant devices within the meaning of 
the current exemption is likely to be a fair use. 
                                                      
1062 2015 Recommendation at 188–89. 
1063 EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 6 Initial at 12. 
1064 Id. 
1065 Id. 
1066 2015 Recommendation at 189; 2012 Recommendation at 74; 2010 Recommendation at 97– 100. 
1067 2015 Recommendation at 189; 2012 Recommendation at 74. 
1068 See EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 6 Initial at 12 n.79. 
1069 Opponents argue that jailbreaking may give rise to piracy of creative content transmitted to 
voice assistant devices, such as music streamed via a subscription-based service.  See ACT Class 6 
Opp’n at 4–6; Joint Creators II Class 6 Opp’n at 11–13.  This concern does not go to the effect of 
the copying or alteration of the device firmware on the market for or value of that work.  
Therefore, the Acting Register addresses it below in her analysis of the fourth statutory factor 
under section 1201(a)(1)(C). 

[PAGE 176]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
173 
d. Causation 
The Acting Register finds that proponents have met their burden of showing that the 
statutory prohibition on circumvention of access controls limits their ability to engage in 
jailbreaking of voice assistant devices.  But for the prohibition, users likely could gain 
lawful access to the copyrighted firmware for that purpose.1070 
e. Asserted Adverse Effects  
Regarding the first statutory factor, EFF/ORI/ASCDI argue that a jailbreaking exemption 
“will have either no effect or a positive effect on the availability of copyrighted firmware 
and application software.”1071  They point to the Register’s prior conclusion that 
jailbreaking likely would increase the availability of applications for smartphones and 
likely would not interfere with the availability of smartphone operating systems or other 
works created for wireless communications devices.
1072  In proponents’ view, the same 
conclusion should apply here.  Proponents further contend that jailbreaking voice 
assistant devices will not contribute to infringement of copyrighted entertainment media 
streamed to such devices, such as content from music streaming services, because any 
digital rights management (“DRM”) protecting such streams is separate from the access 
controls in the bootloader and operating system.1073 
Opponents challenge the contention that jailbreaking is necessary to promote the 
development of new applications.  Joint Creators II note that Amazon and Google 
“already allow independent app development for voice assistants” and reports suggest 
that Apple will do so in the future.1074  ACT argues that circumvention is unnecessary 
given the availability of “low-cost, open source hardware available for 
programming.”1075  Citing Raspberry Pi and Arduino as examples, ACT contends that 
                                                      
1070 See EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 6 Initial at 6–7 (stating that obtaining access to firmware on 
Amazon Echo and Google Home “requires modifying or replacing the access controls on the 
device” and that Apple HomePod contains cryptographic verification preventing running of nonapproved applications and cryptographic checks preventing modification or replacement of the 
operating system); EFF Class 6 Reply at 7 (“Jailbreaking is . . . the only  way to add non-Apple 
software to a HomePod.”). 
1071 EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 6 Initial at 15. 
1072 Id. (citing 2010 Recommendation at 102). 
1073 Id. 
1074 Joint Creators II Class 6 Opp’n at 14. 
1075 ACT Class 6 Opp’n at 3. 

[PAGE 177]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
174 
these platforms “enable users to create personalized home automation with voice 
assistant devices” without the need to circumvent access controls.1076 
In response, proponents dispute that these options provide adequate alternatives to 
circumvention.  First, EFF notes that one of the uses in which users seek to engage is the 
alteration of the firmware “to selectively limit [the device’s] functionality, such as by 
limiting the reach of the always-on voice recognition, the various wireless interfaces, and 
the transmission of very personal data.”1077  It argues that such modifications “require 
adding software to the device itself, and cannot be accomplished through ‘ Alexa Skills’ 
and similar third-party functionality that resides largely on the manufacturer’s 
servers.”
1078 
Second, with respect to the installation of third-party apps, EFF notes that the Register 
previously rejected the argument that the Android platform’s relative openness to such 
software renders jailbreaking unnecessary.1079  Further, they emphasize that the Apple 
HomePod does not currently permit the installation of third-party apps, arguing that 
“speculation about whether Apple might change its policy in the future does not obviate 
the need for an exemption now.”
1080  As to the electronics platforms cited by ACT, EFF 
contends that they do not provide an adequate substitute because “[b]uilding a device 
from scratch to approximate the functionality of a voice assistant” would require 
significant amounts of hardware, assembly, and programming, the costs of which are 
“likely to be more than the retail price of a mass-produced voice assistant device.”1081 
The Acting Register finds that this factor favors the requested exemption.  As the 
Register concluded in the past three rulemakings, “access controls prevent consumers 
from using third-party applications, so denying a jailbreaking exemption would 
significantly diminish the availability of those works.  At the same time, granting the 
exemption is unlikely to discourage use or development of devices or the copyrighted 
firmware needed to run them.”
1082   
The Acting Register concludes that this potential diminished availability of copyrighted 
works would not be adequately offset by the alternatives to circumvention cited by 
                                                      
1076 Id.; see also Tr. at 155:06–156:19, Hearing Ex. 6-B, (Apr. 12, 2018) (Zuck, ACT) (discussing 
photographs of DYI device). 
1077 EFF Class 6 Reply at 7. 
1078 Id. 
1079 Id. (citing 2015 Recommendation at 190). 
1080 Id. 
1081 Id. at 7–8. 
1082 2015 Recommendation at 190 (citing 2012 Recommendation at 76, and 2010 Recommendation 
at 101). 

[PAGE 178]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
175 
opponents.  Opponents do not dispute proponents’ assertion that limiting device 
functions cannot be accomplished using manufacturer-provided functionality.1083  
Moreover, although the record indicates that Amazon and Google allow the installation 
of third-party apps on their voice assistant devices, opponents do not dispute that Apple 
has yet to do so on its HomePod.  Absent an exemption, therefore, users in at least that 
segment of the market would be prevented from installing such apps.  Nor do the 
hardware platforms cited by ACT provide a realistic and sufficient alternative.  While 
section 1201’s legislative history cautions against finding an adverse impact on the basis 
of “mere inconveniences,” the costs and burdens associated with building an entirely 
separate device on which to run third-party apps would far exceed that standard.1084 
The Acting Register does not, however, find that granting the second component of 
proponents’ request— the addition of language expressly permitting circumvention “to 
enable or disable hardware features of the smartphone or device”— would increase the 
availability for use of copyrighted works.  As explained above, the record lacks sufficient 
information about the nature those activities to permit a determination of whether they 
are outside the scope of the current exemption.  At any rate, proponents did not offer 
evidence suggesting that the absence of such language has caused confusion or has 
otherwise adversely affected those seeking to jailbreak under the current exemption, 
stating only “because of the importance of this ability, particularly to protect user 
privacy and security, we request that the Office recommend including that purpose 
explicitly in the exemption.”
1085  Thus, there is no basis to conclude that the requested 
addition would promote the availability for use of copyrighted works. 
Finally, although the parties did not raise this issue, the Acting Register notes that there 
is a plausible argument that the permanent exemption for reverse engineering under 
section 1201(f) already permits this activity and thus diminishes the favorability of this 
statutory factor.  The Copyright Office’s recent policy study on section 1201 concluded 
that section 1201(f) “may . . . allow jailbreaking smartphones, for example, ‘in order to 
make the operating system on that phone interoperable with an independently created 
application . . . [when] the modifications . . . are made purely for the purpose of such 
interoperability.’”
1086  Assuming that construction is correct, it could be argued that a 
jailbreaking exemption is unnecessary to promote the availability for use of copyrighted 
works because jailbreaking is already permitted under section 1201(f).  The report noted, 
                                                      
1083 Cf. id. (“ Although Android is a somewhat more open platform than Apple’s iOS in terms of 
the applications it will allow . . . it may not be possible to uninstall applications” without 
jailbreaking.). 
1084 House Manager’s Report at 6; see also Section 1201 Report at 122 (noting that “alternatives to 
circumvention should be realistic and not merely theoretical”). 
1085 EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 6 Initial at 17. 
1086 Section 1201 Report at 70 n.377 (quoting 2010 Recommendation at 100 (citations omitted)).  

[PAGE 179]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
176 
however, that the Office would continue to recommend granting exemptions otherwise 
meeting the statutory standard “in cases where there may be reasonable disagreement as 
to whether section 1201(f) applies.”1087  Previous Registers recognized that section 
1201(f) does not unambiguously authorize jailbreaking by end users,1088 and the Acting 
Register notes the general dearth of case law on that question.  Therefore, while the 
Office continues to believe that section 1201(f) is properly construed to accommodate 
certain jailbreaking activities, the Acting Register will not alter her analysis of the first 
statutory factor on this basis. 
As to the second statutory factor, proponents argue that the availability of firmware for 
nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational purposes “will not be harmed” and 
that this factor might even favor an exemption because “[j]ailbreaking a voice assistant 
[device] could enable the device to be used for capturing and preserving an audio record 
under the control of the device owner, with voice control over the recording 
functions.”1089  They do not, however, elaborate on that potential use. 
In the three previous rulemakings, the Register found that this factor is not directly 
implicated by the jailbreaking exemptions,1090 and the Acting Register reaches the same 
conclusion here.  Proponents’ one-sentence reference to the possible preservation of 
audio records does not tip this factor in favor of an exemption because it is speculative 
and unsupported by the record.  This factor accordingly is neutral. 
For the third factor— the impact on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, 
scholarship, or research—proponents  contend that this exemption will enable users to 
install, use, study, and comment upon software that otherwise could not be installed on 
voice assistant devices due to manufacturer-imposed content restrictions.  As an 
example, they note that Apple will not approve apps for sale in its App Store if they 
contain “content that is offensive, insensitive, upsetting, intended to disgust, or in 
exceptionally poor taste,” meaning that jailbreaking is required to install such apps on 
iOS devices.1091 
The Acting Register finds that this factor somewhat favors the requested exemption, 
insofar as it may allow users to research and comment upon new software applications 
                                                      
1087 Id. 
1088 See 2015 Recommendation at 181 n.1159; 2012 Recommendation at 71; 2010 Recommendation 
at 84–85.   
1089 EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 6 Initial at 16. 
1090 2015 Recommendation at 190; 2012 Recommendation at 77; 2010 Recommendation at 101.  
1091 EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 6 Initial at 16.  Proponents also assert that manufacturers have made 
certain apps unavailable in foreign countries at the request of those countries’ governments, see 
id., but they do not explain how an exemption under U.S. law would address that issue.  

[PAGE 180]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
177 
that would otherwise be excluded from use on voice assistant devices.  Moreover, as was 
true in the 2015 rulemaking, “the current record suggests that jailbreaking may help 
further research of security flaws by allowing users to access a device’s ‘lower-level 
functionality’ to detect vulnerabilities.”1092 
As to the fourth factor, proponents contend that an expanded jailbreaking exemption 
would have no adverse impact on the market for the firmware on voice assistant devices 
for the same reasons cited in their argument under the fourth fair use factor.  In fact, 
they argue, “the proposed expansion is likely to stimulate the market for such works by 
permitting developers to create new applications for the devices[,] . . . thus making these 
devices—together with their copyrighted firmware —more attractive to consumers.” 1093 
But opponents’ argument under this factor—indeed, their principal argument against 
the expansion as a whole—is that jailbreaking is likely to enable voice assistant devices 
to access pirated content.  Joint Creators II provide a statement from an expert, 
Christopher Bell, who opines that “obtaining root access to the firmware on a voice 
assistant [device] in order to install arbitrary code to run on the device may lead to a 
compromise of . . . protection schemes” used to prevent unauthorized access to content 
from subscription streaming services.
1094  First, Mr. Bell states that a person who obtains 
root access likely could “attach a peripheral device and obtain permanent copies of 
sound recordings that the consumer only paid to access via a temporary 
subscription.”
1095  Second, he states that such a user “could potentially avoid limitations 
imposed by a service provider on the number of devices through which one subscription 
account may be accessed,” resulting in “multiple consumers sharing accounts.”1096  As 
further evidence of piracy risk, Joint Creators II refer to a statement by an entrepreneur 
and inventor named Todd Troxell, who notes that he is unable “to create an app to ‘filter 
curse words from all applications’” without jailbreaking the device.
1097  According to 
Joint Creators II, “[t]his implies that jailbreaking will enable Mr. Troxell to impact 
content delivery from subscription music, television, e-book, and streaming services.”
1098 
These piracy concerns, opponents argue, are greater in the context of voice assistant 
devices than in that of other devices.  Opponents do not dispute that manufacturers 
                                                      
1092 2015 Recommendation at 191. 
1093 EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 6 Initial at 16. 
1094 Joint Creators II Class 6 Opp’n at Ex. 1 (statement of Christopher Bell, Vice President Tech. & 
Anti-Piracy, Business Development Warner Music Grp. (“Bell Statement”) at 2). 
1095 Id. (Bell Statement at 3). 
1096 Id. (Bell Statement at 3) (describing technological process analogous to “MAC address 
spoofing”). 
1097 Id. at 13 (citing EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 6 Initial at Ex. A (statement of Todd Troxell at 1)). 
1098 Id. 

[PAGE 181]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
178 
generally provide root access to the operating systems on personal computers by 
default,1099 or that the existing jailbreaking exemptions authorize such access on mobile 
computing devices.  But in contrast, RIAA argues, voice assistant devices are relatively 
simple devices that do not incorporate the same “hardware and software complexity” 
that exists in personal computers, and therefore they provide more limited security 
options.1100  As a result, it contends, it may be easier to download unauthorized copies of 
sound recordings streamed to a voice assistant device than it would be to extract such 
material from a general purpose computing device.1101  In addition, RIAA asserts that an 
exemption would threaten the viability of the licensing market for music streaming 
services.  It notes that although there is “not a direct relationship” between music 
copyright owners and manufacturers of voice assistant devices, content owners’ 
negotiations with streaming services are premised on “an assumption that the music 
will be kept secure” when the services in turn allow the content to be accessed on 
particular devices.1102  Opponents accordingly “consider access controls on voice 
assistant firmware to be one important aspect of ensuring secure delivery of content.”1103  
Opponents further suggest that jailbreaking would facilitate the installation of 
counterfeit apps and apps that enable unauthorized access to copyrighted content.  ACT 
argued that the requested expansion “would open the door to an online environment 
where illegal and counterfeit apps could be distributed freely.”1104  Joint Creators II and 
RIAA introduced evidence showing that counterfeit versions of Spotify and Pandora, as 
well as other apps providing unauthorized access to creative works, are widely available 
via Cydia, an online app store for jailbroken devices.1105  They argue that the jailbreaking 
of devices contributes to the availability and use of these illegal platforms, which 
“continue to cause significant harm to the entertainment industries.”1106  Joint Creators II 
accordingly urge that any expanded jailbreaking exemption “expressly exclude 
                                                      
1099 See EFF Class 6 Reply at 5 (claiming that “[p]ersonal computers give root or superuser 
privileges to their owner or primary user by default”). 
1100 Tr. at 100:03–13 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Hughes, RIAA). 
1101 Joint Creators II Class 6 Opp’n at Ex. 1 (Bell Statement at 3). 
1102 Tr. at 103:08–12 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Hughes, RIAA). 
1103 Joint Creators II Class 6 Opp’n at Ex. 1 (Bell Statement at 4). 
1104 ACT Class 6 Opp’n at 6. 
1105 Tr. at 118:24–119:24, 121:24–122:14, Hearing Ex. 6-A (Apr. 12, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators 
II) (discussing Cydia); Tr. at 144:17–145:05, Hearing Ex. 6-D (Apr. 12, 2018) (Hughes, RIAA) 
(same). 
1106 Joint Creators II Class 6 Opp’n at 13.  Joint Creators II cite a music industry study concluding 
that 40% of consumers across thirteen countries access unlicensed music.  See id. (citing IFPI, 
CONNECTING WITH MUSIC: MUSIC CONSUMER INSIGHT REPORT 5 (2017), http://www.ifpi.org/
downloads/Music-Consumer-Insight-Report-2017.pdf). 

[PAGE 182]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
179 
jailbreaking that results in the installation of applications that enable unauthorized 
access to copyrighted works,” as well as “circumvention that results in unauthorized 
access to music, or audiovisual works.”1107 
Proponents respond that there is no showing that extending the jailbreaking exemption 
to voice assistant devices will increase the likelihood of piracy.  EFF notes that 
subscription-based content apps like Spotify are also available on devices covered by the 
prior jailbreaking exemptions and argue there is no evidence that unauthorized access to 
such services “is more prevalent on mobile devices because of the legal ability to 
jailbreak.”
1108  In addition, they argue that access to content from streaming services is 
protected by access controls that are separate from those protecting access to the device 
firmware.  They offer a statement from their own expert, Seth Schoen, who opines that 
“[t]he device owner’s root privileges typically are not sufficient to give the owner 
unrestricted access to [entertainment] media, because the application software used to 
decrypt and view those media enforces other restrictions or contains other technical 
measures that do not depend on [withholding root privileges].”1109  Mr. Schoen further 
states that “[s]treaming media services can also use a variety of measures on the server 
side to enforce policies about authorized access to media.  These measures do not 
depend on locking the user’s device against modification.”1110  Such server-side 
measures include “restrict[ing] the number of simultaneous streams each customer can 
run” and “analyz[ing] connections to [the provider’s] server for unusual patterns of 
activity.”
1111 
As to ACT’s contention concerning the installation of counterfeit apps, EFF responds 
that “[t]he Register has never found that the mere ability to load counterfeit software on 
a general-purpose computing device justifies denying owners the right to install 
software of their choice.”1112  In their view, this concern is no greater for voice assistant 
devices than it is for smartphones.1113 
Based on the record as a whole, the Acting Register concludes that the fourth statutory 
factor is at best neutral, and therefore does not tip the balance against the requested 
exemption.  With respect to the effect on the value of the device firmware, the same 
conclusions noted above regarding the fourth fair use factor, as well as the Register’s 
                                                      
1107 Id. at 12 n.7, 13. 
1108 EFF Class 6 Reply at 5. 
1109 Id. at Attach. 1 (statement of Seth Schoen, Senior Staff Technologist, EFF at 1–2); see also id. at 6. 
1110 Id. (statement of Seth Schoen, Senior Staff Technologist, EFF at 2). 
1111 Id. (statement of Seth Schoen, Senior Staff Technologist, EFF at 2). 
1112 Id. at 6. 
1113 Id. 

[PAGE 183]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
180 
past findings in the 2015 rulemaking on this issue, are applicable here.  There is no 
evidence that the prior jailbreaking exemptions have harmed the market for firmware in 
smartphones or all-purpose mobile devices, and nothing in the record suggests that a 
different conclusion is warranted for voice assistant devices.1114 
Nor can the Acting Register conclude, upon the current record, that an expanded 
exemption is likely to harm the market for copyrighted works streamed to voice 
assistant devices.  The Acting Register recognizes that piracy of streaming content is a 
highly significant concern, and credits Mr. Bell’s statement that “[v]oice assistants are 
rapidly becoming an important part of the ecosystem through which consumers access 
music,” as well as his description of the various TPMs applied to streaming apps to 
prevent unauthorized access and facilitate these licensed services.
1115  The evidence, 
however, does not indicate that the prior or current jailbreaking exemptions have led to 
increased levels of piracy on mobile devices.
1116  Indeed, opponents did not oppose 
renewal of the existing exemption.1117  Furthermore, the evidence in this proceeding is 
insufficient to conclude that allowing jailbreaking of voice assistant devices will create a 
greater risk of unauthorized access to streaming content than exists with respect to other 
devices.  Instead, it is only cursorily alleged that the hardware/software may be less 
robust in voice assistant devices than the other devices covered by the current 
exemption, and participants’ experts offered conflicting descriptions of the potential 
impact of the exemption.  Notably, Joint Creators II’s experts acknowledged a general 
lack of familiarity with the access controls used on voice assistant devices.  Mr. Bell 
noted that his employer, Warner Music Group, “is not privy to the precise methods used 
to securely communicate or store [information shared by streaming services] on each 
                                                      
1114 Cf. 2015 Recommendation at 191 (finding “no evidence on the current record that jailbreaking 
will harm the market for smartphones, devices, or the firmware within them”). 
1115 Joint Creators II Class 6 Opp’n at Ex. 1 (Bell Statement at 1). 
1116 The Acting Register appreciates opponents’ concern that it is difficult to obtain direct evidence 
of such a relationship.  See Tr. at 146:06–10 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II) (“[I]t’s very 
difficult, if not impossible to collect one-to-one evidence showing that this individual person 
jailbroke their phone, installed this app and then downloaded our music.”).  Nothing in the 
statute, however, prevents the Register from drawing reasonable inferences from circumstantial 
evidence. 
1117 At the hearing, Joint Creators II suggested that opposition was impracticable in light of the 
Office’s statement that it would recommend renewal in the absence of a “material change in the 
facts, law, or other circumstances set forth in the prior rulemaking record.”  NOI at 29,8 06; see Tr. 
at 120:11–20 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II).  But that standard is not so rigid that it 
would have precluded the Office from considering relevant evidence going to the effect of the 
current exemption on piracy activity, had such evidence been available; indeed, the Office would 
consider evidence regarding whether the current exemptions were relied on by users seeking to 
install apps facilitating unauthorized access to copyrighted works.   

[PAGE 184]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
181 
voice assistant” and that “[g]iven that these devices are in their infancy, much is 
unknown to us about the technical measures utilized by the manufacturers and the 
streaming service providers.”1118  At the hearing, RIAA’s Chief Technology Officer stated 
that he had “no personal experience researching . . . in detail” how difficult it may be to 
extract music data from the buffer of a voice assistant device.1119  For opponents to 
establish that this statutory factor weighs against the exemption on the ground that it 
would adversely affect the market for their own creative works, they must offer more 
than speculation about the role the access controls protecting the device firmware may 
play in protecting access to those works. 
Moreover, opponents did not dispute that subscription streaming services typically 
control access to their content with TPMs separate from those protecting the firmware.  
Mr. Bell stated that such services “would typically use multiple measures to prevent 
unauthorized access,” including requiring “a customer log-in and password to verify 
that a subscription has been obtained” and “encrypt[ing] streams as they are delivered 
to the consumer.”
1120  The current record does not support a finding that jailbreaking 
undermines the effectiveness of those separate TPMs.1121  Thus, while the Acting Register 
takes very seriously opponents’ concerns over potential impacts on licensing 
negotiations with such services, there is insufficient basis to conclude that granting the 
exemption is likely to disrupt that market.1122 
As noted, Joint Creators II also urge that any exemption include limitations to guard 
against the installation of counterfeit or otherwise unauthorized apps.  The Acting 
Register agrees that concerns over the potential use of jailbroken devices as platforms for 
unauthorized content are legitimate, and therefore she believes it appropriate to address 
                                                      
1118 Joint Creators II Class 6 Opp’n at Ex. 1 (Bell Statement at 2, 4). 
1119 Tr. at 104:15–19 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Hughes, RIAA). 
1120 Joint Creators II Class 6 Opp’n at Ex. 1 (Bell Statement at 2); see also Tr. at 132:09–11 (Apr. 12, 
2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II) (stating “I think there are things that the services already do on 
the server side to prevent some of this”). 
1121 Cf. 2015 Recommendation at 215 (proponents of jailbreaking exemption for smart TVs 
“explained that access to copyrighted programming . . . from services like Hulu and Netflix ‘is 
controlled by separate TPMs’ from those used to protect the smart TV firmware, and Joint 
Creators do not rebut this claim”) (citation omitted).  In this regard, the record evidence 
distinguishes the access controls protecting the firmware in voice assistant devices from the 
access controls in video game consoles.  The Register has repeatedly concluded that “‘access 
controls on gaming consoles protect not only the console firmware, but the video games and 
applications that run on the console as well,’ many of which are owned by the console 
manufacturers.”  Id. at 199 (quoting 2012 Recommendation at 41).   
1122 To the extent probative evidence of market impact emerges during the next three years, it will 
be relevant if the issue is revisited in the next rulemaking. 

[PAGE 185]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
182 
that issue in the regulatory text.  The Acting Register declines, however, to recommend 
the specific language proposed by Joint Creators II, which would exclude jailbreaking 
“that results in the installation of applications that enable unauthorized access to 
copyrighted works.”1123  That formulation is potentially overbroad, as it could be read to 
bar even the installation of web browsers, which can “enable unauthorized access to 
copyrighted works.”1124  But the Acting Register will recommend that the exemption 
expressly exclude circumvention undertaken for purpose of gaining unauthorized access 
to copyrighted works other than the device firmware.  The Acting Register will discuss 
this condition further in the Conclusion and Recommendation section below.   
With respect to the fifth factor, the Acting Register does not find any additional factors 
relevant to the asserted adverse effects in this proposed class.  Therefore, in light of the 
foregoing, the Acting Register finds that users are adversely affected in their ability to 
jailbreak voice assistant devices, or are likely to be so adversely affected during the next 
three years.  The Acting Register does not, however, find such an adverse effect resulting 
from the lack of express regulatory language permitting circumvention for purposes of 
enabling or disabling hardware features of the device. 
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA agrees with the Acting Register that an exemption is warranted, though it would 
adopt the broader language requested by proponents.  It concludes that jailbreaking 
voice assistant devices is unlikely to harm the market for copyrighted works, noting that 
there is no evidence of market harm for the devices covered by the current exemption.
1125  
NTIA rejects opponents’ argument about unauthorized access to entertainment content 
on the ground that it “fail[s] to explain why infringement is more likely on voice 
assistant platforms than on smartphones, tablets, and other devices already subject to 
the exemption.”
1126   
NTIA further concludes that proponents have demonstrated that users in this class are 
adversely affected by the statutory prohibition.  In its view, “the proffered alternatives to 
circumvention—including building one’s own device from an online model — are not 
viable.”1127  In addition, relying on the Register’s application of the statutory factors to 
prior jailbreaking exemptions, NTIA concludes that “the proposed exemption would 
                                                      
1123 Joint Creators II Class 6 Opp’n at 13. 
1124 EFF Class 6 Reply at 6. 
1125 NTIA Letter at 47. 
1126 Id. 
1127 Id. at 48. 

[PAGE 186]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
183 
have either no effect or a positive effect on the availability of copyrighted firmware and 
application software.”1128 
NTIA’s recommended exemption language includes proponents’ suggested reference to 
“enabl[ing] or disabl[ing] hardware features of the smartphone or device.”
1129  NTIA 
does not address this provision in detail, but it states in a footnote that the Register 
found in 2012 that such uses “would likely be transformative and non-infringing.”
1130  
Yet in that proceeding the Register did not reach that conclusion specifically with respect 
to enabling or disabling hardware features; the 2012 Recommendation does not refer to 
those activities.1131  For the reasons discussed above, the Acting Register concludes that 
the addition of this language is not warranted on the current record. 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
For the reasons described above, proponents of Class 6 have satisfied their burden of 
showing that technological measures applied to voice assistant devices have an 
adverse effect on noninfringing uses.  The Acting Register accordingly recommends 
adoption of an exemption authorizing the jailbreaking of such devices.   
The Acting Register finds that proponents’ definition of “voice assistant device” 
appropriately describes the scope of the category of devices.  Such devices must be 
“designed to take user input primarily by voice,” which excludes video game consoles, 
set-top boxes, DVD and Blu-Ray players, and similar devices that typically are operated 
using buttons.  In addition, consistent with the existing definition of “portable allpurpose mobile computing device,” a voice assistant device must be “primarily 
designed to run a wide variety of programs rather than for consumption of a particular 
type of media content.”  This requirement provides an additional basis for excluding 
game consoles, set-top boxes, and digital disc players, which ordinarily are not designed 
to run a wide variety of computer programs (as distinguished from a particular type of 
program, such as video games).  Finally, a voice assistant device must be “designed to 
be installed in a home or office.” 
In addition, as noted, the recommended exemption does not extend to circumvention 
intended to facilitate access to pirated works.  The exemption text accordingly includes 
the condition that circumvention not be “accomplished for the purpose of gaining 
unauthorized access to other copyrighted works.”  Because the Acting Register 
previously determined that the existing jailbreaking exemptions should be renewed in 
                                                      
1128 Id. 
1129 Id. at 49; see id. at 45 (quoting EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 6 Initial at 2). 
1130 Id. at 47 n.234 (citing 2012 Recommendation at 71–72). 
1131 See 2012 Recommendation at 72–74. 

[PAGE 187]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
184 
their current form, she does not at this stage recommend adding this new language to 
those exemptions.  Therefore, although proponents framed their request as an 
amendment of the current exemption pertaining to smartphones and portable allpurpose mobile computing devices, the Acting Register recommends that the newly 
granted exemption for voice assistant devices appear as a separate provision in the 
regulations so that it may incorporate this additional condition.  In the next rulemaking, 
the Office may seek public input on whether it is appropriate to extend this language to 
the other jailbreaking exemptions. 
Accordingly, the Acting Register recommends that the Librarian designate the following 
class: 
Computer programs that enable voice assistant devices to execute 
lawfully obtained software applications, where circumvention is 
accomplished for the sole purpose of enabling interoperability of 
such applications with computer programs on the device, or to 
permit removal of software from the device, and is not accomplished 
for the purpose of gaining unauthorized access to other copyrighted 
works.  For purposes of this paragraph (b)(8), a 
“voice assistant 
device” is a device that is primarily designed to run a wide variety of 
programs rather than for consumption of a particular type of media 
content, is designed to take user input primarily by voice, and is 
designed to be installed in a home or office. 
G. Proposed Class 7: Computer Programs—Repair  
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption 
Several organizations petitioned to expand the current exemption allowing for 
circumvention of access controls controlling the functioning of motorized land vehicles 
for purposes of diagnosis, repair, or lawful modification of a vehicle function to allow an 
additional range of activities.1132  The Office synthesized these suggestions into Proposed 
Class 7, for which it sought public comment on “whether an expanded exemption to 
cover additional repair and related activities should be adopted, including any proposed 
regulatory language.”1133  In response, the Office received comments in support of 
expanding the exemption, along with proposed regulatory language, from Farmers; EFF, 
                                                      
1132 Auto Care & CTA Class 7 Pet. at 2–3; EFF Class 7 Pet. at 2; iFixit Class 7 Pet. at 2; AFBF, Nat’l 
Corn Growers Ass’n & Nat’l Farmers Union (collectively, “Farmers”) Class 7 Pet. at 2; see 37 
C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(6) (2016). 
1133 NPRM at 49,561. 

[PAGE 188]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
185 
ORI, and ASCDI (collectively, “EFF/ORI/ASCDI”); and MEMA.  Additional comments in 
support of an expanded exemption were submitted by Auto Care, CTA, eBay Inc., FSF, 
and sixteen individuals.1134  Although the commenters’ proposals varied in scope, and 
there is no singular unified proposed exemption, they can be grouped into the following 
four categories: 
1) removing the current limitation prohibiting circumvention of TPMs to access 
computer programs primarily designed for the control of vehicle telematics and 
entertainment systems;1135  
2) expanding the exemption to apply to other types of software-enabled devices, 
including appliances, computers, toys, and other Internet of Things devices.  For 
example, EFF proposes “an exemption to enable circumvention of access controls 
applied to software and compilations of data, where circumvention is for the 
purpose of noninfringing repair, diagnosis, or modification of a software-enabled 
device”;
1136 
3) extending the exemption to allow circumvention by third-party service 
providers, and in particular, independent vehicle repair shops, for purposes of 
diagnosis, repair, and lawful modification;1137 and 
4) allowing the acquisition, use, and dissemination of circumvention tools in 
furtherance of diagnosis, repair, and modification.
1138 
Opposition comments, reflecting a diverse set of concerns, were submitted by the 
Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers (“ Auto Alliance”); DVD CCA and AACS LA; 
ESA; Harman International; and Joint Creators II.1139 
                                                      
1134 The individuals supporting this class are Alex Adams, William Brown, Arthur De Volve, Jim 
Delton, Pat Goltz, Geoffrey Gross, Robert Johnson, Harvey Lewis, Lovelidge, Michael Paisis, 
Robert Preston, Scott Schaefer, Richard Taylor, James Walker, Andrew White, Daniel Willhelm, 
and Adam Zuckerman. 
1135 CTA Class 7 Initial at 5–6; Farmers Class 7 Initial at 6 (with respect only to mechanized 
agricultural equipment); Auto Care Class 7 Initial at 4–6. 
1136 EFF Class 7 Pet. at 2; see also Consumers Union Class 7 Initial at 2; EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 
Initial at 2–7; FSF Class 7 Initial at 1–2. 
1137 See, e.g., Consumers Union Class 7 Initial at 1; CTA Class 7 Initial at 1–2, 4; Farmers Class 7 
Initial at 6; MEMA Class 7 Initial at 6. 
1138 See, e.g., Auto Care Class 7 Initial at 4; CTA Class 7 Initial at 2–5; FSF Class 7 Initial at 2. 
1139 Auto Alliance Class 7 Opp’n (joined by The Ass’n of Global Automakers (“Global 
Automakers”); Harman Class 7 Opp’n at 2 (joined by Panasonic Corporation of North America); 
Joint Creators II Class 7 Initial at 4–5. 

[PAGE 189]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
186 
b. Overview of Issues 
Following the 2015 rulemaking, the Copyright Office issued two policy studies that 
touched upon issues relevant to the need to repair or modify software-embedded 
devices.  In its 2016 Software Study, the Office observed that current copyright law, 
including section 117 and fair use under section 107, may provide relief for many repair 
and tinkering activities, while acknowledging that the analyses could be factintensive.1140  Next, in its Section 1201 Report, the Office suggested that section 1201 may 
be inhibiting legitimate repair activities, and recommended legislative consideration of a 
permanent exemption for diagnosis, maintenance, and repair activities.1141  The Office, 
however, declined to support a permanent exemption for modification, suggesting that 
the triennial rulemaking continue to address these activities by tailoring exemptions to 
specific classes of works.1142 
Turning to the four categories of concerns presented by this class, participants raise a 
host of issues addressing the use of access controls on vehicles and other devices in ways 
that allegedly inhibit diagnosis, repair, and modification. 
Third-Party Assistance.  In 2015, the Register declined to adopt language that would allow 
circumvention “on behalf of” the owner, concluding that the phrase might implicate the 
anti-trafficking provisions set forth in section 1201(a)(2) and (b).1143  In this rulemaking, 
some proponents suggest that the inability to obtain expert assistance has left ordinary 
repair activities out of the reach of many individual consumers.1144  For example, 
Farmers explain that farmers and ranchers “need local expert assistance” to modify 
original equipment manufacturer (“OEM”) software and repair tractors and other 
agricultural vehicles, including to perform “routine and simple maintenance or [to] 
control vehicle operating modes after repair.”1145  They attach six declarations attesting 
to the need for local mechanical assistance.1146  While the main of commenters were 
                                                      
1140 U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, SOFTWARE-ENABLED CONSUMER PRODUCTS 35–41 (2016), 
https://www.copyright.gov/policy/software/software-full-report.pdf (“Software Study”). 
1141 Section 1201 Report at 92–95. 
1142 Id. at 95–97 (“[I]n many cases modification activities may not implicate significant copyright 
interests.  On the other hand, some tinkering activities may result in the creations of new works 
in ways that implicate the copyright owner’s exclusive right to prepare derivative works.”). 
1143 2015 Recommendation at 246. 
1144 See, e.g., Auto Care Class 7 Initial at 3; Consumers Union Class 7 Initial at 2; CTA Class 7 Initial 
at 1–2. 
1145 Farmers Class 7 Initial at 7. 
1146 Farmers Class 7 Initial at 12 (decl. of Kevin Kenney, Software Engineer for Agricultural 
Vehicles), 14 (decl. of Guy Mills, Jr., Farmer), at 18 (decl. of Charles “Jason” Pratt, Farmer), 19 
(decl. of Kyle Schwarting, Farmer), 20 (decl. of Paul Shamblin, Lead Mechanic at Talley Farms), 21 

[PAGE 190]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
187 
concerned with enabling independent automobile or agricultural vehicle repair, other 
examples involved smartphones or other devices.1147  Opponents argue that the statute 
does not allow the Register to recommend, or the Librarian adopt, an exemption that 
authorizes third-party assistance on the basis that it would contravene the antitrafficking provisions.1148 
Provision of Tools.  In 2015, the Register noted that section 1201(a)(1) does not provide the 
authority to adopt an exemption that permits “trafficking” in circumvention tools.1149  In 
the subsequent Section 1201 Report, the Copyright Office concluded that “exemption 
beneficiaries should be able to make necessary tools solely for their own use in carrying 
out exempted circumventions.”1150  Here, some proponents ask the Office to explicitly 
affirm this view in the exemption to make it more valuable to users.1151  Others propose 
that companies that specialize in software development should be allowed to develop 
and distribute tools to users.
1152  Opponents respond that the interpretive framework has 
not changed since 2015, and that even if beneficiaries may use tools, it is outside the 
Librarian’s authority to regulate the scope of section 1201(a)(2) and (b).
1153 
Vehicle Telematics and Entertainment Systems.  The 2015 rulemaking excluded ECUs chiefly 
designed to operate entertainment and telematics systems in vehicles, explaining that 
the record was largely focused on ECUs that control the vehicle’s mechanical operation, 
and noting concerns about unauthorized access to the services and content that 
entertainment and telematics ECUs protect.
1154  Now, some proponents desire to remove 
that limitation.  As they describe it, access to vehicle telematics and entertainment 
systems is restricted through a variety of TPMs including encrypted ECUs, cell phone 
baseband locks on telematics systems, passwords on diagnostic interfaces, “virtual 
                                                                                                                                                              
(decl. of John Doe, Large-Scale Farmer), 22 (decl. of Mary Pat Weyback, Deputy General Counsel, 
Am. Farm Bureau Fed’n) (affirming that the “John Doe” declarant who wished to remain 
anonymous was known to AFBF). 
1147 See, e.g., ASCDI, ORI & Repair.org Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1–2; Consumers Union Class 
7 Initial at 2–3; EFF, Auto Care, Dorman, iFixit, SmarTeks & Repair.org Class 7 Post-Hearing 
Resp. at 2–5; iFixit Class 7 Pet. at 2. 
1148 See, e.g., Auto Alliance Class 7 Opp’n at 7–9; Joint Creators II Class 7 Opp’n at 12; Tr. at 19:02–
07 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II). 
1149 2015 Recommendation at 246–47. 
1150 Section 1201 Report at 53–54. 
1151 See CTA Class 7 Initial at 2, 4–6. 
1152 See Auto Care & CTA Class 7 Pet. at 3; iFixit Class 7 Pet. at 2. 
1153 See Auto Alliance Class 7 Opp’n at 9–10; Joint Creators II Class 7 Opp’n at 12. 
1154 2015 Recommendation at 246. 

[PAGE 191]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
188 
handshake” configurations, memory modifications, and disabled access to “ports” from 
which vehicle data could be extracted.1155  Proponents suggest that access to the 
telematics system is sometimes required to restore vehicle functioning, particularly by 
accessing the diagnostics data stored in the system.1156  Opponents respond that some of 
the proposed uses, such as accessing “storage capacity” of a vehicle entertainment 
system, are not fair.1157  In opponents’ view, expanding the current exemption would 
have an adverse impact on the market for copyrighted works that are accessed through 
these vehicle systems.1158  In any event, they argue that proponents have not sufficiently 
demonstrated that it is necessary to circumvent TPMs restricting access to these systems 
to engage in diagnosis, repair, or modification.1159 
Other Devices.  Many proponents seek to broaden the exemption to permit the diagnosis 
and repair of other software-enabled devices, as well as modification of such devices.1160  
They suggest that the proliferation of software-enabled devices is challenging “longestablished, fundamental rights and expectations of consumers regarding their 
ownership and dominion over the products they have lawfully acquired,” and that 
repair is a fair use.
1161  EFF/ORI/ASCDI generally assert that TPMs— including 
encryption, passwords, and virtual handshakes—restrict access to software and data 
compilations embedded on these devices.1162  Others observe that TPMs prohibit access 
                                                      
1155 See CTA Class 7 Initial at 3; Farmers Class 7 Initial at 3–8; iFixit Class 7 Pet. at 2; MEMA Class 
7 Initial at 2.  
1156 See Auto Care Class 7 Initial at 5; CTA Class 7 Initial at 3; Tr. at 46:14–48:14 (Apr. 10, 2018) 
(Lowe, Auto Care); Tr. at 65:07–66:17 (Apr. 25, 2017) (Wiens, iFixit). 
1157 See Harman Class 7 Opp’n at 5, 7–8; Joint Creators II Class 7 Opp’n at 8 n.3. 
1158 See Harman Class 7 Opp’n at 8; Joint Creators II Class 7 Opp’n at 11. 
1159 See Auto Alliance Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1; Joint Creators II Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. 
at 1; Tr. at 60:19–22; 60:25–61:23 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Mooney, Harman); Tr. at 57:12–24 (Apr. 10, 2018) 
(Williams, Joint Creators II). 
1160 Consumers Union Class 7 Initial at 2–3; EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 2–7; EFF, 
AutoCare, Dorman, iFixit, SmarTeks, Puls & Repair.org Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2–3; FSF 
Class 7 Initial at 1–2. 
1161 Consumers Union Class 7 Initial at 2–3; see also EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 2 
(software-enabled devices “limit[] the ability of device owners to repair, diagnose, or modify 
their property”). 
1162 EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 2; see also DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 7 Opp’n at 2 
(suggesting CSS and AACS would be implicated); Joint Creators II Class 7 Opp’n at 5 (“It is 
impossible to list all of the access controls that would be undermined by [EFF/ORI/ASCDI’s] 
extremely broad proposal.”). 

[PAGE 192]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
189 
to software controlling LG appliances and Apple iPhones.1163  In response, opponents 
comment that, overall, proponents have not met their statutory burden of demonstrating 
that TPMs are having an adverse impact on noninfringing uses of software-enabled 
devices.1164  They also express concerns about the impact of an expansion on highly 
expressive works, in contrast to the prior rulemaking’s focus on re-enabling activities 
related to vehicle functioning that had long been purely mechanical and unrelated to by 
copyright.  Particularly where devices permit access to other expressive content, 
opponents suggest circumvention would enable unauthorized access and facilitate 
piracy.
1165  With respect to the specific proposal to allow modification of softwareenabled devices (as distinguished from repair), opponents assert that such activity may 
implicate copyright owners’ exclusive right to prepare derivative works.1166   
2. Discussion 
a. Scope of the Proposed Class 
Outside of the vehicle context, many proponents urge the adoption of a broad 
exemption, generally protecting a variety of diagnosis, repair, maintenance, and 
modification activities on “all devices that run software” without regard to differences 
among devices or the technology embedded within them.1167  As they put it, software 
has become ubiquitous in consumer and other devices, and TPMs are “limiting the 
ability of device owners to repair, diagnose, or modify their property, thanks in part to 
restrictions imposed by Section 1201(a)(1).”
1168  In EFF/ORI/ASCDI’s view, where 
categories of devices are “exceptions to that rule or . . . present special complications,” 
those devices may be carved out from the general exemption.1169  Similarly, 
ASCDI/ORI/Repair.org claim that “all products with embedded computer chips are 
based on the same architecture and the same components, which are assembled at the 
same factories in a global marketplace,” and argue that “developing rules that apply to 
these products based on what they are capable of doing, as opposed to how they are 
actually used, is problematic.”
1170   
                                                      
1163 See Tr. at 30:15–31:01 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit) (discussing LG appliances); Tr. at 32:12–20, 
32:23–33:04, 33:11–16 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit) (describing issue with replacing iPhone home 
button due to TPM on device). 
1164 See Joint Creators II Class 7 Opp’n at 7; Joint Creators II Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1–3. 
1165 See ESA Class 7 Opp’n at 2–5, 7–8; Joint Creators II Class 7 Opp’n at 10–11. 
1166 See Joint Creators II Opp’n at 9–10; Tr. 26:04–08 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II). 
1167 See, e.g., EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 2, 14. 
1168 Id. at 2. 
1169 Id. at 14. 
1170 ASCDI, ORI & Repair.org Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2. 

[PAGE 193]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
190 
Opponents respond that proposals that would cover “every conceivable device and 
machine” are “overbroad and factually unsupported.”1171  As a larger matter, they 
suggest that adopting such an exemption notwithstanding the scant record in this class 
would set a precedent disavowing previous procedural “rules of the road” that would 
impact future rulemakings.1172  Regarding this class specifically, they argue that 
proponents’ broad approach “does not recognize any distinctions among types of 
devices as to the TPMs and methods of circumvention involved, the associated use cases, 
and the infringement that would be involved in circumvention or result from it.”1173  In 
particular, Joint Creators II contend that proponents have offered no evidence regarding 
the need to repair devices used to access literary works, motion pictures, and music.1174  
They suggest that because highly expressive works like music or feature films may be 
protected and accessed differently on different devices, the fair use and adverse effects 
analysis can vary significantly from one device to another.1175  For example, ESA submits 
that unlike many other software-enabled devices, video game consoles provide access to 
“vast numbers of valuable copyrighted works” with licensing arrangements that depend 
upon a TPM-secured platform.1176  Joint Creators II also observe that the Section 1201 
Report noted that modification “raises significantly different issues from repair.”1177 
Further, opponents note that the Register previously declined to recommend 
exemptions that would permit circumvention to access ECUs on in-vehicle 
entertainment systems and to repair video game consoles, concluding inter alia that the 
record lacked sufficient evidence to support a need for circumvention.
1178  Therefore, 
opponents contend that any exemption should enumerate devices for which there is a 
record demonstrating that a TPM is causing or is likely to cause an adverse effect on 
noninfringing uses.
1179 
                                                      
1171 Joint Creators II Class 7 Opp’n at 4; see also Tr. at 77:01–80:08 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Williams, Joint 
Creators II). 
1172 Tr. 28:02–12 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II). 
1173 ESA Class 7 Opp’n at 6; see also Tr. at 38:22–40:25 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II). 
1174 Joint Creators II Class 7 Opp’n at 4. 
1175 See Tr. at 16:14–18 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II) (arguing that in the case of 
“devices that are designed to access expressive works, . . . the countervailing interest of 
preventing the unauthorized access outweighs the need to get to independent repair”).  
1176 ESA Class 7 Opp’n at 2–5; see also Joint Creators Class 7 Opp’n at 9–10; Joint Creators II Class 7 
Ex Parte Meeting Summary at 2 (July 24, 2018). 
1177 Joint Creators II Class 7 Opp’n at 4–5 (quoting Section 1201 Report at 95). 
1178 Id. at 3. 
1179 Joint Creators II Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2; Tr. at 79:19–80:08 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Williams, 
Joint Creators II). 

[PAGE 194]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
191 
While recognizing that the ability to repair software-enabled devices has been 
acknowledged as an important interest, both in the context of copyright and in other 
legal areas,1180 the Acting Register concludes that the record in this class is insufficient to 
fully evaluate, as statutorily required, an exemption encompassing all types of softwareenabled consumer products.  When considering a class of works, the statute requires a 
determination that users “are, or are likely to be in the succeeding 3-year period, adversely 
affected by the prohibition . . . in their ability to make noninfringing uses.”1181  The 
Copyright Office has consistently interpreted that language as requiring the Register to 
determine whether, on balance, the evidence supports the requested exemption.1182  This 
interpretation is strongly supported by the legislative history, which explains, “[i]f the 
rulemaking has produced insufficient evidence to determine whether there have been 
adverse impacts with respect to particular classes,” an exemption should not issue.1183  
The legislative history further suggests that the definition of a class should consider 
whether the availability of one category of computer programs is likely to be affected “in 
the same way” by the circumvention bar as the availability of other programs for the 
same purpose.
1184   
Here, it is not clear whether “devices,” generally, share enough commonalities for the 
Acting Register to evaluate whether access controls are, in practice, adversely affecting 
noninfringing uses.  The rulemaking record lacks a minimum quantity of evidence for a 
broad panoply of the devices that proponents reference, let alone those which are not 
introduced but would fall under the proposed exemption.  Outside of the vehicle 
context, the information provided is sparse regarding specific types of devices where 
TPMs inhibit repair or modification activities, with initial comments providing only 
cursory notice of devices considered by proponents as “relevant” to the exemption.
1185  
To fully air issues in this class, including to give proper notice to opponents, the 
Copyright Office repeatedly sought additional information on these issues in hearings in 
                                                      
1180 See Section 1201 Report at 88–90; Software Study at 31–33. 
1181 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C) (emphasis added); see also Section 1201 Report at 111. 
1182 Section 1201 Report at 111–12; see also NPRM at 49,552; 2015 Recommendation at 13–14; 2012 
Recommendation at 6; 2010 Recommendation at 10; 2006 Recommendation at 8; 2003 
Recommendation at 10–11, 19–20. 
1183 Commerce Comm. Report at 38 (stating a class should be “a narrow and focused subset of the 
broad categories of works . . . identified in section 102 of the Copyright Act.”). 
1184 House Manager’s Report at 7. 
1185 EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 2; see also Consumers Union Class 7 Initial (not identifying 
any specific devices).  As noted above, the other initial commenters were focused on an 
exemption limited to vehicles. 

[PAGE 195]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
192 
multiple cities, as well as in post-hearing letters.1186  While in post-hearing comments, 
some proponents ultimately submitted lengthy lists of specific devices that “could be 
configured to include technological protection measures that would prevent independent 
maintenance and repair,” for many categories, it is still unclear whether TPMs are 
typically applied to these devices.1187   
As a general matter, this level of information is insufficient for the Acting Register to 
determine whether users of various devices are similarly situated for purposes of repair 
and modification.  Many of proponents’ examples do not indicate, for example, whether 
the relevant TPMs effectively control access within the meaning of the statute, whether 
the TPMs control access to copyrighted works other than the device firmware, or 
whether reasonable alternatives to circumvention may exist.  Similarly, proponents 
contend that section 117 provides a basis for adopting an exemption, but have 
introduced scant evidence demonstrating whether “devices,” generally, and the 
software embedded in them, are likely to be owned, as that statute requires.
1188  Further, 
as opponents note, past rulemakings have sometimes declined to recommend adoption 
of exemptions for repair of specific types of devices after considering adverse effects in 
reference to the statutory factors.
1189 
Given these evidentiary deficiencies, the Acting Register concludes that the more 
prudent approach is to refine the class based on the types of devices for which there is a 
cognizable record.1190  This approach is consistent with the Office’s practice in past 
                                                      
1186 See, e.g., Class 7 Post-Hearing Letter at 2 (May 21, 2018); Tr. at 28:18–30:01 (Apr. 25, 2018) 
(Smith, U.S. Copyright Office; Wiens, iFixit); Tr. at 93:22–97:16 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Shore, ORI; Smith, 
U.S. Copyright Office); Tr. at 84:07–85:01 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Smith, U.S. Copyright Office). 
1187 ASCDI, ORI & Repair.org Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2 and Attach.; EFF, Auto Care, 
Dorman, iFixit, SmarTeks & Repair.org Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2–3 (listing identical 
categories of devices as ASCDI/ORI/Repair.org, but not addressing presence of TPMs). 
1188 17 U.S.C. § 117; see, e.g., ASCDI, ORI & Repair.org Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2 (June 11, 
2018) (listing various retail and wholesale equipment, servers, networking and office equipment, 
without addressing lease versus purchase options). 
1189 See 2015 Recommendation 199–201 (video game consoles); 2012 Recommendation at 47 
(same). 
1190 As a matter of policy, it is true that the Copyright Office has signaled that repair and 
maintenance activities are likely to be noninfringing, conclusions that the Acting Register draws 
upon while evaluating the noninfringing basis for the proposed class below.  See Section 1201 
Report at 88–90, 92–95; Software Study at 31–41.  Further, since a statutory exemption need not be 
constrained by the fail-safe mechanisms of the triennial rulemaking, the Office continues to 
recommend legislative consideration of a properly crafted permanent exemption for repair 
activities.  See Section 1201 Report at v, 90, 92–95. 

[PAGE 196]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
193 
rulemakings.1191  Specifically, the device categories for which the Acting Register has 
determined that proponents provided cognizable legal and factual support to evaluate 
an exemption are as follows: 
• Vehicle telematics and entertainment systems.  A number of commenters focus 
their discussion strictly on expanding the range of activities permitted within the 
confines of motorized land vehicles.1192 
• Home appliances and home systems.  A number of participants provided 
information related to the need to circumvent access controls on home appliances 
and home systems, such as refrigerators, toasters, and lighting and 
environmental control systems, and suggested that this category shares a 
commonality compared to other devices.1193 
• Smartphones.  The record also contains multiple testimonies regarding the need 
to circumvent access controls on smartphones to repair them for owners.
1194  
• Video game consoles.  At the public hearings and in post-hearing responses, 
proponents contended that TPMs prevent repair of issues with optical drives and 
other console malfunctions.
1195 
• Computers and ancillary computing devices.  Proponents offer some limited 
information in support of expanding the exemption to computers and a variety 
                                                      
1191 See, e.g., 2015 Recommendation at 317 (declining to recommend an “open-ended exemption” 
for security research in favor of an exemption tailored to machines and devices for which there 
was an “evidentiary showing of adverse effects”); 2010 Recommendation at 16 (explaining that 
“the records in [the 2010] and prior rulemaking proceedings have demonstrated that in many 
cases, [an initial] subset of a category of works should be further tailored in accordance with the 
evidence in the record”). 
1192 See Auto Care Class 7 Initial at 1; CTA Class 7 Initial at 1; eBay Class 7 Reply at 1; Farmers 
Class 7 Initial; MEMA Class 7 Initial at 2. 
1193 See ASCDI, ORI & Repair.org Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2 (June 11, 2018); EFF, ORI & 
ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 3 (lighting systems); EFF, AutoCare, Dorman, iFixit, SmarTeks, Puls & 
Repair.org Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2 (June 11, 2018); Tr. at 83:08–16 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Band, 
ORI) (discussing thermostats); Tr. at 30:17–18 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit) (“LG, since the 
beginning of 2017, hasn’t sold any appliances that aren’t Wi-Fi connected.”). 
1194 See Tr. at 13:19–14:24 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Zieminski, Puls) (“we repair iPhones, Google Pixel 
devices, Samsung devices”); Tr. at 32:12–20, 32:23–33:04, 33:11–16 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit) 
(describing inability to restore iPhones to full functionality after replacing batteries and h ome 
buttons). 
1195 See EFF, AutoCare, Dorman, iFixit, SmarTeks, Puls & Repair.org Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 
4–5; Tr. at 12:17–13:23 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Zieminski, Puls); Tr. at 29:08–12 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Wiens, 
iFixit). 

[PAGE 197]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
194 
of ancillary computing devices, including hard drives, debuggers, servers, 
routers, and switches.1196 
• Consumables.  The record includes some testimony regarding consumers’ desire 
to modify devices to permit the use of replacement cartridges, specifically 
relating to ink, coffee, juice, and cat litter box cleaning fluid.
1197 
• In addition, EFF offers specific examples of the desire to circumvent TPMs to 
modify a few other specific devices, including a toy robotic dog, a camera gimbal 
(i.e., a pivoted mount), and handheld two-way radios.1198 
Accordingly, the Acting Register bases the following analysis on whether there are, or 
are likely to be, adverse effects on noninfringing uses of these categories of devices 
(including analyzing below whether there is more than a de minimis showing for each of 
these categories).1199 
b. Works Protected by Copyright 
ECUs that control vehicle operations, telematics, and infotainment systems constitute 
“computer programs” as defined in section 101.
1200  Likewise, software that enables other 
consumer devices, including home appliances and phones, are computer programs.1201  
The Acting Register accordingly finds that at least some works in the class are protected 
by copyright. 
c. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
The following analysis first considers proposed expansions within the context of 
motorized land vehicles (e.g., personal automobiles and mechanized agricultural 
                                                      
1196 See EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 6–7; see also ASCDI, ORI & Repair.org Class 7 PostHearing Resp. at 2; EFF Class 7 Reply at 5; EFF, Auto Care, Dorman, iFixit, SmarTeks, Puls, 
Repair.org Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2. 
1197 See Tr. at 18:01–07 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Walsh, EFF); Tr. at 44:13–46:15 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Walsh, EFF; 
Wiens, iFixit); see also EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 3–4. 
1198 EFF Class 7 Reply at 5; EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 3–5. 
1199 In contrast, while the post-hearing letters from EFF and ORI/ASCDI included laundry lists of 
other devices, including fork-lifts, staplers, and cash registers, these lists, or other passing 
references in the record, do not provide enough information for t he Acting Register to properly 
consider them (or their commonalities with other devices) with respect to the statutory elements 
of the rulemaking.  See EFF, Auto Care, Dorman, iFixit, SmarTeks, Puls, Repair.org Class 7 PostHearing Resp. at 2–3; ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2. 
1200 See 2015 Recommendation at 218. 
1201 See Software Study at 2–3. 

[PAGE 198]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
195 
vehicles), and then addresses expansion of the exemption to other types of devices.  
While infringement concerns can bear upon issues related to third-party assistance and 
provision and acquisition of circumvention tools (including whether uses are strictly 
personal or commercial), the primary focus of those issues relates to whether the 
expansions would contravene the anti-trafficking provisions of section 1201(a)(2) and 
(b).  Accordingly, issues related to third-party assistance and circumvention tools are 
primarily discussed separately at the end of the recommendation for this class. 
i. Vehicle Telematics and Entertainment Systems 
Proponents assert that diagnosis, repair, and lawful modification of vehicle telematics 
and entertainment systems are fair uses and are noninfringing under section 117. 
1) Fair Use 
Proponents request removing the regulatory limitation “except for computer programs 
primarily designed for the control of telematics or entertainment systems for such 
vehicle” to allow for a broader range of diagnosis, repair, and lawful modification 
activities.1202  They argue that telematics and entertainment systems often are protected 
by the same TPMs used to protect other vehicle software, and therefore this limitation 
effectively excludes other systems that need to be accessed for purposes of vehicle 
diagnosis, repair, or modification of a vehicle function.  Proponents also seek to repair or 
replace the entertainment systems themselves and to access the “storage capacity” of 
such systems for noninfringing uses.  Because these uses present different issues under 
the fair use analysis, the Acting Register addresses them separately below. 
Diagnosis, Repair, and Lawful Modifications of Vehicle Functions.  Regarding the purpose 
and character of the use, proponents argue that for some car models,
1203 it is necessary to 
access the telematics software to engage in diagnosis, repair, and lawful modification of 
a vehicle function, and that this activity is transformative in the same way as accessing 
ECUs that control vehicle functions under the existing exemption.1204  In cases where 
entertainment systems are integrated with other functional vehicle systems, proponents 
                                                      
1202 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(6) (2016); see Auto Care Class 7 Initial at 4–6; CTA Class 7 Initial at 5–6; 
Farmers Class 7 Initial at 6 (with respect only to mechanized agricultural equipment). 
1203 See Tr. at 59:22–60:09 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit) (Tesla); Tr. at 48:05–14 (Apr. 10, 2018) 
(Lowe, Auto Care) (BMW). 
1204 See Auto Care Class 7 Initial at 5 (noting a “growing trend of vehicle manufacturers restricting 
the amount of information available through the OBD port” such that “access to telematics 
capabilities will increasingly be necessary for diagnosis and for uploading software 
modifications, updates, and repairs” to vehicles); CTA Class 7 Initial at 3; Farmers Class 7 Initial 
at 9 & n.48 (accessing telematics for a “user’s repair of motor vehicles that involves the repair of 
functions that were previously controlled by mechanical or analog techniques” is a fair use). 

[PAGE 199]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
196 
contend that users should be permitted incidental access to make functional repairs.1205  
As to telematics systems, proponents argue that vehicle owners’ “access to [that] data 
about [their] own driving or [their] own vehicle would be an obvious fair use.”1206 
Opponents contend that the proposed activities are not favored under the first factor 
because access to entertainment and telematics systems could allow unauthorized access 
to expressive content.  For example, Harman asserts that access to its integrated 
telematics and infotainment systems would enable unauthorized use of subscription 
services that access expressive content via the telematics system, such as SiriusXM.1207  
Similarly, Auto Alliance posits that the expansion could allow unauthorized access to 
“maps, databases of geographic data, and other navigational information.”1208 
In 2015, the Register concluded that diagnosis, repair, and modification of vehicle 
functioning were likely to be transformative uses where they could result in creation of 
new applications to facilitate diagnosis and repair, and to interoperate with different 
auto parts.1209  Even where the new use “coincides generally with the original use,” the 
Register concluded the first factor may still favor “noncommercial and personal” uses 
that “enhance the intended use of ECU computer programs.”1210  The Office 
subsequently noted in its Software Study that repair may be a favored purpose when 
directed at preserving the functionality of a device.1211 
Upon the broader record in this rulemaking, the Acting Register finds that the same 
logic supports accessing the telematics system and, if necessary, incidentally accessing 
entertainment systems, strictly for purposes of diagnosis, repair, and lawful 
modification of vehicle functions (compared to entertainment functions).  To be sure, 
accessing such systems with the object of accessing entertainment or expressive content 
without authorization would tip the first factor heavily against fair use.  But the record 
now indicates that in some car models, and arguably to an increasing extent, it is 
becoming difficult for owners to obtain necessary diagnostic information through the 
onboard diagnostic port, requiring them to instead access this data from telematics 
                                                      
1205 See EFF, Auto Care, Dorman, iFixit, SmarTeks & Repair.org Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 5–10 
(June 11, 2018); Tr. at 56:04–57:17 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit); Tr. at 43:12–45:08 (Apr. 10, 2018) 
(Kealey, Dorman); Tr. at 50:23–51:09 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Lowe, Auto Care). 
1206 Auto Care Class 7 Initial at 5. 
1207 Harman Class 7 Opp’n at 4–5; see also Auto Alliance Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1 (June 6, 
2018); Harman Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1–4; Joint Creators II Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1 
(June 11, 2018). 
1208 Auto Alliance Class 7 Opp’n at 10–11. 
1209 2015 Recommendation at 234–35. 
1210 Id. 
1211 Software Study at 40. 

[PAGE 200]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
197 
systems to proceed with repair activities.1212  Testimony further indicated that in some 
cases, the “same computer” contains infotainment or entertainment systems.1213  The 
Acting Register recognizes the seriousness of opponents’ concerns regarding 
unauthorized access to content made available through such systems.1214  Those issues, 
however, relate primarily to the possibility that the proposed exemption could be 
abused, not to the purpose and character of the activities for which proponents seek an 
exemption.  As under the current exemption, those activities would be strictly limited to 
“diagnosis, repair or lawful modification of a vehicle function,” and would not extend to 
circumvention for purposes of gaining unauthorized access to entertainment content.1215  
With the proposed uses defined in this manner, the Acting Register concludes that the 
first factor weighs in favor of fair use.  The Acting Register will consider opponents’ 
piracy-related concerns below in her discussion of the fourth fair use factor and the 
statutory factors under section 1201(a)(1)(C). 
As to the second fair use factor, proponents do not present specific arguments 
concerning the nature of the software controlling either telematics or entertainment 
systems.  Opponents do not dispute that the firmware on telematics systems itself is 
functional, although, as noted, they suggest that access to the telematics system 
implicates other expressive works including maps or compilations of geographic 
data.
1216  Harman also objects to the characterization of infotainment system firmware as 
functional, offering examples of vehicle entertainment system features such as 
“augmented reality,” “virtual personal assistance,” and integrated music and 
audiovisual works.
1217 
The second factor “calls for recognition that some works are closer to the core of 
intended copyright protection than others, with the consequence that fair use is more 
difficult to establish when the former works are copied.”1218  The Register previously 
concluded that “vehicle software is not especially ‘expressive’; it is not meant to be 
                                                      
1212 See Auto Care Class 7 Initial at 5; CTA Class 7 Initial at 3; Tr. at 46:14–48:14 (Apr. 10, 2018) 
(Lowe, Auto Care). 
1213 Tr. at 56:04–57:17 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit); see also EFF, Auto Care, Dorman, iFixit, 
SmarTeks & Repair.org Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 5–10 (June 11, 2018); Tr. at 69:17–70:22 (Apr. 
10, 2018) (Lowe, Auto Care). 
1214 Cf. 2015 Recommendation at 235. 
1215 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(6) (2016). 
1216 Auto Alliance Class 7 Opp’n at 10. 
1217 Harman Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2. 
1218 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 586 (citing examples of factual works as further removed from the core of 
copyright protection). 

[PAGE 201]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
198 
consumed as a creative work,” but rather “to operate a device.”1219  Here, at least some 
aspects of the telematics software are functional works.1220  But other software at issue 
contains integrated expressive content that is further attenuated from vehicle 
functionality, which would disfavor fair use.  Overall, this factor is mixed. 
Regarding the third factor, participants do not squarely address the amount and 
substantiality of the work used.  It appears that in some cases it may be necessary to use 
vehicle computer programs in their entirety to achieve a legitimate purpose, and courts 
have held that the third factor does not necessarily weigh against fair use in such 
circumstances.1221  Ultimately, the Acting Register gives this factor little weight. 
As to the fourth factor, proponents assert that vehicle firmware is “effectively useless” 
outside of the vehicle, with essentially no separate market for the software apart from 
the vehicles.
1222  Opponents contend that “[t]elematics and entertainment software often 
interact with servers outside the vehicle, have value apart from the vehicle, are often 
sold separately from the vehicle, and may be paid for subsequent to . . . purchase of the 
vehicle.”1223 
The fourth factor requires the Office to consider “not only the extent of market harm 
caused by the particular actions of the alleged infringer, but also ‘whether unrestricted 
and widespread conduct of the sort engaged in by the [user] . . . would result in a 
substantially adverse impact on the potential market.’”
1224  In 2015, the Office concluded 
that “computer programs on the majority of ECUs are only meaningful in connection 
with the vehicle, that the copies are generally sold only with the vehicle, and that the 
consumer pays for those copies when purchasing the vehicle.”1225  Here, the record 
indicates that certain telematics and entertainment software can have independent 
                                                      
1219 2015 Recommendation at 235; see Oracle, 886 F.3d at 1204–05 (finding it reasonable that 
“functional considerations [of software] were substantial and important” in favoring fair use 
under the second factor); Connectix, 203 F.3d at 603–05 (finding the second factor favored fair use 
where entire operating system was copied to study and use functional elements of software). 
1220 See 2015 Recommendation at 235 (vehicle ECUs); 2012 Recommendation at 73 (smartphones).  
1221 See HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 98–99; Arriba Soft, 336 F.3d at 820–21; Connectix, 203 F.3d at 603–06; 
cf. EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 9 (discussing the necessity of accessing and copying the 
entire firmware of a device to understand its functionality). 
1222 Tr. at 25:11–22 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Kealey, Dorman). 
1223 Auto Alliance Class 7 Opp’n at 11–12 (describing how GM’s OnStar and Mercedes-Benz’s 
mbrace entertainment and shopping services have “meaningful value apart from the vehicle”); 
see also Harman Class 7 Opp’n at 4 (expressing concern about reproduction and sale of its 
telematics source code on the black market). 
1224 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 590 (citation omitted). 
1225 2015 Recommendation at 236. 

[PAGE 202]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
199 
value, and may be accessed through subscription services.  But while the accessing of 
subscription-based software presents a more complex question, this does not appear to 
be the thrust of proponents’ aim; rather, their testimony is focused on accessing these 
ECUs strictly to diagnose or repair the functioning of a vehicle.1226  As the Office 
explained in its Software Study, where programs have no value apart from the devices 
that they operate, repairing these programs is not likely to interfere with any market 
likely to be exploited by the copyright owner.1227  Setting aside instances where software 
may be accessed through a separate subscription, the same rationale seemingly applies 
to the diagnosis, repair, and lawful modification of vehicles where it is necessary to 
access the telematics or, incidentally, the entertainment ECUs for those activities. 
Overall, when considering circumvention as “a necessary step undertaken . . . to allow 
the diagnosis, repair or lawful modification of a vehicle function,”
1228 the Acting Register 
finds this limiting purpose to be an important factor in her ultimate conclusion that such 
activities are likely to be a fair use.  To the extent opponents, particularly Harmon, have 
raised concerns about unauthorized uses of telematics software, obtaining unauthorized 
access to subscription services for entertainment content, or other unauthorized 
activities that jeopardize protection of copyrighted works, those are serious issues, and 
such activities should be expressly excluded from the scope of the exemption. 
Other activities.  Proponents also suggest users should be permitted to access “storage 
capacity” in vehicle entertainment systems for noninfringing uses
1229 and to replace or 
repair entertainment modules.1230  Auto Care and CTA cite Sony Corp. of America v. 
Universal City Studios, Inc.1231 for the broad proposition that the “ability to receive copied 
content—which is all that circumvention of access to an entertainment system would 
do—is not itself an infringement of copyright.” 1232  In addition, proponents imply that 
use of “storage capacity” in a vehicle entertainment system to space-shift “entertainment 
content [that] the consumer owned or created or personal photographs” would not 
impact the market for copyrighted works.1233  Opponents respond that Sony is 
inapposite.  In their view, as a case addressing the fair use of home “time-shifted” 
                                                      
1226 See Tr. 48:05–14 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Lowe, Auto Care) (commenting that moving diagnostic data 
to the telematics system would inhibit the ability to repair functional parts, such as the brake 
module); Tr. 68:04–70:22 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Band, ORI; Lowe, Auto Care). 
1227 Software Study at 41. 
1228 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(6) (2016). 
1229 See Auto Care Class 7 Initial at 5–6; CTA Class 7 Reply at 4–5; Farmers Class 7 Initial at 9 n.48. 
1230 See Tr. at 43:12–45:05-08 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Kealey, Dorman). 
1231 464 U.S. 417 (1984). 
1232 Auto Care & CTA Class 7 Pet. at 3–4. 
1233 See Auto Care Class 7 Initial at 5–6. 

[PAGE 203]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
200 
recorded content, Sony does not stand for the broader proposition that “space-shifting” 
is a fair use or that there exists an unfettered right to transfer and store copyrighted 
works.1234 
In previous rulemakings, as well as in the Class 3 discussion above, the Office has 
consistently found insufficient legal authority to support the claim that space-shifting 
activity, generally, is likely to constitute fair use.1235  For similar reasons, the Acting 
Register cannot find that this proposed activity is likely to be fair. 
Finally, there was a brief discussion, following the close of written comments, regarding 
the need to repair vehicle infotainment/entertainment systems themselves.1236  Given the 
sparse record, and particularly in light of opponents’ countervailing concerns about 
unauthorized access to copyrighted content,1237 there is insufficient information for the 
Acting Register to evaluate whether repair of these systems is likely noninfringing under 
the same analysis and if so, whether such activity is adversely affected by section 1201. 
2) Section 117 
Proponents contend that making copies and adaptations is an essential step in lawful 
diagnosis, repair, and modification, and therefore those activities are noninfringing 
under section 117.
1238  Section 117(a)(1) is a limited exemption for an “owner of a copy of 
a computer program,”1239 and the inquiry into whether an individual qualifies as an 
“owner” is fact-intensive.1240  Without putting forward specific facts regarding whether 
                                                      
1234 See Harman Class 7 Opp’n at 5, 7–8; Joint Creators II Class 7 Opp’n at 8 n.3. 
1235 See 2015 Recommendation at 108, 121–24; 2012 Recommendation 162–65; 2006 
Recommendation at 60, 69–72, 80–83; 2003 Recommendation at 130–31, 137–38. 
1236 See Auto Care & Dorman Class 7 Ex Parte Meeting Summary at 2–3 (Sept. 6, 2018); Tr. at 42:03–
45:14 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Kealey, Dorman) (discussing configuration of infotainment systems and 
Dorman’s interest in repairing infotainment modules). 
1237 See also 2015 Recommendation at 235 (noting that “[a]ccess controls on entertainment system 
ECUs not only preserve the integrity of the ECU itself, but also protect the co ntent that is played 
through the entertainment system”). 
1238 See EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 10; EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Reply at 2. 
1239 17 U.S.C. § 117(a)(1).  While section 117(c) is directed at purposes of maintenance and repair, it 
authorizes making copies only upon “activation” of a machine, which may be why proponents 
generally relied upon 117(a)(1), which permits a broader range of activities.  
1240 See Krause v. Titleserv, Inc., 402 F.3d 119 (2d Cir. 2005); Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc., 621 F.3d 1102 
(9th Cir. 2010).  In Krause, the Second Circuit directed courts to look at whether there were 
sufficient incidents of ownership by considering: (1) whether substantial consideration was paid 
for the copy; (2) whether the copy was created for the sole benefit of the purchaser; (3) whether 
the copy was customized to serve the purchaser’s use; (4) whether the copy was stored on 
property owned by the purchaser; (5) whether the creator reserved the right to repossess the 

[PAGE 204]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
201 
vehicle telematics or entertainment software is likely owned, eBay argues that 
recalibrating vehicle software would be covered under section 117, if the Acting Register 
in fact concludes that the purchaser of the vehicle is also the owner of the vehicle 
software.1241  MEMA, with a tailored focus on third-party service providers, asserts that 
the diagnosis, repair, or modification of software on vehicles by such providers “and 
similar services are expressly authorized under [s]ection 117.”1242 
In opposition, Auto Alliance argues that proponents have not demonstrated that an 
owner of a vehicle is also the owner of copies of telematics and entertainment software 
under section 117(a).1243  It asserts:  “Many telematics and entertainment systems are 
subject to license agreements that clearly show the user does not own the copyrighted 
software.  Based on these license agreements, the Copyright Office in 2015 concluded 
that users may not own the computer programs that operate vehicle entertainment or 
telematics systems.”1244  Even if the existence of such license agreements is not 
dispositive, Auto Alliance concludes, “proponents have not submitted any evidence to 
rebut this conclusion.”
1245 
Auto Alliance is correct that the 2015 record included license agreements for telematics 
and entertainment system software in motor vehicles.
1246  Proponents have not 
supplemented the record to support the proposition that the owner of a vehicle also 
owns copies of that vehicle’s telematics or entertainment software.  Instead, opponents 
again attest that this software is likely to be licensed, including via subscriptions.
1247  
Therefore, the evidence overall again suggests that vehicle owners may more properly 
be considered lessees of at least some telematics and entertainment system software.  
The Acting Register concludes that, on the current record, section 117(a)(1) does not 
cover these proposed uses. 
                                                                                                                                                              
copy; (6) whether the creator agreed that the purchaser had the right to possess and use the 
programs forever regardless of whether the relationship between the parties terminated; and (7) 
whether the purchaser was free to discard or destroy the copy anytime it wished.  402 F.3d at 124.  
In Vernor, the Ninth Circuit held that “a software user is a licensee rather than an owner of a copy 
where the copyright owner (1) specifies that the user is granted a license; (2) significantly restricts 
the user’s ability to transfer the software; and (3) imposes notable use restrictions.  621 F.3d at 
1111. 
1241 eBay Class 7 Reply at 3. 
1242 MEMA Class 7 Reply at 2–3; see also MEMA Class 7 Initial at 3. 
1243 Auto Alliance Class 7 Opp’n at 11. 
1244 Id. (citing 2015 Recommendation at 238). 
1245 Id. 
1246 2015 Recommendation at 238. 
1247 See, e.g., Auto Alliance Class 7 Opp’n at 11–12. 

[PAGE 205]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
202 
ii. Other Devices 
Commenters seeking an expansion to allow diagnosis, repair, and modification of 
devices outside the context of motorized land vehicles suggest that these activities are 
noninfringing under the fair use doctrine and section 117.  As explained above, the 
following analysis considers these arguments in the context of those types of devices 
cognizably reflected in the record to varying degrees, namely home appliances, 
smartphones, video game consoles, computers and ancillary or peripheral computing 
devices, and consumables, plus a few examples of specific modified devices. 
1) Fair Use 
Following the path of the recent Section 1201 Report, this recommendation considers 
first repair and diagnostic activities, and then modification.  Based on the factual 
allegations surfaced in the comments, the Acting Register further isolates specific issues 
with respect to video game consoles and consumables.  Finally, when considering this 
expansion, the written comments and testimony focused on a desire to repair or modify 
the firmware embedded in these devices or to repair a functional component controlled 
by the firmware1248—as opposed to, for example, an app loaded  on a device—and the 
following analysis reflects this limitation as well. 
Diagnosis, repair, and maintenance, generally.  Under the first fair use factor, proponents 
contend generally that these activities are favored because they are transformative and 
promote research to “understand the functional aspects of a copyrighted work.”
1249  In 
opposition, Joint Creators II state that “[r]epair typically involves copying or adapting a 
work to cause the work to perform the same purpose it was originally intended to 
perform.  That is not a transformative use.”
1250  They further claim that “exposing 
expressive works to unauthorized access causes the first factor to weigh against fair 
use.”
1251  Finally, Joint Creators II urge the Acting Register, if she recommends an 
                                                      
1248 See, e.g., Consumers Union Class 7 Initial at 2 (addressing “software that enables and 
governs— and restricts— the functioning of everyday consumer products in which it is 
embedded”); EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 3–10 (asserting fair uses of firmware on various 
devices); Tr. at 37:26–38:17 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Walsh, EFF; Wiens, iFixit) (asserting that there is no 
market for firmware tied to a particular device); Tr. at 96:07–15 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Shore, ASCDI) 
(describing issues of accessing firmware to repair devices). 
1249 EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 8. 
1250 Joint Creators II Class 7 Opp’n at 8 (citing Wall Data Inc. v. L.A. Cty. Sheriff’s Dep’t, 447 F.3d 
769, 778 (9th Cir. 2006)). 
1251 Id. 

[PAGE 206]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
203 
expansion related to repair, to incorporate the definition of repair as provided by section 
117(d)(2).1252 
In analyzing the first fair use factor, the Acting Register notes that the Copyright Office’s 
Software Study observed that, because the fundamental purpose of repair is to restore 
the functionality of a device so that it may be used, “repair supports—rather than 
displaces— the purpose of the embedded programs.”
1253  Applying similar logic, the 2015 
rulemaking concluded that the first factor favored an exemption for vehicle repair 
because the activities were personal, noncommercial, and would “enhance the intended 
use” of the vehicle programs.
1254  Moreover, the Office’s Section 1201 Report observed an 
emerging “general understanding that bona fide repair and maintenance activities are 
typically noninfringing.”1255  Because proponents express the same desire to engage in 
these bona fide repair activities with respect to other devices, the Acting Register 
concludes that this factor favors proponents. 
Regarding the second factor, proponents assert that the nature of the work favors fair 
use because device firmware is primarily functional in nature.1256  Proponents state that 
software code used as a “lockout” to restrict access to a device “bears only a thin 
copyright interest that is overcome by the need to use that code for interoperability.”1257  
But ESA contends that “even if some elements of the console firmware are considered 
functional, the games, motion pictures and other works that are protected by the 
firmware are highly expressive.”1258 
As noted above, courts have found that this factor favors fair use where the relevant 
work is functional software.1259  Here, it appears that the participants may agree that the 
works at issue are device firmware, and that this firmware is primarily functional.  
While specific concerns with respect to access to video game consoles and other conduits 
to highly expressive works are addressed below, the proposed uses are not to access 
these other expressive works, but rather to diagnose or repair the computer programs 
                                                      
1252 Joint Creators Class 7 Opp’n at 5; see 17 U.S.C. 117(d)(2) (“the ‘repair’ of a machine is the 
restoring of the machine to the state of working in accordance with its original specifications and 
any changes to those specifications authorized for that machine”). 
1253 Software Study at 38-41. 
1254 2015 Recommendation at 234–37. 
1255 Section 1201 Report at 90. 
1256 EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 9; Tr. at 37:05–10 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Walsh, EFF). 
1257 EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 8–9 (citing Static Control Components, Inc. v. Lexmark Int’l, 
Inc., Nos. Civ.A. 02-571, Civ.A. 04-84, 2007 WL 1485770, at *5 (E.D. Ky. Apr. 18, 2007)). 
1258 ESA Class 7 Opp’n at 8. 
1259 See Oracle, 886 F.3d at 1204–05; Connectix, 203 F.3d at 603–05; see also 2015 Recommendation at 
235; 2012 Recommendation at 73. 

[PAGE 207]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
204 
that control the functioning of devices in which they are embedded.  Accordingly, the 
Acting Register finds that this factor favors fair use. 
Regarding the third factor, commenters do not squarely address the amount and 
substantiality of the work used in relation to the fair use analysis.1260  As noted, the fact 
that the entirety of the work is used is not dispositive, as courts have permitted such 
uses where necessary to achieve a transformative purpose.
1261  Indeed, in 2015, the 
Register noted that although most of the proposed activity would involve reproducing 
copyrighted programs in their entirety, this factor should be given little weight because 
the copying was necessary to accomplish a transformative purpose.
1262  The Acting 
Register finds the same conclusion sound here. 
Considering the fourth factor, proponents comment that because firmware is tied to a 
particular device, it has no independent commercial value.
1263  But opponents submit 
that “the fourth factor analysis for repair with respect to many devices will weigh 
against fair use.”1264  Opponents’ comments are specifically directed to devices, 
including video game consoles, where the “software . . . is intended to prevent 
piracy.”1265  Opponents suggest that once the firmware on these devices is accessed, even 
for repair, it is compromised such that it can no longer prevent piracy and consequently, 
these uses diminish the value of and market for the devices and other creative works.1266   
In 2015, the Register concluded that computer programs in vehicles are valuable only in 
connection with the vehicle and that no independent market for vehicle software 
exists.1267  Similarly, in the Software Study, the Office focused on whether “these types of 
computer programs” were “distributed as standalone works,” concluding that where 
                                                      
1260 ESA does state that “virtually all of the hacks for video game consoles use nearly all of the 
code contained within the copyrighted computer programs,” but it was not clear if the word 
“hacks” refers to diagnosis and repair activities.  ESA Class 7 Opp’n at 8.  Either way, this does 
not change the Acting Register’s conclusion. 
1261 See HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 98–99; Arriba Soft, 336 F.3d at 820–21; Connectix, 203 F.3d at 603–06. 
1262 See 2015 Recommendation at 235–36. 
1263 See EFF Class 7 Initial at 10 (“In the case of device firmware, the copyrighted work is sold to 
end-users along with an entire device.”); Tr. at 37:26-38:17 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Walsh, EFF; Wiens, 
iFixit) (“[I]t’s very unlikely that there’s going to be market substitution as a result of these works 
where the work’s utility and market value is connected to a physical device”). 
1264 Joint Creators II Class 7 Opp’n at 9. 
1265 Id. 
1266 ESA Class 7 Opp’n at 8; Joint Creators Class 7 Opp’n at 9; see also DVD CCA & AACS LA 
Class 7 Opp’n at 4; DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2 (June 11, 2018); Joint 
Creators II Class 7 Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2 (June 11, 2018). 
1267 See 2015 Recommendation at 236. 

[PAGE 208]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
205 
programs have no separable value, “repairing these programs is not likely to interfere 
with any market likely exploited by the copyright owner.”1268  Now, the Acting Register 
must consider the fourth factor in relation to the current record, for the enumerated 
categories of specific devices raised above.  Apart from gaming consoles (discussed 
further below), the record seems to indicate that the TPMs at issue are generally 
restricting access to the device firmware, and not to other expressive works.1269  Further, 
in the case of smartphones specifically, although these devices can no doubt be used to 
consume expressive works, previous rulemakings have concluded that the firmware on 
smartphones is unlikely to have a significant independent market that can be harmed.1270  
Thus, the Acting Register follows the conclusions of the 2015 rulemaking and the 
Software Study, and does not find that this factor disfavors the expanded exemption. 
Repair of video game consoles, specifically.  Proponents contend that the same analysis 
should hold with respect to video game consoles.1271  Opponents, however, express 
concern that circumvention of TPMs on video game consoles creates risk of 
unauthorized access to content and piracy, because the TPMs also protect access to the 
games themselves.1272  Opponents claim that, even if circumvention were for legitimate 
repair, once TPMs are circumvented, it is questionable that they could be restored.1273  
Further, ESA states that circumvention could result in a console being “unable to run 
properly licensed content.”1274  They contend that these unique concerns militate against 
a fair use finding with respect to the first and fourth factors. 
Opponents also claim the second and third factors disfavor fair use.  They argue that 
video game console firmware “contains elements protected by copyright and, even if 
some elements of the console firmware are considered functional, the games, motion 
pictures and other works that are protected by the firmware are highly expressive.”1275  
                                                      
1268 Software Study at 41. 
1269 See, e.g., EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 3–10; Tr. at 37:26–38:17 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Walsh, 
EFF; Wiens, iFixit); Tr. at 96:07–15 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Shore, ASCDI). 
1270 See 2015 Recommendation at 163–64; 2012 Recommendation at 73–74; 2010 Recommendation 
at 97–100. 
1271 See EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 10, 13. 
1272 ESA Class 7 Opp’n at 2–5, 7–8 (noting that in both the 2012 and 2015 Recommendations, the 
Register “concluded that there is a strong link between console jailbreaking and piracy”); Tr. 
15:04–25 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II); Tr. at 65:15–22 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Williams, 
Joint Creators II) (commenting that TPMs effectively ensure legitimate copies are played, whether 
a physical copy or in the cloud). 
1273 ESA Class 7 Opp’n at 5 (noting that “TPMs cease to serve their protective function once 
circumvented”); Tr. at 20:16-23:10 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II). 
1274 ESA Class 7 Opp’n at 5. 
1275 Id. at 8. 

[PAGE 209]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
206 
They also contend that the “amount and substantiality of the portion used is not 
reasonable, because virtually all of the hacks used for video game consoles use nearly all 
of the code contained within the copyrighted computer programs.”1276 
In multiple past rulemakings, the Office has rejected proposed jailbreaking exemptions 
for video game consoles—including passing suggestions of the need to repair these 
consoles—because of the potential harm to the market.
1277  For example, in 2012, the 
Register stated that: 
[O]pponents have provided compelling, uncontradicted evidence that 
circumvention of access controls to permit interoperability of video game 
consoles—regardless of purpose — has the effect of diminishing the value 
of, and impairing the market for, the affected code, because the 
compromised code can no longer serve as a secure platform for the 
development and distribution of legitimate content.1278 
This rulemaking reflects similar console-specific concerns about potential market harm.  
Proponents have not provided a persuasive legal or factual analysis why the Acting 
Register should reach a different conclusion than in 2012 or 2015, and so she does not. 
Modification, generally.  EFF, which focuses most of its arguments on the importance of 
modification, argues that “[m]odifying device software in order to enable new uses is 
the essence of a transformative use under the fair use doctrine.”1279  ORI states that in 
many cases the modification of a device’s functionality is the intended use (compared to 
an intention to modify the copyrighted work), though modification of the software may 
be necessary for that purpose.
1280  EFF provides a handful of examples, including 
modifying a two-way radio to serve as a scanner to listen in on private talk groups and 
calls, jailbreaking the PlayStation 3 to run “software of [users’] choice,” and modifying 
the Sony Aibo robotic dog to teach it “to dance, speak, obey wireless commands, and 
even share the video used for Aibo’s vision.”1281  From a legal basis, EFF relies upon two 
                                                      
1276 Id. 
1277 2015 Recommendation at 199–201; 2012 Recommendation at 42–44, 47. 
1278 2012 Recommendation at 44. 
1279 EFF Class 7 Reply at 5; see also Tr. at 37:11–19 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Walsh, EFF). 
1280 See Tr. at 100:03–17 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Band, ORI) (stating that “a lot of times what we’re really 
trying to do is modify the device.  But . . . to modify the device, you might need to modify the 
software”). 
1281 EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 3–6. 

[PAGE 210]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
207 
Ninth Circuit cases, Sega v. Accolade1282 and Sony v. Connectix,1283 for the proposition that 
“enabling interoperability and increasing the utility of hardware are fair uses.”1284 
In response, opponents cite to the Copyright Office’s Section 1201 Report concerning the 
challenges of defining “modification” and “tinkering” in such a way that would permit 
these activities without implicating the exclusive right to prepare derivative works.1285  
Opponents warn that user modifications may affect the market for future modifications 
to device software made and sold by the manufacturer.1286  They also argue that the term 
“tinkering” could include accessing highly expressive content and unlawfully modifying 
that content.1287  Opponents suggest that the Federal Circuit’s recent decision in Oracle 
America, Inc. v. Google, Inc.1288 diminishes the weight of the cases cited by proponents 
concerning transformative use, noting that the Oracle court held that verbatim copying 
for purposes of interoperability was only “moderately transformative activity.”1289 
In analyzing whether “modification” is likely to be noninfringing, the first hurdle is 
definitional.  As the Section 1201 Report concluded, proponents “have suggested no 
reliable way to define with any precision a category of lawful adaptations, generally, for 
purposes of section 1201.”
1290  While the existing exemption allows “lawful modification 
of a vehicle function,”1291 the proposal for other devices is broader, seemingly 
encompassing any modification in connection with a device.1292  In some cases, where a 
user seeks to modify only a functional element of a device for a personal, 
noncommercial use, that activity may well qualify as a fair use.  In other cases, however, 
a modification under the proposed exemption may result in an infringing derivative 
work.  Indeed, the statutory definition of “derivative work” requires an underlying 
work to “be recast, transformed, or adapted,”1293 and at the hearings proponents 
appeared to acknowledge that at least some of the modifications they describe in their 
                                                      
1282 977 F.2d at 1522–23. 
1283 203 F.3d at 608. 
1284 EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 8. 
1285 See Joint Creators II Opp’n at 9–10 (citing Section 1201 Report at 96–97). 
1286 See Tr. at 38:22–40:25 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II). 
1287 See Joint Creators II Opp’n at 9–10. 
1288 886 F.3d at 1199–202. 
1289 Tr. at 40:08–25 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II). 
1290 Section 1201 Report at 96–97. 
1291 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(6) (2016) (emphasis added). 
1292 EFF, Auto Care, Dorman, iFixit, SmarTeks & Repair.org Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 10 (June 
11, 2018). 
1293 17 U.S.C. § 101. 

[PAGE 211]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
208 
comments could implicate that right.1294 And the proposed class includes 
commercializing these modifications insofar as the same proponents also stress the need 
for third-party assistance.  Moreover, it is not clear that the two cases cited by 
proponents go so far as to support the broader range of activities envisioned by the 
proposal.1295 
Thus, the Acting Register does not conclude that modification of a function of a device 
as a general category is likely to be noninfringing.  As the Office has repeatedly stated, 
“there is no ‘rule of doubt’ favoring an exemption when it is unclear whether a 
particular use is a fair use.”1296  Because “modification” has not been defined with 
sufficient precision here, the Acting Register declines to find that this aspect of the 
proposed expansion is likely to be a fair use. 
Modification of consumables, specifically.  In contrast, the several examples regarding the 
desire to modify consumable devices described by proponents seem to share a more 
definable set of commonalities.  Proponents’ concern here is that device owners are 
locked into using a manufacturer’s replacement cartridges and are unable to use 
competitive consumable cartridges without modifying their devices.1297  In this case, the 
purpose of the modification is to make the device accept non-manufacturer-approved 
component parts.  Opponents did not specifically oppose the inclusion of devices 
involving consumables, other than in their broad opposition to exempting any device 
that would provide access to expressive works, and in their concern that the evidence for 
an expanded exemption was generally insufficient. 
The Acting Register notes there are some parallels between this proposal and the 
existing exemption for 3D printers to enable the use of non-manufacturer-approved 
feedstock.1298  Moreover, the proposed modifications are limited to developing 
interoperability between products, a use the Office has acknowledged in prior 
                                                      
1294 See Tr. at 41:01–17 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Walsh, EFF) (suggesting opponents’ specific objections to 
robotic dogs and video game consoles should not undermine proponents ’ broader fair use 
analysis); Tr. at 76:01–04 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Band, ORI) (noting that modification of robotic dog 
“could be creating a derivative work, and that would be non-infringing and that would not be 
permitted”); see also 2015 Recommendation at 200; 2012 Recommendation at 39–44 (declining to 
recommend exemption for jailbreaking gaming consoles). 
1295 EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 8 (citing Sega, 977 F.2d at 1514–17, and Connectix, 203 F.3d 
at 598–601 both of which analyzed reverse engineering, specifically). 
1296 2015 Recommendation at 15; 2012 Recommendation at 7; 2010 Recommendation at 11 –12. 
1297 See EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 5–6; Tr. at 18:01–07 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Walsh, EFF).  
Proponents identified a similar concern with respect to replacing smart light bulbs.  EFF, ORI & 
ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 3. 
1298 See 2015 Recommendation at 356–77. 

[PAGE 212]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
209 
rulemakings is likely fair.1299  As the Section 1201 Report noted, Congress did not intend 
that “section 1201 would serve as a sword to inhibit market entrants from offering 
competing consumer products.”1300  Therefore, while the record remains sparse 
concerning whether there are TPMs protecting copyrighted works that effectively 
prevent the desired uses of these products, to the extent those elements are present, the 
Acting Register concludes that the uses, on balance, are likely to be noninfringing.  As 
noted above, however, this does not end the inquiry.  Proponents still must establish 
that the prohibition on circumvention is likely to cause an adverse effect on users’ ability 
to engage in these uses.  The Acting Register addresses that issue below. 
Further, in some cases, a regulatory exemption may not be necessary, as the Copyright 
Office has noted that section 1201(f) should be available to insulate circumvention 
activities undertaken for the purpose of achieving interoperability of a computer 
program with other programs.
1301  As the Section 1201 Report explains, section 1201(f) 
largely codified the holding of Sega that proponents primarily rely on in seeking an 
exemption for interoperability uses. 
2) Section 117 
Proponents also assert that the proposed uses of computer programs on softwareenabled devices are noninfringing under section 117.  To start, they state that the owners 
of these devices typically own the copy of the software embedded within them.
1302  They 
suggest section 1201 should not be interpreted in a way that divests consumers of these 
traditional expectations of ownership.  In contrast to the discussion regarding telematics 
and entertainment ECUs, and with the exception of video game consoles, opponents do 
not dispute that owners of the devices at issue here generally own the copy of the 
firmware on those devices.  
In its Software Study, the Copyright Office noted that the question of ownership “can be 
complex” with regard to embedded software, in part depending upon the nature of 
consideration paid for the software as part of the transaction.  The Office noted that the 
acquisition of specialized software like programs controlling the function of windshield 
wipers may be “essentially invisible to the consumer” of a purchased automobile, 
                                                      
1299 See, e.g., id. at 162 (discussing smartphone unlocking and noting “interoperability is favored 
under the law”). 
1300 Section 1201 Report at 48. 
1301 See id. at 67–71 (discussing Sega and 17 U.S.C. § 1201(f)).  See generally  17 U.S.C. § 1201(f). 
1302 See Tr. at 54:04–07 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit) (suggesting that the “overwhelming majority 
of products have no license—that have software in them, have no license agreement associated 
with them”); Tr. at 51:23–52:08 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Walsh, EFF) (arguing that “even if there is [an enduser license agreement] in place, the person who owns the device is typically also the owner of 
that copy of the software”). 

[PAGE 213]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
210 
whereas “operating system software in a personal computer” will play a more 
significant element in the transaction, and may well be licensed.1303  Previously the 
Register found it likely that “some subset” of owners of wireless devices, including 
smartphones, likely own the copy of the device software.1304  Based on the limited 
record, the same logic might extend to devices like home appliances, as well as some 
subset of the other categories such as consumables.  For video game consoles, 
commenters dispute whether owners of the console also own the copy of device 
firmware, and the record lacks sufficient evidence to resolve that issue either way.
1305  
Thus it appears that some, but not all, devices may involve ownership of copies of the 
software within the meaning of section 117(a). 
The next requirement under 117(a)(1) is that reproduction or adaptation of the computer 
program be an “essential step in the utilization of the program in conjunction with a 
machine,” and the copy is used in no other manner.1306  Opponents argue that section 
117 does not cover various activities proposed by proponents, with Joint Creators II 
stating that proponents “fail[] to establish that the copying and adaptation involved in 
repairing devices used to access expressive works is a noninfringing use.  Section 117 is 
limited in scope and would not apply to all repair activities.”
1307 
The Copyright Office has previously noted that “[i]f the embedded software copy is 
owned, section 117(a) provides broad protections” for a range of activities.1308  While it is 
true this range has limits, many of the examples provided by proponents may qualify 
under section 117(a)(1) as they are directed at copying or adapting the computer 
program to enable the continued operation of the machine.  For example, Mr. Wiens 
testified that it is necessary to circumvent a TPM to replace an iPhone home button.1309  
Similarly, he described the growing utilization of TPMs in devices by manufacturers of 
                                                      
1303 Software Study at 36. 
1304 2015 Recommendation at 161–62 (internal quotation marks omitted) (relying also on the 
Unlocking Act § 2(c), 128 Stat. at 1751–52, as demonstrating congressional intent that “device 
owners be entitled to engage in circumvention independent of the question of legal ownership of 
device software”); 2012 Recommendation at 93. 
1305 Compare Tr. 22:08–17; 52:20–06 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II) (suggesting console 
owners do not own the copy of the firmware), with Tr. at 53:07–12 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Walsh, EFF) 
(suggesting console owners are free to resell and dispose of consoles, including installed 
software, and no obligation to return to manufacturer).  
1306 17 U.S.C. § 117(a)(1). 
1307 Joint Creators Class 7 Opp’n at 8. 
1308 Software Study at 36 (further noting that “section 117(a) has been interpreted to permit a 
broad range of activities, including fixing bugs, transferring programs to a new operating system, 
and adding new features to make the software more useful to its owner”).  
1309 Tr. at 33:11–16 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit). 

[PAGE 214]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
211 
home appliances and the corresponding rise in need for users to circumvent TPMs to 
repair those devices.1310  The Acting Register concludes that these types of functional 
corrections or improvements likely qualify as noninfringing under section 117(a)(1).1311  
In addition, if the ownership criteria were met, section 117(a)(1) would seem to permit 
some (but not all) of the modification examples given, including modifying lighting 
system firmware to pair with third-party lightbulbs or debugging.1312  But again, 
following two policy studies where the Copyright Office concluded respectively that 
section 117 is fact-dependent and that there was no consensus regarding the meaning of 
lawful modification,1313 the Acting Register declines to extrapolate from briefly sketched 
statements to conclude more definitively as to whether the class of modifications sought 
in this exemption are likely noninfringing. 
In sum, the Acting Register concludes that some of the proposed uses— including some 
involving owned smartphones and home appliances—are likely to be non infringing 
under section 117.  As stated above, however, there is no “rule of doubt” favoring an 
exemption when it is unclear that a particular use is noninfringing.
1314  Because the 
record lacks sufficient evidence regarding ownership of other devices, or a working 
understanding of the types of modification sought, the Acting Register does not have 
adequate information to determine whether the full range of requested activities may 
fall within the scope of permissible uses under section 117(a)(1). 
d. Causation 
The Acting Register finds that the record shows that the current qualifying language 
“except for computer programs primarily designed for the control of telematics or 
entertainment systems for such vehicle” limits the ability of owners to engage in the 
diagnosis, repair, or lawful modification of a vehicle function as described above.  
Additionally, the Acting Register finds that the record shows that the statutory 
prohibition on circumvention of access controls limits participants’ ability to engage in 
diagnosis and repair of home appliances and smartphones.  But for the prohibition, 
users likely could gain lawful access to the copyrighted firmware for those purposes. 
With respect to consumables, however, it is not clear from the record whether the 
prohibition on circumvention is causing any adverse effect on consumers’ ability to 
                                                      
1310 Tr. at 30:05–31:01 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit). 
1311 Software Study at 36 & n.191 (citing Krause, 402 F.3d at 125); see also Tr. at 92:21–93:20 (Apr. 25, 
2018) (Walsh, EFF). 
1312 EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 3–5. 
1313 Section 1201 Report at 90; Software Study at 33, 36 (noting it would be difficult for Congress to 
“identify the precise situations where ‘tinkering’ and ‘repair’ should be permitted”). 
1314 See 2015 Recommendation at 15; 2012 Recommendation at 7. 

[PAGE 215]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
212 
engage in the proposed activity.  Similarly, in the case of computing peripheral devices, 
the record does not establish that TPMs are consistently controlling access to a 
copyrighted work within the meaning of the statute.  The evidentiary deficiencies 
regarding these categories of devices are discussed below. 
e. Asserted Adverse Effects 
i. Vehicle Telematics and Entertainment Systems 
Turning to the analysis of adverse effects and consideration of the statutory factors 
under 1201(a)(1)(C), the first and fourth factors—the availability for use of copyrighted 
works and the effect of circumvention of TPMs on the market for copyrighted works—
are the most germane to the proposed uses of vehicle telematics and entertainment 
systems.  The second and third factors—the availability for use of works for nonprofit 
archival, preservation, and educational purposes; and the impact on criticism, comment, 
news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research—are not  especially relevant. 
With respect to the first factor, proponents argue that absent an exemption, access to the 
works will be unavailable due to TPMs.  Regarding telematics systems, proponents 
contend that these systems are becoming the nexus for diagnostic information necessary 
to evaluate and repair vehicles.
1315  In some cases, they note, manufacturers have 
migrated some or all data relating to vehicle function from physical OBD ports to 
telematics systems.1316  Furthermore, proponents indicate that some manufacturers—
including BMW and Tesla—are considering removing or have already removed the OBD 
port entirely.1317  There is also some indication that entertainment systems may be 
integrated with systems controlling vehicle functions, though it is unclear whether this 
is a common design.
1318  Consequently, proponents argue, vehicle owners in these 
situations are unable to diagnose or repair their vehicles without accessing these 
systems.
1319  In addition, they note that where owners are unable to repair their vehicles 
due to the additional cost or time, the software is no longer available for use, as the 
                                                      
1315 See Auto Care & CTA Class 7 Pet. at 3; Auto Care Class 7 Initial at 5; CTA Class 7 Initial at 3; 
Farmers Class 7 Initial at 9 n.48; iFixit Class 7 Pet. at 2. 
1316 See Tr. at 59:22–60:09, 65:07–66:17 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit) (referencing John Deere and 
Tesla); Tr. at 46:16–47:03; 48:05–14 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Lowe, Auto Care). 
1317 See Tr. at 46:14–48:14 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Lowe, Auto Care); Tr. at 59:22–60:09 (Apr. 25, 2018) 
(Wiens, iFixit). 
1318 See EFF, Auto Care, Dorman, iFixit SmarTeks & Repair.org Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 5–10 
(June 11, 2018); Tr. at 56:04–57:17 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit); Tr. at 50:23–51:09 (Apr. 10, 2018) 
(Lowe, Auto Care); Tr. at 69:17–70:22 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Lowe, Auto Care). 
1319 See Tr. at 70:22–71:18 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit). 

[PAGE 216]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
213 
vehicles sit idle or are disposed of, sometimes in favor of older machines without 
embedded software.1320 
Opponents counter that use of telematics for diagnosis, repair, and modification is not 
necessary because diagnostic data is still available through the onboard diagnostics 
port.
1321  Alternatively, opponents say that circumvention is not needed because in 2014, 
organizations representing automobile OEMs and independent repair services entered 
into a nationwide memorandum of understanding (“MOU”) and Right to Repair 
(“R2R”) Agreement that obligate manufacturers to make available diagnostic and repair 
information to vehicle owners and independent repair services.
1322  On this issue, 
proponents counter that the MOU is inadequate because it leaves out many vehicles, 
requires vehicle owners to pay to reinstall vehicle software on replacement parts, and 
excludes telematics systems.1323  Finally, opponents contend that proponents have not 
met their burden of demonstrating the adverse effects of TPMs on noninfringing uses.1324 
The Acting Register concludes that this factor favors an exemption.  The record 
demonstrates that the OBD-II port may provide only limited information, and there can 
be a need to access the telematics ECU, and incidentally an infotainment or 
entertainment system,
1325 to engage in activities otherwise permitted under the current 
exemption.  And although some repair and diagnostic activities can be conducted 
                                                      
1320 Farmers Class 7 Initial at 2, 6 (commenting that farmers experience significant downtime 
waiting for repair of equipment, and that some farmers are opting to purchase older equipment 
at increased prices because it does not contain software). 
1321 See Tr. at 60:19–61:23 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Mooney, Harman). 
1322 See Auto Alliance Class 7 Opp’n at 7, 15 (Ex. A, MOU and R2R Agreement); see also 2015 
Recommendation at 225–26. 
1323 See Auto Care Class 7 Reply at 3–6; CTA Class 7 Reply at 4; see also 2015 Recommendation at 
225–26 (noting that MOU did not cover all models of vehicles). 
1324 See Auto Alliance Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1 (June 6, 2018); Joint Creators II Class 7 Post -
Hearing Resp. at 1 (June 11, 2018); Tr. at 57:12 –24 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II). 
1325 Dorman also suggested that it has a need to repair or replace infotainment/entertainment 
modules, and has turned down requests to supply refurbished modules because there is no way 
for the end-user to complete the installation by syncing its controls with the vehicles, which 
requires circumvention.  See Tr. at 44:18–45:02 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Kealey, Dorman).  In a subsequent 
ex parte meeting with the Office, Dorman indicated that repairs to functional vehicle systems, 
such as the air conditioning, may be implicated where controls are integrated into the 
infotainment system.  See Auto Care & Dorman Class 7 Ex Parte Meeting Summary at 2–3 (Sept. 6, 
2018).  But opponents suggest that both the infringement and 1201 statutory factor analyses differ 
significantly with respect to repair or modification of these systems.  On the whole, without a 
more fully developed record on the need to circumvent for purposes unrelated to vehicle 
functions, the Acting Register does not recommend further adjustments to the existing 
exemption. 

[PAGE 217]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
214 
through the use of manufacturer-licensed services, proponents provide evidence 
demonstrating that those alternatives may be less accessible (including for time-sensitive 
agricultural activities) and/or substantially more costly.1326 
Regarding the fourth statutory factor, the record is mixed.  Proponents state that because 
telematics and entertainment software serves no purpose outside of vehicles, there is no 
independent market for the software separate from vehicle sales.1327  Opponents warn 
that “permitting an exemption for telematics or entertainment systems would enable 
rampant piracy of copyrighted works like music and films,” as well as “broad theft of 
valuable intellectual property, including valuable source code.”1328  And, as noted above, 
opponents contend that access to the telematics system implicates other expressive 
works such as maps, databases of geographic data, and data compilations.
1329  Further, 
they argue, circumvention of the entertainment system could provide “access to 
everything in the system, including audiovisual works and sound recordings that reside 
in streaming services that the user has not paid for.”1330  Consequently, the market for invehicle licensed content, which is predicated on adequate protections, could be 
significantly diminished.
1331  Opponents further contend that to the extent proponents 
focus on the use of entertainment systems for “storage capacity,” allowing users to 
upload their own content also has the potential to impact the licensing market for invehicle entertainment software and content.1332 
                                                      
1326 See Adams Class 7 Reply at 2; Auto Care Class 7 Initial at 5; CTA Class 7 Reply at 3; DeVolve 
Class 7 Reply at 2; Farmers Class 7 Initial at 2–6; MEMA Class 7 Reply at 5; White Class 7 Reply at 
2; Zuckerman Class 7 Reply at 2; Tr. at 29:19-30:05 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Band, ORI). 
1327 See Tr. at 25:11–22 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Kealey, Dorman). 
1328 Harman Class 7 Opp’n at 3, 6, 8–9; see also Tr. at 59:05–14 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Williams, Joint 
Creators II) (commenting that once a vehicle entertainment system is accessed via circumvention, 
it facilitates unauthorized access to subscription streaming services and copies of copyrighted 
content can be downloaded). 
1329 Auto Alliance Class 7 Opp’n at 10. 
1330 Harman Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2–3; see also Joint Creators II Class 7 Opp’n at 8, 11, Ex. 
1 (Bell Statement at 2–3) (describing how root access could lead to unauthorized copying and 
access). 
1331 See, e.g., Auto Alliance Class 7 Opp’n at 11 (“[T]he circumvention of access controls could 
severely diminish the value of this copyrighted content by enabling vehicle owners to cancel their 
subscriptions altogether and rely upon unauthorized access facilitated by circumvention.”); Tr. at 
61:03–62:11 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II) (commenting that content providers  that 
license to vehicle manufacturers seek certain protections that, if absent or inadequate, would 
affect licensors’ decisions to enter the market). 
1332 See Auto Alliance Class 7 Opp’n at 11; Tr. at 57:25–58:17 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Williams, Joint 
Creators II). 

[PAGE 218]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
215 
Opponents raise legitimate concerns about the impact of the proposed uses on the 
market for expressive works.  In 2015, the Office distinguished telematics and 
entertainment systems on the ground that there was “evidence to suggest that 
circumvention of access controls on entertainment and telematics ECUs could result in a 
diminution in the value of copyrighted works if those systems could no longer reliably 
protect the content made available through them.”1333  But it is also true that there is little 
to suggest that there is a market for most vehicle firmware apart from the market for the 
vehicles themselves.1334  Most of opponents’ concerns, while significant, primarily relate 
to accessing entertainment works through vehicle entertainment systems and related 
subscription services, not to repairing more functional software installed to facilitate 
vehicle operation, which may require bypassing TPMs that incidentally protect 
entertainment systems.
1335  Further, the existing exemption is limited to diagnosis, repair, 
and lawful modification of a vehicle function.  In light of these concerns, the Acting 
Register concludes that this factor favors removing the limitation to telematics and 
entertainment ECUs, but only as needed to repair or lawfully modify a vehicle function.   
Finally, the statute also allows consideration of “such other factors as the Librarian 
considers appropriate.”
1336  Opponents raise concerns regarding vehicle safety, 
environmental impact, unauthorized access to private data, and compliance with 
regulations promulgated by other federal agencies.
1337  Proponents respond that these 
considerations do not relate to the copyright concerns that are the primary focus of this 
rulemaking.1338  Moreover, proponents suggest that the exemption will promote 
competition in the aftermarket and facilitate environmental responsibility.1339  Overall, 
this factor does not significantly affect the Acting Register’s calculus. 
Reviewing the totality of the evidence, the Acting Register concludes that proponents 
have established that the current prohibition against accessing telematics and 
entertainment ECUs is or is likely to adversely impact noninfringing repair, 
                                                      
1333 2015 Recommendation at 241. 
1334 See id. at 236. 
1335 Cf. EFF, Auto Care, Dorman, iFixit, SmarTeks & Repair.org Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 5–10 
(June 11, 2018) (comparing examples of schematics for older vehicles where telematics and 
infotainment systems were physically separate to modern, integrated systems). 
1336 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(v). 
1337 See Auto Alliance Class 7 Opp’n at 13–14; Harman Class 7 Opp’n at 3–4 (citing incident where 
Jeep was hacked to remotely control vehicle functions); Tr. at 74:20–75:23 (Apr. 25, 2018) 
(Mooney, Harman). 
1338 See Auto Care Class 7 Reply at 6; Consumers Union Class 7 Initial at 3 (acknowledging 
importance of product safety, data privacy and security); CTA Class 7 Reply at 4. 
1339 See, e.g., eBay Class 7 Reply at 2. 

[PAGE 219]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
216 
maintenance, and lawful modification of vehicle functions.  But this conclusion does not 
extend to circumvention undertaken to access works provided via a separate 
subscription service, such as SiriusXM, or via a drive directed at entertainment 
consumption, such as a DVD or Blu-ray player.1340 
ii. Other Devices 
While the rulemaking generally considers whether adverse effects have been 
demonstrated in reference to the statutory factors, as with the rest of this class, the 
spotty record and sprawling nature poses a challenge.  The Acting Register first analyzes 
whether, for each category of devices, the record reflects that the prohibition on 
circumvention is inhibiting the identified likely noninfringing uses.  Next, if there does 
seem to be an adverse effect, she considers those categories specifically in connection to 
the statutory factors.   
1) Device Categories 
Smartphones.  There was considerable testimony from repair services and concerned 
individuals suggesting that TPMs inhibit the restoration of smartphones to full 
functionality.1341  For example, when services repaired the iPhone home button on a 
device with touch ID, the phone would often receive an error message and become 
disabled.1342  Further, existing manufacturer repair channels may be inadequate.1343  
Opponents did not contest the specifics with respect to smartphones.  Further, as past 
rulemakings have recognized a need to engage in circumvention for purposes of 
unlocking and jailbreaking smartphones, and the testimony is that the circumstances 
that gave rise to those records have not materially changed, the Acting Register can look 
to those records regarding the applicability of TPMs.  The Acting Register will consider 
whether the prohibition is adversely affecting the repair of smartphones with reference 
to the statutory factors.   
                                                      
1340 Further, the record also suggests such services or devices are typically protected by separate 
TPMs, such as passwords or the AACS or CSS access controls.  See DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 7 
Opp’n at 4; Joint Creators Class 7 Opp’n at Ex. 1 (Bell Statement at 2). 
1341 See EFF, Auto Care, Dorman, iFixit, SmarTeks & Repair.org Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2 
(June 11, 2018); iFixit Class 7 Pet. at 2; Tr. at 13:19–14:24 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Zieminski, Puls); Tr. at 
32:12–35:12 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit; Zieminski, Puls). 
1342 See Tr. at 34:09–19 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Zieminski, Puls). 
1343 See Tr. at 98:07–21 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Zieminski, Puls) (commenting that “it would effectively 
take Apple 2.7 years just to catch up with the backlog in the United States to be able to [make all 
necessary repairs] if you relied strictly on Apple Geniuses”); Tr. at 33:19–35:12 (Apr. 25, 2018) 
(Zieminski, Puls) (stating that issue with iPhone home button took 2–3 years of complaints, blog 
posts, and class action). 

[PAGE 220]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
217 
Home appliances and home systems.  Proponents also testified that it is becoming difficult 
to repair many home appliances and systems, such as refrigerators or environmental 
controls systems, due to the prohibition on circumvention, and they anticipate that 
consumer requests to repair these appliances will increase as warranties on devices 
expire.1344  For example, proponents note that where a software-enabled appliance is 
synced to a Wi-Fi network, TPMs on security software may impede the owner’s ability 
to make repairs without circumvention.1345  In other cases, consumers may seek to 
circumvent TPMs on home appliances to turn off Wi-Fi functionality for security 
purposes.1346  Moreover, the Office has recognized that the increased integration of TPMprotected software into “everyday products,” and home appliances in particular, could 
undermine traditional expectations of ownership unless owners can freely repair those 
products.1347  The Acting Register will consider whether the prohibition is adversely 
affecting the repair of home appliances and home systems with reference to the 
statutory factors. 
Computers and computing peripherals.  In contrast, while it is self-evident that computing 
equipment can break and need to be repaired, it was not clear from the record that 
section 1201 is inhibiting such repairs.  Much of the record consisted only of equipment 
lists without explanation of whether TPMs are typically applied and, if so, how they 
might inhibit repair activities.  Without more information, it would not seem reasonable 
to infer that section 1201 is actually inhibiting the repair of everyday devices such as 
display monitors, faxes, keyboards, handsets, or other office equipment that have long 
been repaired without needing an exemption under copyright law.
1348  Other examples 
related more to modification, a broad concept that, as noted, the Acting Register is not 
                                                      
1344 See EFF Class 7 Pet at 2; iFixit Class 7 Pet. at 2 (suggesting everyday products “from lightbulbs 
to toothbrushes” and “smart refrigerators” contain software, and an exemption is necessary to 
preserve ownership rights); Tr. at 31:07–13 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit) (noting that the “typical 
warranty is 12 months” whereas “[t]he anticipated life span of an appliance would be in the ten -
year range”); Tr. at 13:21–22 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Zieminski, Puls) (commenting that Puls is beginning 
to expand its repair services to include smart home appliances). 
1345 See Tr. at 30:15–31:01 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit). 
1346 See Tr. at 73:21–74:01 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit); Tr. at 30:05–14 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Wiens, 
iFixit). 
1347 See Software Study at i–ii, 2, 8 (offering examples of software embedded in home appliances 
including microwaves, toasters, thermostats, and refrigerators and noting “the marketplace is 
changing; some would say radically”); see also Section 1201 Report at 88–90. 
1348 At the hearing, ORI and ASCDI testified that some repair servicers may be inhibited from 
identifying themselves.  Tr. at 85:23–86:05 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Band, ORI); Tr. at 96:07–97:16 (Apr. 10, 
2018) (Shore, ASCDI).  So long as the testimony is otherwise credible, the rulemaking has long 
considered anonymous statements.  See, e.g., Farmers Class 7 Initial at 21 (decl. of John Doe, 
Large-Scale Farmer). 

[PAGE 221]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
218 
able to conclude is likely to be noninfringing.1349  Finally, proponents raise an example of 
the WD Passport external hard drive series, asserting that “encryption . . . interferes with 
the owner’s ability to repair the hard drive if the controller malfunctions.”1350  But in the 
explanation, they also allege that there is “a TPM that fails to protect access to the 
firmware on the hard drive or the user’s files.”1351  It is thus unclear that the TPM is 
effectively controlling access to a work within the meaning of section 1201(a)(1).1352  
Further, in none of these examples do proponents address whether the asserted adverse 
effects are common to the broader category of devices or instead represent “individual 
cases” outside the scope of the rulemaking.1353  The Acting Register accordingly finds 
that the evidence relating to computers and ancillary devices is insufficient at this time 
to conclude that there are demonstrable adverse effects on noninfringing uses. 
Consumables.  In two brief sentences in EFF/ORI/ASCDI’s initial comments, with a 
smattering of follow-up, they also mention a handful of devices that use “consumable 
cartridges.”
1354  These examples generally consist of a reference to the relevant product 
category, together with a single news article for each category suggesting a possible 
manufacturer “lock-in” effect.
1355  This information is insufficient for a determination of 
whether TPMs are effectively controlling access to copyrighted software in those 
products.  In a case involving similar interoperability uses, the Sixth Circuit held that an 
authentication sequence preventing the use of third-party printer toner cartridges did 
not effectively control access to the printer software where the code could be read 
directly from the printer memory.1356  Moreover, for most of the examples briefly raised, 
including printer ink,1357 coffee1358, and juice,1359 it appears that the manufacturers have 
                                                      
1349 See EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 6 (Lenovo laptops and ST-Link 
debugger/programmer). 
1350 Id. 
1351 Id. 
1352 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201; Lexmark Int’l v. Static Control Components, Inc., 387 F.3d 522, 547 (6th Cir. 
2004) (“[J]ust as one would not say that a lock on any door of a house ‘controls access’ to the 
house after its purchaser receives the key to the lock, it does not make sense to say that this 
provision of the DMCA applies to otherwise-readily-accessible copyrighted works.”). 
1353 House Manager’s Report at 6. 
1354 EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 5–6. 
1355 Id.  While light bulb interoperability is addressed separately in the submission, it may 
implicate similar issues.  See id. at 3. 
1356 Lexmark, 387 F.3d at 546–47; see also Tr. at 44:23–45:02 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit) (discussing 
example of cat litter cleaning fluid cartridge and stating that the device “was very similar to what 
you see on the ink cartridge”); Tr. at 45:17–46:04 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Walsh, EFF). 
1357 See EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 6 & n.24 (referencing HP printer ink policies); Karl 
Bode, HP Issues Flimsy Mea Culpa For Recent Printer Cartridge DRM Idiocy, But It’s Not Enough, 

[PAGE 222]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
219 
removed or discontinued the use of TPMs or offered alternatives for consumers seeking 
to use interoperable components.  Meanwhile, section 1201(f) may cover many of these 
uses to the extent they seek to facilitate interoperability with a computer program.1360  
While the Copyright Office stands by its statement that “section 1201 was not intended 
to facilitate manufacturers’ use of TPMs to facilitate product tying,” to recommend an 
exemption, there must be a record that shows distinct, verifiable, and measureable 
adverse effects, or that such effects are likely to occur.
1361  Accordingly, on the current 
record, the Acting Register does not recommend expanding the exemption to specifically 
include consumables. 
Video game consoles.  Proponents suggest there is a need to circumvent access controls to 
engage in console repair and “not to expand the functionality of the device.”1362  
Specifically, they suggest that there is a need to repair the optical drive for the Xbox 360 
and PlayStation 4, which implicates section 1201 because “the drive is cryptographically 
paired to the main board.”1363  But the 2015 rulemaking considered this exact issue, 
concluding that “there are other methods of replacing a malfunctioning optical drive 
that do not require circumvention.”1364  Opponents suggest that “[t]he current record 
                                                                                                                                                              
TECHDIRT (Oct. 4, 2016), https://www.techdirt.com/articles/20161003/11423135692/hp-issuesflimsy-mea-culpa-recent-printer-cartridge-drm-idiocy-not-enough.shtml; Karl Bode, HP Brings 
Back Obnoxious DRM That Cripples Competing Printer Cartridges, TECHDIRT (Sept. 19, 2017) 
(https://www.techdirt.com/articles/20170914/11491238210/hp-brings-back-obnoxious-drm-thatcripples-competing-printer-cartridges.shtml (HP offering alternate firmware without TPMs). 
1358 EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 6 & n.25 (citing Julia Bluff, Repairman Takes Keurig to Task 
over Unfixable Machines, IFIXIT BLOG (Dec. 21, 2015) https://ifixit.org/blog/7668/unfixable-keurig/ 
(stating that Keurig is developing a recyclable pod)); Brian Barrett, Keurig’s My K-Cup Retreat 
Shows We Can Beat DRM, WIRED (May 8, 2015) https://www.wired.com/2015/05/keurig-k-cupdrm/ (Keurig reinstated re-usable coffee pod that accepts alternate inputs following customer 
complaints). 
1359 See EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 6 & n.26 (referencing Juicero product); Ashley 
Carman, Juicero, Maker of the Doomed $400 Internet-Connected Juicer, Is Shutting Down, THE VERGE 
(Sept. 1, 2017) https://www.theverge.com/2017/9/1/16243356/juicero-shut-down-lay-off-refund. 
1360 For a discussion of the scope of section 1201(f), see  Section 1201 Report at 15–16, 63–71. 
1361 Section 1201 Report at 92, 120. 
1362 Tr. at 17:02–16 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit). 
1363 EFF, Auto Care, Dorman, iFixit, SmarTeks & Repair.org Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 4 (June 
11, 2018). 
1364 2015 Recommendation at 196–97; 200–01. 

[PAGE 223]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
220 
included even less evidence and fewer arguments attempting to support the inclusion of 
consoles in any repair exemption.”1365 
Indeed, the record again suggests that in many cases, manufacturer repair services will 
be widely available and adequate.1366  Proponents suggest that manufacturer warranties 
and repair services are inadequate because of high costs, repair wait times, and the 
possibility of losing user-saved game data when a manufacturer replaces, rather than 
repairs, a console.
1367  Opponents, on the other hand, state that the major manufacturers 
continue to offer warranties and low-cost options for out-of-warranty repairs, which 
they characterize as fast, reliable, and well-rated by customers.1368  Opponents also 
caution that once TPMs are circumvented by an independent service, it is questionable 
whether they could be restored.1369  Because of this, opponents argue that it would be 
difficult for a user to “repair” or perform “maintenance” on a console in a manner 
consistent with how those terms are defined in section 117(d).1370 
At bottom, the record reflects similar facts to the 2015 rulemaking, which concluded that 
proponents had failed to demonstrate a showing of adverse effects, and so the Acting 
Register reaches the same conclusion here. 
Other devices.  Proponents offer specific examples of modification of a few other devices, 
including a robotic dog, a camera gimbal, and handheld two-way radios.
1371  But as 
discussed above, as an overall matter, the Acting Register cannot conclude that 
“modification” is likely to be noninfringing.  Moreover, proponents fail to address 
whether the asserted adverse effects concerning these devices apply to the broader 
category of devices of which they are a part, or instead represent “individual cases,” in 
which case they are outside the scope of the rulemaking.1372  Thus, the Acting Register 
finds that the evidence relating to these devices is insufficient at this time to adequately 
identify and evaluate any asserted adverse effects on noninfringing uses. 
                                                      
1365 Joint Creators II Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2 n.3 (June 11, 2018). 
1366 Cf. 2015 Recommendation at 200–01. 
1367 See EFF Class 7 Reply at 4–5; Tr. at 10:01–11:08 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Miranda, SmarTeks); Tr. at 
19:02–20:13 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit). 
1368 Joint Creators II Post-Hearing Resp. at 2 n.3. 
1369 See ESA Class 7 Opp’n at 5 (circumvention could result in a console being “unable to run 
properly licensed content.”); Tr. at 20:16–23:10 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II). 
1370 Tr. at 21:26–23:10 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II). 
1371 See EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 3–5; EFF Class 7 Reply at 5. 
1372 House Manager’s Report at 6. 

[PAGE 224]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
221 
2) Statutory Factors 
Having isolated potential adverse effects to the categories of repair of home appliances 
and smartphones, the following analysis considers these categories in reference to the 
statutory factors.  The first statutory factor favors an exemption, as the proposed uses 
extend the useful life of the devices by facilitating repair and restoration of device 
functionality.  The record demonstrates there are times where manufacturer-authorized 
repair channels are insufficient to address widespread consumer problems in a timely 
manner or to address the issue at all, and also suggests that circumvention is necessary 
to engage in activities of self-repair.
1373 
Regarding the second and third factors, proponents suggest that the exemption would 
allow for some of the additional uses outlined in the statute, such as enabling “hands-on 
learning.”1374  Opponents respond that the proposed uses are unrelated to archival, 
preservation, or educational purposes, or to criticism and commentary.1375  To some 
extent, the record shows that consumers and independent repair services rely on shared 
observations about device malfunctions.1376  The Acting Register finds these factors 
weigh slightly in favor of a determination that TPMs have an adverse effect on the 
proposed uses. 
For the fourth factor, the effect on the value for copyrighted works, proponents reiterate 
their position that because device firmware does not have value independent from a 
device, there is no cognizable impact on the market.1377  Opponents largely do not object 
to expanding the exemption to allow circumvention to repair home appliances, though 
they do express concern about modification of any devices where expressive works are 
implicated.1378  Opponents also stress the potential harm from “depriving copyright 
owners of the exclusive right to modify their software.”1379  But as noted above when 
discussing infringement, the purpose of diagnosis and repair is to restore the intended 
functionality of the device, and not to modify expressive works.  There is little in the 
record to suggest that engaging in these activities will negatively affect the value of 
                                                      
1373 See Tr. at 73:21–74:01 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit); Tr. at 98:07–21 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Zieminski, 
Puls). 
1374 EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 12. 
1375 See Joint Creators II Class 7 Opp’n at 11. 
1376 See Tr. at 97:23–98:21 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Zieminski, Puls) (noting the need to widely disseminate 
repair information to effectuate timely repairs by independent servicers). 
1377 See EFF, ORI & ASCDI Class 7 Initial at 10, 13. 
1378 See Tr. at 90:06–18 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II). 
1379 Joint Creators II Class 7 Initial at 10. 

[PAGE 225]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
222 
copyrighted works.  For these reasons, the fourth factor favors exemption with regard to 
diagnosis and repair of home appliances and smartphones. 
The Acting Register does not find any additional factors material to the determination of 
adverse effects. 
After weighing the statutory factors, the Acting Register concludes that the prohibition 
on circumvention of TPMs is causing, or is likely to cause, an adverse impact on the 
noninfringing diagnosis, maintenance, and repair of home appliances and smartphones.  
The Acting Register cannot conclude that, based on the record, proponents have 
demonstrated an actual or likely adverse effect on any other activities with respect to 
expansion to other devices.  Simply put, the available record is too thin. 
f. Third-Party Assistance 
As noted, several proponents requested that the exemption specifically permit third 
parties, such as repair services, to assist owners in carrying out the authorized activities.  
The anti-trafficking provisions in sections 1201(a)(2) and (b) make it unlawful to “offer to 
the public, provide, or otherwise traffic in any . . . service . . . or part thereof” that is 
primarily designed for the purpose of circumvention, has only limited commercially 
significant purpose other than circumvention, or is marketed for use in 
circumvention.
1380  As the Office has previously noted, these provisions provide 
important benefits to the copyright system, including “prevent[ing] the development of 
mainstream business models based around the production and sale of circumvention 
tools.”1381  The Librarian is not authorized to adopt exemptions to the anti-trafficking 
provisions.  In the 2015 rulemaking, the Office declined to recommend an exemption 
expressly permitting vehicle repair or modification “on behalf of” the vehicle owner, 
concluding that such a provision could implicate the prohibition on circumvention 
“service[s].”
1382 
In the Section 1201 Report, the Office considered the issue of third-party assistance in 
light of persisting concerns that “ordinary consumers often lack the skills or technical 
knowledge to circumvent independently.”
1383  The Office concluded that there is 
“substantial uncertainty as to whether there are types of third-party assistance that 
would fall outside the reach of the ‘service’ bar.”1384  To address the frustration of users 
who are eligible to benefit from an exemption, but who may not have the tools or skills 
                                                      
1380 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(2), (b)(1). 
1381 Section 1201 Report at 56. 
1382 2015 Recommendation at 246–47. 
1383 Section 1201 Report at 56. 
1384 Id. at 59. 

[PAGE 226]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
223 
to circumvent TPMs, the Office said that in future rulemakings it would “seek to avoid 
recommending unduly narrow definitions of exemption beneficiaries.”1385  The Office 
observed that this approach would appear to be consistent with section 1201(a)(1)(C)’s 
reference to permitting “users of a copyrighted work” to engage in circumvention, as 
opposed to “owners” of a work.1386  The Office cautioned, however, that it “cannot 
affirmatively recommend exemption language that is likely to be read to authorize 
unlawful trafficking activity.”
1387  In addition, the Office noted that the question of 
whether certain forms of third-party assistance may fall outside the trafficking 
prohibition was both “untested [in the courts] and outside the scope of the 
rulemaking.”
1388 
In this context, proponents urge the Office to refine the language of the exemption to 
permit third-party assistance.  Farmers petition the Office to expressly include language 
permitting third-party assistance for agricultural equipment.
1389  Others argue that the 
reference to “users” in section 1201(a)(1) already contemplates third-party assistance 
and should be interpreted broadly.1390  In proponents’ view, the increased integration of 
software has added a layer of complexity to functional repairs such that many vehicle 
and device owners would not be able to take advantage of the exemption without thirdparty assistance.
1391 
In its opposition to exempting third-party assistance for vehicle repair, the Auto Alliance 
states that the Office is not authorized by statute to enable “services” because it would 
impermissibly expand the exemption to activity that would constitute unlawful 
trafficking.
1392  Others offer similar objections.1393  Specifically, Joint Creators II argue that 
to the extent the services provided by a repair business always require circumvention, its 
activities are likely to constitute unlawful trafficking.1394 
                                                      
1385 Id. at 62. 
1386 Id. at 61 n.335. 
1387 Id. at 61–62. 
1388 Id. at 62. 
1389 Farmers Class 7 Initial at 6. 
1390 See, e.g., Auto Care Class 7 Initial at 2–3; Consumers Union Class 7 Initial at 3; CTA Class 7 
Initial at 2; EFF Class 7 Pet. at 3; iFixit Class 7 Pet. at 2; MEMA Class 7 Initial at 6. 
1391 See, e.g., eBay Class 7 Reply at 2, 4; Farmers Class 7 Initial at 7–8; MEMA Class 7 Reply at 4. 
1392 Auto Alliance Class 7 Opp’n at 7–9. 
1393 See, e.g., Harman Class 7 Opp’n at 4; Joint Creators II Class 7 Opp’n at 12; Tr. at 19:02–07 (Apr. 
10, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II). 
1394 Tr. at 100:05–103:01 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II). 

[PAGE 227]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
224 
Proponents respond that third-party repair services are not primarily designed or 
marketed for the purpose of circumvention; rather circumvention of TPMs is merely 
ancillary to those services.1395  Proponents distinguish third-party assistance specifically 
in service of noninfringing activity from trafficking, which facilitates infringement.1396  
They further argue that third-party assistance is implicit in the statute, and that no 
negative inference should be taken from Congress’s adoption of the Unlocking Act, 
which expressly authorizes circumvention at the direction of the device owner in the 
context of cellphones.
1397 
The parties also disagree as to whether section 117 provides a basis for allowing thirdparty assistance.  Proponents point out that section 117 allows the owner of a copy of a 
program to “authorize” the making of a copy or adaption of the program for purposes of 
maintenance or repair.
1398  Opponents, however, respond that “a defense to copyright 
infringement is not a defense to a section 1201 violation,” and thus section 117 cannot 
justify an exemption “likely to encourage trafficking under [section] 1201(a)(2).”1399 
In light of these competing statutory interpretations, and for the reasons discussed in the 
Section 1201 Report, the Acting Register recommends removing the current exemption 
language requiring that circumvention be “undertaken by the authorized owner.”  
While the statutory language is far from clear, and the courts have yet to address this 
issue, there is at least a plausible argument that some forms of third-party assistance 
involving circumvention will not rise to the level of a prohibited “service” in all 
instances.
1400  Indeed, as Joint Creators II appear to acknowledge,1401 a contrary reading 
would seem to render superfluous the criteria in section 1201(a)(2)(A) through (C), 
which bar only those services that are “primarily designed” for the purpose of 
circumventing, that have “only a limited commercially significant purpose or use” 
beyond circumvention, or that are marketed for use in circumventing.
1402  Moreover, as 
noted in the Section 1201 Report, the statutory directive to consider possible adverse 
effects on “users of a copyrighted work” arguably suggests that, in at least some cases, a 
                                                      
1395 See Tr. at 91:23–92:04 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Walsh, EFF); Tr. at 13:17–18 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Band, ORI). 
1396 See Tr. at 90:20–25 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Walsh, EFF); Tr. at 26:24–29:01 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Band, ORI). 
1397 Tr. at 106:08–20 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Walsh, EFF); see Unlocking Act § 2(c), 128 Stat. at 1751–52; see 
also 2015 Recommendation at 247; Section 1201 Report at 59–62 (both discussing provision). 
1398 17 U.S.C. § 117(c); see MEMA Class 7 Reply at 2–3; Tr. at 39:11–24 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Band, ORI). 
1399 Tr. at 40:06–14 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II). 
1400 See 1201 Report at 59 (concluding that there is “substantial uncertainty” on this issue).  
1401 Tr. at 19:15–20:12 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II). 
1402 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(2)(A)–(C). 

[PAGE 228]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
225 
party other than the owner of a copy of a work may be within the class of persons 
covered by an exemption.1403 
To be clear, removal of the “authorized owner” language should in no way be 
understood to suggest that the exemption extends to conduct prohibited by the antitrafficking provisions; such an exemption is beyond the Librarian’s authority to adopt.  
Nor is the Acting Register expressing a view as to whether particular examples of 
assistance do or do not constitute unlawful circumvention services.  Specifically, the 
Acting Register expresses no opinion on whether vehicle or other repair services may 
run afoul of the anti-trafficking provisions when engaging in circumvention on behalf of 
customers.  The recommended revision simply accounts for the possibility that certain 
third parties may qualify as “user[s]” eligible for an exemption from liability under 
section 1201(a)(1).  Such parties still will be required to consider whether their activities 
could separately give rise to liability under section 1201(a)(2) or (b).  Given the legal 
uncertainty in this area, services electing to proceed with circumvention activity 
pursuant to the exemption do so at their peril.   
g. Circumvention Tools 
In the Section 1201 Report, the Office concluded that “beneficiaries should be able to 
make necessary tools solely for their own use in carrying out exempted circumventions,” 
and indeed are entitled to do so for “purposes of self-help” under the current statutory 
language.1404  However, the Office noted that current law does not permit the 
distribution of such tools and did not recommend that Congress allow this activity 
because “it would be impossible to control downstream uses” for unauthorized or 
unlawful circumvention.1405 
A number of petitioners in this rulemaking ask the Office to adopt a more expansive 
view that would allow exemption beneficiaries, including third parties, to not only make 
tools, but also to distribute them.
1406  Other proposals focused on the acquisition and use 
                                                      
1403 Id. § 1201(a)(1)(C) (emphasis added); see 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(2) (2016). 
1404 Section 1201 Report at 53–54. 
1405 Id. at 56. 
1406 See, e,g., Auto Care & CTA Class 7 Pet. at 3 (petitioning to allow “companies with expertise in 
software to develop and make circumvention and repair solutions available to servicers and 
consumers”); FSF Class 7 Initial at 2 (“exemption should extend . . . further to the sharing of tools 
that enable users to repair their devices”). 

[PAGE 229]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
226 
of circumvention tools.1407  Opponents object that these proposals are unjustified by the 
record and would violate the anti-trafficking provisions.1408 
As discussed in the Section 1201 Report, the Acting Register recognizes that the 
acquisition and use of tools often is necessary for beneficiaries to circumvent TPMs, and 
the 2015 regulatory exemption language would seem to already encompass that 
activity.1409  The distribution of such tools, however, is prohibited by the trafficking 
provisions, and, as noted, the Librarian is not authorized to grant exemptions to those 
provisions.  Moreover, there are sound policy reasons why such exemptions are not 
permitted.  In the Section 1201 Report, the Office recommended against a legislative 
change that would permit the distribution of such tools to exemption beneficiaries, 
concluding that “it would be impossible to control the downstream uses of any 
circumvention tools once distributed, even if they were produced with the intent that 
they be used only to assist authorized circumvention.”1410  Accordingly, the Acting 
Register does not recommend additional language exempting the dissemination or 
distribution of tools. 
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA, like the Acting Register, grouped the various expansion proposals into four 
categories:  software-enabled devices; telematics and entertainment systems; third 
parties; and distribution and sale of circumvention tools. 
Software-Enabled Devices.  NTIA supports expanding the exemption to a “new definable 
sub-class” of home appliances and mobile handsets (such as cell phones) “when 
circumvention is a necessary step to allow the diagnosis, repair or lawful modification of 
a device function.”1411  NTIA concludes that these are noninfringing fair uses, in part 
because “diagnosis is a critical component of repairing a device” and subsequent 
modification of devices is transformative.1412  In winnowing the scope of proposed 
devices to home appliances and handsets, NTIA relies on the “strength of the record for 
these devices.”1413  For home appliances, NTIA cites evidence that “appliance companies 
are installing various security measures that prevent repair” and that circumvention is 
                                                      
1407 See, e.g., Farmers Class 7 Initial at 6. 
1408 See Auto Alliance Class 7 Opp’n at 4–7; Joint Creators II Class 7 Opp’n at 5, 12; Tr. at 18:16–
19:07 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II). 
1409 See Section 1201 Report at 52–56; see also CTA Class 7 Initial at 2–3; Farmers Class 7 Initial at 
10; Tr. at 32:02–15 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Lowe, Auto Care). 
1410 Section 1201 Report at 56. 
1411 NTIA Letter at 50, 52. 
1412 Id. at 51. 
1413 Id. 

[PAGE 230]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
227 
necessary to “update and secure the device” when the manufacturer has ceased 
providing security updates.1414  For handsets, NTIA points to record support for 
replacing cell phone batteries and modifying two-way radio functionality.1415  NTIA 
further observes that any infringement concerns are “ameliorated as [home appliances 
and handsets] . . . do not include media playback of copyrighted works as their primary 
function.”1416 
The Acting Register largely concurs with NTIA’s support for expanding the exemption 
to allow users to diagnose and repair smartphones and home appliances.  But, as noted 
above, the Acting Register finds that “modification” has not been defined with sufficient 
precision in this rulemaking to conclude as a general matter that it is likely to be 
noninfringing.  Accordingly, the Acting Register declines to recommend an exemption 
that would allow modification of devices, including two-way radio functionality.  
Further, as noted below, the Acting Register recommends additional regulatory 
language defining “repair” in accordance with section 117. 
Telematics and Entertainment Systems.  NTIA supports expanding the existing exemption 
to allow “use of telematics data for diagnostic purposes.”1417  NTIA found persuasive the 
more developed record in this rulemaking, including testimony that “critical diagnostic 
information is increasingly inaccessible through the ‘on-board diagnostics’ (OBD) port” 
and that there is now “a trend toward diagnostic information being located in the 
telematics module.”1418  NTIA recommends, however, “limiting use to obtaining the 
diagnostic data from the telematics module for purposes of repair and modification of the 
vehicle, and not repair or modification to the module itself.”1419  As to vehicle 
entertainment systems, NTIA “continues to have reservations about the strength of [the] 
record and the potential for infringement” and does not recommend an expansion to 
permit access for the proposed uses, including “storage capacity.”
1420 
Like NTIA, the Acting Register is unpersuaded by the proposed use of entertainment 
systems’ storage capacity for noninfringing purposes.  As outlined above, however, the 
record demonstrates that incidental access to vehicle entertainment systems may be 
necessary to diagnose, repair, or lawfully modify vehicle functions.  The Acting Register 
therefore concludes that a narrow expansion permitting such incidental access is 
                                                      
1414 Id. 
1415 Id. 
1416 Id. at 52. 
1417 Id. at 53. 
1418 Id. 
1419 Id. at 53–54. 
1420 Id. at 54. 

[PAGE 231]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
228 
appropriate, provided that the exemption includes adequate safeguards—in particular, a 
requirement that circumvention not be accomplished for the purpose of gaining 
unauthorized access to other copyrighted works. 
Third Parties.  NTIA recommends removing the current exemption’s reference to “the 
authorized owner of the vehicle”—a change that it characterizes as “extending the 
current exemption to allow circumvention by third-party service providers to diagnose, 
repair and modify software-enabled vehicles on behalf of owners.”
1421  Acknowledging 
the challenges posed by “increasingly complex” vehicle systems, NTIA comments that 
vehicle owners “risk losing the freedom to diagnos[e], repair, and modify their vehicles 
without this expansion.”1422  NTIA “does not believe that the proposed exemption will 
violate the anti-trafficking provisions [of the DMCA],” concluding instead that it “will 
allow vehicle owners to receive the necessary assistance to exercise ownership rights 
that [the] DMCA intended to leave intact.”1423  Although the Acting Register concurs 
with NTIA’s recommendation to eliminate regulatory language requiring that 
circumvention be undertaken by the authorized owner, as noted above, she expresses no 
view on whether particular activities may or may not implicate the anti-trafficking 
provisions.  To reiterate, those provisions are unaffected by the exemption. 
Distribution and Sale of Circumvention Tools.  NTIA agrees with the Acting Register’s 
recommendation to deny the proposals to “permit third-party commercialization of 
software repair tools for vehicles in this class,” concluding that such activity is “likely to 
constitute trafficking.”
1424  NTIA comments that although activities that constitute 
“personal use” of circumvention tools may be permitted, “distribution of the same 
tools,” including “marketing and sale of tools,” “may violate the DMCA’s antitrafficking provisions.”
1425 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
After thorough consideration, the Acting Register recommends expanding the current 
exemption in areas where there is sufficient record support for such a change, while 
retaining language to ensure that both the class of works and the permitted uses are 
appropriately defined.  As a result, the Acting Register is recommending two separate 
exemptions, one related to motorized land vehicles, and one related to the repair and 
maintenance of additional categories of devices. 
                                                      
1421 Id. at 60. 
1422 Id. at 55. 
1423 Id. at 58 & n.298 (citing Section 1201 Study at 54). 
1424 Id. at 60–61. 
1425 Id. at 61. 

[PAGE 232]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
229 
Regarding motor vehicles, first, the recommended exemption removes the requirement 
that circumvention be “undertaken by the authorized owner” of the vehicle or device, 
instead recommending that it apply where such items are “lawfully acquired.”  This 
change responds to proponents’ concerns that the language of the existing exemption 
improperly excludes other users with a legitimate interest in engaging in noninfringing 
diagnosis, repair, or modification activities.  As discussed above, in recommending this 
change, the Acting Register expresses no view on whether particular activities might 
constitute prohibited “service[s]” under section 1201(a)(2) and (b). 
Second, the Acting Register recommends removing the language excluding access to 
computer programs designed for the control of telematics or entertainment systems.  
The Acting Register is persuaded that, due to increasing integration of vehicle computer 
systems since the 2015 rulemaking, retaining this limitation may impede noninfringing 
uses that can only be accomplished by accessing these systems.  Nonetheless, the Acting 
Register takes seriously opponents’ concerns about unauthorized access to expressive 
works through subscription services unrelated to vehicle functioning, and accordingly 
the recommended exemption specifically excludes access to “programs accessed 
through a separate subscription service.”  Further, while the broadened exemption 
permits incidental access to a vehicle infotainment system, it provides that such access is 
allowed only to the extent it is “a necessary step to allow the diagnosis, repair, or lawful 
modification of a vehicle function.”  Because the Acting Register finds that the record is 
insufficiently developed to support expanding the exemption to permit diagnosis, 
repair, or lawful modification of the telematics and infotainment systems themselves, 
the regulatory language does not extend to those activities.  To further underscore that 
the exemption does not authorize circumvention for purposes going beyond those 
specified, it includes the additional requirement that circumvention may not be 
“accomplished for the purpose of gaining unauthorized access to other copyrighted 
works.”  This language ensures that the exemption cannot be used as a shield for piracy 
in the guise of vehicle repair.   
Next, the Acting Register recommends a new exemption allowing for the circumvention 
of TPMs restricting access to firmware that controls smartphones, and firmware that 
controls home appliances and home systems, for the purposes of diagnosis, 
maintenance, or repair.  In doing so, the Acting Register adopts section 117’s definitions 
of “maintenance” and “repair.”
1426  Here again, the recommended text includes the 
condition that circumvention not be “accomplished for the purpose of gaining 
unauthorized access to other copyrighted works.” 
                                                      
1426 17 U.S.C. § 117(d); see Joint Creators Class 7 Opp’n at 5 (suggesting that the statutory 
definition of “repair” be incorporated into any exemption). 

[PAGE 233]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
230 
Accordingly, the Acting Register recommends that the Librarian designate the following 
classes: 
(1) Computer programs that are contained in and control the functioning of a 
lawfully acquired motorized land vehicle such as a personal automobile, 
commercial vehicle, or mechanized agricultural vehicle, except for programs 
accessed through a separate subscription service, when circumvention is a 
necessary step to allow the diagnosis, repair, or lawful modification of a 
vehicle function, where such circumvention does not constitute a violation of 
applicable law, including without limitation regulations promulgated by the 
Department of Transportation or the Environmental Protection Agency, and is 
not accomplished for the purpose of gaining unauthorized access to other 
copyrighted works. 
(2) Computer programs that are contained in and control the functioning of a 
lawfully acquired smartphone or home appliance or home system, such as a 
refrigerator, thermostat, HVAC, or electrical system, when circumvention is a 
necessary step to allow the diagnosis, maintenance, or repair of such a device 
or system, and is not accomplished for the purpose of gaining access to other 
copyrighted works.  For purposes of this paragraph (b)(10): 
(i) The “maintenance” of a device or system is the servicing of 
the device or system in order to make it work in accordance with 
its original specifications and any changes to those 
specifications authorized for that device or system; and 
(ii) The “repair” of a device or system is the restoring of the 
device or system to the state of working in accordance with its 
original specifications and any changes to those specifications 
authorized for that device or system. 
H. Proposed Class 9: Computer Programs—Software P reservation 
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption 
Proposed Class 9 seeks to address concerns that TPMs applied to computer programs 
can interfere with legitimate preservation activities.  The Software Preservation Network 
(“SPN”) and the LCA filed a petition that would allow “libraries, archives, museums, 
and other cultural heritage institutions” to circumvent TPMs on “lawfully acquired 
software for the purposes of preserving software and software-dependent materials.”
1427  
                                                      
1427 SPN & LCA Class 9 Pet. at 2.   

[PAGE 234]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
231 
Because the issues in this class are relevant to the analysis in Proposed Class 8, which 
pertains specifically to video games, the Acting Register addresses this class first. 
SPN and LCA explained that their proposed exemption is intended to enable cultural 
heritage institutions to preserve both TPM-protected computer programs as well as 
“dependent” materials—“writings, calculations, software programs, etc.” stored in 
digital formats that are inaccessible without running the underlying program.1428  SPN 
and LCA proposed that the exemption define “computer program” as “any device 
program or application that:  (1) allows a user to interact with a device, (2) allows other 
programs or applications to complete instructed tasks, and/or (3) otherwise allows the 
device to function.”1429  They proposed defining “computer program-dependent 
materials” to include “all digital file formats where accessibility depends on a software 
program.”1430   
In response to concerns raised by opponents that the initial proposal was overbroad, 
SPN and LCA in their reply comments proposed narrower regulatory language.  This 
updated proposal defines “computer program” in accordance with section 101 and 
limits the proposed class of works to computer programs no longer reasonably available 
in the commercial marketplace.  Thus, SPN and LCA’s current proposed language is as 
follows: 
1) Computer programs that have been lawfully acquired and which are 
no longer reasonably available in the commercial marketplace, for the 
purpose of preserving a computer program and/or a computer 
program-dependent material when a technological protection 
measure of a computer program renders either the computer program 
or computer program-dependent material inaccessible;  
a) Provided that such activity is undertaken by an eligible library, 
archive, museum, or other cultural heritage institution, where 
such activities are carried out without any purpose of direct or 
indirect commercial advantage and the computer program is not 
distributed or made available to the public outside of the premises 
of eligible institutions.   
2) For the purposes of the exemption in paragraph (1), the following 
definitions shall apply:  
                                                      
1428 SPN & LCA Class 9 Initial at 4. 
1429 Id. 
1430 Id. 

[PAGE 235]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
232 
a)  A “computer program” is a set of statements or instructions to 
be used directly or indirectly in a computer in order to bring 
about a certain result.   
b)  “Computer program-dependent material” refers to a digital file 
where accessibility requires a computer program.  
c)  A library, archive, museum, or other cultural heritage 
institution is considered “eligible” when it meets criteria laid out 
in 17 U.S.C. § 108(a)(2):  that the institution is (i) open to the 
public, or (ii) available not only to researchers affiliated with the 
library or archives or with the institution of which it is a part, but 
also to other persons doing research in a specialized field.
1431 
Additional comments in support of the petition were filed by FSF, Andrew Berger, Nick 
Montfort, and Edward Salas.  Comments in opposition were filed by ACT, Joint Creators 
II, ESA, the Software and Information Industry Association (“SIIA”), DVD CCA and 
AACS LA, and BSA.  After SPN and LCA submitted their narrowed proposal, however, 
ACT participated in the hearing as a supporter of the exemption, though its 
representative expressed some disagreement regarding the proposed language.1432  
b. Overview of Issues 
Proponents assert that the requested exemption is necessary because many cultural 
heritage institutions have collections of historically or culturally significant computer 
programs that they are unable to properly preserve due to various TPMs preventing 
access.1433  This in turn thwarts the preservation of numerous digital files that were 
created using the TPM-protected program and that require that program for access.  
Proponents contend that this lack of access not only prevents valuable research in a 
variety of fields, but also could lead to the permanent loss of important portions of the 
recent historical record, as many of these materials are stored in obsolete, fragile, or 
deteriorating formats.
1434 
According to proponents, institutions typically encounter these TPMs in attempting to 
create or access preservation copies of computer programs stored in older media 
formats.  They note that current best practices for digital preservation “are universally 
predicated on data migration, which means the transfer of data from fragile, historical 
media to the robust technical systems that have been designed for digital 
                                                      
1431 SPN & LCA Class 9 Reply at 18. 
1432 See Tr. at 190:24–193:12 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Zuck, ACT). 
1433 See SPN & LCA Class 9 Initial at 6–9.   
1434 See id. 

[PAGE 236]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
233 
preservation.”1435  In some cases, a TPM prevents the copying of the program from its 
original media to the institution’s computer system.1436  In other cases, preservationists 
are able to migrate the program data to their system, but access controls on the program 
prevent them from running the new copy.1437  As a result, they can neither verify the 
validity of that copy nor make it available for research purposes.1438  This renders 
preservation effectively “a meaningless activity.”1439 
Proponents identify several types of TPMs that they believe inhibit their efforts.  These 
include (1) product keys, which are “‘unique, alpha-numeric code[s]’ that are required to 
be entered upon installation of computer software”; (2) passwords; (3) online 
authentication; (4) bad sector copy protection, which “protects against copying by 
rendering some portions of the storage media unreadable when copied”; (5) time 
restrictions preventing software from running after expiration of a subscription; (6) CDchecks preventing software from installing or running unless the disc is in the computer; 
and (7) dongles, “a form of hardware, such as a USB stick, that must be inserted into the 
computer to run software.”1440 
                                                      
1435 Id. at 29 (statement of Henry Lowood, Stanford Univ.). 
1436 See id. at 26 (statement of Heath Reinhard, Living Computs. Museum + Labs.) (“[M]any of the 
software titles we would like to preserve and exhibit have some form or another of copy 
protection that does not allow us to legally make copies.”); Berger Class 9 Reply at 6 (stating that 
TPMs prevent “[t]he act of copying data from physical media, when the TPM is designed to 
prevent making copies”); Tr. at 173:07–11 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Lowood, Stanford Univ.). 
1437 See Berger Class 9 Reply at 6. 
1438 See id. at 2; Tr. at 173:12–17 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Lowood, Stanford Univ.). 
1439 SPN & LCA Class 9 Initial at 29 (statement of Henry Lowood, Stanford Univ.); see also SPN & 
LCA Class 9 Initial at 3. 
1440 SPN & LCA Class 9 Initial at 5–6 (citation omitted).  The Register has previously concluded 
that obsolete operating systems and obsolete hardware are not TPMs within the meaning of 
section 1201.  See 2006 Recommendation at 30–33.  In other words, where a computer program is 
inaccessible simply because the operating system or hardware on which it was designed to run is 
no longer available, and the program is incompatible with newer systems or hardware, the 
obsolete system or hardware does not constitute a “technological measure that effectively 
controls access to” the program.  17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1).  Therefore, gaining access to such a 
program would not require an exemption.  By contrast, the current proposed class involves 
programs that are inaccessible because of TPMs that were affirmatively put in place, typically at 
the time the programs were made.  Further, while opponents suggest that proponents are 
encountering not access controls but copy controls, the circumvention of which is not barred by 
section 1201(a)(1), see SIIA Class 9 Opp’n at 4 & n.8; Tr. at 246:16–25 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Williams, 
Joint Creators II), the record establishes that at least some of the TPMs referred to by proponen ts 
do qualify as access controls. 

[PAGE 237]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
234 
Although proposed Class 9 would constitute a new exemption, proponents note that the 
Register recommended, and the Librarian granted, exemptions for software preservation 
in 2003 and 2006.1441  Those exemptions allowed circumvention of access controls on 
“[c]omputer programs and video games distributed in formats that have become 
obsolete” and that “require the original media or hardware as a condition of access.”1442  
“Obsolete” formats were defined largely in accordance with 17 U.S.C. § 108(c); a format 
was considered obsolete “if the machine or system necessary to render perceptible a 
work stored in that format is no longer manufactured or is no longer reasonably 
available in the commercial marketplace.”1443  The 2006 exemption included the 
additional condition that the circumvention be “accomplished for the purpose of 
preservation or archival reproduction of published digital works by a library or 
archive.”1444  Proponents describe their proposal as “a continuation of the digital 
preservation effort that the Copyright Office and the Librarian had recognized” in 
adopting those exemptions.1445 
Opponents contend that the proposal is overbroad in several respects.  First, they argue 
that the exemption would improperly allow circumvention for activities beyond those 
provided for in the section 108 exceptions for libraries and archives.  They note that the 
2003 and 2006 exemptions were limited to programs stored in obsolete formats— works 
that section 108(c) specifically allows libraries and archives to copy for replacement 
purposes.1446  Second, opponents object that the term “computer program-dependent 
materials” might be read to sweep in any category of copyrightable work.1447  Third, 
Joint Creators II and SIIA object to including “other cultural heritage institutions” within 
the class of beneficiaries—a term th at they note is undefined.
1448  Finally, ESA and DVD 
CCA/AACS LA request that any exemption exclude particular types of programs (video 
                                                      
1441 SPN & LCA Class 9 Initial at 3. 
1442 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(2) (2007); id. § 201.40(b)(3) (2004). 
1443 Id. § 201.40(b)(2) (2007); id. § 201.40(b)(3) (2004).   
1444 Id. § 201.40(b)(2) (2007).  The proponents of these exemptions did not seek their readoption in 
subsequent rulemakings. 
1445 SPN & LCA Class 9 Initial at 3. 
1446 ACT Class 9 Opp’n at 3 (“The Copyright Office should again follow the guidance of section 
108 and limit the proposed exemption to obsolete software.”); BSA Opp’n at 3 (“[O]nly Section 
108 provides a solid basis for such non-infringing uses, and it provides such a basis only with 
respect to works distributed in obsolete formats, including computer programs not reasonably 
available in the commercial marketplace.”); Joint Creators II Class 9 Opp’n at 4–5  ( “A s  t h e  
Register has done in prior cycles, she should use the current § 108 as a guideline to assess 
whether the uses at issue are noninfringing.”). 
1447 ESA Class 9 Opp’n at 2–3; Joint Creators Class 9 Opp’n at 3–4; SIIA Class 9 Opp’n at 3. 
1448 Joint Creators Class 9 Opp’n at 3 n.2; SIIA Class 9 Opp’n at 3. 

[PAGE 238]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
235 
games and CSS and AACS technologies, respectively).1449  Notwithstanding these 
concerns, a number of opponents indicate that they would not object to a more narrowly 
tailored exemption for software preservation.1450 
With respect to video games specifically, ESA contends that this proposed class would 
overlap with the existing video game exemption, which enables eligible libraries, 
archives, and museums to preserve games for which external server support has been 
discontinued.
1451  It argues that SPN and LCA’s proposal would effectively expand that 
exemption.1452  In ESA’s view, it would be “needlessly confusing” for video game 
preservation to be “governed by two separate exemptions targeting the same uses with 
two different sets of rules.”1453 
SPN and LCA filed reply comments stating that they are “willing to narrow their initial 
proposal to assuage some of the concerns of opponents,” specifically, by limiting the 
exemption to programs that are no longer reasonably available in the commercial 
marketplace.1454  As to the other objections, however, SPN and LCA respond that “the 
proposed limitations suggested by opponents are far too narrow to accommodate 
pressing needs for software preservation.”1455  Regarding video games, they note that the 
current preservation exemption is limited to games that require an external server for 
access, while this proposal addresses a separate need for preservation of non-serverbased games. 
2. Discussion 
a. Works Protected by Copyright 
The proposed exemption would apply to TPMs controlling access to computer 
programs, which are protectable under the Copyright Act.1456  Therefore, the Acting 
                                                      
1449 See DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 9 Opp’n at 4; ESA Class 9 Opp’n at 6–7. 
1450 See ACT Class 9 Opp’n at 2 (“The App Association does not oppose granting the proposed 
exemption . . . if [it] includes the obsolescence limitation used in previous rulemakings.”); BSA 
Class 9 Opp’n at 1 (“BSA supports a proposed exemption to enable preservation of software and 
software-dependent materials . . . provided the class of works to which the exemption applies is 
limited to works stored on ‘obsolete’ formats, including computer programs no longer reasonably 
available in the commercial marketplace.”); see also SIIA Class 9 Opp’n at 5 (similar). 
1451 ESA Class 9 Opp’n at 3–4. 
1452 Id. at 5. 
1453 Id. at 6. 
1454 SPN & LCA Class 9 Reply at 3, 9. 
1455 Id. at 3. 
1456 See 17 U.S.C. § 101 (definition of “computer program”). 

[PAGE 239]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
236 
Register finds that the proposed class includes at least some works protected by 
copyright. 
b. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Proponents advance three bases for finding their proposed activities to be noninfringing:  
(1) the fair use doctrine, (2) the section 108(c) exception for library and archival 
replacement copies, and (3) the section 117(a) exception for archival copies of computer 
programs.1457  Because the limitations of section 108(c) are relevant to the parties’ fair use 
arguments, the Acting Register will address that provision first. 
i. Section 108(c) 
Section 108(c) authorizes an eligible library or archives to make three copies of a 
published work solely for purposes of replacing a copy that is damaged, deteriorating, 
lost, or stolen, “or if the existing format in which the work is stored has become 
obsolete.”1458  A format is considered obsolete “if the machine or device necessary to 
render perceptible a work stored in that format is no longer manufactured or is no 
longer reasonably available in the commercial marketplace.”1459  To qualify for the 
exception, the institution must have first determined, after a reasonable effort, that an 
unused replacement cannot be obtained at a fair price.1460  If a replacement copy is made 
in digital format, it may not be made available to the public in that format outside the 
institution’s premises.1461 
Proponents contend that a portion of the activities for which they seek an exemption are 
within the scope of section 108(c), and at least two of the opponents appear to agree.1462  
Proponents indicate that their preservation work includes migrating programs from 
older formats such as 8- or 5.25-inch floppy disks to modern systems to “preserve the 
                                                      
1457 Proponents also address section 108(h), which authorizes libraries and archives to make 
certain uses of published works during the twenty years of their copyright term, but they note 
that this provision “is usually inapplicable to digital preservation efforts.”  SPN & LCA Class 9 
Initial at 14. 
1458 17 U.S.C. § 108(c). 
1459 Id. 
1460 Id. § 108(c)(1). 
1461 Id. § 108(c)(2). 
1462 See ACT Class 9 Opp’n at 3 (“The Copyright Office should again follow the guidance of 
section 108 and limit the proposed exemption to obsolete software.”); BSA Class 9 Opp’n at 6–7 
(stating that the petition “appears to satisfy [the statutory] burden with respect to works 
distributed on obsolete formats, including computer programs no longer reasonably available in 
the commercial marketplace”). 

[PAGE 240]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
237 
content on these disks for future access.”1463  Such storage formats clearly meet the 
statutory definition of “obsolete,” and given that proponents’ request is limited to noncommercially available programs, no unused replacements are likely to be available.  
Moreover, proponents note that “[i]n some instances, libraries and archives are able to 
limit the number of copies of digital material that they possess to the three stipulated by 
17 U.S.C. § 108(c).”1464  In addition, consistent with section 108(c), the proposed 
exemption would require that the institution not make copies available to the public 
outside its premises.1465  The Acting Register thus agrees that insofar as proponents’ 
request includes these particular types of preservation activities by libraries and 
archives, the uses likely are noninfringing under section 108(c). 
Proponents hasten to note, however, that section 108(c) “covers only a slim subsection” 
of the activities in which they seek to engage.1466  They point out that digital preservation 
often necessitates the creation of “multiple temporary copies—which, while limited in 
duration, may nevertheless constitute ‘copies’ that violate the three-copy rule” under the 
statute.1467  This concern is consistent with the Copyright Office’s longstanding view that 
the three-copy limit does not adequately accommodate the requirements of modern 
digital preservation practices.1468  Proponents additionally note that section 108(c) does 
not allow modification of a work, which they indicate is usually required when 
migrating a program to new storage media.
1469  Further, they note that section 108 
applies only to libraries and archives—a limitation that excl udes other institutions, such 
as museums, involved in software preservation.1470 
In addition, proponents argue that section 108(c) does not capture the full range of 
software for which there is a legitimate preservation need.  The statute’s definition of an 
obsolete format, they note, is based on whether the machine or device necessary to make 
the work perceptible is still commercially available.1471  As a result, they contend, if the 
                                                      
1463 SPN & LCA Class 9 Initial at 15. 
1464 Id. at 15–16. 
1465 See SPN & LCA Class 9 Reply at 18. 
1466 SPN & LCA Class 9 Initial at 14–15. 
1467 Id. at 16. 
1468 Section 108 Discussion Document at 25 (“Making a single end-use digital copy . . . may 
require making more than three copies in the process.”). 
1469 SPN & LCA Class 9 Initial at 16, 29 (statement of Henry Lowood, Stanford Univ.) (“Use of 
historical software requires installation on contemporary hardware platforms or development of 
an emulation solution.  Usually some modification of the original software will be necessary, in 
either case.”).  
1470 Id. at 16. 
1471 SPN & LCA Class 9 Reply at 10. 

[PAGE 241]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
238 
exemption were to incorporate that limitation, TPM-protected programs that are 
commercially unavailable but that are stored in non-obsolete formats may be 
unavailable for preservation for many years.  For example, “a work of software no 
longer reasonably commercially available and stored only on CDs . . . could not be 
preserved until CD drives were no longer sold,” during which time the software may 
significantly deteriorate.1472  Proponents further argue that the concept of format 
obsolescence is a poor fit for the growing number of programs distributed via download 
rather than in physical media.1473  They accordingly urge that the class of works be 
defined more broadly to include any computer program that is no longer reasonably 
available in the commercial marketplace, regardless of the format in which it is 
stored.
1474 
Because not all of the proposed uses are protected by section 108(c), proponents must 
demonstrate that their additional proposed activities are likely noninfringing on 
separate legal grounds. 
ii. Fair Use 
1) Applicability of Fair Use 
Before considering the merits of proponents’ fair use arguments, the Acting Register first 
addresses a threshold contention by opponents that she should not look to fair use as a 
basis for expanding the exemption beyond the limitations of section 108.  Opponents 
note that the 2003 and 2006 software preservation exemptions were limited to programs 
in obsolete formats and that the Register expressly declined to recommend broadening 
them based on fair use.
1475  In their view, there is no basis for the Acting Register to 
revisit those determinations.1476  Joint Creators II further contend that it would be 
premature to recommend an exemption going beyond section 108 until Congress acts on 
formal recommendations from the Office regarding legislative updates to that 
provision.
1477 
                                                      
1472 Id. 
1473 Id. at 11 (“ A literal reading of the obsolescence language from § 108 . . . might mean that 
preservationists would have to wait until computers are no longer commercially available” before 
preserving a video game distributed only via download.). 
1474 Id. at 11. 
1475 Joint Creators II Class 9 Opp’n at 6–7 (citing 2003 Recommendation at 54–55 and 2006 
Recommendation at 29); BSA Class 9 Opp’n at 5 (same). 
1476 BSA Class 9 Opp’n at 5; Tr. at 206:05–14 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II). 
1477 Joint Creators II Class 9 Opp’n at 12–13; Tr. at 206:20–207:07 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Williams, Joint 
Creators II). 

[PAGE 242]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
239 
In her analysis of the 2003 and 2006 exemptions, the Register recognized that “some 
preservation activity beyond the scope of §108 may well constitute a fair use.”1478  She 
concluded, however, that the record was inadequate to demonstrate a need for a broader 
exemption on that basis.  As explained in the 2003 Recommendation, “[u]nless 
particular facts about the use of particular works are presented to reveal that the 
§108(c) exemption is insufficient, and unless these particular facts could be analyzed 
under §107 to establish a likelihood that fair use is applicable, it would be improper 
in this rulemaking to go beyond the express congressional parameters contained in 
the DMCA amendments to §108.”
1479  Absent such evidence, the Register was 
reluctant to make “sweeping generalizations” about the possible application of fair 
use, noting that “disparate works may be involved in the preservation activity and 
the effect on the potential market for the work may vary.”1480 
The current proceeding does not present these same concerns.  In contrast to the prior 
rulemakings, and as detailed above, proponents have put forward substantial evidence 
establishing that section 108(c) does not fully cover the activities for which they believe 
there is a legitimate need for an exemption.  Moreover, notwithstanding the concerns 
expressed in 2003 and 2006, the Office more recently has considered exemptions on the 
basis of fair use even where a specific statutory exception also addresses the subject 
matter.1481  Indeed, in the closely related context of video game preservation, the Register 
in 2015 analyzed the proposed exemption under fair use, while noting that section 108 
“provides useful and important guidance as to Congress’s intent regarding the nature 
and scope of legitimate preservation activities.”1482  That approach is consistent with the 
statute, which includes a savings clause expressly providing that nothing in section 108 
“in any way affects the right of fair use as provided by section 107.”
1483  It is also 
                                                      
1478 2003 Recommendation at 54–55; accord 2006 Recommendation at 29–30.  In fact, the Register 
noted in 2006 that “[i]n such cases, the exemption for this class of works should also be 
available.”  2006 Recommendation at 30.   
1479 2003 Recommendation at 55. 
1480 Id. 
1481 See 2015 Recommendation at 169 (unlocking exemption) (“[U]nlike past rulemakings where 
the finding of noninfringing use rested solely on section 117, the Register here also concludes that 
the exemption is likely to facilitate fair use of the computer programs on the covered devices.”), 
234–37 (same regarding vehicle repair exemption), 300–03 (same regarding vehicle software 
security research), 368–71 (same regarding exemption for 3D printing). 
1482 Id. at 342. 
1483 17 U.S.C. § 108(f)(4); see also HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 94 n.4 (relying on savings clause to reject 
argument that section 108 foreclosed analysis under fair use); H.R. REP. NO. 94-1476, at 74, 
reprinted in 1976 U.S.C.C.A.N. 5687–88 (“No provision of section 108 is intended to take away any 
rights existing under the fair use doctrine.”); Section 108 Discussion Document at 14 (“[T]he 

[PAGE 243]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
240 
consistent with the Copyright Office’s view on the importance of ensuring that “fair use 
remains an important safety valve [that] is available to libraries and archives in 
situations not addressed by the text of section 108.”1484 
The Acting Register accordingly will consider proponents’ argument that their activities 
are likely fair uses.  Opponents do not directly contest that argument. 
2) Discussion 
Proponents seek to enable eligible libraries, archives, museums, and other cultural 
heritage institutions to reproduce and, where necessary, modify lawfully acquired 
copies of TPM-protected computer programs no longer reasonably available in the 
commercial marketplace to preserve such programs and/or program-dependent 
materials.  They also seek to make the programs available for research exclusively on the 
premises of the institution.  Under the proposed exemption, these activities could not be 
carried out with any purpose of direct or indirect commercial advantage, and the class of 
beneficiaries would be limited to institutions meeting the criteria in section 108(a)(2)—
those that are open to the public, or available not only to researchers affiliated with the 
institution, but also to other persons doing research in a specialized field.
1485  In addition, 
both proponents and opponents stated that they would not object to incorporating the 
further eligibility conditions proposed in the Office’s recent Section 108 Discussion 
Document:  (1) that the institution have a public service mission; (2) that the institution’s 
trained staff or volunteers provide professional services normally associated with 
libraries, archives, or museums; (3) that the institution’s collections are composed of 
lawfully acquired and/or licensed materials; and (4) that the institution implement 
reasonable digital security measures as appropriate for the activities permitted.1486 
With respect to proponents’ desire to make programs available for on-premises access, 
this request is aimed primarily at enabling access by researchers for purposes of 
scholarship.  A few statements, however, suggest a desire to make programs available 
more broadly.  For example, proponents note that “[t]he Living Computers: Museum + 
Labs cannot put some of their software collection on display because the original floppy 
                                                                                                                                                              
savings clause . . . was designed as an appropriate backstop to fill in potential legal gaps not 
addressed by the existing specific exception.”). 
1484 Section 108 Discussion Document at 16. 
1485 17 U.S.C. § 108(a)(2). 
1486 Section 108 Discussion Document at 51; see Tr. at 250:11–251:07 (Albert, SPN); Tr. at 256:07–20 
(Apr. 12, 2018) (Meyerson, SPN; Troncoso, BSA; Mohr, SIIA). 

[PAGE 244]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
241 
disks are easy to break.  And without circumvention, they cannot make copies.”1487  
Proponents do not, however, elaborate on the nature of these displays or provide legal 
analysis of how they might affect the fair use inquiry.  Therefore, the Acting Register 
will limit her fair use analysis to the reproduction and modification of programs for 
purposes of preservation and research, and will not consider whether exhibitions such 
as those referenced by proponents may also qualify as fair uses.  The Register followed 
the same approach in considering the proposed exemption for video game preservation 
in 2015.  There, the Register declined to define that exemption to include exhibiting 
games to the public in playable form because that activity implicated the public 
performance and display rights, and the proponents failed to address legal issues 
pertaining to those rights.1488  As the Register explained, “[t]he performance and display 
of a video game for visitors in a public space is a markedly different activity than efforts 
to preserve or study the game in a dedicated archival or research setting.”1489  In 
adopting this limitation, the Acting Register again “expresses no opinion on whether the 
exhibition activities proposed by proponents, insofar as they constitute public 
performances, would or could constitute fair or otherwise noninfringing uses. . . .  [She] 
merely concludes that the lack of any legal or evidentiary record on this issue precludes 
such a finding.”1490 
Addressing the first fair use factor, the purpose and character of the use, proponents 
note that their activities are non-commercial and argue that “[p]reserving public access 
to information constitutes a public benefit and is strongly favored in the fair use 
analysis.”
1491  They point to the legislative history of the Copyright Act, which states that 
“the making of duplicate copies for purposes of archival preservation certainly falls 
within the scope of ‘fair use.’”
1492  They also cite case law holding that copying for 
preservation purposes can provide a significant public benefit.1493  Proponents further 
contend that many of their contemplated uses are transformative in that “[p]reservation 
. . . serves a different purpose from the original commercial purpose of software—it 
                                                      
1487 SPN & LCA Class 9 Initial at 8; see also id. at 26 (statement of Heath Reinhard, Living 
Computs. Museum + Labs) (“[M]any of the software titles we would like to preserve and exhibit 
have some form or another of copy protection that does not allow us to legally make copies.”).  
1488 2015 Recommendation at 342 (“For example, would visitors’ interactions with the games be 
limited in some way, or would visitors be permitted to play games for extended periods of 
time?”). 
1489 Id. 
1490 Id. at 343. 
1491 SPN & LCA Class 9 Initial at 10. 
1492 Id. (quoting H.R. REP. NO. 94-1476, at 73, reprinted in 1976 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 5687). 
1493 Id. (citing Authors Guild, Inc. v. Google Inc., 954 F. Supp. 2d 282, 293 (S.D.N.Y. 2013), and 
Sudeman v. Seajay Soc’y, Inc., 142 F.3d 194, 203 (4th Cir. 1998)). 

[PAGE 245]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
242 
ensures that the preserved work will be available for research in the future.”1494  They 
argue that software migration is analogous to the activity in Connectix, in which the 
Ninth Circuit held that the copying of video game console firmware to enable 
consumers to play games on a personal computer was transformative because it 
“afford[ed] opportunities for game play in new environments.”1495  Proponents also rely 
on White v. West Publishing Corp., where the court found the inclusion of copyrighted 
legal briefs in an online database to be transformative because it served the different 
purpose of “creating an interactive legal research tool.”1496 
The Acting Register agrees that the first factor weighs in favor of fair use.  As an initial 
matter, it is arguable that the proposed activity would not be considered transformative 
because it is aimed at allowing software to perform its original function and does not 
“add[] something new, with a further purpose or different character.”1497  The Acting 
Register finds it unnecessary to resolve that issue, however, because, as proponents note, 
the legislative history and case law make clear that library and archival preservation is a 
favored purpose under the fair use analysis.  Moreover, as the Register previously 
recognized, section 108 “highlight[s] Congress’s recognition of preservation as an 
important social activity” and generally indicates “the types of uses that are most likely 
to qualify as fair in this area.”
1498  Here, the proposed exemption incorporates most of the 
key conditions in that provision, namely that the preservation activity must be 
undertaken by an institution meeting specified public access requirements, that no 
copies may be made available to the public outside the institution’s premises, and that 
the use may not be for purposes of commercial advantage.  The Acting Register 
accordingly concludes that, even if the proposed uses would not be found 
transformative, their purpose and character are of a type that favors fair use. 
Regarding the second factor, proponents contend that the nature of the copyrighted 
works favors fair use because many of the programs they seek to access are functional 
works such as “word-processing, spreadsheet, and database software,” which, in their 
view, derive value “from their functional ability to represent information that is owned 
or created by those seeking access.”1499  They also rely on Connectix for the proposition 
that “copying to gain access to . . . functional elements [of a computer program] [is] more 
                                                      
1494 Id. at 11. 
1495 Connectix, 203 F.3d at 606; see SPN & LCA Class 9 Initial at 11. 
1496 29 F. Supp. 3d 396, 399 (S.D.N.Y. 2014); see SPN & LCA Initial at 11. 
1497 Campbell, 510 U.S.at 579. 
1498 2015 Recommendation at 341–42. 
1499 SPN & LCA Class 9 Initial at 11 (citing Sega, 977 F.2d at 1526, Am. Geophysical Union, 60 F.3d at 
925, and Television Digest, Inc. v. U.S. Tel. Ass’n, 841 F. Supp. 5, 10 (D.D.C. 1993)). 

[PAGE 246]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
243 
likely to be fair use.”1500  Finally, they note that many of the programs are orphan works, 
the owners of which “may be bankrupt, dissolved, or dead.”1501 
The Acting Register does not agree that the presence of so-called functional programs in 
the proposed class tips this factor in favor of fair use.  Indeed, all computer programs are 
by definition functional,1502 as they are designed to accomplish a specific task, and for 
the Acting Register to conclude that as a general matter, uses of software are uniformly 
favored under the second factor would overlook cases which have found this factor to 
weigh against the fair use of computer programs.1503  Moreover, as proponents have 
emphasized, the proposed class also includes video games, which are often highly 
expressive in nature.
1504  Nevertheless, the Register previously concluded that the second 
factor did “not necessarily negate a finding of fair use” where the copying and 
modification of video games were “necessary to allow continued legitimate use of the 
work.”
1505  The same conclusion applies here.  Overall, the Acting Register concludes 
that while this factor is not necessarily favorable to fair use, it is of limited significance in 
the analysis. 
As to the third factor, the amount and substantiality of the portion used, proponents 
acknowledge that their activities may involve copying programs in their entirety, but 
assert that “[p]roviding access to vintage software may, in some cases, be impossible 
without copying the whole work.”1506  Relying on cases holding that it is sometimes 
necessary to copy an entire work to make a fair use, proponents contend that the 
amount they seek to copy is “reasonable in relation to the purpose of the copying.”1507  
The Acting Register agrees.  The record indicates that “current digital preservation 
                                                      
1500 Id. (citing Connectix, 203 F.3d at 604–05). 
1501 Id. at 12. 
1502 See 17 U.S.C. § 101 (defining a “computer program” as “a set of statements or instructions to 
be used directly or indirectly in a computer in order to bring about a certain result”); see also 
Oracle Am., Inc. v. Google, Inc., 750 F.3d 1339, 1367 (Fed. Cir. 2014). 
1503 See, e.g., Wall Data, 447 F.3d at 780 (although the software products were “not purely creative,” 
the second factor weighed against fair use since they were developed over many years with 
substantial investment); Cable/Home Commc’n Corp. v. Network Prods., Inc., 902 F.2d 829, 844 (11th 
Cir. 1990) (protective nature of embedded software that descrambled satellite- transmitted 
programming for subscribers weighed against a “decoding pirate chip” being a fair use).  
1504 See 2015 Recommendation at 338 (“[V]ideo games are highly expressive and thus at the core of 
copyright’s protective purposes.”). 
1505 Id. at 338. 
1506 SPN & LCA Class 9 Initial at 12. 
1507 Id. (citing Bill Graham Archives v. Dorling Kindersley Ltd., 448 F.3d 605, 613 (2d Cir. 2006), and 
Núñez v. Caribbean Int’l News Corp., 235 F.3d 18, 24 (1st Cir. 2000)). 

[PAGE 247]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
244 
practices are universally predicated on data migration,”1508 a process that frequently 
requires making complete copies.1509  The evidence further indicates that proponents 
seek to modify programs only to the extent necessary to allow them to perform their 
original functions on modern computer systems.1510  The Acting Register accordingly 
concludes that this factor does not weigh against a fair use finding.1511 
Finally, regarding the fourth factor, proponents argue that “[c]reating and maintaining 
copies for the purpose of archiving and scholarship do not interfere [with] the market 
for the work, making the impact on the copyright holders’ interest minimal.”1512  They 
note that “[s]cholars require access to vintage word processing programs, design 
software, and the like in order to study them and the materials that depend on them, not 
for their original commercial purpose (creating text files, 3D designs, and so on).”1513  
Proponents further argue that their proposed limitations on eligible users and uses, as 
well as the exclusion of commercially available works, eliminate any risk of market 
harm. 
Although opponents did not directly address the fourth factor in written comments, 
Joint Creators II argued at the hearing that the inclusion of video games would harm the 
market for those works.  ESA contends generally that many of the activities labelled 
“preservation” are infringing or would promote infringement, although the bulk of its 
concerns appear to relate to online game services.
1514  ESA also advances substantially 
the same argument in reference to the fourth statutory factor under section 
1201(a)(1)(C).1515  According to these opponents, the existing market for the rerelease of 
classic video games could be harmed if institutions are free to make such games 
available for members of the public to play on their premises.1516 
                                                      
1508 Id. at 29 (statement of Henry Lowood, Stanford Univ.). 
1509 See Berger Class 9 Reply at 2. 
1510 See SPN & LCA Class 9 Initial at 29 (statement of Henry Lowood, Stanford Univ.).  
1511 Cf. HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 98–99 (holding that third factor favored fair use where libraries’ 
creation of digital copies of entire books was reasonably necessary to enable full-text search of 
digital repository). 
1512 SPN & LCA Class 9 Initial at 12. 
1513 Id. 
1514 ESA Class 9 Opp’n at 7–8 (citing ESA Class 8 Opp’n at 24–38). 
1515 See id. at 8. 
1516 See Tr. at 207:13–16 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II) (“[W]ith video games 
especially, there’s an incentive to preserve them because they are often rereleased, and so there 
can be market harm . . . .”); Tr. at 245:20–22 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II) (“[T]here’s 
a higher level demand for classic video games than there is for most pieces of classic functional 
software.”). 

[PAGE 248]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
245 
The Acting Register agrees with proponents that there is little risk of market harm in 
light of the proposal’s significant limitations on qualifying users, uses, and works.  As 
the Register concluded in recommending the current exemption for video game 
preservation, “allowing circumvention by appropriate entities solely for noncommercial 
preservation and research purposes— without distribution to or offsite access by 
members of the public, consistent with section 108—would not appear to carry a 
significant risk to the market.”1517  That conclusion is particularly sound in this class, 
which is limited to programs no longer reasonably available in the commercial 
marketplace.  With respect to video games, proponents agree that preservation of serverbased games should continue to be governed by the existing exemption;
1518 therefore, the 
uses proposed here would not extend to those works.  As to non-server-based games, 
the Acting Register appreciates opponents’ legitimate interest in preserving the market 
for reissued games, but nothing in the record suggests that the narrow preservation and 
research activities contemplated by this proposal would materially interfere with that 
market.  In particular, opponents provided no evidence that the existing video game 
preservation exemption—which includes substantially the same safeguards as those in 
SPN and LCA’s amended proposal— has had any such effect.
1519  The Acting Register 
accordingly concludes that this factor favors fair use. 
Based on the foregoing analysis, the Acting Register finds that proponents have met 
their burden of showing that the proposed uses are likely to be fair. 
iii. Section 117 
Proponents contend that their proposed exemption “also includes uses that may be noninfringing under 17 U.S.C. § 117.”1520  They refer specifically to section 117(a)(2), which 
authorizes the owner of a copy of a computer program to make or authorize the making 
                                                      
1517 2015 Recommendation at 344. 
1518 Tr. at 241:16–18 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Albert, SPN); see also SPN & LCA Class 9 Reply at 7 n.33 (“To 
the extent that there is direct overlap between the Class 8 exemption (existing or proposed) and 
this exemption, the more specific restrictions in Class 8 should apply.”). 
1519 In contrast to the existing video game preservation exemption, proponents here do not seek 
specific exemption language authorizing the jailbreaking of video game consoles.  Cf.  37 C.F.R. 
§ 201.40(b)(8)(ii).  To the extent, however, that jailbreaking is necessary to preserve commercially 
unavailable, non-server based console software and/or video games dependent on that software, 
the proposed exemption likely would permit such activity, provided the other requirements are 
met.  But as the Register concluded regarding the existing exemption, given the narrow class of 
eligible users and the limitations on permitted uses, the piracy risk normally associated with 
jailbreaking consoles would appear to be greatly diminished in this context.  See  2015 
Recommendation at 344. 
1520 SPN & LCA Class 9 Initial at 17. 

[PAGE 249]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
246 
of a copy or adaptation “for archival purposes only.”1521  According to proponents, 
“[t]here are many uses of TPM-protected software that qualify as non-infringing because 
they are for archival purposes under § 117(a)(2), and copies are necessary to eliminate 
the risk that the software will be damaged or destroyed.”1522   
Opponents respond that section 117(a)(2) does not protect proponents’ activities.  
Because section 117 applies only to the owner of a copy, not a licensee, SIIA suggests 
that this limitation excludes proponents because “most software that is not cloud-based 
is licensed and not sold.”1523  BSA contends that the copies proponents describe are not 
the “back-up” copies covered by section 117, but instead are “use” copies to which the 
statute “is simply inapplicable.”1524  BSA further notes that in 2003 and 2006 the Register 
declined to recommend expanding the software preservation exemption on the basis of 
section 117 because she concluded that the relevant activity “fit[] far more comfortably 
within the scope of §108 than that of §117.”1525 
In response to SIIA’s argument, proponents assert that ownership under section 117 “is 
a complex, fact-specific matter” and that “[i]t would be inappropriate to assume” that 
every transaction formally designated a license would fall outside the statute’s scope.1526  
They note that they “never suggested that § 117 will apply to all, or even most, software, 
but that it provides an alternate potential source of noninfringing uses applicable in 
some preservation cases.”1527  In response to BSA, proponents argue that “[i]f copies 
made for purposes of archiving and preservation count as ‘use’ copies . . . § 117 would 
lose any applicability whatsoever.”1528 
The Acting Register finds the record insufficient to permit a determination of whether 
beneficiaries of the proposed exemption are likely to qualify as “owners” of the software 
copies within the meaning of section 117.  As proponents correctly note, that inquiry is 
highly fact-specific and turns upon several factors.  In the Second Circuit, these include 
(1) whether substantial consideration was paid for the copy; (2) whether the copy was 
created for the sole benefit of the purchaser; (3) whether the copy was customized to 
serve the purchaser’s use; (4) whether the copy was stored on property owned by the 
                                                      
1521 17 U.S.C. § 117(a)(2).   
1522 SPN & LCA Class 9 Initial at 18. 
1523 SIIA Class 9 Opp’n at 4 (emphasis omitted). 
1524 BSA Class 9 Opp’n at 6. 
1525 Id. at 6 & n.27 (citing 2006 Recommendation at 29, and 2003 Recommendation at 58–59). 
1526 SPN & LCA Class 9 Reply at 15 (citing Vernor, 621 F.3d at 1111, Krause, 402 F.3d at 124, and 
2015 Recommendation at 336). 
1527 Id. at 15–16. 
1528 Id. at 16. 

[PAGE 250]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
247 
purchaser; (5) whether the creator reserved the right to repossess the copy; (6) whether 
the creator agreed that the purchaser had the right to possess and use the programs 
forever regardless of whether the relationship between the parties terminated; and (7) 
whether the purchaser was free to discard or destroy the copy anytime it wished.1529  In 
the Ninth Circuit, “a software user is a licensee rather than an owner of a copy where the 
copyright owner (1) specifies that the user is granted a license; (2) significantly restricts 
the user’s ability to transfer the software; and (3) imposes notable use restrictions.”1530 
Proponents have introduced no evidence that would allow these factors to be resolved 
either in favor of or against a finding of ownership.  While one might assume that the 
proposed class includes at least some copies of programs that qualify as “owned,” 
nothing in the record enables the Acting Register to reach that conclusion definitively, or 
to determine what proportion of the class such copies might represent.  Proponents’ 
acknowledgement that section 117 may not cover “even most” of the proposed class 
only underscores this lack of evidence.
1531  Thus, the Acting Register cannot conclude, on 
a class-wide basis, that the proposed uses would more likely than not be protected 
under section 117.1532  Proponents accordingly have failed to meet their burden of 
showing that their activities are likely noninfringing on this additional ground.1533 
c. Causation 
The Acting Register finds that proponents have met their burden of showing that the 
prohibition on circumvention of access controls limits their ability to make the 
noninfringing uses described above.  But for the prohibition on circumvention, eligible 
institutions likely could gain lawful access to the computer programs in the proposed 
class in order to engage in those activities. 
                                                      
1529 Krause, 402 F.3d at 124. 
1530 Vernor, 621 F.3d at 1111. 
1531 SPN & LCA Class 9 Reply at 15. 
1532 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C) (Register must determine “whether . . . users of a copyrighted 
work . . . are likely to be . . . adversely affected in their ability to make noninfringing uses . . . of a 
particular class of copyrighted works”) (emphasis added). 
1533 In 2003, the Register found section 117(a)(2) inapplicable to the proposed software 
preservation activities on the ground that it applies only to software at risk of damage or 
destruction by mechanical or electrical failure, though acknowledging that the case law on that 
issue was not uniform.  See 2003 Recommendation at 56–57 & nn.101–03 (collecting cases and 
treatises).  The Register also concluded that section 117(a)(2) is limited to the creation of backup 
copies and does not cover copies that will be used.  See id. at 58.  While the Acting Register need 
not revisit those conclusions in light of proponents’ failure to establish ownership, reliance on 
section 117(a)(2) also would require these issues to be resolved in proponents’ favor.  

[PAGE 251]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
248 
d. Asserted Adverse Effects  
Because this proposed exemption is limited to circumvention for nonprofit preservation 
and research purposes, and the parties’ arguments under the first three statutory factors 
address substantially overlapping issues, the Acting Register considers these factors 
together.  
Proponents argue that circumvention is necessary “to allow preservationists to preserve, 
keep running, and thus increase the availability of TPM-protected software,” and 
thereby “ensure[] that software and software-dependent material remain available for 
archival, preservation, research, and educational purposes.”1534  Without an exemption, 
they contend, much of this material could be lost permanently, either because future 
systems will be unable to run it or because it is stored in deteriorating media.1535  
Proponents further argue that an exemption will advance the burgeoning study of 
computer programs “as cultural and scientific artifacts.”1536  In addition, they believe the 
proposed exemption would aid the development of new software by facilitating 
research into the functioning of older programs.1537 
With respect to potential alternatives to circumvention, proponents contend that the use 
of modern software purportedly compatible with older programs is not always reliable: 
Digital work loaded by backwards-compatible software, if it exists, can 
distort the original material.  Backwards compatibility sometimes relies 
on converting the original data into a contemporary file format; this can 
cause data loss or be impossible without access to the original software.  
Architectural designs may be rendered without objects no longer 
supported by current versions.  Music and visual art may be missing key 
components that were supported by community-created plugins that are 
not compatible with current software.1538 
Proponents further assert that the use of a more recent version of a program is not an 
adequate alternative “where a particular version of the software is itself the subject” of 
research.1539   
                                                      
1534 SPN & LCA Class 9 Initial at 19. 
1535 Id. at 6, 19; SPN & LCA Class 9 Reply at 10. 
1536 SPN & LCA Class 9 Initial at 19. 
1537 Id. at 20. 
1538 Id. at 7–8.  
1539 Berger Class 9 Reply at 7. 

[PAGE 252]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
249 
Among opponents, only ESA directly addresses these statutory factors, and only with 
respect to video games.  ESA disputes that an exemption is necessary to facilitate game 
preservation.  First, it contends that “video game publishers have strong economic 
incentives to preserve their own games, which are often issued and re-issued in patterns 
common to other forms of creative content, such as film and music.”1540  Second, it notes 
that there already exist “extensive video game preservation programs” and that ESA 
and its members are engaged in cooperative preservation efforts with public 
institutions.1541  Third, it argues that the current exemption for video game preservation 
“is sufficient to facilitate preservation by eligible institutions, and to facilitate subsequent 
research and study.”
1542 
Proponents respond that the current video game preservation exemption is limited to 
games dependent on an external server for access.  By contrast, they state, their proposal 
“covers a different set of TPMs and preservation activities—namely, software, including 
video games, that may not be preserved without circumvention of a TPM but are not 
necessarily reliant on a server.”
1543  They cite two examples of historic games, playable 
on the Commodore 64 system, sought to be preserved by the Living Computers: 
Museum + Labs that “did not rely upon a server as a TPM.”1544  As noted, proponents 
agree that the current video game preservation exemption should continue to apply in 
the context of server-based games. 
The Acting Register finds that these factors favor the requested exemption.  Proponents 
have provided substantial evidence that granting the exemption would benefit 
preservation, education, and scholarship by facilitating the study of software and 
dependent materials that might otherwise be lost to history.  The ability of researchers to 
operate and study historic software as it originally functioned is likely to promote 
commentary and teaching in a variety of disciplines.  Furthermore, the preservation 
initiatives and reissues referenced by ESA may not provide adequate alternatives to 
circumvention with respect to the full range of preservationists’ activities involving 
video games.  Those industry efforts, while laudable, may not include all of the titles 
                                                      
1540 ESA Class 9 Opp’n at 7. 
1541 Id. 
1542 Id. 
1543 SPN & LCA Class 9 Reply at 7; see also Tr. at 241:04–09 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Albert, SPN) (“[W]e’re 
literally talking about . . . video games that were distributed on floppy discs for . . . the Iomega or 
the Commodore 64 . . . .”). 
1544 SPN & LCA Class 9 Reply at 8 (discussing Battle Droidz and Dark Side).  In providing these 
examples, proponents again indicate that Living Computers seeks to exhibit video games.  See id.  
As noted above, the Acting Register is not recommending an exemption that would allow 
circumvention for purposes of exhibiting programs publicly.  The Acting Register expresses no 
view as to whether such exhibits might implicate copyright owners’ exclusive rights. 

[PAGE 253]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
250 
that proponents have a legitimate interest in preserving, and rereleases may not always 
be identical to the games as originally issued.  In addition, the existing video game 
preservation exemption does not obviate the need for this proposal because it does not 
provide a means of preserving non-server-based games. 
As to the fourth statutory factor, for the same reasons discussed above in reference to the 
fourth fair use factor, the Acting Register finds that granting the proposed exemption is 
unlikely to adversely affect the market for or value of the computer programs in the 
proposed class. 
Opponents suggest that the proposed exemption could harm the value of copyrighted 
works outside the class because of its reference to computer program-dependent 
materials.  As noted, the proposed exemption would allow circumvention for the 
purpose of preserving both computer programs and program-dependent materials, 
defined as “digital file[s] where accessibility requires a computer program.”1545  
Opponents contend that this provision renders the proposal substantially overbroad.  
For example, Joint Creators II argue that “because . . . almost every type of work can 
now be accessed using software, it could be read to cover circumvention of technological 
protection measures to access all categories of copyrightable works for the purpose of 
preservation.”
1546  They urge that the language be omitted from any exemption, arguing 
that referring to dependent materials is unnecessary given that the proposed class of 
works is limited to computer programs.1547 
In response, proponents explain that the exemption is targeted towards circumvention 
of access controls placed on computer programs, which are a subcategory of literary 
works.1548  Regarding the reference to computer-program dependent materials, “[t]he 
purpose of this language is to indicate that, under the proposed exemption, preservation 
of computer program-dependent material would be a permissible purpose for 
circumventing a TPM on a computer program.”1549  In proponents’ view, this language is 
necessary for the exemption to apply in situations where an institution’s purpose in 
                                                      
1545 Id. at 18. 
1546 Joint Creators II Class 9 Opp’n at 3–4; see also ESA Class 9 Opp’n at 3 (“The concept of 
‘dependent materials’ appears to be an effort to back-door every type of copyrighted work into 
an exemption that is ostensibly about software.”); SIIA Class 9 Opp’n at 3 (similar). 
1547 See Tr. at 188:03–08 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II) (“I don’t think that there’s any 
reason to actually refer to dependent materials at all in any exemption if what you’re trying to 
circumvent to gain access to is only a piece of software that then gives you lawful access to 
another type of work without circumvention of any additional TPM.”).  
1548 SPN & LCA Class 9 Reply at 3–4. 
1549 Id. at 4.   

[PAGE 254]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
251 
circumventing a TPM controlling access to a computer program goes beyond the 
preservation of that underlying program.1550 
Based on proponents’ clarification, it is apparent that their proposed class is limited to 
computer programs, meaning that the proposed exemption would allow circumvention 
only of TPMs on that type of work.  The class thus qualifies as a “narrow and focused 
subset of the broad categories of works . . . identified in section 102.”1551  While in most 
cases exemption language will not refer to works outside the class, here proponents 
have demonstrated a legitimate interest in preserving not only TPM-protected programs 
but also other digital materials dependent upon such programs for access, and that it 
would be helpful to stipulate that circumvention for that purpose is permissible in order 
for the intended beneficiaries to make use of the exemption.  But it is unnecessary for the 
regulatory text to attempt to articulate the precise circumstances under which the 
preservation of program-dependent materials is noninfringing.  Such an effort to define 
the lawful uses of works outside the class would seemingly exceed the proper scope of 
this rulemaking.  Rather, it is sufficient for the exemption to provide that such 
preservation activity, to the extent lawful, is a permissible purpose for which an eligible 
user may engage in the circumvention covered by the exemption.   
This approach is consistent with precedent from prior rulemakings.  As noted above, 
this current class echoes the 2006 rulemaking, which resulted in the adoption of an 
exemption for circumvention of obsolete computer programs and video games for 
purposes of preservation.
1552  That exemption permitted “circumvention . . . 
accomplished for the purpose of preservation or archival reproduction of published digital 
works by a library or archive,” suggesting that it contemplated preservation of works 
other than computer programs.1553  Moreover, the 2000 rulemaking produced a 
substantially broader exemption addressing issues of obsolescence.  In that proceeding, 
the Register recommended, and the Librarian adopted, an exemption for the 
circumvention of “[l]iterary works, including computer programs and databases, 
protected by access control mechanisms that fail to permit access because of 
                                                      
1550 See Tr. at 219:23–220:06 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Albert, SPN) (“[T]here [are] . . . really significant 
chilling effects from 1201, but also sort of a conservative bent to many practitioners of software 
preservation, especially in large institutions.  And our goal here was to make very clear that if 
you are circumventing the TPM for the purposes of preserving the computer-dependent material, 
not just the computer program, that’s still a thing covered by the exemption.”); Tr. at 227:18–23 
(Apr. 12, 2018) (Band, LCA) (“[U]nless . . . it’s worded in such a way to make it clear  that . . . 
you’re not trying to just preserve the software [but] you’re able to get to the Adobe file itself . . . 
there will be confusion.”). 
1551 Commerce Comm. Report at 38. 
1552 2006 Recommendation at 1. 
1553 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(2) (2007) (emphasis added). 

[PAGE 255]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
252 
malfunction, damage or obsoleteness.”1554  These precedents underscore that a general 
accommodation for preservation of program-dependent materials does not render the 
class overbroad. 
The Acting Register concludes that an exemption defined in this manner is unlikely to 
adversely affect the market for or value of program-dependent materials.  The 
exemption does not purport to expand the permissible uses of such materials beyond 
what is already allowed under existing law; it simply would facilitate such lawful uses 
where they depend on access to a separate program protected by a TPM.  Furthermore, 
the fact that the class is limited to computer programs that are no longer commercially 
available would seem to minimize risk that the exemption could be used to access 
commercially available dependent materials.  At the hearing, a university curator 
testified that he is unaware of any collection of obsolete software that would enable 
access to such materials, describing that concern as “a complete non-issue from a library 
perspective.”1555  Opponents offer no evidence to the contrary.  To the extent such a 
program could be used to access commercially available dependent materials, the 
existence of a market for those works would be an important factor in determining 
whether copying them for preservation purposes would be lawful.  Where such activity 
is infringing, circumvention for that purpose would not be permitted under the 
exemption. 
The Acting Register does not find any additional factors relevant to the asserted adverse 
effects in this proposed class.  Based on the foregoing, the Acting Register finds that 
users are adversely affected by the prohibition on circumvention in their ability to 
engage in noninfringing preservation activities, or are likely to be so adversely affected 
during the next three years. 
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA supports adopting the proposed exemption.  In its view, the class is appropriately 
defined because it is limited to “computer programs, to preservation uses, and to 
preservation-oriented institutional users.”1556  It agrees with proponents that the 
exemption should expressly refer to preservation of “computer program-dependent 
materials,” concluding that “a user would not be able to access those materials without 
preserving the software protected by a TPM.”
1557  It also agrees that the exemption 
should include video games, noting that proponents provided specific examples of 
                                                      
1554 Id. § 201.40(b)(2) (2001). 
1555 Tr. at 234:13–235:05 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Lowood, Stanford Univ.). 
1556 NTIA Letter at 66. 
1557 Id. at 68. 

[PAGE 256]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
253 
games that may not be covered by the current preservation exemption.1558  In addition, it 
finds that there are no reasonable alternatives to circumvention, as the use of software 
with backwards compatibility “is inadequate and can distort the original work.”1559 
NTIA also would grant proponents’ request to include “other cultural heritage 
institutions” within the class of eligible users.1560  To define such institutions, it proposes 
adopting the eligibility conditions set out in the Section 108 Discussion Document.1561  
NTIA would not, however, require libraries, archives, and museums to satisfy those 
criteria because, in its view, “the meaning and activities of those institutions are wellunderstood.”
1562  But under the Section 108 Discussion Document’s proposal, those 
conditions would apply to libraries, archives, and museums, and in fact would apply 
only to those institutions.1563  The Office did not recommend extending the section 108 
exceptions to other entities meeting those criteria.  As discussed below, the Acting 
Register concludes that this exemption likewise should be limited to libraries, archives, 
and museums. 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
In light of the foregoing, the Acting Register recommends granting an exemption that 
incorporates most of the substance of proponents’ request, with certain changes to 
address the concerns discussed above.  First, the recommended language limits the 
eligible users to libraries, archives, and museums, as defined according to the criteria 
proposed in the Section 108 Discussion Document.  The Acting Register declines to 
recommend including “other cultural heritage institutions” within the class of 
beneficiaries.  While the Register in 2015 recommended including museums in the 
current video game preservation exemption, finding that they engage in preservation 
efforts similar to those of libraries and archives,
1564 the Acting Register cannot, on this 
record, reach the same conclusion with respect to “other cultural heritage institutions,” 
which is an undefined and potentially far-reaching term.  The Acting Register believes, 
however, that the eligibility criteria are sufficiently flexible to encompass a broad 
spectrum of institutions.1565 
                                                      
1558 Id. at 66. 
1559 Id. at 69–70. 
1560 Id. at 67. 
1561 Id. at 67 & n.334. 
1562 Id. at 67 n.334. 
1563 See Section 108 Discussion Document at 18–21. 
1564 See 2015 Recommendation at 342. 
1565 Proponents do provide examples of institutions engaged in software preservation that “may 
not classify themselves as libraries, museums, or archives,” SPN & LCA Class 9 Reply at 6, but 

[PAGE 257]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
254 
Second, the recommended exemption incorporates proponents’ suggestion that the class 
be defined as computer programs “that have been lawfully acquired and that are no 
longer reasonably available in the commercial marketplace.”  For purposes of this 
exemption, the Acting Register does not understand a program to be reasonably 
available in the commercial marketplace if it can be purchased only in second-hand 
stores.  The availability of a second-hand copy of a program that is no longer being 
produced would not obviate the need for preservation, as the same concerns over 
deterioration and obsolescence would apply to that copy.  Further, circumvention 
presumably still would be necessary to access such copies in most cases, as they are 
likely to have the same TPM protections as those in the user institution’s collections.  
Moreover, this understanding is consistent with both the Register’s 2003 
Recommendation and the legislative history of section 108(c).
1566 
Third, in lieu of including the phrase “computer program-dependent materials” as a 
defined term, the recommended exemption simply provides that circumvention is 
permitted for the purpose of “lawful preservation . . . of digital materials dependent 
upon a computer program as a condition of access.”  For the reasons discussed above, 
the Acting Register believes this language adequately addresses proponents’ desire for 
clarity, making it unnecessary to define the class of dependent materials eligible for 
preservation—an issue best left for case -by-case determination under existing copyright 
law.  
Finally, in response to ESA’s concern over having video game preservation governed by 
two separate exemptions, the Acting Register recommends that the portion of this class 
pertaining to video games be codified in the existing preservation exemption.  Thus, the 
new exemption discussed here would cover computer programs other than video 
games, while an addition to the prior exemption would provide for preservation of the 
games addressed by this class—those that do not requi re an external server for 
gameplay.  The Acting Register’s recommended regulatory language for such games is 
provided at the conclusion of the discussion of proposed Class 8 below.  Preservation of 
server-based games would continue to be governed by that existing exemption. 
 
                                                                                                                                                              
the record does not always indicate that they would fail to qualify as such under the Office’s 
proposed definition.  In at least some instances, it seems they would.  For example, proponents 
reference Rhizome, a digital institution that operates multiple archives and is affiliated with the 
New Museum.  See id. (citing R
HIZOME, http://rhizome.org/about/ (last visited, Sept. 26, 2018).  
Lyndsey Moulds, a software curator at Rhizome, testified at the hearing that museums have a 
particular need for this exemption.  Tr. at 176:01–17 (Apr. 12, 2018) (Moulds, Rhizome).   
1566 See 2003 Recommendation at 51; S. REP. NO. 105-190, at 62 (1998). 

[PAGE 258]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
255 
Accordingly, the Acting Register recommends that the Librarian designate the following 
class: 
(i) Computer programs, except video games, that have been lawfully acquired 
and that are no longer reasonably available in the commercial marketplace, 
solely for the purpose of lawful preservation of a computer program, or of 
digital materials dependent upon a computer program as a condition of access, 
by an eligible library, archives, or museum, where such activities are carried 
out without any purpose of direct or indirect commercial advantage and the 
program is not distributed or made available outside of the physical premises 
of the eligible library, archives, or museum. 
(ii) For purposes of the exemption in paragraph (b)(13)(i) of this section, a 
library, archives, or museum is considered “eligible” if— 
(A) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are open to the 
public and/or are routinely made available to researchers who are not 
affiliated with the library, archives, or museum; 
(B) The library, archives, or museum has a public service mission; 
(C) The library, archives, or museum’s trained staff or volunteers 
provide professional services normally associated with libraries, 
archives, or museums; 
(D) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are composed of 
lawfully acquired and/or licensed materials; and 
(E) The library, archives, or museum implements reasonable digital 
security measures as appropriate for the activities permitted by this 
paragraph (b)(13). 
I. Proposed Class 8:  Computer Programs – Video Game Preservation 
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption 
Class 8 proponents seek to expand the current exemption that allows eligible institutions 
to circumvent access controls to preserve video games for which external server support 
has been discontinued.1567  As explained in the 2015 Recommendation, some video 
games “require a network connection to a remote server operated by the game’s 
                                                      
1567 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(8) (2016). 

[PAGE 259]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
256 
developer” before the video game can be accessed and played.1568  When the developer 
takes such a server offline, a game can be rendered unplayable or limited to certain 
functions, such as single-player play or multiplayer play on a local network.1569  The 
current exemption allows an eligible library, archives, or museum to circumvent this 
type of authentication mechanism to preserve lawfully acquired games.  As relevant 
here, the exemption is limited to games acquired in “complete” form—those that can be 
played without accessing or reproducing copyrightable content stored or previously 
stored on an external computer server— and requires that the video game not be 
distributed or made available outside of the physical premises of the eligible institution.   
The Museum of Art and Digital Entertainment (“MADE”) filed a petition seeking to 
expand the exemption to allow for circumvention of video games that need to access 
creative content stored on a remote server, which MADE refers to as “online games.”1570  
It also seeks to broaden the class of users of the exemption, currently limited to eligible 
libraries, archives, or museums, to include volunteer “affiliate archivists” under the 
supervision of those entities.  While nothing in the existing exemption prohibits library, 
archive, or museum volunteers from engaging in circumvention of TPMs to preserve 
video games, this request appears directed at loosening the current restriction on 
distributing or making the game available outside the institution’s physical premises.1571  
Specifically, MADE proposes amending the existing exemption language by adding the 
language in bold below: 
(i) Video games in the form of computer programs embodied in physical or 
downloaded formats that have been lawfully acquired as complete games, when 
the copyright owner or its authorized representative has ceased to provide access 
to an external computer server necessary to either facilitate an authentication 
process to enable local gameplay or to conduct online gameplay, solely for the 
purpose of: 
(A) Permitting access to the video game to allow copying and 
modification of the computer program to restore access to the game for 
personal, local gameplay on a personal computer or video game console; 
or  
(B) Permitting access to the video game to allow copying and 
modification of the computer program to restore access to the game on a 
personal computer or video game console when necessary to allow 
                                                      
1568 2015 Recommendation at 321. 
1569 Id. 
1570 MADE Class 8 Pet. at 2; MADE Class 8 Initial at 2. 
1571 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(8)(i)(B) (2016). 

[PAGE 260]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
257 
preservation of the game in a playable form by an eligible library, 
archives or museum, or an eligible library, archives or museum’s 
eligible affiliate, where such activities are carried out without any 
purpose of direct or indirect commercial advantage and the video game is 
not distributed or made available to the public outside of the physical 
premises of the eligible library, archives or museum. 
(ii) Computer programs used to operate video game consoles solely to the extent 
necessary for an eligible library, archives or museum, or an eligible library, 
archives or museum’s eligible affiliate, to engage in the preservation activities 
described in paragraph (i)(B).  
(iii) For purposes of the exemptions in paragraphs (i) and (ii), the following 
definitions shall apply:  
(A) “Complete games” means video games that can be played by users 
without accessing or reproducing copyrightable content stored or 
previously stored on an external computer server, or video games that 
can be played by users through lawful access of game content stored or 
previously stored on an external computer server. 
(B) “Ceased to provide access” means that the copyright owner or its 
authorized representative has either issued an affirmative statement 
indicating that external server support for the video game has ended and 
such support is in fact no longer available or, alternatively, server support 
has been discontinued for a period of at least six months; provided, 
however, that server support has not since been restored.  
(C) “Local gameplay” means gameplay conducted on a personal 
computer or video game console, or locally connected personal 
computers or consoles, and not through an online service or facility.  
(D) “Online gameplay” means gameplay conducted on a personal 
computer or video game console using an external computer server. 
(D) (E) A library, archives or museum is considered “eligible” when the 
collections of the library, archives or museum are open to the public 
and/or are routinely made available to researchers who are not affiliated 
with the library, archives or museum.  

[PAGE 261]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
258 
(F) An affiliate of a library, archives, or museum is considered “eligible” 
when engaged in the lawful preservation of video games under the 
supervision of an eligible library, archives, or museum.1572 
Comments supporting the proposed expansion were filed by Consumers Union, FSF, 
MADE, Public Knowledge, and forty-seven individuals.1573  ESA and Joint Creators II 
oppose expanding the class. 
b. Overview of Issues 
In recommending an exemption for video game preservation in 2015, the Register noted 
“the enormous value of video games to our culture and economy.”1574  While finding 
that “[t]he record clearly establishes that libraries and archives, along with museums, 
engage in valuable preservation activities with respect to video games,” she also found it 
necessary to refine the class definition to reflect the specific evidentiary findings in that 
proceeding.1575   
The existing exemption does not include games that require access to copyrightable 
content previously stored on an external server for two reasons.  First, the 2015 
proponents excluded from their request both games that reside entirely on a remote 
server and games that constitute “persistent worlds.”1576  For many games, remote 
servers are used to host creative content such as characters, maps, or items, as well as 
copyrightable software architecture, and to allow for multiplayer play over the 
internet.1577  Persistent worlds include games, such as massively-multiplayer online 
games (“MMOs”), that “require robust servers designed to host hundreds, if not 
thousands of simultaneous players, and cannot generally be re-created after a shutdown 
                                                      
1572 MADE Class 8 Initial at 6–8. 
1573 The individual commenters are Joshua Adams, Willis Adkins, Imran Aktar, Nathan Benedetti, 
Chris Boehm, Andrew Borman, Kristian Brucaj, Edward Burke, Stephen Burkett, Aaron Bush, 
Brandon Costner, Christian David, Michael Dobbs, John Dolph, Frank Randal l “Randy” Farmer, 
Brendan Giddens, Mike Grafius, Edward Griffith, Jeff Hanson, Jerrod Howland, Sheryl Knowles, 
Joseph Kwiatkowski, Judah Lindsey, Drew Littrell, Jodee Luke, Nate Miller, David N, Taylor 
Nodell, Austin Olin, Craig Patterson, Michael Patukonis, Joe Public, Sean Raines, Devon 
Reynolds, Patrick Rorie, Brian Sears, Clifford Sheridan, Catherine Silverberg, Elijah Smith, Brian 
Spicer, Arthur Stubblefield, Matthew Temple, Johnny van Heteren, Travis Vandenbrul, John 
Williams, John Young, and one anonymous commenter. 
1574 2015 Recommendation at 335. 
1575 Id. at 350–51. 
1576 Id. at 323. 
1577 See Tr. at 48:05–10 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Clarendon) (describing how a server engages in collision 
detection); Tr. at 40:18–21, 58:26–59:16 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Englund, ESA) (noting that maps and 
game logic are stored remotely). 

[PAGE 262]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
259 
without the cooperation of the game’s developer.”1578  Because these types of games 
were not at issue in 2015, the current exemption excludes them through language 
limiting its reach to “complete games”— a requirement that the Register found to be “an 
important limitation.”1579  The proposed expansion would extend the class to include 
multiplayer games, persistent worlds, and other video games where creative works are 
“stored or [were] previously stored on an external computer server.”1580   
Second, the Register also concluded that engaging in multiplayer play over the internet, 
generally, would likely implicate section 1201(a)(2)’s anti-trafficking provisions, as 
“[r]einstating multiplayer play may require not only replicating or creating new 
protocols that communicate with games, but also launching a new centralized server 
and distributing the new protocols to [remotely-located] gamers.”1581  Instead, the 
Register suggested that the two categories of users contemplated in the exemption—
gamers who engage in continued recreational play and preservationists— could still 
engage in local multiplayer play at the same physical premises using, for example, 
multiple controllers on a single device or a local area network without the need to 
implement a new matchmaking service.
1582   
MADE contends that the current exemption, while helpful, does not allow it to preserve 
the growing number of online video games for future generations to study.
1583  
Proponents explain that libraries, archives, and museums (collectively “preservation 
institutions”) cannot engage in certain preservation activities involving online games 
without either copying the game’s server code or reconstructing that server’s 
functionality, which would also require an exemption to circumvent TPMs on these 
works.1584   
MADE asserts that there are multiple scenarios that could enable it to legally acquire a 
copy of the server code, including when the game’s copyright owners donate a copy to a 
preservation institution or potentially in circumstances where the work was taken home 
by an employee or salvaged.1585  Copyright owners are also preserving server code 
                                                      
1578 EFF 2015 Class 23 Initial at 2 (internal quotations and citations omitted).  
1579 2015 Recommendation at 350. 
1580 MADE Class 8 Initial at 7; MADE Class 8 Pet. at 2. 
1581 2015 Recommendation at 346. 
1582 Id. at 345. 
1583 MADE Class 8 Initial at 2–3. 
1584 MADE Class 8 Reply at 5 (preservation would be accomplished “through replication and 
modification of a game’s original online client-protocol-server architecture”); Tr. at 71:19–72:21 
(Apr. 13, 2018) (Fries) (describing possessing and recreating server code). 
1585 Tr. at 23:04–12 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Handy, MADE) (noting that source code may be saved in 
people’s garages); Tr. at 69:05–09 (Apr. 13, 2018) (Fries) (noting that copies of games could be 

[PAGE 263]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
260 
themselves, even if the code is held privately.1586  In rare instances, a publisher may sell a 
server to a private collector.1587  But proponents explain that even where an institution 
possesses both a server and a local copy of the game, an exemption may be necessary to 
circumvent, for example, third-party billing software acting as a TPM.1588  As an 
example, proponents describe MADE’s efforts to preserve the game Habitat, for which 
they acquired a server copy via “two original authors of the game.”1589 
If the preservation institution cannot lawfully acquire the server copy of the work, 
proponents seek to reconstruct the necessary server code.  Proponents explain that they 
sometimes anticipatorily use an application program interface (or “ API”) on a local client 
to send instructions to a remote server and monitor the responses while the server is still 
up and running.1590  Preservationists would save any content that has been pushed down 
from a server to local clients during gameplay, which could then be copied and used to 
recreate the game.1591  Finally, proponents plan to write new code that attempts to 
replicate the missing server code, which could include core expressive aspects of the 
game.1592  MADE explains that the amount of creative content that was stored on the 
server and would need to be reconstructed “varies from game to game.”1593 
Proponents believe that the need for an exemption is immediate.  They note that modern 
games increasingly require a remote server to run,1594 citing data indicating that 90% of 
                                                                                                                                                              
taken home by employees or saved from dumpsters); see also Nathan Grayson, Guy Finds 
StarCraft Source Code And Returns It To Blizzard, Gets Free Trip To BlizzCon, KOTAKU (May 3, 2017), 
https://kotaku.com/guy-finds-starcraft-source-code-and-returns-it-to-blizz-1794897125 
(describing finding Blizzard’s StarCraft source code in a box of items purchased on eBay). 
1586 Tr. at 56:11–19 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Englund, ESA). 
1587 See Luke Winkie, These Players Loved Their WoW Servers So Much, They Bought the Old Hardware, 
PCGAMER (Sept. 7, 2017), https://www.pcgamer.com/these-players-loved-their-wow-servers-somuch-they-bought-the-old-hardware/ (noting that video game publisher Blizzard has auctioned 
off retired World of Warcraft blade servers). 
1588 Tr. at 69:17–25 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Walker, Samuelson Law, Tech. & Pub. Policy Clinic). 
1589 MADE Class 8 Initial at App. A-1; see also Tr. at 10:23–24 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Handy, MADE). 
1590 Tr. at 72:11–19 (Apr. 13, 2018) (Fries) (describing using an application program interface on a 
local copy of a game to recreate a server that acts like the original); see also Tr. at 34:24–35:10 (Apr. 
23. 2018) (Walker, Samuelson Law, Tech. & Pub. Policy Clinic); Tr. at 31:12–16 (Apr. 23, 2018) 
(Clarendon). 
1591 See Tr. at 32:04–09 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Clarendon). 
1592 See Tr. at 86:05–08 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Handy, MADE) (describing recreating game maps on a new 
server); Tr. at 72:06–21 (Apr. 13, 2018) (Fries) (describing recreating server software). 
1593 Tr. at 27:26 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Handy, MADE). 
1594 MADE Class 8 Initial at 3–4; Public Knowledge Class 8 Initial at 3. 

[PAGE 264]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
261 
the top-grossing PC and mobile games in 2017 were online-only multiplayer games.1595  
Proponents further observe that companies have been moving more non-multiplayer 
content to remote servers to prevent cheating or to prevent players from having access to 
creative content they have not paid for or have not earned in-game.1596  Finally, they note 
that for games released decades ago, the resources needed for restoration, including 
software engineers who know a game’s architecture, are becoming harder to find.1597   
Public Knowledge suggests that Class 8 should also include video games which may be 
currently available in the marketplace that have received software updates and are thus 
unsupported in their original form.  Using the example of World of Warcraft, a game 
that has had several different updates to its code, Public Knowledge notes that it is 
difficult to determine whether a copyright owner or authorized representative ceased to 
provide access to an external computer in circumstances where an earlier version of a 
game is no longer available, but a later version of that same game remains supported.
1598  
These later versions may include functional updates, security patches, or new creative, 
aesthetic features—all of which may be mandatory for users to continue to play the 
game.1599  Public Knowledge suggests that fan-managed efforts to preserve the initial 
versions of these games have been met with resistance and cease-and-desist notices.1600   
Finally, Public Knowledge claims that it is increasingly unworkable to draw a distinction 
between single-player and multiplayer video games.1601  For example, games can include 
“light social networking elements,” progress saving and inventory synchronization, and 
limited interactions with third parties, which may demonstrate a spectrum between 
connected single-player and dedicated multiplayer games.
1602  On this point specifically, 
the Acting Register notes that the current exemption does not draw a line between 
single-player and multiplayer games, but rather between complete and incomplete 
                                                      
1595 Public Knowledge Class 8 Initial at 3 (citing Worldwide Digital Games Market: October 2017, 
SUPERDATA (Nov. 30, 2017), https://www.superdataresearch.com/us-digital-games-market/). 
1596 See Tr. at 73:24–74:15 (Apr. 13, 2018) (Fries). 
1597 See Tr. at 16:19–17:01 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Handy, MADE).   
1598 Public Knowledge Class 8 Initial at 5; Tr. at 90:13–94:03 (Apr. 13, 2018) (Rose, Public 
Knowledge); see also 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(8)(iii)(B) (2016) (definition of “ceased to provid e 
access”). 
1599 See Tr. at 93:10–15 (Apr. 13, 2018) (Rose, Public Knowledge).  But see Patukonis Class 8 Reply 
at 2 (stating that downloadable content or expansion packs “are most often not required to 
continue to access the original content of the initial purchase”). 
1600 Public Knowledge Class 8 Initial at 5–6. 
1601 Id. at 8–9; Tr. at 82:16–90:01 (Apr. 13, 2018) (Rose, Public Knowledge) (presenting examples of 
games that blur the distinction between single player and multiplayer games). 
1602 Public Knowledge Class 8 Initial at 8–9. 

[PAGE 265]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
262 
games, defining complete games as “video games that can be played by users without 
accessing or reproducing copyrightable content stored or previously stored on an 
external computer server.”1603  The current petition and subsequent discussion are 
directed at expanding the definition of “complete games.”  To the extent that Public 
Knowledge’s concerns are directed at expanding the “continued play” arm of the 
exemption, these concerns were not raised at the petition stage and thus are not before 
the Office in this proceeding.  The Acting Register notes, however, that the current 
exemption does not foreclose all multiplayer functionality.
1604  
As in the last rulemaking, all participants praise video games as an important form of 
cultural expression.  But ESA and Joint Creators II believe that no expansion is needed 
because existing preservation efforts by video game companies and preservation 
institutions, coupled with the current video game preservation exemption, are sufficient 
to address any legitimate preservation needs.
1605  ESA explains that “its member 
companies are committed to, and actively support, serious professional efforts to 
preserve video games and recognize the industry’s creative contributions under 
circumstances that do not jeopardize game companies’ rights under copyright law.”1606  
As detailed below, ESA contests that proponents’ activities would be noninfringing, or 
that they have otherwise met the statutory requirements for an exemption.  Opponents 
further suggest that the record indicates that the purpose of the expanded exemption is 
not truly for preservation uses, but rather to enable recreational play of these games, and 
that therefore no expansion is warranted.
1607   
2. Discussion 
The Acting Register notes that the proponents again make impassioned arguments 
related to the cultural, historical, and educational significance of video games.  Several 
commenters detailed how video games have been personally significant to their lives.1608  
The Acting Register and all participants agree that video games are culturally significant 
                                                      
1603 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(8)(iii)(A) (2016). 
1604 See 2015 Recommendation at 345.  
1605 ESA Class 8 Opp’n at 7, 21; Joint Creators II Class 8 Opp’n at 6–9. 
1606 ESA Class 8 Opp’n at 2. 
1607 Id. at 22; Joint Creators II Class 8 Opp’n at 4. 
1608 See, e.g., Anonymous Class 8 Initial at 2 (describing playing an online character until it was 
nearly “old enough to vote”); Borman Class 8 Initial at 2; Dobbs Class 8 Initial at 2 (“I would love 
to one day take my children on a digital tour of the games of my childhood.”); Giddens Class 8 
Initial at 2 (“[Gamers] can and do develop a strong attachment to the characters and items that 
they’ve collected over the years as well as the communities that form.”); Kwiatkowski Class 8 
Reply at 2; Reynolds Class 8 Reply at 2 (noting that gamers have met spouses on shutdown 
games and that shutdowns can feel “like losing a family member”). 

[PAGE 266]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
263 
and worth preserving.  It is heartening that some preservation work is already being 
performed at the Video Game History Foundation, the Museum of Modern Art, the 
International Center for the History of Electronic Games at the Strong Museum of Play, 
Stanford University, and the Universities of Texas and Michigan, as well as by both 
opponents and proponents in this class.1609  While these preservation efforts may be 
aided by the existing exemption, it does not cover all games, leaving gaps in 
preservation efforts.1610  For example, as an Xbox co-creator noted, some MMOs have 
unique cultural importance because “they’re the first virtual worlds.  They’re the first 
times that human beings got together and met in a virtual space.”
1611  At the same time, 
proponents must satisfy the statutory elements for an exemption, and any exemption 
must adhere to the statutory limits delineated by Congress. 
Proponents rely on fair use as the basis for the proposed exemption.  While proponents 
also suggest that the preservation activities are noninfringing under section 108, in 
context it is clear that proponents are arguing that section 108 serves as a useful 
supplement to a section 107 analysis. 
a. Works Protected by Copyright 
There is no dispute that video games, as computer programs or audiovisual works, are 
works protected by copyright.
1612  While this class encompasses functional aspects of the 
game software, the proposed expansion also concerns preservation of highly expressive 
and creative game elements previously stored on external servers.1613 
b. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Proponents describe two methods of preserving video games stored, in part, on remote 
servers: 
There’s really two choices.  One is that you have access to the original 
source code.  So, in the case of MADE, they’re trying to bring back an 
                                                      
1609 MADE Class 8 Initial at 4 & App. A-6–9; ESA Class 8 Opp’n at 7; Tr. at 09:20–10:05 (Apr. 23, 
2018) (Handy, MADE). 
1610 In addition, as noted in Class 9, the Acting Register is also recommending an expanded 
exemption for games that do not require a server connection, such as Commodore 64 games.  
1611 Tr. at 65:05–12 (Apr. 13, 2018) (Fries); see id. at 63:18–64:20. 
1612 See U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, COMPENDIUM OF U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE PRACTICES § 618.8(A)(2) 
(3d ed. 2018). 
1613 Cf. 2015 Recommendation at 326 (suggestion by prior proponents EFF/Albert that previous 
exemption request, excluding the need to access copyrightable content on external servers, would 
involve “changing only functional aspects of the software, not expressive elements such as 
graphics or audio.”) (citation omitted). 

[PAGE 267]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
264 
MMO and an early online game, and fortunately, they had access to both 
the source code and to the hardware itself, the custom hardware that it 
ran on. . . .  The second option is to recreate the server software.  That has 
been done illegally by people around some very popular games, for 
example, people have built [an] illegal version of the server-side code for 
World of Warcraft.1614   
These activities would implicate the reproduction right, the right to prepare derivative 
works, or both.  MADE asserts these preservation activities conform to the contours of 
section 108 and are fair uses. 
In many respects, the current class represents a sequel to the 2015 video game discussion, 
where the Register noted that participants agreed “that preservation, research and study 
sometimes are permitted as fair uses,” but noted that “[t]he consensus evaporates . . . 
when considering the types of activities and actors properly considered as engaging in 
‘preservation.’”1615  The two methods for obtaining the copyrightable content stored on 
remote servers pose related but distinct questions with respect to infringement; 
participants’ comments are discussed in full before the Acting Register sets out her 
analysis. 
Under the first fair use factor, the purpose and character of the use, MADE argues that 
“the preservation of abandoned online video games serves critical, educational, and 
scholarly purposes consistent with the examples provided in [the preamble of] § 107,” 
including criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, and research.1616  It 
argues that uses that provide substantial public benefits, including preservation of video 
games, are favored under this factor.1617  Other commenters concur, with Public 
Knowledge stating that online multiplayer games have been used by a wide variety of 
academic researchers, including economists, epidemiologists, terrorism researchers, 
neurobiologists, social scientists, psychologists, and others.
1618  Randy Farmer notes that 
the MMO Habitat, a game he co-created, is historically significant and worthy of study 
because its code was a predecessor to the JavaScript Object Notation messaging 
standard.1619 
MADE also argues that preserving abandoned games is a highly transformative use, 
because preservation “imbues preserved games with new meaning and message (by 
                                                      
1614 Tr. at 71:17–72:10 (Apr. 13, 2018) (Fries). 
1615 2015 Recommendation at 340 (citation omitted). 
1616 MADE Class 8 Initial at 17. 
1617 Id. at 19 (citing Sega, 977 F.2d at 1523). 
1618 Public Knowledge Class 8 Initial at 6–7; see also Burkett Class 8 Initial at 2. 
1619 Farmer Class 8 Initial at 2. 

[PAGE 268]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
265 
turning games into objects for scholarly attention) and . . . adds new expression (in the 
form of new software code).”1620  MADE cites Perfect 10, Inc. v. Amazon.com, Inc., and 
Authors Guild, Inc. v. HathiTrust for the proposition that “even complete recreations of a 
copyrighted work for a different purpose can be transformative.”1621 
With regard to the second fair use factor, the nature of the copyrighted work, MADE 
acknowledges that video games contain both expressive and functional elements, but 
argues that when it is necessary to copy expressive elements to perform the functional 
elements, this factor favors fair use.1622  For the third fair use factor, MADE 
acknowledges that the copying at issue is “substantial” and may require copying and 
modifying “all [] of a game’s architecture as well as some expressive elements,” but 
contends such copying is not “‘excessive’ because it is necessary to the transformative 
and socially beneficial purpose of preserving the work.”1623   
On the fourth factor, MADE contends that because the works at issue are no longer sold 
through normal channels, there is “little-to-no market” for the video games it seeks to 
preserve.1624  MADE also notes that the contours of the proposed exemption provide that 
the preservation activities cannot be for “direct or indirect commercial advantage” and 
that such games cannot be distributed outside of the eligible preservation institution.1625 
Underlying many of opponents’ objections to proponents’ fair use arguments is a belief 
that proponents’ intended use of the video games is not a true preservation use.  Instead, 
opponents contend that proponents wish to engage in recreational play that could 
function as a market substitute.1626  ESA believes that because the uses at issue are nontransformative and commercial, the first fair use factor weighs against fair use.1627   
ESA maintains that MADE essentially is a commercial actor rather than a nonprofit 
museum, because it charges an admission fee, promotes the fact that visitors can play 
video games at its museum, and engages in the public performance and display of 
                                                      
1620 MADE Class 8 Reply at 20. 
1621 MADE Class 8 Reply at 20 (citing Perfect 10, 508 F.3d at 1165–66, and HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 
97). 
1622 MADE Class 8 Initial at 20. 
1623 Id. at 21 (citing 2015 Recommendation at 341); Tr. at 27:26 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Handy, MADE) 
(noting that the amount of a video game that stored on remote servers “varies from game to 
game”). 
1624 MADE Class 8 Initial at 22. 
1625 Id. at 23 (referencing 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(8)(i)(B) (2016)). 
1626 Joint Creators II Class 8 Opp’n at 12. 
1627 ESA Class 8 Opp’n at 32. 

[PAGE 269]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
266 
games rather than only reproduction and modification for preservation purposes.1628  
ESA observes that nonprofit organizations are not immune from making commercial 
uses of works, especially when they engage in “repeated and exploitative copying of 
copyrighted works.”1629  Further, ESA points out that direct economic benefit is not 
required to demonstrate commercial use.1630   
ESA also argues that the uses at issue are non-transformative, as proponents’ goal is “to 
emerge with a copy that faithfully reproduces expressive elements of the original game 
experience.”1631  According to ESA, such an act “introduces no new expression, meaning 
or message,” but “simply reproduces a work to enable the use for which it was 
originally created.”1632  In addition, Joint Creators II suggest that to recreate a server, 
preservationists would require “unauthorized hacking into computer servers” before 
they are decommissioned, which would “likely not only violate the Copyright Act—it 
would also likely violate the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act.”
1633 
Regarding the second factor specifically, ESA asserts that a finding that the works at 
issue are highly creative might not “counsel against fair use if proponents proposed 
copying only functional elements of video game software.”1634  But ESA believes that 
proponents wish to copy or recreate “game server software that controls expressive 
aspects of video games, as well as server-based game elements” to engage in public 
performance and display, not strictly preservation, of those works.
1635  In addition, ESA 
asserts that the server copies at issue here are unpublished, which it argues weighs 
strongly against a finding of fair use.
1636  As to the third factor, ESA contends that the 
intended use here is both significant and substantial.  In its view, the anticipated uses 
involve “durable copying and persistent public performance and display of large and 
important parts of video games,” which ESA argues is significantly different than the 
small, but necessary, modifications to the copies of local games considered in the 2015 
rulemaking.
1637   
                                                      
1628 Id. at 26–27, 33; see also Tr. at 52:07–53:04 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II). 
1629 ESA Class 8 Opp’n at 32 (quoting Wall Data, 447 F.3d at 779). 
1630 Id. (citing Napster, 239 F.3d at 1015).   
1631 Id. at 32–33.   
1632 Id. at 33.   
1633 Joint Creators II Class 8 Opp’n at 10 (citing 18 U.S.C. § 1030). 
1634 ESA Class 8 Opp’n at 34. 
1635 Id. 
1636 Id. at 36 (citing Harper & Row, 471 U.S. at 549–55).   
1637 Id. at 35. 

[PAGE 270]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
267 
Finally, as to the fourth factor, ESA argues that the video game software now at issue is 
distinguishable from that in the 2015 rulemaking, which should result in a different 
analysis of market effect.  First, ESA notes again that the server copy proponents wish to 
acquire is an unpublished work that has never been distributed to the public.1638  
Opponents also explain that the games covered under the existing and proposed 
exemption are not truly “abandoned” as proponents suggest.  ESA asserts that 
abandonment is a term of art, requiring a demonstrated intent “to surrender rights in the 
work”; here, by contrast, the periodic discontinuation of certain games is often a 
strategic choice to drive interest in a sequel or other derivative work.1639  It notes that 
video game publishers frequently “revive” their older works for new platforms or due 
to the increased interest in “retro gaming.”
1640   
As noted, the activities described by proponents involve two distinct uses:  (1) those that 
would require complete, or at least significant, recreation of a game’s original server 
software, and (2) the preservation of a game where a copy of the decommissioned server 
software has been lawfully acquired into the collections of an eligible institution.1641  
Because these activities require different fair use analyses, the Acting Register addresses 
them separately below.  The Acting Register also separately addresses the question of 
“affiliate archivists” in any exemption. 
i. Recreation of Server Software 
The Acting Register concludes that the record is insufficient to support a finding that the 
recreation of video game server software as described by proponents is likely to be a fair 
use.  To start, the 2015 rulemaking recognized that preservation for scholarship and 
research is a favored use under the law.
1642  But in doing so, the Register concluded that 
“section 108 provides useful and important guidance as to Congress’s intent regarding 
the nature and scope of legitimate preservation activities, and hence the types of uses 
that are most likely to qualify as fair in this area.”1643  Indeed, proponents argue that the 
expanded exemption would be “within the scope of legitimate preservation activities 
                                                      
1638 Id. at 36 (citing Harper & Row, 471 U.S. at 549–55). 
1639 Id. 
1640 Id.; Joint Creators II Class 8 Opp’n at 12. 
1641 See Tr. at 81:11–16 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Handy, MADE) (“if [original artists] don’t have the actual 
source codes or we don’t have access to the source codes, we will work with them to re-create the 
original server”); see also MADE Class 8 Initial at App. A-1 (Preservationists of video games ask 
themselves “do we rewrite [the game server] from scratch, or try to get the old server running?”). 
1642 See, e.g., 2015 Recommendation at 343 (citing 17 U.S.C. § 107).  
1643 Id. at 342; see also id. at 341 (rejecting proposition that “anyone who seeks to continue playing a 
video game should be treated as a de facto preservationist”). 

[PAGE 271]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
268 
contemplated by § 108.”1644  Yet the exception for library preservation under section 108 
is limited to works “currently in the collections” of a preservation institution and would 
not extend to works that are reconstructed from different sources.1645  A user’s status as a 
library, archives, or museum alone does not compel the conclusion that its activities 
necessarily qualify as fair use, for “we must consider not only the nature of the user, but 
the use itself.”1646   
Here, a number of scenarios described by proponents do not involve preserving server 
software that is already in an institution’s collections.
1647  Instead, proponents indicate 
that some uses would involve substantially rewriting the server software to approximate 
how the original would have functioned.1648  Proponents thus describe something more 
akin to reconstructing the remote server, rather than preserving that work.1649   
The departure of this aspect of the proposal from congressionally-established contours 
of preservation has implications for the fair use analysis.1650  In this scenario, the lack of a 
                                                      
1644 MADE Class 8 Initial at 13–14. 
1645 17 U.S.C. § 108(b)(1). 
1646 Cambridge Univ. Press, 769 F.3d at 1264–65; accord Am. Geophysical Union, 60 F.3d at 921–22 (“[A] 
court’s focus should be on the use of the copyrighted material and not simply on the user”); see 
also Campbell, 510 U.S.at 584 (“[T]he mere fact that a use is educational and not for profit does not 
insulate it from a finding of infringement, any more than the commercial character of a use bars a 
finding of fairness.”). 
1647 See Tr. at 71:17–72:10 (Apr. 13, 2018) (Fries). 
1648 See Tr. at 81:11–16 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Handy, MADE); Tr. at 72:06–72:21 (Apr. 13, 2018) (Fries). 
1649 See, e.g., Karen Kroslowitz, Preservation, Conservation, Restoration: What’s the Difference?, 
COMPUT. HISTORY MUSEUM (Oct. 26, 2012), http://www.computerhistory.org/atchm/preservationconservation-restoration-whats-the-difference/ (“Preservation—or more accurately preventive 
conservation—is the practice of maintaining artifacts by providing a stable storage or display 
environment in order to minimize further damage or deterioration. . . .  Restoration equals 
permanent change.  Cleaning and replacing significant parts, whether original to the object’s 
manufacturer or not, alter the historical integrity of an artifact.  Once changed an object’s 
provenance has also been altered and it is no longer a true document of its place in history.  
That’s a big deal in museums, which are considered by the majority of Americans to be the most 
trustworthy source of information about the past.”); MADE Class 8 Initial at App. A-6 (statement 
of Henry Lowood, Curator, Stanford Univ.) (“ Access to the original software and to the digital 
assets (maps, audio files, character animations, etc.) that make up a game or virtual environment 
is fundamentally important.  If a game server is shut down without provisions being made for 
access to the original software, preservation is impossible.”). 
1650 By analogy, in the related context of patent law, users may replace an unprotected element, 
but not engage in activity significant enough to constitute “reconstruction” of the patented 
article.  See Aro Mfg. Co. v. Convertible Top Replacement Co., 365 U.S. 336, 346 (1961) (replacement of 

[PAGE 272]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
269 
copy of the work distinguishes proponents’ situation from much of the cases and 
reasoning they rely upon in claiming that their activities serve a favored purpose.  For 
example, in HathiTrust, the preserved books at issue were not reconstructed, but were 
reproduced in digital copies containing “the full text of the work, in a machine readable 
format, as well as the images of each page in the work as they appear in the print 
version.”1651  Similarly, much of proponents’ analysis of the section 107 factors appears 
to assume that the preservation activities will require the access to and copying of 
server-side software,1652 instances that the Acting Register analyzes separately below. 
Moreover, the reconstruction of a work implicates copyright owners’ exclusive right to 
prepare derivative works—which is generally not covered by section 108’s exceptions 
for preservation activities.1653  While such activities may advance preservation interests 
or be a fair use in particular instances, that determination will vary based on casespecific factors such as the amount and substantiality of the changes made to the 
original.  While proponents presumably seek to faithfully replicate the experience of the 
original game to the extent possible, the evidence indicates that in at least some 
circumstances the resulting work is considerably different than the original.  MADE 
states that to preserve video games that rely on remote servers, “an online game’s 
architecture must be modified to work with new operating systems and hardware, 
making the preserved game substantially different from the original:  same game, 
different code.”1654   
These uncertainties preclude broad generalizations as to the nature of the activities 
described by proponents, in the instances where they lack a copy of the source code 
previously hosted on the decommissioned external server.
1655  Accordingly, and without 
                                                                                                                                                              
spent fabric in convertible car top was noninfringing repair because it was not a “true 
reconstruction of the entity as to in fact make a new article”) (internal citations omitted).  
1651 HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 92 (emphasis omitted).   
1652 See MADE Class 8 Initial at 19–22; see also id. at App. A-6–8 (statement of Henry Lowood) 
(“[P]reservation without access to the software, both as data and as an executable program, 
becomes a meaningless activity.”). 
1653 See 17 U.S.C. § 108(a)–(g) (except for the limited circumstances under subsections (h)–(i), 
section 108 only contemplates the reproduction and distribution rights).   
1654 MADE Class 8 Reply at 21–22.  
1655 The record in this class generally discusses that content stored on some remote servers can 
range from small amounts of mostly functional code to larger amounts of code, including highly 
creative content.  See MADE Class 8 Initial at 20; Tr. at 27:26 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Handy, MADE); Tr. 
at 28:17–22 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Clarendon).  In instances where the missing server code is largely 
functional and of a lesser amount, the proposed uses more likely would be fair, but without a 
record that includes specific examples of these games, the Acting Register cannot evaluate 
further. 

[PAGE 273]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
270 
prejudging the analysis as to any specific online video game, the Acting Register cannot 
conclude that these activities are likely to qualify as fair uses.   
Finally, Public Knowledge’s interest in allowing preservation institutions to recreate 
server copies of works after the game’s software is updated, and where the updated 
version remains available, would involve preservation via recreation of copies of the 
game while it is still available in the market.  Proponents’ comments do not adequately 
address how this difference may alter the infringement analysis, and it is a potentially 
significant departure from the current exemption, which focuses on discontinued server 
support for the game, generally.1656  Further, it is unclear that practicing preservationists 
are currently interested in addressing this category of software.1657  The Acting Register 
therefore does not find it appropriate to consider amending the current regulatory 
definition of “ceased to provide access.” 
ii. Preservation of Lawfully Acquired Server Software 
A different analysis is warranted in cases where an institution is able to legally obtain a 
complete copy of remote server video game software and seeks to reproduce and modify 
that copy to preserve it.  The Acting Register again finds that section 108 provides 
“useful and important guidance” as to whether these activities are likely to be fair.
1658  
The current exemption allows for circumvention of self-contained copies of video games, 
that is, games that do not require creation of a new server to continue to play the game.  
Here, preservationists suggest they could lawfully acquire both a server and a local copy 
of a video game, which would then be “currently in the collections” of eligible 
institutions under section 108.1659  Although the server and local copies of games may 
contain core expressive elements of the work, any necessary modifications to the 
lawfully acquired games would be for largely functional purposes, such as modifying 
software architecture or protocols to ensure that game servers and clients can 
communicate with each other in a modern environment.1660  In this instance, the 
reproduction and modification of functional aspects of video game software to enable 
                                                      
1656 See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(8)(iii)(B) (2016).  As noted in the 2015 Recommendation, this 
definition was originally proposed by proponents on behalf of preservationist institutions.  See 
2015 Recommendation at 350. 
1657 See, e.g., Tr. at 36:05–10 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Handy, MADE) (“So this exemption is not for World of 
Warcraft.  And I’m going to use World of Warcraft as an example.  World of Warcraft has 
expansions. . . .  They distributed [versions of the game] on a disk on a client.  So that data is out 
there already.”). 
1658 See 2015 Recommendation at 342.   
1659 17 U.S.C. § 108(b)(1). 
1660 See MADE Class 8 Initial at 20; Tr. at 71:22–72:07 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Walker, Samuelson Law, 
Tech. & Pub. Policy Clinic); Tr. at 35:24–36:03 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Handy, MADE). 

[PAGE 274]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
271 
noncommercial preservation and research would seem likely to be a fair use, following a 
similar analysis as that which established the 2015 exemption.1661   
Indeed, ESA itself implies that in a circumstance where the server was handed over by 
the copyright owner, an exemption would not even be necessary.1662  But an exemption 
may be helpful in just the circumstance that was presented by MADE— where the 
preservation institution is in legal possession of both the server and local copy of the 
game, but is still prevented from preserving the game because of an access code.  For 
example, in the Habitat instance, an additional piece of code (obsolete billing code) acted 
as a TPM.1663  Although the evidence here demonstrates that obtaining a server copy is 
difficult, it appears games’ server copies can be acquired through donation, salvage, or 
sale.1664  In light of this, and recognizing the valuable and important goals of 
preservation institutions, the Acting Register concludes that proponents have 
sufficiently demonstrated a set of proposed uses that are likely noninfringing when they 
have lawfully acquired the essential component works that comprise the game.1665   
iii. Use of Affiliate Archivists 
Next, the Acting Register considers “affiliate archivists,” a proposed class of users 
engaged in lawful game preservation under the supervision of libraries, archives, or 
museums.1666  MADE believes that preservation institutions would benefit from an 
exemption to cover these users, so that they can contribute expertise to preservation 
                                                      
1661 See 2015 Recommendation at 341–44 (applying section 108 as guidance to limit class and 
analyzing fair use factors).   
1662 See Tr. at 41:25–42:10 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Englund, ESA). 
1663 See Tr. at 69:16–25 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Walker, Samuelson Law, Tech. & Pub. Policy Clinic). 
1664 See MADE Class 8 Initial at App. A-1 (donation); Tr. at 69:05–09 (Apr. 13, 2018) (Fries) 
(salvage); Tr. at 23:04–12 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Handy, MADE) (source code donated from garages).  
While ESA alleges game server software to be an unpublished work, ESA Class 8 Opp’n at 36, the 
proposed exemption would apply only in situations where the server software is lawfully 
acquired by an eligible institution.  Section 108 authorizes preservation of unpublished works in 
an eligible institution’s collections, see 17 U.S.C. § 108(b), suggesting that such activity is likely to 
fall within the parameters of fair use.  Moreover, the Copyright Act expressly provides that “[t]he 
fact that a work is unpublished shall not itself bar a finding of fair use if such finding is made 
upon consideration of all the . . . factors.”  17 U.S.C. § 107.   
1665 See Tr. at 69:05–09 (Apr. 13, 2018) (Fries) (“Most of what exists today either is something that 
employees were working on and took home to their house or stuff that people rescued out of 
dumpsters when the companies went out of business.”).  The Acting Register notes that the 
current exemption applies to circumvention by qualifying users, including gamers or 
preservationists, who lawfully acquire copies of video games, and does not apply to 
circumvention performed by third parties. 
1666 MADE Class 8 Initial at 4.   

[PAGE 275]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
272 
efforts from remote locations without facing any potential liability risk.1667  MADE notes 
that, based on its experience in preserving Habitat, preservation of a single work in this 
class could include “thousands of person-hours,” encompassing both non-expert 
volunteers working on low-level preservation tasks, as well as software engineers with 
“extremely specialized knowledge.”1668  While the proposed language is arguably 
ambiguous concerning whether the affiliates themselves would be required to engage in 
circumvention, proponents subsequently confirmed that this was intended by their 
language.1669 
Opponents vehemently object to the use of affiliate archivists, contending that there is a 
heightened risk of market harm if access to video games in the collection of the eligible 
organization is no longer limited to the premises of the organization.1670  ESA contends 
that proponents have not explained how preservation institutions “could effectively 
supervise a legion of affiliates,” suggesting that “[i]t is not hard to imagine an 
organization opening up ‘affiliation’ to anyone who volunteers through completion of 
an online form, without any meaningful verification of the affiliates’ identities or 
intentions.”1671  As ESA puts it, “[i]n effect, the request would dissolve any meaningful 
distinction between preservationists and recreational gamers, and invite substantial 
mischief.”1672  They further note that an expanded user class would allow affiliates to 
engage in console jailbreaking in their homes.1673  In Joint Creators II’s view, such 
console jailbreaking “would put at risk other content accessible via the consoles, such as 
motion pictures and recorded music.”1674   
MADE replies that affiliate archivists would be “limited by the policies of their 
institutional sponsors,” as well as the restrictions found in the exemption.1675  When 
pressed to describe how affiliate archivists would be supervised, MADE suggested it 
could use Github to limit access to and downloading of the server’s code.1676  MADE also 
                                                      
1667 Tr. at 84:04–07 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Handy, MADE). 
1668 MADE Class 8 Initial at App. A-1; Tr. at 96:14–23, 127:01–15 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Handy, MADE) 
(discussing restoration of Habitat). 
1669 Tr. at 85:18–22 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Handy, MADE). 
1670 ESA Class 8 Opp’n at 36–37. 
1671 Id. at 9, 29. 
1672 Id. at 4. 
1673 Id. Opp’n at 36–37. 
1674 Joint Creators II Class 8 Opp’n at 14. 
1675 MADE Class 8 Reply at 7, 16. 
1676 Tr. at 89:12–21 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Handy, MADE).  Github is a platform for hosting software 
code designed around Git, a system to “track software written by a large, disparate group, rather 
than by a managed team at a software company.  It allows multiple developers to work on the 

[PAGE 276]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
273 
suggested it could ask how other museums handle volunteer supervision, but added 
that software preservation is “a very messy field.”1677  Further, MADE acknowledges that 
different affiliate archivists would need to share circumvention technology among 
themselves to restore access to the game.1678 
As addressed in prior rulemakings, “circumvention of console restrictions—eve n when 
initially undertaken for salutary purposes—is inextricably linked to and tends to foster 
piracy,” and prior Registers have concluded that modification of console code by 
individual consumers is unlikely to be a fair use.1679  The logic seems to apply equally to 
this request, inasmuch as it allows individuals to circumvent consoles in their own 
homes.  As a representative from MADE pointed out, “all the [preservation] work that 
[currently] is being done in this space is being done by fan groups in [a] completely 
illegal space.”1680   
Further, the proposed class’s loose contemplation of affiliate archivists is not consistent 
with principles surrounding “trained volunteers” in the Copyright Office’s Section 108 
Discussion Document.  This report contemplates volunteers “who provide professional 
services normally associated with a library, archives, or museum,” including “awareness 
of issues and knowledge regarding institutional practices” to guide in the reproduction 
and distribution of copyrighted material.1681  Further, while the Section 108 Study Group 
proposed letting outside contractors perform certain section 108 activities on behalf of a 
qualifying institution, that proposal contained important conditions, including allowing 
only reproduction activities, prohibiting retention of any materials outside of the 
premises of the preservation institution unless essential to an outsourced service, and 
requiring a written agreement between the preservation institution and contractor to 
                                                                                                                                                              
same code in different places, and to integrate their changes later.”  The Economist Explains: What 
is Github?, THE ECONOMIST (June 18, 2018), https://www.economist.com/the-economist-explains/
2018/06/18/what-is-github. 
1677 Tr. at 123:13–18 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Handy, MADE). 
1678 Tr. at 115: 08–11 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Handy, MADE); see also Tr. at 127:07–09 (Apr. 23, 2018) 
(Handy, MADE) (noting that only approximately a dozen people have the particular knowledge 
to work on any single video game preservation project).  But see Tr. at 115:12–19 (Apr. 23, 2018) 
(Deamer, Samuelson Law, Tech. & Pub. Policy Clinic) (suggesting that the trafficking prohibitions 
may not apply to volunteers working for the same organization). 
1679 2012 Recommendation at 43–44; see also 2015 Recommendation at 339–40. 
1680 Tr. at 10:11–13 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Handy, MADE); see also Tr. at 105:04–26, 105:07–11 (Apr. 23, 
2018) (Williams, Joint Creators II); Kyle Orland, Blizzard Shuts Down “Legacy” WoW Fan Server 
Hours After it Goes Up, ARS TECHNICA (July 24, 2017), https://arstechnica.com/gaming/2017/07/
blizzard-shuts-down-legacy-wow-fan-server-hours-after-it-goes-up/. 
1681 Section 108 Discussion Document at 19–20.   

[PAGE 277]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
274 
preserve infringement lawsuits for contractors acting outside of section 108.1682  
Similarly, the Copyright Act’s exceptions for educational institutions engaged in 
distance learning activities require such institutions to “institute[] policies regarding 
copyright” and “provide[] informational materials to faculty, students, and relevant staff 
members that accurately describe, and promote compliance with, the laws of the United 
States relating to copyright.”1683  Here, by contrast, both the proposed language and the 
proponent institutions’ practices seem to lack any such protective guidelines.1684 
Considering all of the above, the Acting Register cannot agree that the use of affiliate 
archivists, as contemplated by MADE, is likely to constitute a fair use.   
To be clear, the existing exemption does not restrict volunteers from engaging in lawful 
preservation efforts that do not involve circumvention of access controls, including 
potentially remote activity to the extent it is sufficiently supervised to constitute 
“preservation . . . by an eligible” sponsoring institution.  On the contrary, the 2015 
Recommendation noted that “interested individuals may be able to contribute to 
valuable preservation efforts by lending their talents and expertise to qualified 
institutions.”
1685  Participants agree that video game preservation is time consuming—in 
the case of Habitat, requiring “countless hours provided by volunteers.”1686  But taking 
Habitat as an example, it also appears that volunteers can be meaningfully engaged in 
preservation activities without engaging in circumvention off-premises.  Because the 
record indicates a patchiness regarding institutional policies for supervising 
preservation activities by volunteers or other third parties, the Acting Register 
                                                      
1682 SECTION 108 STUDY GROUP, THE SECTION 108 STUDY GROUP REPORT 41(Mar. 2008), 
http://www.section108.gov/docs/Sec108StudyGroupReport.pdf; see also Section 108 Discussion 
Document at 49–50. 
1683 17 U.S.C. § 110(2)(D).  This provision also requires such institutions to “provide[] notice to 
students that materials used in connection with the course may be subject to copyright 
protection.”  Id. 
1684 See MADE Class 8 Reply at 17 (“[W]e disagree with Opponents[’] mischaracterization of [the 
Section 108 Study Group] report as establishing strict guidelines for third -parties instead of 
providing general recommendations.  Extensive, ex ante regulation is not recommended by the 
§ 108 Study Group and is unnecessary here.”).  Currently, the MADE’s publicly available 
volunteer sign-up process appears to consist of soliciting contact information, a statement of 
skills, and the question “have you ever been convicted of a felony?”  See MADE, Get Involved, 
https://www.themade.org/get-involved/ (last visited Sept. 27, 2018), (click on “Fill out our 
volunteer sign[-]up sheet here.”).  Indeed, many of the individual commenters appear to 
understand this class as one directed at furthering remote continued play of the game, rather 
than typical preservation efforts.  See, e.g., Consumers Union Class 8 Initial at 2–3; Patukonis 
Class 8 Reply at 2–3. 
1685 2015 Recommendation at 351. 
1686 MADE Class 8 Initial at 27 & App. A-1. 

[PAGE 278]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
275 
encourages eligible institutions interested in growing individual participation to 
establish more robust training and guidelines to facilitate these efforts.  The Section 108 
Discussion Document and Study Group report may provide helpful insight in this 
regard. 
c. Causation 
ESA asserts that the cause of any adverse effect suffered by proponents is not due to “a 
problem caused by TPMs, as opposed to the discontinuation of a video game 
service.”1687  It argues that the server software and other remote content are “not merely 
a TPM controlling access to the local game software,” but are a part of an online service 
where there is “no permanent right of access.”1688  ESA analogizes the remote servers to a 
streaming service that has ceased existing— the content would still be missing even if the 
ability to receive it were restored.1689  ESA also argues that an exemption would add little 
to preservation efforts, because “as illustrated by the proponents’ restoration of the 
video game Habitat, what they would like to accomplish is impracticable (or at least 
would be extraordinarily difficult) without the cooperation of video game 
companies.”1690 
In response, MADE states that “game servers and protocols are often protected by 
TPMs, or may themselves function as TPMs.”1691  It contends without circumvention, the 
video games in this class simply could not be preserved and that this is enough to show 
causation.1692 
Setting aside MADE’s contention that the very existence of an external server necessarily 
serves as a TPM, it seems evident that preservation of an online video game would, at 
the very least, require circumventing similar authentication checks, specific server 
protocols, or cryptographic verifications on the local client as considered in the existing 
exemption for preserving offline games.1693  With respect to accessing missing server 
content, however, where this server-side software is unavailable, ESA raises a valid 
question whether the adverse impact on an eligible institution’s ability to use a 
copyrightable work is more properly flowing from the game publishers’ decision to 
withdraw access to the work, rather than the remainder of TPMs on the local software 
                                                      
1687 ESA Class 8 Opp’n at 13–14; see also Tr. at 90:02–07 (Apr. 13, 2018) (Rose, Public Knowledge). 
1688 Id. at 14. 
1689 Id. 
1690 Id. at 7. 
1691 MADE Class 8 Reply at 14–15.  
1692 Id. 
1693 See 2015 Recommendation at 324. 

[PAGE 279]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
276 
formerly protecting that work.1694  Regardless, as noted above, the Acting Register is 
unable to conclude that the proposed uses in that scenario are likely to be noninfringing. 
d. Asserted Adverse Effects 
Proponents contend that preservation efforts aimed at online video games are currently 
hampered.  They assert that there are no alternatives to circumvention, because it is 
difficult to get permission or a license from copyright owners, as it is challenging to 
determine who holds the rights to video games, and older copyright owners may no 
longer exist.1695  Regarding the first statutory factor specifically, MADE notes that, in the 
2015 rulemaking, the Register found that an exemption would enhance the availability 
of copyrighted works via preservation and suggested that a broader exemption would 
allow for preservation of more works.1696  MADE also suggests that preservation of these 
works “will likely stimulate new copyrighted works offering commentary and analysis 
of video games, thus increasing the number of copyrighted works that are available.”1697   
ESA suggests that the current preservation efforts are sufficient to prevent games from 
being lost.1698  ESA also argues that any expanded exemption could “reduce the 
incentives to invest in the creation of new games and make game consoles a less 
attractive platform for content delivery.”1699 
This factor favors the requested exemption.  As the Register found in 2015, “a relatively 
narrow exemption, drawing upon some of the principles of section 108, would allow 
libraries, archives and museums to restore and maintain access to video games that 
might otherwise be lost, thus enhancing the availability of copyrighted works.”1700  
Similarly, in light of the laudable partnerships in video game preservation demonstrated 
between game publishers, preservation institutions, and others, the suggestion that a 
properly crafted exemption would reduce the incentive to create new games is 
speculative. 
Under the second and third statutory factors— the availability for use of works for 
nonprofit archival, preservation and educational purposes, and the impact on criticism, 
comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research—MADE notes that “[a]t 
                                                      
1694 See Commerce Comm. Report at 37 (“[a]dverse impacts that flow from other sources . . . are 
outside the scope of the rulemaking”); House Manager’s Report at 6; Section 1201 Report at 117. 
1695 MADE Class 8 Initial at 28–29; Tr. at 68:04–19 (Apr. 13, 2018) (Fries). 
1696 MADE Class 8 Initial at 30 (citing 2015 Recommendation at 348). 
1697 Id. (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).   
1698 ESA Class 8 Opp’n at 39. 
1699 Id. 
1700 2015 Recommendation at 348. 

[PAGE 280]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
277 
present, scholars and educators do not have access to most abandoned online video 
games.”1701  In turn, it argues, preservation will enable future study, including allowing 
researchers to “’get inside’ the software,” and “understand the development of the 
technology.”1702 
ESA suggests that the existing exemption sufficiently “enable[s] preservation and 
subsequent criticism, comment, teaching, scholarship, or research.”1703  ESA adds that 
“online multiplayer gameplay is not necessary for preservation or for subsequent 
scholarly purposes,” and claims that proponents make no showing that the proposed 
expansion would increase scholarship on video games.
1704 
As the Register concluded in 2015, these factors heavily favor proponents’ desire to 
engage in preservation activities.1705  It is critical that video games be preserved to 
promote future scholarship of these games.  While this request is limited to preservation 
activities, as opposed to recreational gameplay, scholars may need to access a game and 
experience how it was originally played to understand its design or construction.1706  
While ESA contends that preservation efforts have not yet stimulated new copyrighted 
works in the form of commentary and analysis of video games, it likely is too early for 
such scholarly work—or even preservation activities —to be completed.   
For the fourth section 1201 factor, MADE reiterates much of its arguments under the 
fourth fair use factor, including that the market will not be negatively impacted because 
the proposed exemption “must be explicitly non-commercial.”1707  Further, it states that 
there is little to no market for abandoned video games and that preservation in fact may 
help the market for these works by promoting greater public interest in them.1708 
Perhaps focusing on the “affiliate archivist” aspect of the class, ESA contends that the 
proposed exemption would significantly increase the number of individuals eligible to 
jailbreak consoles, in contravention of the current constraint that such conduct occur in a 
controlled setting.1709  ESA also repeates an argument presented in the 2015 rulemaking, 
namely, that an exemption would harm the market for sequels or reissued older 
                                                      
1701 MADE Class 8 Initial at 30. 
1702 Id. at 31, App. at A-8 (statement of Henry Lowood, Curator, Stanford Univ.). 
1703 ESA Class 8 Opp’n at 40. 
1704 Id. at 39–40. 
1705 See 2015 Recommendation at 348. 
1706 See id. 
1707 MADE Class 8 Initial at 31; MADE Class 8 Reply at 29. 
1708 Id. at 31–32. 
1709 ESA Class 8 Opp’n at 40. 

[PAGE 281]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
278 
games.1710  Like MADE, ESA suggests that its concerns under the fourth fair use factor 
equally apply here.1711 
There is no evidence that the current exemption has harmed the market for video games, 
including reissued games or sequels, and there is no reason to believe that expanding 
the exemption to include a subset of online video games for which external server 
support has been discontinued and where a copy of that server-side software has been 
lawfully obtained, would change that analysis.  In 2015, when drawing a distinction 
between preservationist uses and recreational play, the Register recognized not only the 
critical need to preserve video games, but also that the piracy risks were tempered 
within the confined limits of the preservationist class.
1712  But ESA raises legitimate 
concerns regarding an exemption that would allow affiliate archivists to circumvent 
access controls in an uncontrolled environment, including by jailbreaking consoles.  
While volunteers may add great value to preservation efforts, as noted above, 
proponents have not demonstrated that this aspect of the proposal is likely 
noninfringing, and the Acting Register similarly concludes that it could adversely affect 
the market for copyrighted works.1713  Otherwise, while publisher-supported 
preservation efforts are laudable, the evidence in record does not convince the Acting 
Register that additional video game preservation efforts conducted by qualifying 
preservation institutions would harm the video game market. 
Opponents suggest three additional factors to consider.  First, ESA voices a business 
reputation-related concern that unauthorized third-party game servers run by 
volunteers would not protect against cheating, abusive conduct, or the privacy of 
users.
1714  Second, Joint Creators II argue that copying computer programs on remote 
servers may involve unauthorized “hacking” in violation of the Computer Fraud and 
Abuse Act (“CFAA”).1715  Finally, ESA states that the proposed expansion “contemplates 
violation of Section 1201(a)(2)’s anti-trafficking provisions.”1716 
MADE replies that ESA’s trafficking argument “is predicated on numerous factual 
mischaracterizations, such as the allegation that the Proposed Exemption will be used 
                                                      
1710 Id. at 36; see 2015 Recommendation at 332. 
1711 ESA Class 8 Opp’n at 40–41. 
1712 2015 Recommendation at 344. 
1713 See also id. at 346–47. 
1714 ESA Class 8 Opp’n at 9, 37. 
1715 Joint Creators II Class 8 Opp’n at 10–11; see 18 U.S.C. § 1030. 
1716 ESA Class 8 Opp’n at 9. 

[PAGE 282]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
279 
for ‘re-establishing online gameplay.’”1717  MADE also asserts that the exemption will 
not lead to any reputation-related harms.1718 
In the 2015 rulemaking, the Register stated that “[r]einstating multiplayer play may 
require not only replicating or creating new protocols that communicate with games, but 
also launching a new centralized server and distributing the new protocols to 
gamers.”1719  The Register concluded that such activity may implicate the anti-trafficking 
provisions of section 1201(a)(2).1720  Here, though, aside from the proposed expansion 
related to affiliate archivists, proponents agree that “preserved game architecture 
(including protocols) will not be distributed or made available to the public ‘outside the 
premises’ of an eligible library, archives, or museum.”
1721  As such, this request, setting 
aside the affiliate archivist aspect, does not raise the same distribution concerns.  
Similarly, Joint Creators II’s concern that the CFAA could be violated is accommodated 
by the requirement that the works at issue be lawfully acquired.
1722  In any event, the 
CFAA continues to apply to the extent users’ activities implicate its requirements.  
Finally, limiting the exemption to on-premises preservation and scholarship would 
appear to eliminate the bulk of ESA’s business reputation concerns, which again seem 
based on an assumption that the affiliate archivist concept would in practice act as a fig 
leaf to enable widespread, unsupervised internet play by its consumers. 
In sum, the Acting Register finds that consideration of adverse effects in reference to the 
statutory factors supports a narrowly crafted amendment to the definition of “complete 
game” to accommodate instances where a preservation institution has obtained a 
complete copy of both the client- and server-side software.   
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA supports the adoption of an expanded exemption, but one narrower than 
requested by proponents.  NTIA believes that the record supports an expanded 
exemption for some preservation uses, but agrees with the Office that there should be no 
exemption involving reproduction of expressive content stored on a remote server. 
NTIA notes both the importance of preservation as well as the legal and logistical 
challenges in preserving server-dependent video games.  It believes that “in light of 
                                                      
1717 MADE Class 8 Reply at 30 (quoting ESA Class 8 Opp’n at 41). 
1718 Id. at 26. 
1719 2015 Recommendation at 346. 
1720 Id. 
1721 MADE Class 8 Initial at 33. 
1722 See 18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(2) (prohibiting intentionally accessing a computer without 
authorization or exceeding authorized access). 

[PAGE 283]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
280 
these difficult issues,” any expansion must be tailored to “enable preservation of more 
video games without suggesting applicability in situations where the activity is more 
likely to constitute copyright infringement— such as if the game can only be reproduced 
using expressive content stored on a server.”1723  NTIA proposes an expansion to allow 
preservation “where the user uses the server component— while still not providing any 
substantial expressive content—for administrative tasks beyond authentication, 
including command and control functions such as tracking player progress, facilitating 
communications between players, or storing high scores.”1724  To accommodate these 
uses, it proposes regulatory language that would apply in situations where “all or nearly 
all of the audiovisual content and gameplay mechanics reside on the player or 
institution’s lawfully acquired local copy of the game.”1725  The Acting Register has not 
followed this approach, however, as NTIA does not define “gameplay mechanics” or 
provide a means to determine what constitutes “nearly all” of a game’s audiovisual 
content. 
Like the Acting Register, NTIA does not support adding an “affiliate archivist” user 
class, believing that volunteers may be able to engage in preservation-related 
circumvention activities under the current exemption.
1726  NTIA concludes that adding 
such a provision risks “introducing confusing language or suggesting that any such 
preservationists may not need to be answerable to the institutions for which they are 
volunteering.”1727 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
For the reasons described above, the Acting Register recommends a narrow expansion of 
the existing exemption for video games where server support has ended.  Based on the 
record presented, the Acting Register concludes that where a preservation institution has 
lawfully acquired both a local and a server copy of a video game, the preservation 
activities proposed by proponents are likely to be noninfringing and the adverse effect is 
necessarily caused by the prohibition on circumvention.  As discussed above, based on 
the descriptions in this rulemaking, the Acting Register is not recommending an 
exemption to allow for instances where the preservation institution lacks access to the 
server software, or to allow affiliate archivists to engage in circumvention off-premises.  
On this record, the Acting Register cannot conclude that those activities are likely to be 
noninfringing. 
                                                      
1723 NTIA Letter at 64. 
1724 Id. at 63. 
1725 Id. at 64. 
1726 Id. 
1727 Id. 

[PAGE 284]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
281 
The Acting Register is recommending an exemption for “server-dependent games,” 
defined as video games that can be played by users who lawfully possess both a copy of 
a game intended for a personal computer or video game console and a corresponding 
copy of the game’s code that is stored or was previously stored on an external computer 
server.  The Acting Register continues to recommend an exemption for “complete 
games,” but will revise the exemption language to reflect that the exemption for 
“complete games” applies to both gamers and preservation uses, but the exemption for 
“server dependent games” applies only to preservation uses. 
In addition, for the reasons explained above in the discussion of Proposed Class 9, the 
Acting Register recommends adding a paragraph to the exemption in this class to 
accommodate preservation of non-server-based video games that are no longer 
commercially available.1728  These are the games encompassed by the exemption in 
proposed Class 9 for preservation of computer programs more generally.  The Acting 
Register recommends including this new language here so that all provisions pertaining 
to video games are included in a single exemption.  The recommended exemption 
includes this new provision as a new paragraph (iii) and redesignates the current 
paragraph (iii) as paragraph (iv). 
Accordingly, the Acting Register recommends that the Librarian designate the following 
class: 
(i) Video games in the form of computer programs embodied in physical or 
downloaded formats that have been lawfully acquired as complete games, 
when the copyright owner or its authorized representative has ceased to 
provide access to an external computer server necessary to facilitate an 
authentication process to enable gameplay, solely for the purpose of: 
(A) Permitting access to the video game to allow copying and 
modification of the computer program to restore access to the game for 
personal, local gameplay on a personal computer or video game console; 
or  
                                                      
1728 The Acting Register notes that the Class 8 video game preservation exemption does not 
include the additional eligibility criteria contained in the Class 9 exemption.  Class 9 parties 
agreed to include these criteria which were partially drawn from the Section 108 Discussion 
Document, published after the last proceeding.  Although preservation institutions may meet 
these criteria, because the streamlined renewal procedure did not surface this issue for public 
comment with respect to video game preservation, the Acting Register is not presently 
recommending amending the video game preservation exemption to incorporate those criteria.  
Parties are encouraged to consider whether these eligibility criteria are appropriate for the video 
game preservation exemption in the next section 1201 rulemaking proceeding. 

[PAGE 285]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
282 
(B) Permitting access to the video game to allow copying and 
modification of the computer program to restore access to the game on a 
personal computer or video game console when necessary to allow 
preservation of the game in a playable form by an eligible library, 
archives, or museum, where such activities are carried out without any 
purpose of direct or indirect commercial advantage and the video game 
is not distributed or made available outside of the physical premises of 
the eligible library, archives, or museum. 
(ii) Video games in the form of computer programs embodied in physical or 
downloaded formats that have been lawfully acquired as complete games, that 
do not require access to an external computer server for gameplay, and that are 
no longer reasonably available in the commercial marketplace, solely for the 
purpose of preservation of the game in a playable form by an eligible library, 
archives, or museum, where such activities are carried out without any 
purpose of direct or indirect commercial advantage and the video game is not 
distributed or made available outside of the physical premises of the eligible 
library, archives, or museum. 
(iii) Computer programs used to operate video game consoles solely to the 
extent necessary for an eligible library, archives, or museum to engage in the 
preservation activities described in paragraph (b)(12)(i)(B) or (b)(12)(ii) of this 
section.  
(iv) For purposes of this paragraph (b)(12), the following definitions shall 
apply:  
(A) For purposes of paragraph (b)(12)(i)(A) and (b)(12)(ii) of this section, 
“complete games” means video games that can be played by users 
without accessing or reproducing copyrightable content stored or 
previously stored on an external computer server. 
(B) For purposes of paragraph (b)(12)(i)(B) of this section, “complete 
games” means video games that meet the definition in paragraph 
(b)(12)(iv)(A) of this section, or that consist of both a copy of a game 
intended for a personal computer or video game console and a copy of 
the game’s code that was stored or previously stored on an external 
computer server. 
(C) “Ceased to provide access” means that the copyright owner or its 
authorized representative has either issued an affirmative statement 
indicating that external server support for the video game has ended 
and such support is in fact no longer available or, alternatively, server 

[PAGE 286]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
283 
support has been discontinued for a period of at least six months; 
provided, however, that server support has not since been restored.  
(D) “Local gameplay” means gameplay conducted on a personal 
computer or video game console, or locally connected personal 
computers or consoles, and not through an online service or facility.  
(E) A library, archives, or museum is considered “eligible” when the 
collections of the library, archives, or museum are open to the public 
and/or are routinely made available to researchers who are not 
affiliated with the library, archives, or museum.  
J. Proposed Class 10: Computer Programs—Security R esearch 
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption 
Proposed Class 10 seeks to expand the existing exemption allowing circumvention for 
the purpose of conducting good-faith security research on certain types of softwareenabled devices and machines.  In the 2015 rulemaking, the Office received multiple 
petitions from researchers seeking to access TPM-protected computer programs in 
various devices to test those programs for potential security flaws and vulnerabilities.  
The Register ultimately recommended, and the Librarian granted, an exemption 
permitting circumvention for that purpose, subject to a number of limitations.1729  
Perhaps most notably, rather than authorizing circumvention on software-enabled 
devices generally, the exemption is limited to the specific categories of devices that were 
the focus of the record in that proceeding:  (1) devices or machines primarily designed 
for use by individual consumers (including voting machines); (2) motorized land 
vehicles; and (3) medical devices designed for whole or partial implantation in patients, 
as well as corresponding personal monitoring systems. 
The exemption also prescribes several eligibility requirements for users.  First, the 
machine or device on which the circumvention is undertaken must be “lawfully 
acquired.”  Second, the circumvention must be “solely for the purpose of good-faith 
security research,” which is defined in part to mean “accessing a computer program 
solely for purposes of good-faith testing, investigation and/or correction of a security 
flaw or vulnerability.”  Third, the research activity must be “carried out in a controlled 
environment designed to avoid any harm to individuals or the public.”  Fourth, “the 
information derived from” the research activity must be “used primarily to promote the 
security or safety of the class of devices or machines on which the computer program 
                                                      
1729 See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(7) (2016). 

[PAGE 287]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
284 
operates, or those who use such devices or machines,” and may not be “used or 
maintained in a manner that facilitates copyright infringement.”  Finally, the 
circumvention may not “violate any applicable law, including without limitation the 
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986.”   
Petitions to expand the current exemption were filed by CDT; Professors Felten and 
Halderman (collectively, “Felten/Halderman”); and Professor Green.  The CDT and 
Felten/Halderman petitions sought substantially the same changes.  Each requested the 
removal of the language limiting the exemption to particular device categories, as well 
as full or partial removal of all of the above eligibility conditions.1730  They did not 
provide proposed exemption language, but the combination of their requests would 
result in the following changes: 
(i) Computer programs, where the circumvention is undertaken on a 
lawfully acquired device or machine on which the computer program 
operates solely for the purpose of good-faith security research and does 
not violate any applicable law, including without limitation the 
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986, as amended and codified in title 
18, United States Code; and provided, however, that, except as to voting 
machines, such circumvention is initiated no earlier than 12 months after 
the effective date of this regulation, and the device or machine is one of 
the following: 
(A) A device or machine primarily designed for use by individual 
consumers (including voting machines); 
(B) A motorized land vehicle; or 
(C) A medical device designed for whole or partial implantation 
in patients or a corresponding personal monitoring system, that is 
not and will not be used by patients or for patient care. 
(ii) For purposes of this exemption, “good-faith security research” means 
accessing a computer program solely for purposes of good-faith testing, 
investigation and/or correction of a security flaw or vulnerability, where 
such activity is carried out in a controlled environment designed to avoid 
any harm to individuals or the public, and where the information derived 
from the activity is used primarily to promote the security or safety of the 
class of devices or machines on which the computer program operates, or 
those who use such devices or machines, and is not used or maintained in 
a manner that facilitates copyright infringement. 
                                                      
1730 CDT Class 10 Pet. at 3; Felten & Halderman Class 10 Pet. at 2–3. 

[PAGE 288]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
285 
Professor Green’s petition proposed, as a “helpful starting point” for an amended 
exemption, the language recommended by NTIA in 2015: 
Computer programs, in the form of firmware or software, regardless of 
the device on which they are run, when circumvention is initiated by the 
owner of the copy of the computer program or with the permission of the 
owner of the copy of the computer program, in order to conduct good 
faith security research.  This exemption does not obviate the need to 
comply with other applicable laws and regulations.
1731 
In addition to the petitioners, parties submitting comments in support of an expanded 
exemption included Consumers Union; FSF; Rapid7, Bugcrowd, Duo Security, 
HackerOne, and Luta Security (collectively, “Rapid7 et al.”); and the U.S. Public Policy 
Council of the Association for Computing Machinery (“USACM”).  Comments in 
opposition were filed by ACT; Auto Alliance; BSA; DVD CCA and AACS LA; Dominion 
Election Systems, Election Systems & Software, and Hart InterCivic (collectively, 
“Election System Providers”); Joint Creators II; the National Association of Secretaries of 
State; North Dakota Secretary of State Al Jaeger; and SIIA.  A comment taking no 
position on the request was filed by Professors Bellovin, Blaze, and Heninger. 
b. Overview of Issues 
Proponents argue that while the existing exemption is “a positive step toward enabling 
security research,” the current language contains limitations that unnecessarily restrict 
its scope, as well as ambiguities that chill legitimate research.1732  These provisions, they 
assert, have caused researchers to avoid publicly beneficial research activities at a time 
when cybersecurity threats are becoming increasingly prevalent in numerous facets of 
life.1733  Specifically, they raise the following concerns: 
• They argue that the list of covered device categories (the “Device Limitation”) is 
ambiguous because it does not provide a standard for determining whether a 
device is “primarily designed for use by individual consumers.”1734  In addition, 
proponents contend that this provision is unduly restrictive because it excludes a 
variety of other devices and systems that researchers have a legitimate interest in 
                                                      
1731 Green Class 10 Pet. at 2 (quoting NTIA 2015 Letter at 89). 
1732 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 2. 
1733 CDT Class 10 Initial at 2–3; Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 3–4; id. at 36 (statement of 
Professors Felten and Halderman). 
1734 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 5, 18. 

[PAGE 289]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
286 
studying—for example, building automation systems, commercial networking 
equipment, and traffic control systems.1735 
• They argue that the requirement that a device be “lawfully acquired” (the 
“Lawfully Acquired Limitation”) should be removed because issues surrounding 
the acquisition of physical property are outside the proper scope of copyright 
law.1736 
• They object to the two references to “solely”—the requirement that 
circumvention be “solely” for the purpose of good-faith security research, and 
the definition of such research as accessing a program “solely” for purposes of 
good-faith testing, investigation, and/or correction (the “ Access Limitation”).  In 
proponents’ view, this provision threatens to chill First Amendment-protected 
speech because it arguably prohibits circumvention in furtherance of “broader 
aims” such as “scientific dialogue, academic peer review, and classroom 
teaching.”
1737 
• They argue that the requirement that the research be “carried out in a controlled 
environment designed to avoid any harm to individuals or the public” (the 
“Controlled Environment Limitation”) is ambiguous because it does not define 
when an environment is “controlled.”
1738  Felten/Halderman further contend that 
this provision prevents field research, “where the environment is purposefully 
uncontrolled” so that researchers can observe “how a system interacts with a live 
and unpredictable environment.”1739 
• They argue that the “Use Limitation” (“the information derived from the activity 
is used primarily to promote the security or safety of the class of devices or 
machines . . . or those who use such devices or machines, and is not used or 
maintained in a manner that facilitates copyright infringement”) inhibits 
discussion and publication of research findings by not defining when such 
                                                      
1735 Id. at 5, 19–20; see CDT Class 10 Initial at 3–4; FSF Class 10 Initial at 2; Green Class 10 Initial at 
2; USACM Class 10 Initial at 2; see also Consumers Union Class 10 Initial at 2 (supporting 
expansion “to cover a broader range of products”). 
1736 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 23–24; see CDT Class 10 Initial at 5. 
1737 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 24–25; see also CDT Class 10 Initial at 4; Green Class 10 
Reply at 3. 
1738 CDT Class 10 Initial at 4; Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 5. 
1739 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 38 (statement of Professors Felten and Halderman).  

[PAGE 290]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
287 
activity is “primarily” for the permitted purposes.1740  They also contend that this 
provision subjects researchers to liability based on the actions of third parties.1741 
• They argue that the requirement that the circumvention “not violate any 
applicable law” (the “Other Laws Limitation”) should be removed because it 
“potentially exports the DMCA’s harsh criminal and civil liability into other noncopyright legal regimes, exposing researchers to double liability.”1742  
Opponents object to removal of each of these provisions, arguing that the current 
language appropriately balances the interests of security researchers, copyright owners, 
and the general public.  In their view, the adverse effects asserted by proponents are 
unsupported by the record and are based on unreasonable readings of the relevant text.  
Opponents also variously argue that removing the limitations would render the class 
impermissibly broad, give rise to infringing uses, and jeopardize public safety and 
national security. 
Following the close of the public comment period and the completion of the public 
hearings, the Office received a letter concerning this class from CCIPS.  The CCIPS letter 
stated that “[m]any of the changes sought in the petition appear likely to promote 
productive cybersecurity research, and CCIPS supports them,” subject to certain 
limitations.
1743  With respect to the Device Limitation, CCIPS advised that it would 
support eliminating the language confining the exemption to devices “primarily 
designed for use by individual consumers.”
1744  It recommended clarification of the 
Controlled Environment Limitation and said that it “would not object to its removal.”1745  
As to the Lawfully Acquired Limitation, CCIPS stated that while “the term ‘lawfully 
acquired’ is not itself ambiguous,” it agreed that the exemption should not turn on 
contractual terms purporting to limit the use of the device.1746  It concluded, however, 
that the current language is preferable to conditioning the exemption on ownership of a 
particular copy of software.1747  CCIPS also addressed the Other Laws Limitation, stating 
                                                      
1740 Id. at 25; see CDT Class 10 Initial at 5. 
1741 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 26; see CDT Class 10 Initial at 5; Rapid7 et al. Class 10 
Initial at 2–3. 
1742 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 5; see also CDT Class 10 Initial at 4; Rapid7 et al. Class 
10 Initial at 2. 
1743 CCIPS Letter at 2. 
1744 Id. at 4. 
1745 Id. 
1746 Id. at 5. 
1747 Id. 

[PAGE 291]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
288 
that it would not object to removal of the phrase “any applicable law” were it standing 
alone, but that it recommends retaining the express reference to the CFAA.1748  
2. Discussion 
a. Scope of the Proposed Class 
The Acting Register first addresses a contention advanced by several opponents that 
removing the Device Limitation would render the class overbroad.1749  They argue that 
an exemption covering all software, regardless of device in which it is located, would fail 
to satisfy the legislative history’s directive that a class should be “a narrow and focused 
subset of the broad categories of works . . . identified in section 102 of the Copyright 
Act.”1750  BSA and Election System Providers note that in 2015 the Register cited that 
language in declining to recommend extending the current exemption to “all computer 
programs on all systems and devices, including highly sensitive systems such as nuclear 
power plants and air traffic control systems.”1751  In addition, Joint Creators II assert that 
a class defined in this manner could be read to encompass databases, which was 
expressly excluded from the 2015 exemption.1752 
Proponents respond that the Register included the Device Limitation not because of 
overbreadth concerns, but “only because she concluded that the record did not support 
granting a more broadly-defined exemption.”1753  Here, they argue, the record does 
provide such support, as there is evidence that researchers are adversely affected in their 
ability to make noninfringing uses of non-consumer devices and systems.
1754  
Proponents further contend that the proposed class is sufficiently narrow because 
computer programs are a subset of literary works—one of the broad categories 
identified in section 102—and because “the prohibition on circumvention similarly 
affects security research on all types of software-enabled devices and systems.”1755 
                                                      
1748 Id. at 5–6. 
1749 See ACT Class 10 Opp’n at 3; BSA Class 10 Opp’n at 5; Election System Providers Class 10 
Opp’n at 17; Joint Creators II Class 10 Opp’n at 4–5; SIIA Class 10 Opp’n at 3. 
1750 Commerce Comm. Report at 38; see ACT Class 10 Opp’n at 3; BSA Class 10 Opp’n at 5; 
Election System Providers Class 10 Opp’n at 17; Joint Creators II Class 10 Opp’n at 5. 
1751 2015 Recommendation at 317; see BSA Class 10 Opp’n at 5; Election System Providers Class 10 
Opp’n at 17. 
1752 Joint Creators II Class 10 Opp’n at 7 (citing 2015 Recommendation at 253–54). 
1753 Felten, Halderman & CDT Class 10 Reply at 11–12 (citing 2015 Recommendation at 253–54, 
317). 
1754 Id. at 12. 
1755 Id. at 12–13. 

[PAGE 292]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
289 
The Acting Register agrees that the requested expansion appropriately describes “a 
particular class” within the meaning of the statute.1756  As proponents correctly note, 
computer programs are a subcategory of literary works.1757  And importantly, the 
proposed class here is further refined by reference to a specific set of permitted 
activities.
1758  Further, while the 2015 Recommendation did quote the legislative history’s 
“narrow and focused subset” language in recommending adoption of the Device 
Limitation, it did so in the context of concluding that “[t]he record [did] not support the 
open-ended exemption urged by . . . proponents.”1759  The Register emphasized that the 
proponents’ arguments “focused largely on consumer-oriented software and products” 
and that “[n]o showing was made to justify access to other types of software or explain 
how such an exemption would work.”1760  It was for that reason—and not because of any 
conclusion that software is an inherently overbroad category—that she recommended 
limiting the exemption to the particular types of devices listed in the current rule.1761  
Nothing in the 2015 Recommendation counsels against defining a class to include 
computer programs generally where the record establishes that users of such works are 
similarly affected by the prohibition on circumvention, and where, as here, the class is 
further narrowed by reference to particular types of uses.1762 
As to Joint Creators II’s concern regarding databases, the Acting Register again finds no 
record evidence of a need by proponents to access such works for purposes of security 
research.1763  Databases, moreover, are not a subset of computer programs; rather, they 
are considered compilations under the copyright law.1764  Accordingly, the Acting 
Register does not consider databases to be within the proposed class. 
                                                      
1756 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 
1757 See id. § 101 (definitions of “computer program” and “[l]iterary works”). 
1758 See 2006 Recommendation at 10 (“[I]n appropriate circumstances a ‘class of works’ that is 
defined initially by reference to a section 102 category of works or a subcategory thereof, may 
additionally be refined . . . by reference to the particular type of use and/or user to which the 
exemption shall be applicable.”). 
1759 2015 Recommendation at 317. 
1760 Id. 
1761 Id. (“ Accordingly, the exemption is limited in that respect.”). 
1762 See House Manager’s Report at 7 (suggesting that Register should look to whether the 
prohibition on circumvention affects the availability of works in different categories in the same 
way). 
1763 See 2015 Recommendation at 253–54. 
1764 See U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, COMPENDIUM OF U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE PRACTICES § 727.1 (3d ed. 
2017) (“For purposes of copyright registration, a ‘database’ is defined as a compilation of digital 
information comprised of data, information, abstracts, images, maps, mu sic, sound recordings, 

[PAGE 293]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
290 
b. Works Protected by Copyright 
As under the current exemption, the proposed class is defined to include computer 
programs, which are copyrightable works.  Therefore, the Acting Register finds that at 
least some works included in the proposed class are protected by copyright. 
c. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
In arguing that their proposed uses are noninfringing, proponents focus primarily on 
the activities prohibited by the Device Limitation—that is, security  research conducted 
on devices and systems beyond those listed in the current exemption.  While specific 
examples of these proposed areas of research are discussed below in connection with 
adverse effects, proponents contend that they share common noninfringing bases.  
Proponents argue that most security research is noninfringing because it involves 
elements of programs that “are largely functional in nature” and therefore “are not 
likely to be protected by copyright.”
1765  Additionally, they assert that such research 
typically does not implicate the exclusive rights of copyright owners because “nothing is 
reproduced, distributed, or adapted” except in an incidental manner.1766  Proponents 
note, however, that in some cases a security researcher “may copy the code (typically 
onto a general-purpose computer for analysis), modify the code (for example, to detect 
or patch a security vulnerability or safety issue), and distribute the code as part of 
scholarly discourse.”
1767  In those circumstances, they argue, the activity is noninfringing 
on one or both grounds relied upon by the Register in 2015—section 117 and fair use.   
i. Section 117 
Section 117(a) allows the owner of a copy of a computer program to make or authorize 
the making of a copy or adaptation of the program, provided (1) the copy or adaptation 
“is created as an essential step in the utilization of the computer program with a 
machine,” or (2) the copy or adaptation is “for archival purposes only.”
1768  In 2015, the 
Register found that vehicle owners may qualify as owners of vehicle ECU programs, 
with the possible exception of entertainment and telematics systems subject to written 
licenses.
1769  She further found that many of the reproductions and adaptations involved 
                                                                                                                                                              
video, other digitized material, or references to a particular subject or subjects.”) (bolding 
omitted); 2015 Recommendation at 253–54. 
1765 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 11. 
1766 Id. 
1767 Green Class 10 Initial at 3. 
1768 17 U.S.C. § 117(a). 
1769 2015 Recommendation at 300–04. 

[PAGE 294]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
291 
in vehicle security research are likely to meet the statutory requirements, either because 
they are an “essential step” in identifying potential flaws, or because they constitute 
back-up copies that would satisfy the “archival purposes” provision.1770  Because the 
2015 proponents did not address section 117’s possible relationship to research on other 
devices, the Register expressed no view on its applicability in those contexts. 
The current proponents briefly argue that section 117 may protect research involving a 
broader range of devices.  Felten/Halderman assert that “[t]o the extent that security 
research performed on software outside the context of vehicles meets the ownership 
requirement and meets the essential step requirement, it is a noninfringing use under 
Section 117.”
1771  Green urges the Acting Register to recognize the general proposition 
that “the owner of a physical device is typically also the owner of the copy of the 
software needed to operate that device and make it useful.”
1772  He argues that 
researchers who lawfully acquire a device satisfy the tests for ownership under Krause 
and Vernor because they ordinarily pay substantial consideration, the software operates 
for their benefit or at their direction, they may dispose of the device whenever they 
wish, and the manufacturer generally does not retain the right to repossess the 
software.1773 
Among the opponents, only Election System Providers offer a detailed response.  They 
contend that election software is licensed, rather than sold, to state and local 
governments, and that licensing agreements restrict the governments’ ability to transfer 
their copies.1774  Therefore, they argue, “even if a state or local government purported to 
sell its copy of election software to a researcher,” the researcher would not be the owner 
of that copy, and thus could not rely on section 117.
1775 
The Acting Register finds that proponents have failed to demonstrate that security 
research involving devices, generally, is likely noninfringing under section 117.  As prior 
rulemakings have made clear, the question of ownership under section 117 is a factspecific inquiry that turns on the particular features of the relationship between the 
owner of the copyright in the software and device owners.1776  While the ownership 
analysis provided by Green may well be accurate as to some categories of softwareenabled devices, he offered no evidence that would enable the Acting Register to reach 
                                                      
1770 2015 Recommendation at 304–05. 
1771 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 12. 
1772 Green Class 10 Reply at 2. 
1773 Id.; see also Krause, 402 F.3d at 124; Vernor, 621 F.3d at 1111. 
1774 Election System Providers Class 10 Opp’n at 18. 
1775 Id. (emphasis omitted). 
1776 See, e.g., 2015 Recommendation at 222–23, 238, 263–64, 304; 2012 Recommendation at 91–93. 

[PAGE 295]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
292 
that conclusion with respect to such devices generally.  Indeed, Green does not contest 
Election System Providers’ showing that such an assumption would not be correct in the 
context of voting software.  The same conclusion appears likely with respect to much of 
the software used to operate the large-scale infrastructure proponents seek to research 
under an expanded exemption.  Proponents’ evidence thus is insufficient to support a 
finding that their proposed uses are likely noninfringing on this ground. 
ii. Fair Use 
Proponents contend that the additional research activities encompassed by their 
proposed expansion are fair uses.  In their view, the fair use analysis relied upon by the 
Register in recommending the current exemption is equally applicable to their 
proposal.1777  With the exception of Auto Alliance and Election System Providers, 
opponents generally do not respond to these arguments. 
Regarding the first factor, Felten/Halderman note that in 2015 the Register found that 
many of the proposed uses were likely to be transformative and that “good-faith 
security research ‘encompasses several of the favored activities listed in the preamble of 
section 107.’”1778  They contend that their additional proposed activities “are of the same 
purpose and character” as these uses and involve all of the “paradigmatic fair uses in 
Section 107’s preamble:  criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, [and] 
research.”1779  Green cites Sega and Connectix for the proposition that research into 
functional aspects of software is a legitimate purpose under the first factor.1780  He also 
emphasizes that security research serves a socially beneficial purpose, noting that “[i]t is 
well-recognized in the security community that security can only be reliably obtained 
when a system is subject to widespread testing.”
1781 
In response, Auto Alliance and Election System Providers suggest that the analysis 
under the first factor must take into account all of the proposed changes to the current 
exemption, not just the removal of the Device Limitation.  These changes are relevant, 
they argue, because they could allow users to engage in conduct beyond the narrow 
research activities described by proponents.  For example, Auto Alliance posits that 
removal of the Access and Use Limitations “would weigh against the first fair use factor 
because the expanded exemption would then apply to a broader range of uses, 
                                                      
1777 See Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 12–13; Green Class 10 Initial at 2. 
1778 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 13 (quoting 2015 Recommendation at 300).  
1779 Id. at 14. 
1780 Green Class 10 Initial at 3. 
1781 Id. at 4 (citing Bruce Schneier, The Insecurity of Secret IT Systems, SCHNEIER ON SECURITY (Feb. 
14, 2014), https://www.schneier.com/blog/archives/2014/02/the_insecurity_2.html). 

[PAGE 296]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
293 
including commercial activities, that may not be transformative.”1782  It further asserts 
that “removal of the Controlled Environment Limitation and the Lawfully Acquired 
Limitation would raise safety concerns, because such a broadened exemption would 
permit researchers to interfere with automobiles on public roads, even cars that 
researchers do not lawfully own.”
1783  Similarly, Election System Providers contend that 
without these limitations, “the additional activity proposed here is much less connected 
to . . . salutary [research] ends.”1784  They argue that “[i]t is difficult to see how copying 
to advance the interests of a foreign adversary or interfere in a U.S. election could 
possibly be favored uses under U.S. copyright law, even if the results were publicly 
disclosed.”1785 
Proponents maintain that that the research activities in which they seek to engage “are 
the same as those uses proposed in 2015” and that their proposal “does not seek to 
insulate activities that go beyond security research.”1786  More specifically, 
Felten/Halderman disclaim any intention to work on unlawfully obtained devices.1787  At 
the hearing, moreover, proponents testified that in the case of research on large-scale 
structures such as building HVAC systems, their practice is to obtain advance 
permission of the owner or operator of the system.
1788  Proponents also stress that their 
                                                      
1782 Auto Alliance Class 10 Opp’n at 4. 
1783 Id. at 5. 
1784 Election System Providers Class 10 Opp’n at 19. 
1785 Id. 
1786 See Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 13.  In 2015, the proponents defined “good -faith 
security research” to include: 
[G]ood-faith testing for, investigation of, and discovery of software flaws and 
vulnerabilities that implicate privacy, security, and safety concerns; alerting 
consumers and companies to the existence of such flaws and vulnerabilities; 
teaching students and providing them with hands-on experience investigating 
real systems and devices; publicizing scientific findings related to the 
investigation of software flaws and vulnerabilities through academic 
publications, conference presentations, and other discussions of software and 
device security; and applying research discoveries to correct vulnerabilities and 
create better functioning and more secure software. 
2015 Recommendation at 255–56. 
1787 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 17 (“There is no record indicating that res earchers ever 
intend to work on unlawfully obtained devices.”). 
1788 See Tr. at 112:19–113:13 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Walsh, EFF) (stating that Professor Green would not 
seek to do research on a toll collection system without the authorization of the system owner); Tr. 
at 122:04–08 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Reid, Felten/Halderman) (“[W]e might talk about doing a security 
research experiment on the HVAC system in a building.  Now, in a case like that, we’re obviously 
going to do coordination with the owner or the operator of the building.”); Tr. at 133:07–13 (Apr. 

[PAGE 297]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
294 
proposed research “does not risk human injury or harm,” is limited by “[s]trict norms 
and customs,” and “would not be conducted on voting systems during a live election or 
on a vehicle on a public road.”1789  The Acting Register accordingly understands the 
proposed uses in this class to be limited in accordance with proponents’ statements, and 
will conduct her fair use analysis on that basis.
1790  Given proponents’ representations, 
opponents’ concerns regarding the removal of specific limitations relate more squarely 
to the asserted adverse effects on noninfringing uses, and therefore the Acting Register 
will consider those issues below. 
With the proposed uses defined in this manner, the Acting Register concludes that the 
first factor weighs in favor of fair use.  As the Register found in recommending the 
current exemption, many of the activities involved in security research are likely to be 
transformative, as the copying and alteration of the programs are for the purpose of 
providing information about those works—their susceptibility to security breaches —and 
do not “merely ‘supersede[] the objects’ of the original creation.”
1791  In addition, as the 
Register also found in 2015, good-faith security research promotes several of the 
activities identified in section 107 as examples of favored purposes, including criticism, 
comment, teaching, scholarship, and research.1792  These conclusions are just as 
applicable to good-faith research involving non-consumer devices and systems as they 
are to the research covered by the existing exemption. 
In addition, the Acting Register credits the view expressed by CCIPS that the public 
benefits provided by security research are not limited to research involving consumer 
devices.  CCIPS observes that “[b]oth consumer-operated, network-enabled home 
                                                                                                                                                              
10, 2018) (Halderman, Univ. of Mich.) (“[I]f security researchers are doing research that has the 
possibility of causing harm to the operator of the device, they’re going to make sure that that 
device is one that they have, that they own or have the permission of the device owner to test 
with, and they’re going to take steps to mitigate that harm.”). 
1789 Felten, Halderman & CDT Class 10 Reply at 17, 19; see also Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial 
at 38 (statement of Professors Felten and Halderman) (“Importantly, this type of research does 
not include research that would risk human injury or harm.”). 
1790 Put another way, while the Acting Register agrees that removal of the Access and Use 
Limitations in a vacuum might suggest a use less connected to the purposes of scholarship and 
research relevant to the fair use analysis, proponents’ representations preclude those uses. 
1791 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 579 (citation omitted); see also Google Books, 804 F.3d at 215–16 
(“[C]opying from an original for the purpose of criticism or commentary on the original or 
provision of information about it, tends most clearly to satisfy Campbell’s notion of the 
‘transformative’ purpose involved in the analysis of Factor One.”). 
1792 2015 Recommendation at 300; see 17 U.S.C. § 107 (listing purposes of “criticism, comment, 
news reporting, teaching (including multiple copies for classroom use), scholarship, or 
research”). 

[PAGE 298]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
295 
appliances (often associated with the ‘internet of things’) and industrial-grade network 
routing and switching equipment can contain security vulnerabilities that can pose 
threats to data security, critical infrastructure, and public safety.”1793  It further notes that 
“[i]n some cases, vulnerabilities contained in industrial grade servers or networking 
equipment may present even greater risks to the public than security flaws in consumer 
goods, highlighting the importance of legitimate security research on such devices.”1794  
These considerations further tip the first factor in favor of fair use. 
As to the second factor, Felten/Halderman contend that the nature of the works favors 
fair use for the same reason cited by the Register in 2015— that a program used to 
operate a device is likely to be “largely functional in nature.”1795  Green relies on Sega 
and Connectix to argue that this factor is favorable because device software “contains 
‘unprotected aspects that cannot be examined without copying.’”1796  Election System 
Providers respond that the Register’s 2015 analysis was limited to software in consumer 
products, and therefore it should not apply to the “much broader and more varied” class 
proposed here.1797  In their view, the second factor weighs against fair use with respect to 
election software other than that in voting machines.  These other programs, they argue, 
are “user-oriented applications with significant functionality, user interfaces and 
business workflows, and hence much higher expressive content” than the deviceenabling software at issue in the last rulemaking.1798 
The Acting Register concludes that this factor favors fair use.  While the proposed class 
includes computer programs generally, the record indicates that proponents’ intended 
activities are focused on programs used to operate machines, devices, or systems.  The 
examples cited by proponents include software in building automation systems, 
                                                      
1793 CCIPS Letter at 4. 
1794 Id.  At the same time, CCIPS also emphasized the importance of the phrase “good-faith” in 
this context: 
Security research conducted in bad faith— for example, for the purpose of 
discovering security holes in software in order to exploit them for illicit financial 
gain rather than to improve security generally, or to extort the owners of such 
devices or the data within them—might be called “research,” but is not in good 
faith.  Merely labeling conduct “security research” should not be a basis for 
avoiding criminal or civil liability for circumvention of technological protection 
measures for purposes of infringement or similar bad faith conduct. 
Id. at 3.  The Acting Register agrees with these views. 
1795 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 15 (quoting 2015 Recommendation at 301).  
1796 Green Class 10 Initial at 5 (quoting Connectix, 203 F.3d at 603). 
1797 Election System Providers Class 10 Opp’n at 19. 
1798 Id. 

[PAGE 299]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
296 
commercial networking equipment, traffic control systems, avionics systems, and 
drones.1799  Like the programs encompassed by the current exemption, these programs 
“are likely to fall on the functional rather than creative end of the spectrum.”1800  
Moreover, there is no basis to conclude as a general matter, as Election Service Providers 
suggest, that computer programs stored on non-consumer devices are more likely to 
contain highly expressive content than those on the consumer devices covered by the 
current exemption.  In any event, as Green correctly notes, to the extent good-faith 
security research requires the reproduction of copyrightable elements of a program to 
examine its unprotected aspects, the second factor does not weigh against a finding of 
fair use.
1801 
With respect to the third factor, proponents acknowledge that security research may 
involve copying all or substantial portions of a program, but they assert that doing so “is 
merely incidental to the goal of the research, and is necessary to adequately investigate 
security concerns.”1802  For substantially the same reasons as those stated in the 2015 
Recommendation, the Acting Register finds this factor to be of little significance.  There, 
the Register noted that “[c]ourts have been willing to permit complete copying of the 
original work . . . where it is necessary to accomplish a transformative purpose.”1803  She 
also noted the Sega court’s determination that the third factor is not accorded significant 
weight where functional elements of a program cannot be investigated without some 
intermediate reproduction.1804  Here, the record indicates that the use of substantial 
portions of programs is often necessary to achieve the transformative purposes 
promoted by good-faith security research.1805  The Acting Register therefore again 
concludes that “while the third factor arguably disfavors a fair use finding, the weight to 
be given to it under the circumstances is slight.”
1806 
                                                      
1799 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 19–20; see also CDT Class 10 Initial at 2–3 (similar). 
1800 2015 Recommendation at 301. 
1801 See Connectix, 203 F.3d at 603–05; Sega, 977 F.2d at 1526. 
1802 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 16. 
1803 2015 Recommendation at 301 (citing HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 98, and Arriba Soft, 336 F.3d at 
820–21). 
1804 Id. (citing Sega, 977 F.2d at 1526–27). 
1805 The Acting Register nevertheless notes that proponents make somewhat inconsistent 
statements regarding how often such uses are necessary.  Compare Felten & Halderman Class 10 
Initial at 11 (“[I]n most security research, nothing is reproduced, distributed, or adapted.”), with  
Green Class 10 Initial at 5 (“Security research necessarily requires the use of the entire work, since 
vulnerabilities may be found anywhere in the code.”). 
1806 2015 Recommendation at 301. 

[PAGE 300]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
297 
For the fourth factor, proponents point to the Register’s 2015 finding that the proposed 
security research would not usurp the market for any of the subject computer programs, 
given that researchers would be lawfully obtaining copies of those works.1807  In 
addition, they note the Register’s finding that potential reputational harms resulting 
from negative publicity about the opponents’ software were “not the ‘concern’ of 
copyright,” and therefore did not tip the second factor against fair use.
1808  Proponents 
argue that the same conclusions are applicable here.  In their view, the additional 
research authorized by their proposal would not provide a market substitute for any 
software, and any risk of reputational injury to copyright owners as a result of the 
disclosure of security flaws is irrelevant under the fourth factor.1809  Felten/Halderman 
further state that, in any event, “[m]uch of that harm will likely be avoided through 
coordinated disclosure with the company.”1810 
Felten/Halderman additionally contend that the foregoing analysis should not depend 
on retaining the Lawfully Acquired Limitation, which limits the current exemption to 
circumvention undertaken on a “lawfully acquired device or machine.”  They 
acknowledge that the Register’s analysis in 2015 was premised on the understanding 
that the relevant copies would be lawfully obtained, and they note that “[t]here is no 
record indicating that researchers ever intend to work on unlawfully obtained 
devices.”
1811  Nevertheless, they urge that this understanding “does not need to be 
codified by including the ‘lawfully acquired’ wording that exists in the current 
exemption,” which they believe is ambiguous regarding situations where the ownership 
of a device is in dispute.1812 
Election System Providers counter that, absent regulatory safeguards to ensure that the 
research will be used for socially beneficial purposes, “it must be assumed that such 
research could be used in ways that would threaten the integrity of elections as well as 
the market for election software.”1813  As examples, they suggest that the use of research 
to sell information to a foreign adversary or to disrupt an election “could well scare local 
election officials away from particular products or providers, or even back to hand count 
systems, to the detriment of the market for election software.”
1814  They also object to 
                                                      
1807 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 16–17 (citing 2015 Recommendation at 301–02). 
1808 Id. at 16 (quoting 2015 Recommendation at 302); see also Green Class 10 Initial at 6. 
1809 Id. at 17; accord Green Class 10 Initial at 6. 
1810 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 17. 
1811 Id. 
1812 Id. (stating “there is a significant risk that researchers will obtain devices through legal means 
and later be threatened by liability due to an unknown third-party no-resale contract”). 
1813 Election System Providers Class 10 Opp’n at 20. 
1814 Id. 

[PAGE 301]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
298 
proponents’ request to remove the Lawfully Acquired Limitation, arguing that obtaining 
software without paying the customary price constitutes “classic market harm.”1815 
The parties are correct to recognize that the Register’s prior finding under the fourth 
factor was rooted in her determination that the proposed research would take place only 
on lawfully obtained copies of software.  As Election Service Providers correctly note, 
acquiring a device in violation of law would weigh heavily against a fair use finding, as 
it plainly is conduct that, were it to become widespread, would adversely affect the 
software copyright owner’s potential market.1816  The Acting Register accordingly 
believes that the exemption should continue to expressly prohibit circumvention under 
those circumstances.  The Acting Register will consider proponents’ specific concerns 
regarding the current formulation of the Lawfully Acquired Limitation when discussing 
adverse effects below. 
Subject to this limitation, the Acting Register concludes that the fourth factor favors fair 
use.  As was true of the software at issue in 2015, there is no indication in the record that 
good-faith security research will usurp the market for software in non-consumer devices 
and systems.  The Acting Register finds the speculative market concerns raised by 
Election System Providers to be unavailing.  The actions of bad actors seeking to access 
election software for criminal purposes would not qualify as “good-faith security 
research,” and thus they are outside the scope of the proposal.  Moreover, the harms 
referred to by Election System Providers describe customers being “scare[d] . . . away 
from” software providers after their products are found to have security 
vulnerabilities.
1817  That is precisely the type of reputational harm that the courts have 
held non-cognizable under the fourth factor.1818 
Based on the foregoing analysis, the Acting Register finds that proponents have 
demonstrated that the proposed uses are likely to be fair. 
d. Causation 
The Acting Register finds that proponents have met their burden of showing that the 
prohibition on circumvention of access controls limits their ability to make the 
noninfringing uses described above.  But for the prohibition on circumvention, users 
likely could gain lawful access to the computer programs in the proposed class in order 
to engage in those activities. 
                                                      
1815 Id. 
1816 See Campbell, 510 U.S. at 590. 
1817 Election System Providers Class 10 Opp’n at 20. 
1818 See 2015 Recommendation at 302 (citing Campbell, 510 U.S. at 592). 

[PAGE 302]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
299 
e. Asserted Adverse Effects 
Proponents argue that their ability to conduct noninfringing security research is 
adversely affected by the limitations in the current exemption.  The Acting Register will 
consider these challenged provisions individually, and then address the statutory factors 
in relation to the proposed exemption as a whole. 
i. Current Limitations 
Device Limitation.  Proponents contend that this provision chills legitimate security 
research involving devices and systems that are not clearly “designed for use by 
individual consumers.”1819  As discussed above, proponents believe that the current 
exemption fails to accommodate a growing need for investigation of security features in 
“a wide range of other critical systems, including infrastructure and industrial 
equipment.”1820  Specifically, they suggest that the Device Limitation is currently 
inhibiting research into building automation systems, cryptographic banking, avionics, 
traffic control infrastructure, and cloud computing systems;1821 -industrial-grade firewall 
and private network modules, hardware encryption devices, toll collection systems, nonimplantable medical devices;1822 and other critical systems, including industrial 
equipment and infrastructure that communicates with computerized vehicles.1823  
Proponents identify a variety of TPMs likely to be employed on these systems, noting 
that they are the same as the measures considered in 2015.1824  These include “challengeresponse mechanisms such as access codes, passwords, keys, or digital signatures; 
encryption; and software features designed to prevent tampering with or changing the 
software, such as code obfuscation and runtime checks.”1825 
Opponents’ principal arguments against removal of the Device Limitation are those 
discussed above relating to the scope of the class and the asserted noninfringing uses.  
Two opponents, however, raise objections bearing on proponents’ asserted adverse 
effects.  First, BSA notes that in 2015 the Register found it relevant that the proponents 
failed to explain “why research into critical systems is not being or could not be 
                                                      
1819 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 18. 
1820 CDT Class 10 Initial at 3; accord Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 19–21; Green Class 10 
Initial at 2. 
1821 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 4. 
1822 Green Class 10 Initial at 2; see also Green Class 10 Pet. at 3. 
1823 CDT Class 10 Initial at 3–4. 
1824 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 7; Green Class 10 Initial at 1.  
1825 CDT Class 10 Initial at 2; see also Felton & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 7 (referring to 
“measures controlling installation, execution or use, measures controlling reading or inspection, 
and measures controlling modification”) (quoting 2015 Green Class 25 Initial at 5).  

[PAGE 303]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
300 
conducted with the authorization of the relevant copyright owner.”1826  According to 
BSA, the same concern is applicable here.  It also contends that “[p]roponents have 
presented no evidence to address the unique public safety risks and regulatory 
compliance considerations that would arise if the Device Limitation were 
eliminated.”1827 
The Acting Register does not find that these concerns weigh against the proposed 
expansion on the current record.  As noted, the focus of the 2015 record was on 
consumer-facing devices, and there was little evidence speaking to the need for 
circumvention outside that context.  Here, by contrast, proponents have offered 
substantial evidence of a legitimate need to access TPM-protected software on a broad 
range of additional devices and systems.  They also have demonstrated that obtaining 
authorization of the copyright owner of the software may be infeasible for the same 
reason that applies to TPM-protected consumer devices—the owner may be unwilling to 
subject the program to independent testing.1828   
Nor does the Acting Register believe that public safety concerns provide an appropriate 
basis for denying this aspect of the proposal.  As explained above, while such matters of 
course are of vital importance, they are within the competence of other agencies and 
generally are not among the factors considered as part of this rulemaking absent 
unusual circumstances.  As CCIPS observes: 
As critically important as the integrity of voting machines or the safety of 
motorized land vehicles are [to] the American public, the DMCA was not 
created to protect either interest, and is ill-suited to do so.  To the extent 
such devices now contain copyrighted works protected by technological 
protection measures, the DMCA serves to protect those embedded works.  
However, the DMCA is not the sole nor even the primary legal protection 
preventing malicious tampering with such devices, or otherwise defining 
the contours of appropriate research.
1829   
Following serious and novel concerns by DOT, FDA, and EPA in 2015, the current 
security research exemption was implemented with a twelve-month delay “to allow 
                                                      
1826 BSA Class 10 Opp’n at 5–6 (quoting 2015 Recommendation at 306). 
1827 Id. 
1828 See Tr. at 131:22–132:01 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Reid, Felten/Halderman) (“The mere act of asking for 
permission might well be answered positively, but it might well be answered negatively.”); Tr. at 
147:05–10 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Halderman, Univ. of Mich.) (“[I]f I sought permission to do such 
testing [on election software], I’m not sure it would be granted.  In fact, my strong suspicion is 
that if a local government wanted to bring me in to do a security test of the voting machines from 
the makers represented here today, that those companies would object.”).  
1829 CCIPS Letter at 3. 

[PAGE 304]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
301 
other agencies with expertise in vehicle safety, environmental issues, and other relevant 
areas an opportunity to consider and react to the new rule.”1830  The Copyright Office 
subsequently issued its Section 1201 Report, reiterating that “other agencies should not 
rely on section 1201 to help enforce or cover gaps in their own . . . regulations.”1831  
Accordingly, the public safety risks or regulatory compliance considerations that BSA 
raises, while significant, are more properly addressed through other legal regimes, and 
thus do not provide grounds for denying the requested expansion. 
Second, Election System Providers argue that proponents have failed to demonstrate an 
adverse effect on legitimate security research involving election software beyond that on 
voting machines.  They note that such software “is distributed only to state and local 
governments” and that accessing a government’s computer systems without 
authorization may violate state and federal computer crime laws.
1832  Any adverse effects 
on security research, they contend, are primarily caused by those physical and legal 
barriers, not by section 1201.  Additionally, they argue that the security of election 
systems already is amply tested under current law and that comments supporting the 
proposal suggest a “[w]aning academic interest” in such research.1833 
The Acting Register likewise does not find these to be persuasive grounds for retaining 
the Device Limitation.  The record indicates that local governments may have interest in 
retaining independent researchers to test the security of their voting systems.1834  This 
suggests that researchers may well be able to access such systems without running afoul 
of computer crime laws.  As to the academic value of additional work in this area, the 
Acting Register credits the views of the security researchers participating in this 
proceeding, who attest to its ongoing— indeed, increasing—significance.
1835  Moreover, it 
                                                      
1830 2015 Recommendation at 247 (with the exception of voting machines, for which the regulation 
was implemented immediately); see 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(7) (2016). 
1831 Section 1201 Report at 124–26 (also noting that it “does not anticipate . . . recommending 
additional delays for implementation of exemptions unless necessitated by a grave or unusual 
situation”). 
1832 Election System Providers Class 10 Opp’n at 10. 
1833 Id. at 11–12. 
1834 Indeed, the Joint Security Researchers’ comment vividly describes the need for, and 
subsequent use of, the 2015 exemption for security research in voting systems particularly.  See  
Joint Security Researchers Class 10 Reply; see also Tr. at 145:05–10 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Halderman, 
Univ. of Mich.) (“[T]here absolutely have been cases where local governments have wanted to 
conduct independent security testing on voting systems and have either been denied permission 
or have refrained from seeking permission because they were convinced it would be denied if 
sought.”).   
1835 For example, Professor Halderman testified: 

[PAGE 305]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
302 
is worth noting that observers have remarked on the 2015 exemption’s value in enabling 
important research into the security of voting machines.1836  As noted above, the Office 
received no opposition to renewal of the 2015 exemption for security research with 
respect to voting machines. 
Based on the foregoing, the Acting Register agrees with proponents that the Device 
Limitation is likely to have an adverse effect on users’ ability to engage in noninfringing 
security research.   
Lawfully Acquired Limitation.  Felten/Halderman contend that this requirement “brings 
into the ambit of Section 1201 enforcement disputes about the propriety of acquiring 
certain types of equipment.”1837  They offer an example of a vendor who sells a piece of 
equipment through a contract that purports to prohibit resale.  If the original purchaser 
later sells the equipment to a security researcher, they assert, “the vendor might argue 
that the machine was unlawfully acquired, even though the security researcher had no 
knowledge or reason to know of the agreement between the vendor and the original 
purchaser.”1838  Similarly, Green suggests that the exemption should be “clarified by 
explaining that the existence of an ‘End User License Agreement’ or similar terms does 
not defeat a person’s status as the owner of a copy of a computer program for purposes 
                                                                                                                                                              
[It] is getting all the more urgent to perform independent testing of voting 
systems. The Senate Intelligence Committee, which has been investigating 
interference in and hacking of election infrastructure, recommended just last 
month that states and local governments pursue security testing from the 
Department of Homeland Security for their election infrastructure. 
And furthermore, because the Department of Homeland Security doesn’t have 
the resources to test every local and state system in a timely way, the Senate 
Intelligence Committee . . . recommended the use of private security testing firms 
as well to perform that same kind of test. 
Tr. at 145:14–146:02 (Halderman, Univ. of Mich.); see also Felten, Halderman & CDT Class 10 
Reply at 15 (“[V]ulnerabilities in software, including election software, are still present and are 
under-researched because of the chilling effects of Section 1201.”). 
1836 See, e.g., Kevin Roose, A Solution to Hackers? More Hackers, N.Y. TIMES (Aug. 2, 2017), 
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/08/02/technology/a-solution-to-hackers-more-hackers.html (“The 
reason Def Con was able to test them at all is a 2015 exemption to the Digital Millennium 
Copyright Act that gave researchers a temporary pass to experiment on voting machines.  Now 
that white-hat hackers have found flaws in these machines, they can pass that knowledge on to 
the manufacturers and election officials, who can secure the machines ahead of the next election 
cycle.”) (parentheses omitted). 
1837 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 23. 
1838 Id. 

[PAGE 306]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
303 
of the exemption when the person owns the physical medium that embodies the 
computer program.”1839 
The Acting Register is not convinced that this provision risks chilling good-faith 
research.  There is no indication in the record that any disputes of the type described by 
proponents have arisen, and speculation alone is insufficient to demonstrate a likely 
adverse effect.1840  Furthermore, the Acting Register does not believe the language to be 
ambiguous:  it does not require that the circumventing party be the lawful owner of the 
device—or the software embedded within the device —only that the device be lawfully 
acquired.  In any event, to avoid uncertainty, the Acting Register now makes clear her 
understanding that the phrase “lawfully acquired” requires only that the acquisition not 
be in violation of law.  The Acting Register thus agrees with CCIPS that eligibility for the 
exemption “should not turn on restrictive contractual terms purporting to limit use of 
the hardware on which the copyrighted software is running.”1841  The Acting Register 
believes this guidance obviates any need for amending the regulatory text. 
A related issue involves situations in which a researcher seeks to investigate large-scale 
infrastructure such as a building automation system—activity that would  be permitted if 
the Device Limitation is removed.  The “lawfully acquired” concept is ill-suited to 
research involving these larger systems.1842  A question, then, is whether an expanded 
exemption should require authorization of the owner or operator of the system (as 
distinguished from the owner of the copyright in the software). 
As discussed, proponents testified that their practice is to obtain advance permission of 
the building or system owner in such circumstances.1843  The one example they provide 
of an actual project in which authorization is impracticable is “internet-wide scanning,” 
which they describe as “making small numbers of harmless connection attempts to 
publicly accessible computers. . . .  Internet-wide scanning may also consist of standard 
connection attempts followed by RFC-compliant protocol handshakes with responsive 
hosts.”1844  It is not clear, however, that an exemption from section 1201 is necessary to 
accommodate this type of research.  The record does not establish whether these 
connection attempts or protocol handshakes involve circumvention of TPMs or 
accessing copyrightable works.  Professor Halderman’s testimony was speculative on 
those issues, suggesting only that such a handshake “might be construed as violating an 
                                                      
1839 Green Class 10 Pet. at 2. 
1840 See Section 1201 Report at 28; 2012 Recommendation at 8. 
1841 CCIPS Letter at 5. 
1842 See Felten, Halderman & CDT Class 10 Reply at 21. 
1843 See Tr. at 112:19–113:13 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Walsh, Green); Tr. at 122:04–08 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Reid, 
Felten/Halderman); Tr. at 133:07–13 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Halderman, Univ. of Mich.). 
1844 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 38 (statement of Professors Felten and Halderman). 

[PAGE 307]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
304 
access control mechanism.”1845  This evidence is insufficient to demonstrate that 
researchers would be unduly burdened by a requirement that they obtain permission 
from the relevant system owner or operator in situations where their research involves 
structures that cannot be “acquired.”1846 
Given this record, the Acting Register believes that any exemption authorizing this 
activity should require such authorization.  Such a requirement is consistent with 
congressional intent as reflected in the permanent exemption for security testing under 
section 1201(j), which is conditioned upon the user obtaining “the authorization of the 
owner or operator of [the] computer, computer system, or computer network” that will 
be accessed.
1847  It also accords with the legislative history, which explains:   
[T]he scope of permissible security testing under the Act should be the 
same as permissible testing of a simple door lock:  a prospective buyer 
may test the lock at the store with the store’s consent, or may purchase 
the lock and test it at home in any manner that her or she sees fit . . . .  
What the person may not do, however, is test the lock once it has been 
installed on someone else’s door, without the consent of the person 
whose property is protected by the lock.
1848 
In accordance with these statements, the Acting Register finds it appropriate to include 
language similar to that of section 1201(j) in any exemption involving research on 
systems of this type.  
Access Limitation.  Proponents argue that the two references to “solely” in the current 
text—the requirement that circumvention be “solely” for the purpose of good -faith 
security research, and the definition of such research as accessing a program “solely” for 
purposes of good-faith testing, investigation, and/or correction—potentially limit “postcircumvention First-Amendment-protected speech.”1849  Specifically, they argue that 
“[t]he word ‘solely’ does not clarify whether activities that use the results of the 
noninfringing testing and investigation—for example, publishing papers—are 
                                                      
1845 Tr. at 130:15–22 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Halderman, Univ. of Mich.). 
1846 At the hearing, Professor Halderman also described measurements involving “the cellphones 
in this room or the wi-fi devices in a neighborhood.”  Tr. at 133:20–24 (Apr. 10, 2018) (Halderman, 
Univ. of Mich.).  It was unclear, however, whether those examples refer to actual projects security 
researchers wish to undertake or are simply hypotheticals.  Nor does the testimony establish 
whether such activity would require circumvention of TPMs controlling access to copyrighted 
works. 
1847 17 U.S.C. § 1201(j)(1). 
1848 Conference Report at 67. 
1849 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 24. 

[PAGE 308]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
305 
covered.”1850  They cite “scientific dialogue, academic peer review, and classroom 
teaching” as additional examples of speech that could be implicated.1851 
Opponents disagree that removal of these provisions is necessary or advisable.  BSA and 
Election System Providers contest proponents’ reading of the regulatory language, 
arguing that it does not limit discussion of good-faith research results.  As BSA sees it, 
“[p]rovided an initial act of circumvention is performed ‘solely for purposes of goodfaith testing, investigation, and/or correction of a security flaw or vulnerability,’ a 
beneficiary is free to use insights gleaned from the research for ‘scientific dialogue, 
academic peer review, and classroom teaching.’”1852  Other opponents object on the 
ground that removal of “solely” would leave the exemption ill-defined and could “open 
the door . . . to a host of other purposes” going beyond teaching and scholarship.1853 
The Acting Register agrees with opponents that the Access Limitation is not properly 
read to prohibit teaching, academic dialogue, or scholarship involving information 
derived from good-faith security research.  In the 2015 Recommendation, the Register 
expressly found that the exemption was “likely to increase the use of works in 
educational settings” and that “teaching and scholarship would be enhanced” by it.1854  
She also noted that “[t]he desired research activities may result in criticism or comment 
about [a] work and the devices in which it is incorporated, including potential flaws and 
vulnerabilities.”1855  As those findings recognize, the focus of the Access Limitation is the 
researcher’s purpose at the time of circumvention.  While post-circumvention activities 
                                                      
1850 Id. at 25; see also CDT Class 10 Initial at 4 (“Under these requirements, it is unclear whether 
academic research and open public discussion of vulnerabilities fall within the exemption, 
placing legal constraints on the study and prevention of critical flaws.”); Green Class 10 Reply at 
3. 
1851 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 25. 
1852 BSA Class 10 Opp’n at 3; accord Election System Providers Class 10 Opp’n at 15 (“Nothing in 
the current regulation seems to prohibit teaching based on the results of what was in the first 
instance good-faith security research, scientific dialogue concerning such research or its results, 
or academic peer review of such results.”). 
1853 Auto Alliance Class 10 Opp’n at 11–12; see also Election System Providers Class 10 Opp’n at 15 
(“[T]he proponents propose expanding the exemption to allow circumvention almost without 
regard to its purpose.  For example, in the case of election systems, it would not be in the interests 
of the United States to open this exemption to a researcher motivated to some extent by a 
‘research’ interest but also motivated by a desire to help a foreign adversary interfere in U.S. 
elections.”); Joint Creators II at 10–11 (“[T]here is nothing wrong with the Register attempting to 
ensure that security research cannot become a back door to enable unauthorized access to works 
and other harmful acts.”). 
1854 2015 Recommendation at 310–11. 
1855 Id. at 300. 

[PAGE 309]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
306 
might be relevant to the extent they provide evidence on that issue, a researcher who at 
the time of circumvention intends to publish the results of good-faith research or use 
them in the course of teaching would not exceed the bounds of the Access Limitation.  
Such activities ordinarily are expected to follow from research, and therefore they easily 
fit within the meaning of the regulatory language when read in its proper context.  The 
Acting Register accordingly concludes that this requirement is unlikely to have an 
adverse effect on good-faith research, and therefore she does not recommend its 
removal. 
Controlled Environment Limitation.  Proponents contend that this provision impedes 
legitimate research “because it is ambiguous and it is limiting.”
1856  It is ambiguous, they 
argue, because it does not indicate whether, or to what extent, it permits research 
conducted outside a laboratory.1857  It is limiting, in their view, because it prevents 
research in the field, where “the environment is purposefully uncontrolled” so that 
researchers can “measure variations caused by undetected sources, clarify causation 
from correlation, improve reliability, and perform verification.”1858  They cite building 
automation systems and voting machines as examples of systems that must be tested in 
“real-world environments.”1859  As noted, proponents emphasize that this activity would 
be designed so as not to expose the public to harm and would not occur in “live” 
settings such as an actual election.1860 
Opponents raise several points in opposition to removal of this limitation.  First, they 
note that in 2015 the Register recommended the “controlled environment” language 
based on her finding that “there appeared to be universal agreement among proponents 
that testing in ‘live’ conditions— such as cars being driven on public roads—is wholly 
inappropriate.”1861  In their view, proponents’ request “is directly at odds with the 
position all participants took in the last proceeding, including some of the same 
individuals providing comments in this proceeding.”1862  Second, they contend that 
                                                      
1856 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 38 (statement of Professors Felten and Halderman). 
1857 Id. 
1858 Id. 
1859 Id. at 39 (statement of Professors Felten and Halderman). 
1860 See id. at 38–39 (statement of Professors Felten and Halderman); Felten, Halderman & CDT 
Class 10 Reply at 17 (distinguishing “live” testing from “testing in real-life environments 
carefully designed to avoid harm”). 
1861 2015 Recommendation at 318. 
1862 Election System Providers Class 10 Opp’n at 13; accord Auto Alliance Class 10 Opp’n at 13; 
Joint Creators II Class 10 Opp’n at 8. 

[PAGE 310]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
307 
eliminating this requirement would pose risks to public safety and security.1863  They 
point out that one of the parties supporting other aspects of the proposed expansion, 
Consumers Union, opines in its comments that the Controlled Environment Limitation 
“may be particularly important for ensuring safety and security” and that “[a]ny 
adjustments to this condition should be made only after thorough consideration, and 
should be carefully and specifically circumscribed.”1864  Finally, BSA and Joint Creators 
II argue that proponents’ concerns are unwarranted because the current language does 
not prohibit research outside a lab but requires only that researchers exercise reasonable 
care in performing their work.1865 
The Acting Register continues to believe it is appropriate for the exemption to include 
“common-sense limitations” to reflect the parties’ understanding that good-faith 
research does not include activities that threaten safety and security.1866  At the same 
time, proponents have stated a plausible concern that the phrase “controlled 
environment” potentially could be read to require that the research take place in a lablike setting.  The existing rule was not intended to impose such a requirement, and the 
Acting Register does not understand proponents’ suggested reading to be correct, 
particularly given that the 2015 Recommendation makes no reference to any such 
limitation.  Nevertheless, proponents have introduced evidence that uncertainty over the 
meaning of the language has caused researchers to avoid particular projects.1867  
Moreover, the Acting Register again credits the views of CCIPS, which advises that “in 
some cases, minimizing the risk of harm may require ‘real world’ testing outside of a 
lab-like controlled environment.”
1868  CCIPS therefore suggests that “it would beneficial 
                                                      
1863 See Auto Alliance Class 10 Opp’n at 14 (“The Controlled Environment Limitation very sensibly 
precludes real-time research on cars that are on public roads, where innocent third parties may be 
exposed to serious risks of damage, injury or death.”); Election System Providers Class 10 Opp’n 
at 13–14 (“[T]ampering with election systems during an election would und ermine the 
democratic principles the proponents profess to uphold and violate the law in many states.”); 
Joint Creators II Class 10 Opp’n at 8 (“[O]pening up the exemption to include ‘real-life 
environments’ would potentially harm the very individuals the researchers claim they seek to 
protect.”). 
1864 Consumers Union Class 10 Initial at 3. 
1865 BSA Class 10 Opp’n at 5 (“For purposes of the 2015 Exemption, ‘controlled environment’ 
should be understood as encompassing testing environments where ‘harm to individuals or the 
public’ can be mitigated.”); Joint Creators II Class 10 Opp’n at 8 (“The ‘controlled environment’ 
language simply requires responsible research practices.”). 
1866 2015 Recommendation at 318. 
1867 See Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 38 (statement of Professors Felten and Halderman) 
(“Because the controlled environment limitation is unclear as to what a controlled environment 
is, we often avoid necessary research that may implicate unknown aspects.”). 
1868 CCIPS Letter at 5. 

[PAGE 311]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
308 
to clarify that, although exempted security research need not always be conducted in a 
laboratory setting, it must be conducted with reasonable consideration for risks of harm, 
or under conditions reasonably calculated to minimize risks to the public.”1869  The 
Acting Register believes that this can be accomplished by deleting the word 
“controlled,” so that the exemption simply would require the activity to be “carried out 
in an environment designed to avoid any harm to individuals or the public.”  This 
alteration would resolve the ambiguity cited by proponents, while continuing to provide 
appropriate accommodation for public safety.  The Acting Register understands this to 
be a technical clarification, rather than a substantive change. 
Use Limitation.  The definition of “good-faith security research” requires that “the 
information derived from the activity is used primarily to promote the security or safety 
of the class of devices or machines on which the computer program operates, or those 
who use such devices or machines, and is not used or maintained in a manner that 
facilitates copyright infringement.”
1870  Proponents argue that this provision is 
ambiguous in three ways.  First, they assert that the term “primarily” could be read to 
mean “‘only’— such that if a researcher is found to have used the information for 
anything that is beyond the given uses, they have violated this term.”1871  Second, they 
contend that the phrase “promote the security or safety of the class of devices . . . or 
those who use such devices” could be read to exclude using the information to 
“dissuade consumers from using a vulnerable device that cannot be made safe or 
secure,” since the goal of such disclosure is to “ensur[e] that no one uses a device.”1872  
Third, they argue that the limitation “makes the circumventor liable if someone else uses 
the information they derived to commit copyright infringement.”
1873 
Opponents’ responses are similar to those they advance regarding the other challenged 
limitations.  They contend that proponents’ concerns are premised on a misreading of 
the exemption language.1874  And they argue that weakening these provisions could 
result in disclosures that would harm the public.1875  
                                                      
1869 Id. 
1870 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(7)(ii) (2016). 
1871 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 25; see also CDT Class 10 Initial at 5. 
1872 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 25. 
1873 Id. at 26; accord CDT Class 10 Initial at 5. 
1874 See Auto Alliance Class 10 Opp’n at 15–16 (“ As long as the beneficiary of the exemption uses 
the research information derived from circumvention in accordance with the Use Limitation (i.e., 
to promote safety and security), then liability will not attach.”); BSA Class 10 Opp’n at 4 (“We 
disagree with the fundamental premise of Petitioners’ argument, namely, that ‘primarily’ might 
be interpreted to mean ‘only.’”); Joint Creators II Class 10 Opp’n at 11 (“The researchers are not 
responsible for what others do.  The exemption simply holds res earchers responsible for handing 

[PAGE 312]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
309 
The Acting Register finds no realistic likelihood of adverse effects based on proponents’ 
first two arguments.  First, it is not plausible to conclude that the term “primarily” could 
be interpreted to mean “only.”  Those two terms clearly are not synonymous, and 
nothing in the record suggests that any copyright holder has advanced such a reading.  
Likewise, proponents’ concern that the exemption might not extend to situations in 
which a researcher advises against the use of a device seems farfetched.  It would be 
absurd to construe the exemption to mean that research is protected only if it results in 
users being able to use the class of devices whose security or safety is being examined. 
Proponents’ concern about liability turning on the acts of third parties is somewhat more 
understandable given the exemption’s requirement that the information “is not used or 
maintained in a manner that facilitates copyright infringement.”1876  The Acting Register 
nevertheless does not believe removal of this provision to be advisable.  In 2015 the 
Register recommended adoption of this language—which tracks the statutory factors 
governing eligibility for the security testing exemption under section 1201(j)1877— because 
she determined that it reflected congressional intent regarding appropriate disclosure 
requirements in this context.
1878  The Acting Register adheres to that view.  Nevertheless, 
to address proponents’ concern, the Acting Register now clarifies her understanding that 
this language refers to the researcher’s own use and maintenance of the information 
derived from the research.  Whether a researcher’s use or maintenance of information 
has facilitated copyright infringement by a third party should be determined according 
to the standards governing secondary copyright liability.1879  Thus, evidence of thirdparty infringement is relevant to a researcher’s eligibility for the exemption only insofar 
                                                                                                                                                              
their own results with care to prevent others from misusing them to the extent feasible.”); SIIA 
Class 10 Opp’n at 5 (“We are aware of no case that would prevent petitioners from being able to 
‘inform consumers that the system is insecure so they can protect themselves.’”) (quoting Felten 
& Halderman Class 10 Initial at 40 (statement of Professors Felten and Halderman)).  
1875 See Auto Alliance Class 10 Opp’n at 15 (“When researchers choose to publish detailed analyses 
of vulnerabilities before communicating their findings to system operators or developers . . . they 
are informing bad actors as well as the general public.”); Election System Providers Class 10 
Opp’n at 15 (“With respect to election systems, disclosure that is primarily for purposes other 
than promoting security cannot be justified.  The negative consequences of an uncoordinated 
disclosure of an election-related security vulnerability could be great.”). 
1876 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(7)(ii) (2016) (emphasis added). 
1877 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(j)(3). 
1878 See 2015 Recommendation at 318–19. 
1879 See MGM Studios Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd., 545 U.S. 913 (2005). 

[PAGE 313]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
310 
as it supports a finding that the researcher’s use or maintenance of information 
constitutes contributory or vicarious infringement, or inducement of infringement.1880 
In light of this clarification, the Acting Register does not believe that the Use Limitation 
is likely to cause an adverse effect on noninfringing security research. 
Other Laws Limitation.  Proponents contend that the requirement that the circumvention 
“not violate any applicable law” adversely affects their activities because “[s]ecurity 
research can implicate numerous federal and state regulations, with legal uncertainty 
and uneven application in different jurisdictions.”1881  In their view, “those complexities 
should be sorted out in other contexts without importing the DMCA’s significant 
penalties.”1882  Proponents specifically note that the CFAA has not been construed 
uniformly by courts, and they argue that that uncertainty should not be incorporated 
into the exemption.
1883  They further stress that removal of this condition would not 
eliminate researchers’ obligation to comply with other applicable laws.1884 
Opponents respond that proponents’ concern is misplaced because any uncertainty as to 
their compliance with other legal requirements is the product of ambiguities in those 
laws, not the exemption language.1885  In particular, Auto Alliance and SIIA argue that, to 
the extent researchers’ conduct is barred by other laws, they cannot meet their statutory 
burden to show that section 1201 is the cause of any adverse effect.1886  Opponents also 
                                                      
1880 Proponents Rapid7 et al. offered a proposal that would (1) add a second “primarily” before 
the clause regarding facilitation of infringement and (2) change “in a manner that facilitates” to 
“for the purpose of facilitating.”  The amended language would read “where the information 
derived from the activity . . . is not primarily used or maintained for the purpose of facilitating 
copyright infringement.”  See Rapid7 et al. Class 10 Initial at 3 (bolding added).  The Acting 
Register does not recommend this change.  The proposal appears to assume that “used or 
maintained” refers to the way in which third parties—as opposed to the researche r—uses or 
maintains the information.  As discussed, that is not the Acting Register’s understanding.  
Moreover, the change would seem to allow circumvention where the researcher uses or 
maintains the information for the purpose of facilitating infringement, so long as that is not his or 
her primary purpose. 
1881 Rapid7 et al. Class 10 Initial at 2; see also CDT Class 10 Initial at 4; Felten & Halderman Class 
10 Initial at 5. 
1882 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 24. 
1883 Felten, Halderman & CDT Class 10 Reply at 23; Rapid7 et al. Class 10 Initial at 2.  
1884 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 24; Rapid7 et al. Class 10 Initial at 2.  
1885 Auto Alliance Class 10 Opp’n at 12. 
1886 Id. at 13 (“Since this proceeding is solely concerned with adverse impacts arising ‘by virtue of 
[the] prohibition’ contained in 17 [U.S.C.] § 1201(a)(1)(A), any impacts attributable to other laws 
are completely irrelevant.”); SIIA Class 10 Opp’n at 4 (“[I]f the CFAA (or a similar statute) 
prevents certain activity, then 1201 does not cause the adverse effect as a matter of law.”). 

[PAGE 314]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
311 
note that removing this provision would be inconsistent with congressional intent given 
that Congress included the same requirement in section 1201(j).1887 
In its letter, CCIPS notes that it “does not view the anti-circumvention provisions as the 
most appropriate or efficient means of imposing limits on security research” beyond the 
scope of copyright concerns, and therefore “would not object to the removal of [the 
Other Laws Limitation] from the exemption, were it standing alone.”1888  It concluded, 
however, that 
[g]iven the interplay and occasionally overlapping application of the 
DMCA and the CFAA, CCIPS cannot support removal of the reference to 
the CFAA in the Class 10 exemption.  To do so might mislead researchers 
into believing that operating within the DMCA exemption would also 
provide an exemption from CFAA liability, which it does not.  To avoid 
confusion that could place security researchers in legal jeopardy, we 
support retaining the express reference to the CFAA within the 
exemption.
1889 
Taking all of these considerations into account, the Acting Register concludes that 
proponents have failed to establish an adverse effect resulting from this provision.  As 
the Office recently noted in the context of section 1201(j), “it [is] not clear . . . that the 
requirement to comply with other laws impedes legitimate security research; other laws 
still apply even if the activity is permitted under section 1201.”
1890  Nor did proponents 
offer a persuasive response to opponents’ contention that section 1201 is not the cause of 
any adverse effect when circumvention is prohibited by other laws.  In addition, the 
Acting Register finds it significant that Congress included an obligation to comply with 
other laws in the statutory provision speaking most directly to the activity at issue 
here.
1891  While the proposed exemption does differ from the statute in various respects, 
the Acting Register believes it appropriate to track the statutory language to the extent 
possible, “in the interest of adhering to Congress’s basic purpose in section 1201(j).”1892  
Finally, the Acting Register takes seriously CCIPS’s concerns regarding the relationship 
between section 1201 and the CFAA.  The Acting Register accordingly does not 
recommend removal of the Other Laws Limitation. 
                                                      
1887 See BSA Class 10 Opp’n at 6; Joint Creators II Class 10 Opp’n at 10. 
1888 CCIPS Letter at 5. 
1889 Id. 
1890 Section 1201 Report at 80. 
1891 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(j)(2); see also id. § 1201(g)(2)(D) (same for encryption research exemption). 
1892 2015 Recommendation at 319. 

[PAGE 315]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
312 
ii. Statutory Factors 
The application of the first four statutory factors to the proposed expansion is 
substantially the same as the analysis in 2015.1893  For the first factor, the record again 
supports the conclusion that granting the exemption would increase the availability of 
copyrighted works in the form of articles, presentations, and computer programs aimed 
at rectifying security flaws.  By enabling research on a wider range of devices, the 
removal of the Device Limitation would broaden the universe of programs upon which 
such works may be based.
1894  The second and third factors likewise support the 
exemption, as the record indicates that it would increase the availability of computer 
programs in educational settings and for criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, 
scholarship, and research.  Proponents have established that the Device and Controlled 
Environment Limitations have prevented researchers from undertaking research 
projects outside the scope of the current exemption, and that they have deterred 
researchers from involving students in projects that could expose them to legal risk.1895  
As to the fourth factor, the Acting Register finds that granting the expansion, while 
retaining the other limitations discussed, is unlikely to adversely affect the market for or 
value of copyrighted computer programs, for the same reasons stated above in reference 
to the fourth fair use factor. 
With respect to the fifth factor, the Acting Register does not find that the concerns 
underlying the decision to delay implementation of the 2015 exemption are present on 
the current record.  As discussed, that decision was intended to provide other federal 
agencies that had expressed concern over the proposal the opportunity to consider any 
potential impacts on matters within their regulatory jurisdictions.
1896  The Office 
subsequently made clear that, with those agencies now having had time to respond, it 
“will generally decline to consider health, safety, and environmental concerns” as part of 
the rulemaking.1897  Here, only one other agency, CCIPS, has provided views on the 
proposed exemption, and it recommends changes consistent with the Acting Register’s 
conclusions.  The Acting Register accordingly does not find that any additional factors 
weigh against granting the exemption. 
Based on the foregoing, the Acting Register concludes that proponents have satisfied 
their burden to show that the Device Limitation and the term “controlled” in the 
Controlled Environment Limitation are causing an adverse effect on users’ ability to 
engage in noninfringing security research, or are likely to cause such an adverse effect 
                                                      
1893 See id. at 310–11. 
1894 See Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 27. 
1895 Id. at 37–39 (statement of Professors Felten and Halderman). 
1896 See 2015 Recommendation at 317–18. 
1897 Section 1201 Report at 125–26. 

[PAGE 316]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
313 
during the next three years.  The Acting Register does not find any actual or likely 
adverse effect resulting from the other limitations challenged by proponents. 
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA recommends granting the proposed expansion and proposes the same regulatory 
text it offered in 2015.
1898  That language would allow circumvention “in order to 
conduct good faith security research” on computer programs, “regardless of the device 
on which they are run.”1899  NTIA concludes that “proponents have provided enough 
evidence regarding a range of devices to warrant removal of the device limitation,” and 
it agrees with CCIPS regarding the value of legitimate security research on large-scale 
computer systems.
1900  NTIA further recommends that the Other Laws Limitation be 
replaced with a statement that the exemption “does not obviate the need to comply with 
[all] other applicable laws and regulations.”1901  It acknowledges that CCIPS supports 
retaining the exemption’s express reference to the CFAA, but concludes that its 
proposed amendment “would be less of an obstacle to good-faith security researchers 
(while maintaining a reasonable note of caution).”1902  For the reasons discussed above, 
however, the Acting Register recommends retaining the Other Laws Limitation. 
In addition, NTIA recommends removal of the Controlled Environment, Access, and 
Use Limitations, largely agreeing with proponents that those provisions may chill 
legitimate research.1903  The Acting Register recognizes the importance of providing clear 
legal direction to researchers in this area.  As discussed, however, she concludes that the 
interpretive guidance offered above and the technical correction to the Controlled 
Environment Limitation are sufficient to address proponents’ concerns. 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
The Acting Register accordingly recommends expanding the current security research 
exemption in accordance with the above discussion.  First, the recommended exemption 
removes the Device Limitation.  Second, it includes a provision allowing circumvention 
to be undertaken on a “computer, computer system, or computer network on which the 
computer program operates.”  This language is based on the text of section 1201(j)(1) 
and is intended to address situations in which a researcher seeks access to a structure, 
such as a building automation system, that cannot be “acquired” in the sense of 
                                                      
1898 See NTIA Letter at 83–84; NTIA 2015 Letter at 89. 
1899 NTIA Letter at 84. 
1900 Id. at 77. 
1901 Id. at 79 & n.401. 
1902 Id. at 79 & n.402. 
1903 Id. at 77–81. 

[PAGE 317]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
314 
obtaining physical possession of it, in contrast to instances where the researcher can 
lawfully acquire a device or machine.  The exemption requires that circumvention in 
these circumstances be undertaken “with the authorization of the owner or operator of 
such computer, computer system, or computer network.”  This language likewise is 
drawn from section 1201(j)(1).  Finally, the recommendation removes the term 
“controlled” from the language addressing public safety considerations.  Accordingly, 
the Acting Register recommends that the Librarian designate the following class:  
(i) Computer programs, where the circumvention is undertaken on a 
lawfully acquired device or machine on which the computer program 
operates, or is undertaken on a computer, computer system, or 
computer network on which the computer program operates with the 
authorization of the owner or operator of such computer, computer 
system, or computer network, solely for the purpose of good-faith 
security research and does not violate any applicable law, including 
without limitation the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986. 
(ii) For purposes of this paragraph (b)(11), “good-faith security 
research” means accessing a computer program solely for purposes of 
good-faith testing, investigation, and/or correction of a security flaw or 
vulnerability, where such activity is carried out in an environment 
designed to avoid any harm to individuals or the public, and where the 
information derived from the activity is used primarily to promote the 
security or safety of the class of devices or machines on which the 
computer program operates, or those who use such devices or 
machines, and is not used or maintained in a manner that facilitates 
copyright infringement. 
K. Proposed Class 11: Computer Programs—Avionics  
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption 
Petitioner Air Informatics LLC requests an exemption to permit circumvention of access 
controls on electronic systems used in aircraft, i.e., avionics, to enable access to “aircraft 
flight, operations, maintenance and security” bulk data collected by third parties “upon 
authorization of the aircraft owner or operator” in the course of complying with FAA 
standards, rules, and regulations.
1904  Air Informatics stipulates that its request to access 
“bulk data, in the form of files and logs” does not encompass modification of the 
                                                      
1904 Air Informatics LLC (“ AI”) Class 11 Pet. at 2.  Air Informatics did not propose specific 
regulatory language for this exemption. 

[PAGE 318]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
315 
“software embedded in the avionics components,” which is “under the strict control and 
certification by the FAA and not allowed.”1905  Air Informatics further explains that the 
circumvention and subsequent analysis would be “conducted in a controlled setting 
such as in an office or data management environment” and that “[t]he data would not be 
exposed in any real time flight operations setting.”1906  In addition to Air Informatics, FSF 
and Public Knowledge filed comments supporting the proposed exemption, which was 
unopposed. 
b. Overview of Issues 
This exemption request comes as aircraft are increasingly equipped with technology to 
monitor all aspects of plane operations.  As Air Informatics explains, “[c]ore to these 
aircraft is an integrated centralized computerized flight system[] interconnecting the 
control and information avionics subsystems of the aircraft.”
1907  The data collected by 
these systems include information regarding “flight operations, fuel economy, digital 
flight data recorder, maintenance, fault and information security.”1908   
Due to reliance upon these electronic systems, aircraft “operators have faced a . . . rise in 
the complexity and scope of work needed to keep their fleet secure and operating 
efficiently.”1909  In response, the FAA “has mandated the review of the data, information, 
logs[,] and other information [by aircraft owners or operators] as a means to ensure 
safety, security[,] and regulatory compliance.”1910   
According to proponents, however, access to this information is controlled by 
manufacturers of the digital systems, such as General Electric and Honeywell.1911  
Specifically, the data are first collected in a folder, compressed, and encrypted, then 
transferred to the aircraft owner, maintainer, or operator utilizing a public key 
infrastructure process.1912  The data “transfer is completed by an 802.11 secure 
                                                      
1905 AI Class 11 Initial at 3. 
1906 Id. 
1907 Id. at 1–2. 
1908 Id. at 2. 
1909 Public Knowledge 11 Initial at 1. 
1910 AI Class 11 Initial at 3; see also Public Knowledge Class 11 Initial at 1–2; Tr. at 131:01–05 (Apr. 
25, 2018) (Jackson, AI). 
1911 Public Knowledge Class 11 Initial at 5; see also AI Class 11 Pet. at 2 (“The DMCA has been used 
in the Aviation Industry to prevent access to aircraft flight, operations, maintenance and cyber 
security data to all by the manufacturers of the avionics equipment collecting the data from an 
aircraft, or prevent access to third parties without payment of a licensing or analysis fee.”).  
1912 AI Class 11 Initial at 2. 

[PAGE 319]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
316 
connection, typically using [Wi-Fi Protected Access II] security protocol.”1913  Proponents 
argue that systems manufacturers “use TPMs and threats of legal action under § 1201 to 
prevent operators from [otherwise] accessing the data and reports.”1914  Aircraft owners 
or operators, therefore, must pay manufacturers for access to the aircraft data to ensure 
compliance with FAA rules and regulations.1915   
2. Discussion 
a. Works Protected by Copyright 
Section 1201’s prohibition against circumventing TPMs applies only to “work[s] 
protected under [title 17],” meaning works protected by copyright.
1916  Thus, 
uncopyrightable materials fall outside the ambit of this rulemaking.1917  In such cases, 
“the prohibition on circumvention will not be applicable” as “any protection measures 
on such a work do not implicate section 1201(a)(1),” and an exemption is 
unnecessary.
1918   
Here, the record suggests that the data collected by aircrafts at issue consist of facts.  
According to Air Informatics, the information represents objective details about aircraft, 
including “flight operations, fuel economy, digital flight data recorder, maintenance, 
fault and information security.”
1919  Public Knowledge states more bluntly that “Air 
Informatics seeks access to data inputs and outputs which are not classifiable as a ‘work’ 
protected under Title 17” and alleges that such “access does not implicate any colorable 
copyright concerns.”1920  As such, the factual data are not copyrightable.1921   
Thus, to be protected by copyright, that information must involve a “collection and 
assembling of . . . data that are selected, coordinated, or arranged in such a way that the 
                                                      
1913 Id. 
1914 Public Knowledge Class 11 Initial at 2; see also AI Class 11 Pet. at 2. 
1915 Public Knowledge Class 11 Initial at 2. 
1916 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1). 
1917 See 2003 Recommendation at 99–102 (declining to recommend exemption to circumvent TPMs 
on works that are entirely in the public domain). 
1918 2003 Recommendation at 99. 
1919 AI Class 11 Initial at 2; see also Tr. 146:01–02 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Jackson, AI) (describing the data 
as including “altitude, pressure, temperature, speed, how the airplane is flown, [and] control 
services inputs”). 
1920 Public Knowledge Class 11 Initial at 2. 
1921 See 17 U.S.C. § 102(b); Feist Publ’ns, Inc. v. Rural Tel. Serv. Co., 499 U.S. 340, 344 (1991) (“That 
there can be no valid copyright in facts is universally understood.”); Harper & Row, 471 U.S. 539 at 
556 (“No author may copyright his ideas or the facts he narrates.”). 

[PAGE 320]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
317 
resulting work as a whole constitutes an original work of authorship.”1922  But Public 
Knowledge asserts that the outputs “are formatted and compiled in accordance with an 
industry-wide standard, and thus such compilations do not involve any meaningful 
form of creativity that would qualify them for copyright protection.”1923  Mr. Jackson of 
Air Informatics confirms, stating that “how that data might be formatted is by an 
industry-based standard.”1924  Specifically, he testified that the relevant standard was 
developed by Aeronautical Radio, Inc. (or “ARINC”) via a committee composed of 
operators and is now maintained by a unit of the Society of Automotive Engineers 
through “committees that define standards for . . . the format of data in this particular 
case.”1925 
Based on the record, the collected information would not qualify as a compilation, 
because it is organized in a way typical to the avionics industry.
1926  The Acting Register 
concludes that proponents have not alleged that the data or data compilations they are 
seeking to access are copyrightable.  Mr. Jackson raises some notable concerns regarding 
attempts by airplane manufacturers to control the aftermarket for the data in security 
research and analytics, but it is not clear that section 1201 is facilitating those actions.1927  
Accordingly, it is not necessary to proceed to consider whether proponents have 
demonstrated an adverse effect on a noninfringing use of a particular class of 
copyrighted works.1928   
                                                      
1922 17 U.S.C. § 101 (defining “compilation”); see also Feist, 499 U.S. at 348 (stating that a 
compilation of facts may be copyrightable where “it features an original selection or 
arrangement”). 
1923 Public Knowledge Class 11 Initial at 3. 
1924 Tr. at 132:09–10 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Jackson, AI). 
1925 Tr. at 146:11–22 (Apr. 25, 2018) (Jackson, AI). 
1926 See Feist, 499 U.S. at 363 (“[T]here is nothing remotely creative about arranging names 
alphabetically in a white pages directory.  It is an age-old practice, firmly rooted in tradition and 
so commonplace that it has come to be expected as a matter of course.”); Matthew Bender & Co., 
Inc. v. West Publ’g Co., 158 F.3d 674, 682 (2d Cir. 1998) (“The creative spark [necessary to render a 
compilation copyrightable] is missing where . . . industry conventions or other external factors so 
dictate selection that any person composing a compilation of the type at issue would necessarily 
select the same categories of information . . . .”). 
1927 See Section 1201 Report at 92 (“[V]irtually all agree that section 1201 was not intended to 
facilitate manufacturers’ use of TPMs to facilitate product tying or to achieve a lock-in 
effect . . . .”).  
1928 Mr. Jackson indicated that, in part, his purpose in seeking this exemption is to conduct 
security research.  See AI Class 11 Ex Parte Meeting Summary at 1–2 (Aug. 30, 2018).  To the extent 
applicable, the security research exemption may potentially be utilized to cover such activities.  
See supra Class 10. 

[PAGE 321]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
318 
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA agrees with the Acting Register that the proposed exemption is not warranted.1929  
In its view, “[p]roponents failed to demonstrate that the proposed class includes 
copyrighted works protected by TPMs.”1930  NTIA further explains that “the mere 
existence of encryption cannot trigger a Section 1201 exemption; a copyrighted work 
must exist to trigger a Section 1201 exemption.”1931  Moreover, NTIA continues, “[e]ven 
if the Register were to assume that avionics data were copyrighted works, Air 
Informatics failed to identify clearly the proposed users of the exemption” beyond the 
company itself, suggesting that “the prohibition on circumvention does not adversely 
affect and is not likely to adversely affect users.”1932  Lastly, NTIA maintains that 
“[r]easonable alternatives to circumvention seem to exist,” noting that “the two relevant 
parties can come to an agreement for access to and use of the data.”1933 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
Proponents’ submissions raise potentially valid concerns regarding the use of 
technological measures to restrict access to bulk avionics data by third parties.  But 
proponents have provided no examples suggesting that the data or data compilations 
qualify as works protected by copyright, and indeed, affirmatively suggest they are not.  
In light of the lack of a record alleging that the relevant access controls are protecting 
any works protected by copyright, the Acting Register cannot recommend adoption of 
Proposed Class 11. 
L. Proposed Class 12: Computer Programs—3D Printing    
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption 
Proponents seek to expand a current exemption that permits the circumvention of access 
controls on computer programs in 3D printers to enable the use of non-manufacturerapproved feedstock.  The current exemption language encompasses: 
Computer programs that operate 3D printers that employ microchipreliant technological measures to limit the use of feedstock, when 
circumvention is accomplished solely for the purpose of using alternative 
                                                      
1929 NTIA Letter at 84.  
1930 Id. at 85. 
1931 Id. 
1932 Id. at 85–86. 
1933 Id. at 86. 

[PAGE 322]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
319 
feedstock and not for the purpose of accessing design software, design 
files or proprietary data; provided, however, that the exemption shall not 
extend to any computer program on a 3D printer that produces goods or 
materials for use in commerce the physical production of which is subject 
to legal or regulatory oversight or a related certification process, or where 
the circumvention is otherwise unlawful.1934   
Michael Weinberg filed a petition to eliminate the “qualifying language” at the end of 
the exemption, that is: “provided, however, that the exemption shall not extend to any 
computer program on a 3D printer that produces goods or materials for use in 
commerce the physical production of which is subject to legal or regulatory oversight or 
a related certification process, or where the circumvention is otherwise unlawful.”1935  
Comments supporting the proposed expansion were also filed by FSF and four other 
individuals—George Ellenburg, David Hatch, Abraham Mara, and Tim Postma.  
The comments for this class generally addressed the above qualifying language as a 
whole, which is consistent with the discussion in the 2015 Recommendation of 
restricting the exemption to prevent the use of non-manufacturer-approved feedstock 
where, broadly, 3D-printed objects might “fail legal requirements or regulatory 
mandates.”1936  The Acting Register, therefore, considers the qualifying language as a 
single unit in evaluating the proposed expansion of this exemption. 
b. Overview of Issues 
As described in depth during the 2015 rulemaking, 3D printing involves “various 
technologies that translate digital files into physical objects by adding successive layers 
of material.”1937  These materials or “feedstock” are typically ABS or PLA plastics, but 
can also be metals, waste plastics, woods, or bio-tissue.1938  Manufacturers of 3D printers 
also sell feedstock as a way to ensure some quality control and likely to also secure 
recurring revenue.1939   
                                                      
1934 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(9) (2016). 
1935 Weinberg Class 12 Pet. at 2; see also Weinberg Class 12 Initial at 2 (clarifying the scope of the 
proposed exemption as “focus[ing] on the harms created by the qualifying language in the 
current exemption”); Tr. at 10:15–18 (Apr. 13, 2018) (Weinberg).  
1936 2015 Recommendation at 376. 
1937 Id. at 356. 
1938 Id. at 357. 
1939 See Stratasys Class 12 Opp’n at 7–8 (discussing quality control as a feature of restricting a 3D 
printer to specific feedstock); 2015 Recommendation at 365–66. 

[PAGE 323]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
320 
To ensure that the manufacturer-approved feedstock is used in a 3D printer, some 
manufacturers add a verification microchip attached to the feedstock cartridge that 
ensures that the feedstock is manufacturer-approved before the printer’s software allows 
it to print 3D objects.1940  Without circumventing these verification protocols, owners of 
TPM-protected 3D printers cannot use competitors’ feedstock or tinker with their 
printers to use alternative feedstock.   
In the 2015 rulemaking, the Register found that “proponents have established that TPMs 
constrain the types of feedstock that can be used in 3D printers and that this is likely to 
adversely affect noninfringing uses of the software that controls that functionality.”1941  
But opponents raised concerns that granting an exemption would cause regulatory and 
safety issues, particularly regarding medical implants, aerospace parts, and consumer 
goods.
1942  The FDA reinforced this understanding, stating, for instance, “if a 3D printed 
medical device is intended for insertion into the body, then the manufacturer under 
FDA regulations would have to demonstrate that the products are safe and effective for 
that intended use.”1943  At the same time, the Register concluded that proponents were 
mainly interested in manipulating their 3D printers for consumer and experimental uses 
outside of the stream of commerce.1944  Further, proponents were not seeking to access 
design software, design files, or proprietary data.1945 
Based on these needs and concerns, the Register considered, and rejected, limiting the 
exemption to noncommercial printers, as parties agreed that “it may be difficult to 
demarcate the line between commercial and noncommercial uses.”1946  To address the 
concerns of opponents and the FDA, however, the Register limited the exemption 
according to “the standards that govern the resulting products,” excluding any 3D 
printer program “that produces goods or materials for use in commerce the physical 
production of which is subject to legal or regulatory oversight or a related certification 
process.”1947   
                                                      
1940 2015 Recommendation at 357. 
1941 Id. at 376. 
1942 See, e.g., id. at 366. 
1943 Id. at 375 (citing Letter from Bakul Patel, Assoc. Dir. For Digital Health, Ctr. for Devices and 
Radiological Health, FDA, to Jacqueline C. Charlesworth, Gen. Counsel & Assoc. Register for 
Copyrights, U.S. Copyright Office, at 4 (Aug. 18, 2015). 
1944 Id. at 377. 
1945 Id. at 373. 
1946 Id. at 377; see also Class 26 Post-Hearing Letter (June 3, 2015). 
1947 2015 Recommendation at 377. 

[PAGE 324]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
321 
The 2015 exemption thus addressed only the actual or proposed uses of nonmanufacturer-approved filament reflected in the record in that proceeding.  It did not 
extend to either “accessing design software, design files or proprietary data” or 
“circumstances where the use of third-party feedstock could cause the resulting 3Dprinted object to fail legal requirements or regulatory mandates, including safety 
certification criteria or other similar standards.”1948  In formulating her recommendation, 
the Register commented that “analysis of this class generally was hampered by a limited 
factual record— especially as presented by proponents,”
1949 which made addressing 
proponents’ needs unnecessarily difficult.  While proponents do not presently appear to 
have concerns over design software, design files, or proprietary data, there is now a 
better developed record regarding the qualifying language. 
Currently, proponents put forth two arguments as to why the Acting Register should 
broaden the exemption by dropping this language.  First, proponents argue that this 
clause creates ambiguity such that the exemption itself cannot be applied or used in the 
majority of circumstances.  Due to the far reach of legal and regulatory oversight, they 
contend that the application of the qualifying language to “3D printer[s] that produce[] 
goods or materials for use in commerce the physical production of which is subject to 
legal or regulatory oversight or a related certification process” could be read to preclude 
the use of the exemption in a large percentage of instances.
1950  For instance, Mr. 
Weinberg contends that the qualifying language produced a “vague and unworkable 
standard for applying the existing exemption that effectively eliminates it applicability 
in the vast majority of situations.”
1951  Similarly, Mr. Ellenburg states: “ Any 3D printer 
can produce aircraft parts (subject to FAA approval) and medical devices (subject to 
FDA approval).”1952  Thus, proponents argue, the exemption has not had its intended 
effect of allowing users to circumvent TPMs in most instances. 
Second, proponents argue that the concerns that the qualifying language seeks to 
address are more suitably addressed by other agencies.1953  Essentially, proponents 
assert that non-copyrighted concerns should be left to other agencies. 
                                                      
1948 Id. at 376–77. 
1949 Id. at 370 n.2489. 
1950 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(9) (2016). 
1951 Weinberg Class 12 Initial at 1. 
1952 Ellenburg Class 12 Reply at 2; see also Hatch Class 12 Reply at 2. 
1953 See Ellenburg Class 12 Reply at 2; Mara Class 12 Reply at 2; Weinberg Class 12 Initial at 1, 8. 

[PAGE 325]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
322 
2. Discussion 
a. Works Protected by Copyright 
This class again involves microchip-reliant TPMs attached to 3D printer feedstock that 
limit the use of alternative feedstock by preventing the 3D printer operating systems 
from executing and printing new objects.  The operating systems constitute computer 
programs within the meaning of section 101.  Therefore, like the 2015 rulemaking, the 
Acting Register finds that at least some works included in the proposed expanded class 
are protected by copyright.1954 
b. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
The 2015 rulemaking identified fair use as the noninfringing basis for this exemption, 
and the proposed expansion is evaluated on the same grounds.1955  Proponents do not 
offer new fair use arguments in this rulemaking,1956 but the Office understands 
proponents to be relying on the fair use record from the 2015 rulemaking.  In response, 
Stratasys briefly argues that “any activity excluded by the ‘qualifying language’ in the 
Current Exemption would not be entitled to the fair use defense.”1957  Ultimately, given 
that the record indicates that the state of the 3D printing market appears to be 
substantially the same as in 2015,1958 and case law has not significantly altered the 
                                                      
1954 2015 Recommendation at 367.  In the 2015 rulemaking, the Register noted that “in some cases 
forcing a 3D printer to accept third-party feedstock may not run afoul of section 1201(a)(1),” 
either because the alteration may not involve a copyrighted work or because circumvention may 
not be necessary to read the printer software.  Id. (citing Lexmark, 387 F.3d at 547).  The Register 
found, however, that “there are other cases where a consumer wishing to use third-party 
feedstock in a 3D printer would need to engage in circumvention of a TPM protecting a 
copyrightable work, for example, when more complex code must be modified so the printer can 
handle alternative feedstock.”  Id. 
1955 In the 2015 rulemaking, section 117 was considered as a potential basis in some cases for 
“proponents’ claim that modifying software to permit use of non-manufacturer-approved 
feedstock may also be a noninfringing use,” but that conclusion was not central to the Register’s 
determination.  Id. at 369–70.  During the current rulemaking proceeding, proponents do not 
advance section 117 as a noninfringing basis for this exemption.  See generally Weinberg Class 12 
Initial; Weinberg Class 12 Reply.  Stratasys argues that section 117 is inapplicable.  See Stratasys 
Class 12 Opp’n at 5.  The Office, therefore, does not consider section 117 as a noninfringing basis 
for this exemption at this time. 
1956 See Weinberg Class 12 Initial; Weinberg Class 12 Reply. 
1957 Stratasys Class 12 Opp’n at 4. 
1958 Tr. at 34:11–15 (Apr. 13, 2018) (Chapman, Stratasys) (“I don’t think there’s been any trend to 
have more TPMs, I think it’s similar to the marketplace in 2015, that there are printers that are not 
locked with TPMs and there are printers that are.”). 

[PAGE 326]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
323 
relevant fair use issues, the Acting Register considers fair use in much the same way as 
in the 2015 Recommendation.  The Acting Register thus again concludes that the 
copying or modifying of printer software to accept non-manufacturer-approved 
feedstock is likely to be a fair use. 
Regarding the first factor, the purpose and character of the use, the Register previously 
“note[d] that interoperability is recognized as a favored purpose under the law.  The 
record shows that in many cases, third-party feedstock cannot be used without altering 
the printer operating system software.”1959  This conclusion applies equally to the 
proposed expansion. 
Here, Stratasys argues that the difference between the current and proposed exemption 
is that the proposed exemption “enables circumvention in all commercial settings,” and 
“every commercial use of copyrighted material is presumptively an unfair exploitation 
of the monopoly privilege that belongs to the owner of the copyright . . . .’”1960  It 
contends that expanding the current exemption “beyond the zone of non-commercial, 
personal uses” weighs against finding a fair use on the first factor.1961 
While it is relevant that the proposed exemption would allow for a greater swath of 
commercial uses, Stratasys mischaracterizes the effect that the commercial purpose 
element has on a fair use analysis; the Supreme Court has clarified that there is no “hard 
evidentiary presumption” against commercial uses and that such uses must be 
addressed through a “sensitive balancing of interests.”
1962   
More importantly, there is no bright-line distinction between the current and proposed 
exemptions on the basis of whether commercial uses are permitted.  The current 
exemption already permits circumvention of TPMs to allow for alternative feedstock for 
some commercial purposes; the qualifying language disallows such circumvention only 
where the produced goods are both commercial in nature and the physical production of 
the goods is subject to legal or regulatory oversight or a related certification process.1963  
                                                      
1959 2015 Recommendation at 368 (citations omitted). 
1960 Stratasys Class 12 Opp’n at 4 (quoting Sony, 464 U.S. at 451). 
1961 Id. 
1962 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 584 (quoting Sony, 464 U.S. at 455 n.40) (noting that “[t]he language of the 
statute makes clear that the commercial or nonprofit educational purpose of a work is only one 
element of the first factor enquiry into its purpose and character. . . .  If, indeed, commerciality 
carried presumptive force against a finding of fairness, the presumption would swallow nearly 
all of the illustrative uses listed in the preamble paragraph of § 107, including news reporting, 
comment, criticism, teaching, scholarship, and research, since these activities ‘are generally 
conducted for profit in this country.’”) (quoting Harper & Row, 471 U.S. at 592 (Brennan, J., 
dissenting)). 
1963 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(9) (2016). 

[PAGE 327]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
324 
Accordingly, the Acting Register finds Stratasys’s position unpersuasive and concludes 
that factor one favors proponents. 
The Acting Register concludes that the second factor, the nature of the copyrighted 
work, favors finding a fair use.  As in the 2015 rulemaking, the record establishes that 
computer programs that control the type of feedstock allowed in a 3D printer are largely 
functional, rather than expressive, in nature.1964  Moreover, proponents seek to access 
such computer programs for their functionality, i.e., gaining the ability to use a 3D 
printer in a different manner, rather than for creative purposes, such as altering or 
incorporating the computer program into an original work. 
The third factor, the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the 
copyrighted work as a whole, remains neutral as to the expanded exemption, as the 
analysis remains substantially the same as in the 2015 rulemaking.  In that proceeding, 
the Register concluded that this factor favored neither party, because “there was very 
little record of how much the printer operating system software would need to be 
changed to use third-party feedstock— only that it could ‘vary.’”1965  While Stratasys 
contends “the amount that needs to be copied [] would likely be considerable,”1966 this 
statement is based upon the same testimony that the Register earlier concluded 
demonstrated variation.1967   
The Acting Register again concludes that the fourth factor, the effect of the use upon the 
potential market for or value of the copyrighted work, favors fair use.  While Stratasys 
generally states that “the market for copyright-protected works would be negatively 
impacted if the exemption extended to commercial users,”1968 it does not offer any 
further analysis of the current market.  Because there have been no significant 
developments in the relevant facts or case law, the Acting Register adopts the approach 
of the 2015 Recommendation in focusing on the market for the printer operating system 
                                                      
1964 Weinberg Class 12 Initial at 6–7; Stratasys Class 12 Opp’n at 7. 
1965 2015 Recommendation at 369. 
1966 Stratasys Class 12 Opp’n at 4. 
1967 Id. (Ms. Charlesworth: “Do you need to copy the software in order to make the modification 
required for changing you feedstock?”  Mr. Weinberg: “It depends on the software 
implementation.”  Ms. Charlesworth: “Okay. So it seems there is a lot of variation.”  Mr. 
Weinberg: “ Absolutely.”) (quoting Tr. at 141:15–22 (May 28, 2015)). 
1968 Id. at 5.  Stratasys again mischaracterizes proponents’ request, suggesting that the difference 
between the current and proposed exemptions is that the former disallows all commercial uses, 
while the latter would permit all commercial uses.  As noted above, the current exemption 
already allows for circumvention for commercial uses that are not subject to separate legal or 
regulatory regimes. 

[PAGE 328]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
325 
software rather than the 3D printer as a whole.1969  In the 2015 Recommendation, the 
Register noted that “there does not appear to be a market for printer operating system 
programs separate from the 3D printers themselves, or a quantifiable way to apportion 
the value of the 3D printer attributable to the software features.”1970  The new testimony 
in this cycle reinforces this conclusion.1971  Since neither proponents nor Stratasys 
pointed to any changes in the 3D printer market that would alter the valuation of printer 
operating system programs, the conclusion in the 2015 Recommendation that the fourth 
factor favors fair use remains pertinent to the proposed expansion. 
In sum, the Acting Register finds that proponents have met their burden in 
demonstrating that the proposed expanded language to permit the use of alternative 
feedstock for additional commercial uses is likely to be a fair use. 
c. Causation 
The Acting Register finds that proponents have met their burden of showing that the 
current qualifying language limits their ability to make the noninfringing uses of 3D 
printer operating systems described above.  But for the qualifying language, proponents 
likely could gain lawful access to the operating systems for purposes of engaging in 
those uses. 
d. Asserted Adverse Effects  
The first four statutory factors do not fit neatly onto this situation, where language is 
being removed to relieve a regulatory limitation.  Therefore, the Office focuses its 
analysis on the fifth factor with respect to the safety and related concerns raised by 
participants.   
With regard to the first factors, the record remains limited.  Proponents do not offer new 
arguments or evidence on these factors.  Stratasys offers only a blanket statement that 
relies on the record from the 2015 rulemaking: 
[O]n balance, the statutory factors do not favor any exemption for TPMs 
on 3D printers. . . .  [The] reasoning [provided in Stratasys’ opposition 
comment during the 2015 rulemaking] is especially applicable to the areas 
into which Petitioners want to broaden the Current Exemption—3D 
                                                      
1969 2015 Recommendation at 369. 
1970 Id. 
1971 See Tr. at 49:14–17 (Apr. 13, 2018) (Weinberg) (stating he does not “believe that there are 
concerns being raised that there are standalone markets for the software running these 
machines”). 

[PAGE 329]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
326 
printers used to create commercial products, including in regulated 
industries.1972 
Because the record has not relevantly expanded or changed since the last rulemaking, 
and the parties did not establish that the inclusion or exclusion of the qualifying 
language would have any particular impact on these factors, the Acting Register adopts 
the conclusions made in the 2015 Recommendation.  Specifically, as for the first factor, 
the “record does not demonstrate that an exemption would threaten the availability of 
[3D printer operating] software, or, indeed, that a viable market for this type of software 
exists separate from the printers themselves.”
1973  And, with respect to factor four, there 
is no independent market for 3D printer operating software.1974  In addition, as with the 
last rulemaking, there is insufficient evidence to suggest that the 3D printers operate as 
secure distribution platforms for creative works.1975 
The fifth factor, which allows for consideration of such other factors as the Librarian 
deems appropriate, merits further analysis.  The Office previously considered safety and 
health concerns related to allowing non-manufacturer-approved feedstock to print 3D 
objects that may enter into the stream of commerce, which was a factor in the adoption 
of the qualifying language.  The Register concluded that while “[associated] safety and 
regulatory concerns are not copyright-related,” they were “sufficiently weighty to merit 
consideration in drafting an exemption.”
1976  This was largely based on the fact that the 
Food and Drug Administration submitted “a letter to the Office, explaining that an 
exemption for this class might create unintended public health and safety risks in 
relation to medical devices produced using 3D printers.”
1977  Considering that letter 
alongside the thin record for such uses, “the Register f[ound] that it [was] appropriate to 
limit the exemption to exclude uses that may be subject to regulation or certification.”1978 
In this rulemaking, proponents argue that such health and safety concerns are so 
tangentially related to the topic at hand that they are outside the scope of this 
proceeding.1979  Proponents do not deny that this rulemaking may create consequences 
                                                      
1972 Stratasys Class 12 Opp’n at 6–7 (citation omitted). 
1973 2015 Recommendation at 372. 
1974 See id. 373–74. 
1975 See id. at 374. 
1976 Id. at 375. 
1977 Id. (citing Letter from Bakul Patel, Assoc. Dir. for Digital Health, Ctr. for Devices and 
Radiological Health, FDA, to Jacqueline C. Charlesworth, Gen. Counsel & Assoc. Register of 
Copyrights, U.S. Copyright Office, at 4 (Aug.18, 2015)). 
1978 Id. 
1979 Weinberg Class 12 Initial 7–8 (“There is no reason to believe that Congress crafted . . . Section 
[1201] in order to grant the Copyright Office broad authority over issues of health or safety 

[PAGE 330]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
327 
touching on such health and safety concerns, but they urge the Office to leave concerns 
unrelated to copyright to the appropriate government agencies.1980 
Further, the expanded record now shows that there are situations in which an individual 
may be complying with relevant law or regulations but still be at risk of violating section 
1201 due to the exemption’s qualifying language.  For instance, Mr. Weinberg explains 
that smaller-scale operations utilizing 3D printers in particular may be producing objects 
“subject to legal or regulatory oversight or a related certification process” and 
complying with those rules yet still face penalties under section 1201.1981  Specifically, he 
suggests that individual sellers of homemade wares1982 and small companies creating 
medical devices1983 risk running afoul of section 1201 even if those uses are in 
compliance with related laws and regulations in their respective industries.  He 
contends that given the breadth of regulatory and legal oversight in the United States, 
including of all consumer goods by the Consumer Product Safety Commission, there are 
few instances in which the exemption as currently worded can be utilized.
1984  
In contrast, Stratasys states that “[t]he safety and policy concerns considered under the 
‘fifth factor’ are at least as significant today as they were three years ago, and thus the 
integrity of TPMs deserves at least as much protection.”1985  It describes the advantages 
of a 3D printer with a closed system, i.e., one that “restrict[s] a particular system to 
specific materials,”1986 explaining that “[s]ome systems are closed because of the need to 
mitigate risks involved in the use of a specific material, such as fire hazards or 
hazardous fumes.”1987  Stratasys argues that an expanded exemption “could also leave 
such [3D] printers vulnerable to intrusion.”1988  Relatedly, during the hearing, Stratasys 
                                                                                                                                                              
concerns as long as those concerns had some imaginable nexus with TPMs. . . .  If the FDA, or an y 
other regulatory agency of the United States Government, believes that it has been insufficiently 
empowered by Congress to carry out its mission, it should not rely on the Copyright Office to fill 
the gaps.”).   
1980 See Weinberg Class 12 Reply at 2. 
1981 Weinberg Class 12 Initial 6–7. 
1982 Tr. at 24:19–22 (Apr. 13, 2018) (Weinberg) (“If you were to manufacture something that was 
defective and sell it on Pinterest, then you would be liable under a legal or regulatory regime.”).  
1983 Tr. at 15:12–18 (Apr. 13, 2018) (Weinberg). 
1984 Weinberg Class 12 Initial at 7 (“The legal and regulatory system of the United States is vast 
and touches on almost any good that could be created by a 3D printer.”).  
1985 Stratasys Class 12 Opp’n at 7. 
1986 Id. 
1987 Id. at 9. 
1988 Id. 

[PAGE 331]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
328 
informed the Office that 3D printed materials often go through testing before 
commercial use, even outside of regulations provided by other agencies, indicating that 
there are quality control measures in place outside of regulatory oversight.1989   
In considering these arguments, the Acting Register notes that the Office’s general 
practice is to limit its analysis under the fifth factor to matters bearing on traditional 
copyright concerns, absent unusual circumstances.  As the Office stated in its Section 
1201 Report: 
[W]hile the Office declines to categorically exclude “non-copyright” 
concerns from the fifth statutory factor, the Office also reiterates that the 
rulemaking must be “principally focused on the copyright concerns 
implicated by any proposed exemption,” and that it is not typical for 
safety and environmental concerns to play a significant role in the 
Register’s recommendation.
1990 
Such circumstances are not present here.  The record establishes that there are 
safeguards outside of the current exemption addressing health and safety concerns 
associated with 3D printing.  For example, Stratasys testified regarding the many types 
of inspections and force tests to which the industry voluntarily subjects some 3D-printed 
objects.1991  Stratasys confirmed that 3D-printed objects made with non-manufacturerapproved feedstock may be tested in the same manner.1992  In addition, the FDA recently 
issued guidance regarding 3D printed medical devices.1993  Relatedly, the FAA has 
announced a strategic roadmap for a regulatory drafting effort regarding 3D printing 
that is expected to be ongoing for the next several years.1994  Stratasys’ safety-related 
concerns are more appropriately raised before such entities.  
Under the current, broader record, the Acting Register concludes that the qualifying 
language in the existing exemption may be inhibiting otherwise beneficial or innovative 
                                                      
1989 See Tr. at 55:10–60:19 (Apr. 13, 2018) (Chapman, Stratasys) (discussing the various tests and 
inspection 3D printed objects go through before use). 
1990 Section 1201 Report at 125 (quoting 2015 Recommendation at 248). 
1991 See Tr. at 55:10–60:19 (Apr. 13, 2018) (Chapman, Stratasys).  
1992 Tr. at 59:08–14 (Apr. 13, 2018) (Chapman, Stratasys). 
1993 FDA, TECHNICAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ADDITIVE MANUFACTURED MEDICAL DEVICES: GUIDANCE 
FOR INDUSTRY AND FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION STAFF (2017), https://www.fda.gov/
downloads/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/GuidanceDocuments/
UCM499809.pdf. 
1994 Debra Werner, FAA Prepares Guidance for Wave of 3D-printed Aerospace Parts, SPACENEWS (Oct. 
20, 2017), https://spacenews.com/faa-prepares-guidance-for-wave-of-3d-printed-aerospace-parts/ 
(including regulations, “certification policies, manufacturing policies and maintenance policies”).  

[PAGE 332]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
329 
uses of alternate feedstock, which is contrary to the intention of that exemption.  
Moreover, while the record shows an expanded demand to engage in uses prohibited 
under the current exemption, it does not demonstrate that this limiting language is 
serving to meaningfully alleviate the health and safety concerns raised during the 2015 
rulemaking.  In any event, as noted, the record makes clear that other regulatory forums 
are available to address such issues. 
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA agrees with the Acting Register’s recommendation to expand the exemption by 
removing the current qualifying language.1995  In NTIA’s view, “[p]roponent’s proposed 
use likely constitutes fair use.”1996  NTIA highlights that, among other things, the current 
exemption “suppresses many noncommercial uses of 3D printing, such as scientific 
research.”1997  Regarding health and safety matters, “NTIA recommends that the 
Librarian leave the resolution of any public safety related concerns to the agencies with 
the requisite expertise and jurisdiction to address them.”1998   
NTIA proposes the same regulatory text it submitted in 2015, which differs from the 
current language in certain respects.1999  For example, NTIA proposes requiring that 
“circumvention is undertaken for the purpose of enabling interoperability of feedstock 
or filament with the device.”2000  NTIA does not provide specific rationale for altering the 
regulatory text beyond removing the qualifying language. 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
After thorough consideration, the Office recommends expanding the exemption by 
eliminating the reference to adherence to other regulatory oversight or certification 
processes for the reasons discussed above.  The Acting Register recommends that the 
Librarian designate the following class: 
Computer programs that operate 3D printers that employ microchipreliant technological measures to limit the use of feedstock, when 
circumvention is accomplished solely for the purpose of using 
alternative feedstock and not for the purpose of accessing design 
software, design files, or proprietary data.  
                                                      
1995 NTIA Letter at 87. 
1996 Id. at 88. 
1997 Id. 
1998 Id. at 89 & n.460. 
1999 See id. at 90; NTIA 2015 Letter at 92. 
2000 NTIA Letter at 90. 

[PAGE 333]
section 1201 rulemaking
u.s. copyright office
appendix  recommended regulatory language

[PAGE 334]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
330 
Recommended Regulatory Language 
(a) General. This section prescribes the classes of copyrighted works for which the 
Librarian of Congress has determined, pursuant to 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C) and (D), that 
noninfringing uses by persons who are users of such works are, or are likely to be, 
adversely affected. The prohibition against circumvention of technological measures that 
control access to copyrighted works set forth in 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(A) shall not apply to 
such users of the prescribed classes of copyrighted works.  
(b) Classes of copyrighted works. Pursuant to the authority set forth in 17 U.S.C. 
1201(a)(1)(C) and (D), and upon the recommendation of the Register of Copyrights, the 
Librarian has determined that the prohibition against circumvention of technological 
measures that effectively control access to copyrighted works set forth in 17 U.S.C. 
1201(a)(1)(A) shall not apply to persons who engage in noninfringing uses of the 
following classes of copyrighted works: 
(1) Motion pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in 17 
U.S.C. 101, where the motion picture is lawfully made and acquired on a DVD 
protected by the Content Scramble System, on a Blu-ray disc protected by the 
Advanced Access Content System, or via a digital transmission protected by a 
technological measure, and the person engaging in circumvention under 
paragraph (b)(1)(i) and (b)(1)(ii)(A) and (B) of this section reasonably believes 
that non-circumventing alternatives are unable to produce the required level of 
high-quality content, or the circumvention is undertaken using screen-capture 
technology that appears to be offered to the public as enabling the reproduction 
of motion pictures after content has been lawfully acquired and decrypted, 
where circumvention is undertaken solely in order to make use of short portions 
of the motion pictures in the following instances:  
(i) For the purpose of criticism or comment:  
(A) For use in documentary filmmaking, or other films where the 
motion picture clip is used in parody or for its biographical or 
historically significant nature;  
(B) For use in noncommercial videos (including videos produced 
for a paid commission if the commissioning entity’s use is 
noncommercial); or 
(C) For use in nonfiction multimedia e-books. 
 
 

[PAGE 335]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
331 
(ii) For educational purposes:  
(A) By college and university faculty and students or kindergarten 
through twelfth-grade (K-12) educators and students (where the 
K-12 student is circumventing under the direct supervision of an 
educator), including of accredited general educational 
development (GED) programs, for the purpose of criticism, 
comment, teaching, or scholarship;  
(B) By faculty of massive open online courses (MOOCs) offered by 
accredited nonprofit educational institutions to officially enrolled 
students through online platforms (which platforms themselves 
may be operated for profit), in film studies or other courses 
requiring close analysis of film and media excerpts, for the 
purpose of criticism or comment, where the MOOC provider 
through the online platform limits transmissions to the extent 
technologically feasible to such officially enrolled students, 
institutes copyright policies and provides copyright informational 
materials to faculty, students, and relevant staff members, and 
applies technological measures that reasonably prevent 
unauthorized further dissemination of a work in accessible form 
to others or retention of the work for longer than the course 
session by recipients of a transmission through the platform, as 
contemplated by 17 U.S.C. 110(2); or 
(C) By educators and participants in nonprofit digital and media 
literacy programs offered by libraries, museums, and other 
nonprofit entities with an educational mission, in the course of 
face-to-face instructional activities, for the purpose of criticism or 
comment, except that such users may only circumvent using 
screen-capture technology that appears to be offered to the public 
as enabling the reproduction of motion pictures after content has 
been lawfully acquired and decrypted. 
(2) 
(i) Motion pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in 
17 U.S.C. 101, where the motion picture is lawfully acquired on a DVD 
protected by the Content Scramble System, on a Blu-ray disc protected by 
the Advanced Access Content System, or via a digital transmission 
protected by a technological measure, where: 
(A) Circumvention is undertaken by a disability services office or 
other unit of a kindergarten through twelfth-grade educational 

[PAGE 336]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
332 
institution, college, or university engaged in and/or responsible 
for the provision of accessibility services to students, for the 
purpose of adding captions and/or audio description to a motion 
picture to create an accessible version as a necessary 
accommodation for a student or students with disabilities under 
an applicable disability law, such as the Americans With 
Disabilities Act, the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, or 
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act; 
(B) The educational institution unit in paragraph (b)(2)(i)(A) of 
this section has, after a reasonable effort, determined that an 
accessible version cannot be obtained at a fair price or in a timely 
manner; and 
(C) The accessible versions are provided to students or educators 
and stored by the educational institution in a manner intended to 
reasonably prevent unauthorized further dissemination of a work.  
(ii) For purposes of this paragraph(b)(2), “audio description” means an 
oral narration that provides an accurate rendering of the motion picture. 
(3) Literary works, distributed electronically, that are protected by technological 
measures that either prevent the enabling of read-aloud functionality or interfere 
with screen readers or other applications or assistive technologies: 
(i) When a copy of such a work is lawfully obtained by a blind or other 
person with a disability, as such a person is defined in 17 U.S.C. 121; 
provided, however, that the rights owner is remunerated, as appropriate, 
for the price of the mainstream copy of the work as made available to the 
general public through customary channels; or 
(ii) When such work is a nondramatic literary work, lawfully obtained 
and used by an authorized entity pursuant to 17 U.S.C. 121.  
(4) Literary works consisting of compilations of data generated by medical 
devices that are wholly or partially implanted in the body or by their 
corresponding personal monitoring systems, where such circumvention is 
undertaken by a patient for the sole purpose of lawfully accessing the data 
generated by his or her own device or monitoring system and does not constitute 
a violation of applicable law, including without limitation the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act 
of 1986 or regulations of the Food and Drug Administration, and is accomplished 
through the passive monitoring of wireless transmissions that are already being 
produced by such device or monitoring system.  

[PAGE 337]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
333 
(5) Computer programs that enable the following types of lawfully acquired 
wireless devices to connect to a wireless telecommunications network, when 
circumvention is undertaken solely in order to connect to a wireless 
telecommunications network and such connection is authorized by the operator 
of such network: 
(i) Wireless telephone handsets (i.e., cellphones); 
(ii) All-purpose tablet computers; 
(iii) Portable mobile connectivity devices, such as mobile hotspots, 
removable wireless broadband modems, and similar devices; and 
(iv) Wearable wireless devices designed to be worn on the body, such as 
smartwatches or fitness devices.  
(6) Computer programs that enable smartphones and portable all-purpose 
mobile computing devices to execute lawfully obtained software applications, 
where circumvention is accomplished for the sole purpose of enabling 
interoperability of such applications with computer programs on the smartphone 
or device, or to permit removal of software from the smartphone or device. For 
purposes of this paragraph (b)(6), a “portable all-purpose mobile computing 
device” is a device that is primarily designed to run a wide variety of programs 
rather than for consumption of a particular type of media content, is equipped 
with an operating system primarily designed for mobile use, and is intended to 
be carried or worn by an individual.  
(7) Computer programs that enable smart televisions to execute lawfully 
obtained software applications, where circumvention is accomplished for the 
sole purpose of enabling interoperability of such applications with computer 
programs on the smart television.  
(8) Computer programs that enable voice assistant devices to execute lawfully 
obtained software applications, where circumvention is accomplished for the 
sole purpose of enabling interoperability of such applications with computer 
programs on the device, or to permit removal of software from the device, and is 
not accomplished for the purpose of gaining unauthorized access to other 
copyrighted works. For purposes of this paragraph (b)(8), a “voice assistant 
device” is a device that is primarily designed to run a wide variety of programs 
rather than for consumption of a particular type of media content, is designed to 
take user input primarily by voice, and is designed to be installed in a home or 
office. 

[PAGE 338]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
334 
(9) Computer programs that are contained in and control the functioning of a 
lawfully acquired motorized land vehicle such as a personal automobile, 
commercial vehicle, or mechanized agricultural vehicle, except for programs 
accessed through a separate subscription service, when circumvention is a 
necessary step to allow the diagnosis, repair, or lawful modification of a vehicle 
function, where such circumvention does not constitute a violation of applicable 
law, including without limitation regulations promulgated by the Department of 
Transportation or the Environmental Protection Agency, and is not accomplished 
for the purpose of gaining unauthorized access to other copyrighted works.   
(10) Computer programs that are contained in and control the functioning of a 
lawfully acquired smartphone or home appliance or home system, such as a 
refrigerator, thermostat, HVAC, or electrical system, when circumvention is a 
necessary step to allow the diagnosis, maintenance, or repair of such a device or 
system, and is not accomplished for the purpose of gaining access to other 
copyrighted works. For purposes of this paragraph (b)(10): 
(i) The “maintenance” of a device or system is the servicing of the device 
or system in order to make it work in accordance with its original 
specifications and any changes to those specifications authorized for that 
device or system; and 
(ii) The “repair” of a device or system is the restoring of the device or 
system to the state of working in accordance with its original 
specifications and any changes to those specifications authorized for that 
device or system. 
(11) 
(i) Computer programs, where the circumvention is undertaken on a 
lawfully acquired device or machine on which the computer program 
operates, or is undertaken on a computer, computer system, or computer 
network on which the computer program operates with the authorization 
of the owner or operator of such computer, computer system, or 
computer network, solely for the purpose of good-faith security research 
and does not violate any applicable law, including without limitation the 
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986. 
(ii) For purposes of this paragraph (b)(11), “good-faith security research” 
means accessing a computer program solely for purposes of good-faith 
testing, investigation, and/or correction of a security flaw or vulnerability, 
where such activity is carried out in an environment designed to avoid 
any harm to individuals or the public, and where the information derived 
from the activity is used primarily to promote the security or safety of the 

[PAGE 339]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
335 
class of devices or machines on which the computer program operates, or 
those who use such devices or machines, and is not used or maintained in 
a manner that facilitates copyright infringement. 
(12)  
(i) Video games in the form of computer programs embodied in physical 
or downloaded formats that have been lawfully acquired as complete 
games, when the copyright owner or its authorized representative has 
ceased to provide access to an external computer server necessary to 
facilitate an authentication process to enable gameplay, solely for the 
purpose of: 
(A) Permitting access to the video game to allow copying and 
modification of the computer program to restore access to the 
game for personal, local gameplay on a personal computer or 
video game console; or  
(B) Permitting access to the video game to allow copying and 
modification of the computer program to restore access to the 
game on a personal computer or video game console when 
necessary to allow preservation of the game in a playable form by 
an eligible library, archives, or museum, where such activities are 
carried out without any purpose of direct or indirect commercial 
advantage and the video game is not distributed or made 
available outside of the physical premises of the eligible library, 
archives, or museum. 
(ii) Video games in the form of computer programs embodied in physical 
or downloaded formats that have been lawfully acquired as complete 
games, that do not require access to an external computer server for 
gameplay, and that are no longer reasonably available in the commercial 
marketplace, solely for the purpose of preservation of the game in a 
playable form by an eligible library, archives, or museum, where such 
activities are carried out without any purpose of direct or indirect 
commercial advantage and the video game is not distributed or made 
available outside of the physical premises of the eligible library, archives, 
or museum. 
(iii) Computer programs used to operate video game consoles solely to 
the extent necessary for an eligible library, archives, or museum to engage 
in the preservation activities described in paragraph (b)(12)(i)(B) or 
(b)(12)(ii) of this section.  

[PAGE 340]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
336 
(iv) For purposes of this paragraph (b)(12), the following definitions shall 
apply:  
(A) For purposes of paragraph (b)(12)(i)(A) and (b)(12)(ii) of this 
section, “complete games” means video games that can be played 
by users without accessing or reproducing copyrightable content 
stored or previously stored on an external computer server. 
(B) For purposes of paragraph (b)(12)(i)(B) of this section, 
“complete games” means video games that meet the definition in 
paragraph (b)(12)(iv)(A) of this section, or that consist of both a 
copy of a game intended for a personal computer or video game 
console and a copy of the game’s code that was stored or 
previously stored on an external computer server. 
(C) “Ceased to provide access” means that the copyright owner or 
its authorized representative has either issued an affirmative 
statement indicating that external server support for the video 
game has ended and such support is in fact no longer available or, 
alternatively, server support has been discontinued for a period of 
at least six months; provided, however, that server support has 
not since been restored.  
(D) “Local gameplay” means gameplay conducted on a personal 
computer or video game console, or locally connected personal 
computers or consoles, and not through an online service or 
facility.  
(E) A library, archives, or museum is considered “eligible” when 
the collections of the library, archives, or museum are open to the 
public and/or are routinely made available to researchers who are 
not affiliated with the library, archives, or museum. 
(13)  
(i) Computer programs, except video games, that have been lawfully 
acquired and that are no longer reasonably available in the commercial 
marketplace, solely for the purpose of lawful preservation of a computer 
program, or of digital materials dependent upon a computer program as 
a condition of access, by an eligible library, archives, or museum, where 
such activities are carried out without any purpose of direct or indirect 
commercial advantage and the program is not distributed or made 
available outside of the physical premises of the eligible library, archives, 
or museum. 

[PAGE 341]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding October 2018 
Recommendation of the Acting Register of Copyrights   
337 
(ii) For purposes of the exemption in paragraph (b)(13)(i) of this section, a 
library, archives, or museum is considered “eligible” if—  
(A) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are open to 
the public and/or are routinely made available to researchers who 
are not affiliated with the library, archives, or museum; 
(B) The library, archives, or museum has a public service mission; 
(C) The library, archives, or museum’s trained staff or volunteers 
provide professional services normally associated with libraries, 
archives, or museums; 
(D) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are 
composed of lawfully acquired and/or licensed materials; and 
(E) The library, archives, or museum implements reasonable 
digital security measures as appropriate for the activities 
permitted by this paragraph (b)(13). 
(14) Computer programs that operate 3D printers that employ microchipreliant technological measures to limit the use of feedstock, when 
circumvention is accomplished solely for the purpose of using alternative 
feedstock and not for the purpose of accessing design software, design 
files, or proprietary data. 
(c) Persons who may initiate circumvention. To the extent authorized under 
paragraph (b) of this section, the circumvention of a technological measure that 
restricts wireless telephone handsets or other wireless devices from connecting to 
a wireless telecommunications network may be initiated by the owner of any 
such handset or other device, by another person at the direction of the owner, or 
by a provider of a commercial mobile radio service or a commercial mobile data 
service at the direction of such owner or other person, solely in order to enable 
such owner or a family member of such owner to connect to a wireless 
telecommunications network, when such connection is authorized by the 
operator of such network. 

[PAGE 342]
u .s. copyright of fi ce · library of  congress · 101  independence avenue  se · washington, dc  20559  · www.copyright.gov