[PAGE 1]
united states copyright office
section 1201 rulemaking:  
Eighth Triennial Proceeding to Determine 
Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention
recommendation of the register of copyrights october 2021 

[PAGE 2]
October 19, 2021 
C
arla Hayden 
Librarian of Congress 
Library of Congress 
101 Independence Ave. SE 
Washington, DC 20540 
D
ear Dr. Hayden: 
P
ursuant to my statutory obligation under 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C), please find 
the attached recommendation relating to the rulemaking on exemptions from the 
prohibition on circumvention of technological protection measures that control access to 
copyrighted works. 
S
incerely, 
S
hira Perlmutter 
Register of Copyrights and Director 
U.S. Copyright Office 
cc
: Elizabeth A. Pugh, General Counsel, Library of Congress 


[PAGE 3]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
i 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: 
Eighth Triennial Proceeding to Determine 
Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention 
 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
I. INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 1 
II. LEGAL BACKGROUND ..................................................................................................... 4 
III. HISTORY OF EIGHTH TRIENNIAL PROCEEDING ................................................... 16 
IV. RENEWAL RECOMMENDATIONS ............................................................................... 18 
V. DISCUSSION OF NEW PROPOSED CLASSES ............................................................. 31 
A. Proposed Class 1: Audiovisual Works—Criticism and Comment  ......................... 31 
B. Proposed Class 2: Audiovisual Works—Texting ....................................................... 61 
C. Proposed Class 3: Audiovisual Works—Accessibility  ............................................. 64 
D. Proposed Class 4: Audiovisual Works—Livestream Recording  ............................. 80 
E. Proposed Class 5: Audiovisual Works—Preservation and Replacement  .............. 83 
F. Proposed Class 6: Audiovisual Works—Space -Shifting .......................................... 99 
G. Proposed Class 7(a) and 7(b): Motion Pictures and Literary Works—Text and 
Data Mining .............................................................................................................. 102 
H. Proposed Class 8: Literary Works— Accessibility ................................................... 125 
I. Proposed Class 9: Literary Works— Medical Device Data .................................... 135 
J. Proposed Class 10: Computer Programs – Unlocking ........................................... 153 
K. Proposed Class 11: Computer Programs—Jailbreaking  ........................................ 169 
L. Proposed Class 12: Computer Programs—Repair  .................................................. 190 
M. Proposed Class 13: Computer Programs—Security Research  .............................. 234 
N. Proposed Classes 14(a) and 14(b): Computer Programs and Video Games—
Preservation .............................................................................................................. 259 
O. Proposed Class 15: Computer Programs—3D Printing  ......................................... 283 
P. Proposed Class 16: Computer Programs—Copyright License Investigation  ..... 289 
Q. Proposed Class 17: All Works—Accessibility  .......................................................... 311 
 
APPENDIX:  
Recommended Regulatory Language

[PAGE 4]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
1 
I. Introduction 
Section 1201 of Title 17 generally makes it unlawful to “circumvent a technological 
measure that effectively controls access to” a copyrighted work.1  The Librarian of 
Congress is authorized to adopt temporary exemptions to this prohibition upon the 
recommendation of the Register of Copyrights in a rulemaking proceeding conducted 
every three years.2  The rulemaking occurs through a formal public process 
administered by the Register, who consults with the Assistant Secretary for 
Communications and Information of the Department of Commerce.3  The first 
rulemaking was completed in 2000, and subsequent rulemakings have taken place on a 
triennial basis since then. 
This Recommendation sets forth the Register’s analysis and conclusions regarding 
exemptions proposed for the upcoming three-year period.  In the previous section 1201 
proceeding, the Register recommended, and the Librarian adopted, seventeen groups of 
exemptions.  As discussed below, the Register is recommending that each of those 
exemptions be readopted.  In addition, the Register received petitions for multiple new 
or expanded exemptions; these have been organized into seventeen classes based on the 
category of work and the type of activity at issue.  The Register is recommending that 
exemptions be adopted, either in whole or in part, in fourteen of these classes.  Taking 
into account both renewals and new or expanded exemptions, the Register is 
recommending exemptions covering the following types of activities: 
• Excerpts of motion pictures: 
 For criticism or comment, 
 For nonfiction multimedia e-books  
 For uses in documentary films and other films where the 
use is in parody or for a biographical or historically 
significant nature 
 For uses in noncommercial videos 
 For educational uses,  
 By college and university or K–12 faculty and students, or 
employees acting at the direction of faculty 
 
1 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(A). 
2 Id. § 1201(a)(1)(B)–(D). 
3 Id. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 

[PAGE 5]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
2 
 By faculty and employees of massive open online courses 
(“MOOCs”) 
 By educators and participants in digital and literacy 
programs offered by libraries, museums and other 
nonprofits  
• Motion pictures, for the provision of captioning and/or audio description 
by disability services offices or similar units at educational institutions for 
students, faculty, or staff with disabilities 
• Motion pictures, for the purpose of lawful preservation or the creation of 
a replacement copy by an eligible library, archives, or museum 
• Motion pictures, for the purpose of deploying text and data mining 
techniques on a corpus of motion pictures for scholarly research and 
teaching by researchers at institutions of higher education 
• Literary works, for the purpose of deploying text and data mining 
techniques on a corpus of literary works for scholarly research and 
teaching by researchers at institutions of higher education 
• Literary works distributed electronically (i.e., e-books), for use with 
assistive technologies for persons who are blind, visually impaired or 
have print disabilities 
• Literary works consisting of compilations of data generated by medical 
devices and corresponding personal monitoring systems 
• Computer programs that enable wireless devices to connect to a wireless 
telecommunications network (“unlocking”) 
• Computer programs that operate the following types of devices, to allow 
the device to interoperate with or to remove software applications 
(“jailbreaking”): 
 Smartphones 
 Tablets and other all-purpose mobile computing devices 
 Smart TVs, including video streaming devices 
 Voice assistant devices 
 Routers and dedicated network devices 

[PAGE 6]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
3 
• Computer programs that operate the following types of devices, to allow 
diagnosis, maintenance, and repair: 
 Motorized land vehicles or marine vessels 
 Devices primarily designed for use by consumers 
 Medical devices and systems 
• Computer programs for purposes of good-faith security research 
• Computer programs for purposes of investigating a potential 
infringement of free and open-source computer programs 
• Computer programs other than video games, for the preservation of 
computer programs and computer program-dependent materials by 
libraries, archives, and museums 
• Video games for which outside server support has been discontinued, to 
allow individual play by gamers and preservation of games by libraries, 
archives, and museums (as well as necessary jailbreaking of console 
computer code for preservation uses only), and preservation of 
discontinued video games that never required server support 
• Computer programs that operate 3D printers, to allow use of alternative 
material 
• Video games operated on a general-purpose computer, for the purpose of 
allowing an individual with a physical disability to use software or 
hardware input methods other than a standard keyboard or mouse 
The Register is not recommending adoption of the following proposed exemptions: 
• Audiovisual works, for purposes of creating clips to be used in text 
messages 
• Audiovisual works, for purposes of livestream recording 
• Audiovisual works, for purposes of space-shifting  
As discussed further below, a recommended denial is not necessarily based on a 
determination that the proposal lacks merit.  In some cases, the Register is unable to 
recommend an exemption due to deficiencies in the evidence provided in support, but is 
open to considering similar proposals in the future upon a more robust record. 
 
 

[PAGE 7]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
4 
II. Legal Background 
A. Section 1201(a)(1) 
In 1998, Congress enacted the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (“DMCA”) to 
implement provisions of the World Intellectual Property Organization (“WIPO”) 
Copyright Treaty and WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty.  Title I of the 
DMCA added a new chapter 12 to title 17 of the United States Code, which prohibits 
circumvention of technological measures employed by or on behalf of copyright owners 
to control access to their works.  In enacting section 1201, Congress recognized that the 
same features making digital technology a valuable delivery mechanism—the ability to 
quickly create and distribute near-perfect copies of works on a vast scale—also carry the 
potential to enable piracy to a degree unimaginable in the analog context.  As a result, 
Congress sought to support copyright owners’ use of mechanisms known as 
“technological protection measures,” or “TPMs,” when offering works in digital form.   
Specifically, section 1201(a)(1) states, in pertinent part, that “[n]o person shall 
circumvent a technological measure that effectively controls access to a work protected 
under [title 17].”4  The phrase “circumvent a technological measure” means “to 
descramble a scrambled work, to decrypt an encrypted work, or otherwise to avoid, 
bypass, remove, deactivate, or impair a technological measure, without the authority of 
the copyright owner.”5  A technological measure that “effectively controls access to a 
work” is one that “in the ordinary course of its operation, requires the application of 
information, or a process or a treatment, with the authority of the copyright owner, to 
gain access to the work.”
6 
In addition to the general prohibition on circumvention, Congress created permanent 
exemptions to preserve access to works for certain beneficial purposes (e.g., library 
browsing, reverse engineering) and to allow users to legally circumvent TPMs in limited 
circumstances.  As originally drafted, however, section 1201 did not provide a process 
outside of legislation to create additional exemptions.  The House of Representatives’ 
Committee on Commerce was concerned that the lack of an ability to waive the 
circumvention prohibition might undermine the fair use of copyrighted works.
7  The 
Committee concluded that it would “be appropriate to modify the flat prohibition 
against the circumvention of effective technological measures that control access to 
copyrighted materials, in order to ensure that access for lawful purposes is not 
 
4 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1). 
5 Id. § 1201(a)(3)(A). 
6 Id. § 1201(a)(3)(B).   
7 H.R. REP. NO. 105-551, pt. 2, at 35–36 (1998) (“Commerce Comm. Report”). 

[PAGE 8]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
5 
unjustifiably diminished.”8  Congress thus created this rulemaking proceeding to 
address lawful uses of copyrighted works not covered by the permanent exemptions. 
The Commerce Committee characterized the rulemaking proceeding as a “‘fail-safe’ 
mechanism,” stating that “[t]his mechanism would monitor developments in the 
marketplace for copyrighted materials, and allow the enforceability of the prohibition 
against the act of circumvention to be selectively waived, for limited time periods, if 
necessary to prevent a diminution in the availability to individual users of a particular 
category of copyrighted materials.”9  
As ultimately enacted, the “fail-safe” mechanism in section 1201(a)(1) requires the 
Librarian of Congress, following a rulemaking proceeding conducted by the Copyright 
Office, to publish any class of copyrighted works as to which the Librarian has 
determined that noninfringing uses by persons who are users of a copyrighted work are, 
or are likely to be, adversely affected by the prohibition against circumvention in the 
succeeding three-year period, thereby exempting that class from the prohibition for that 
period.
10  The three-year period was intended to allow exemption proposals to be “fully 
considered and fairly decided on the basis of real marketplace developments,”11 and 
flexible enough to accommodate these market developments.  The Librarian’s 
determination is to be based upon the Register of Copyrights’ recommendation.12  In 
making her recommendation, the Register consults with the Assistant Secretary for 
Communications and Information of the Department of Commerce, who oversees the 
National Telecommunications and Information Administration (“NTIA”).
13   
As explained by the Commerce Committee, “[t]he goal of the proceeding is to assess 
whether the implementation of technological protection measures that effectively 
control access to copyrighted works is adversely affecting the ability of individual users 
to make lawful uses of copyrighted works.”
14  To do this, the Register develops a 
comprehensive administrative record using information submitted by interested parties, 
and makes a recommendation to the Librarian on the basis of that record.15  Based on the 
 
8 Id. at 36. 
9 Id.   
10 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1). 
11 Commerce Comm. Report at 36. 
12 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C); H.R. REP. NO. 105-796, at 64 (1998) (“Conference Report”).   
13 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C).   
14 Commerce Comm. Report at 37.   
15 See Conference Report at 64 (“[A]s is typical with other rulemaking under title 17, and in 
recognition of the expertise of the Copyright Office, the Register of Copyrights will conduct the 
rulemaking, including providing notice of the rulemaking, seeking comments from the public, 
 

[PAGE 9]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
6 
recommendation, the Librarian promulgates the final rule setting forth any exempted 
classes of works.  
B. Relationship to Other Provisions of Section 1201 and Other Laws 
Temporary exemptions promulgated under section 1201(a)(1) apply only to 
circumventing technological measures that control access to copyrighted works.  Section 
1201 also contains provisions prohibiting trafficking in technologies, products, services, 
or devices that are primarily designed or produced for purposes of circumventing 
TPMs.  Section 1201(a)(2) restricts trafficking in those that are used to circumvent 
technological measures that control access to copyrighted works (referred to as “access 
controls”).
16  Section 1201(b) restricts trafficking in those that are used to circumvent 
technological measures that protect the exclusive rights of copyright owners in their 
works, including the right to reproduce these works (referred to as “copy controls”).17  
The Register does not have authority to recommend—nor does the Librarian of 
Congress have authority to adopt—exemptions for these anti -trafficking prohibitions as 
part of the triennial rulemaking process.18 
Section 1201’s permanent exemptions permit specific activities, some of which authorize 
both circumvention and trafficking, including:  
• Section 1201(d), which exempts certain activities of nonprofit libraries, 
archives, and educational institutions from the circumvention bar in 
section 1201(a)(1), so that they can “make a good faith determination of 
whether to acquire a copy of [a] work for the sole purpose of engaging in 
conduct permitted under this title.” 
• Section 1201(e), which exempts “any lawfully authorized investigative, 
protective, information security, or intelligence activity” of the federal or 
a state government from the anticircumvention and anti-trafficking 
provisions in section 1201(a)(1), (a)(2), and (b).   
 
consulting with the Assistant Secretary for Communications and Information of the Department 
of Commerce and any other agencies that are deemed appropriate, and recommending final 
regulations in the report to the Librarian.”). 
16 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(2). 
17 Id. § 1201(b). 
18 See id. § 1201(a)(1)(E) (“Neither the exception under subparagraph (B) from the applicability of 
the prohibition contained in subparagraph (A), nor any determination made in a rulemaking 
conducted under subparagraph (C), may be used as a defense in any action to enforce any 
provision of this title other than this paragraph.”).   

[PAGE 10]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
7 
• Section 1201(f), which exempts certain “reverse engineering” activities 
from section 1201(a)(1), (a)(2), and (b), “for the sole purpose of identifying 
and analyzing those elements of [a computer] program that are necessary 
to achieve interoperability of an independently created computer 
program with other programs.” 
• Section 1201(g), which exempts certain “encryption research” from 
section 1201(a)(1) and (2) (but not 1201(b)). 
• Section 1201(h), which permits courts, in applying section 1201(a)(1) and 
(2) to a “component or part,” to consider whether the component or part 
is needed to “prevent the access of minors to material on the Internet.” 
• Section 1201(i), which exempts from section 1201(a)(1) circumvention 
carried out “solely for the purpose of preventing the collection or 
dissemination of personally identifying information about a natural 
person who seeks to gain access to the work protected.”  
• Section 1201(j), which exempts certain acts of “security testing” from 
section 1201(a)(1) and (2).  
The Librarian cannot exempt any parties from their duty to comply with other laws, 
including non-copyright statutes or regulations.   
C. Rulemaking Standards 
In adopting the DMCA, Congress imposed legal and evidentiary requirements for the 
section 1201 rulemaking proceeding, as discussed below.  The Office analyzed the legal 
and evidentiary standards in its 2017 policy study on section 1201 (“Section 1201 
Report”), and summarizes its conclusions here.19 
1. Burden of Proof 
The Office has noted that “[t]hose who seek an exemption from the prohibition on 
circumvention bear the burden of establishing that the requirements for granting an 
exemption have been satisfied.”20  In its Section 1201 Report, the Office clarified that 
 
19 See U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, SECTION 1201 OF TITLE 17 at 105–27 (2017), 
https://www.copyright.gov/policy/1201/section-1201-full-report.pdf (“Section 1201 Report”). 
20 U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, SECTION 1201 RULEMAKING: SIXTH TRIENNIAL PROCEEDING TO DETERMINE 
EXEMPTIONS TO THE PROHIBITION ON CIRCUMVENTION, RECOMMENDATION OF THE REGISTER OF 
COPYRIGHTS 13 (2015) (“2015 Recommendation”).  References to the Register’s recommendations 
in prior rulemakings are cited by the year of publication followed by “Recommendation” (e.g., 
“2018 Recommendation”). Prior Recommendations are available on the Copyright Office website 
at https://www.copyright.gov/1201/.  

[PAGE 11]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
8 
there are “two distinct burdens:  the ‘burden of persuasion,’ i.e., which party loses if the 
evidence is closely balanced, and the ‘burden of production,’ i.e., which party bears the 
obligation to come forward with evidence at different points in the proceeding.”21  The 
Office noted that, practically speaking, 
the burden of production will effectively be on exemption proponents, 
simply because they have greater knowledge of and access to evidence 
demonstrating adverse effects on noninfringing uses.  Although the 
Office has discretion to engage in independent fact-finding and take 
administrative notice of evidence, the primary way that most evidence 
supporting an exemption will get into the record will continue to be 
through the submissions of proponents, who are usually in the best 
position to provide it.22   
As for the burden of persuasion, the Register will recommend granting an exemption 
only “when the preponderance of the evidence in the record shows that the conditions 
for granting an exemption have been met.”23   
Thus, “[i]n sum, it is the totality of the rulemaking record (i.e., the evidence provided by 
commenters or administratively noticed by the Office) that must, on balance, reflect the 
need for an exemption by a preponderance of the evidence.  Such evidence must, on the 
whole, show that it is more likely than not that users of a copyrighted work will, in the 
succeeding three-year period, be adversely affected by the prohibition on circumvention 
in their ability to make noninfringing uses of a particular class of copyrighted works.”24 
2. Defining an Exemption Class 
Section 1201(a)(1) specifies that an exemption adopted as part of this rulemaking must 
be based on “a particular class of works.”25  The starting point for any definition of a 
“particular class” is the list of categories appearing in section 102 of title 17, such as 
literary works, musical works, and sound recordings.26  But, as the legislative history 
makes clear, “the ‘particular class of copyrighted works’ [is intended to] be a narrow and 
 
21 Section 1201 Report at 110 (quoting Shaffer v. Weast, 546 U.S. 49, 56 (2005) (quotation marks and 
alterations omitted)). 
22 Id. 
23 Id. at 111–12; see 2015 Recommendation at 13–14 (accord). 
24 Section 1201 Report at 112. 
25 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(B).   
26 STAFF OF H. COMM. ON THE JUDICIARY, 105TH CONG., SECTION-BY-SECTION ANALYSIS OF H.R. 2281 
AS PASSED BY THE UNITED STATES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ON AUGUST 4, 1998, at 7 (Comm. Print 
1998) (“House Manager’s Report”).   

[PAGE 12]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
9 
focused subset of the broad categories of works . . . identified in Section 102 of the 
Copyright Act.”27  For example, while the category of “literary works” under section 
102(a)(1) “embraces both prose creations such as journals, periodicals or books, and 
computer programs of all kinds,” Congress explained that “[i]t is exceedingly unlikely 
that the impact of the prohibition on circumvention of access control technologies will be 
the same for scientific journals as it is for computer operating systems.”28  As such, 
“these two categories of works, while both ‘literary works,’ do not constitute a single 
‘particular class’ for purposes of” section 1201(a)(1).29  
At the same time, Congress emphasized that the Librarian “should not draw the 
boundaries of ‘particular classes’ too narrowly.”30  Thus, while the category of “motion 
pictures and other audiovisual works” in section 102 “may appropriately be subdivided, 
for purposes of the rulemaking, into classes such as ‘motion pictures,’ [or] ‘television 
programs,’” it would be inappropriate “to subdivide overly narrowly into particular 
genres of motion pictures, such as Westerns, comedies, or live action dramas.”31   
Determining the appropriate scope of a “class of works” for an exemption may also 
involve consideration of the adverse effects an exemption may have on the market for or 
value of copyrighted works.  For example, the class might be defined in part by 
reference to the medium on which the works are distributed, or even to the access 
control measures applied to them.  In particular, classes may be refined by reference to 
the particular type of use and/or user to which the exemption will apply.32  In some 
cases, “the Office’s ability to narrowly define the class is what enable[s] it to recommend 
the exemption at all.”33  
In sum, “[d]eciding the scope or boundaries of a ‘particular class’ of copyrighted works 
as to which the prohibition contained in section 1201(a)(1) has been shown to have had 
an adverse impact is an important issue” to be determined based upon the law and facts 
developed in the proceeding.34  Accordingly, the Register will look to the specific record 
before her to assess the proper scope of the class for a proposed exemption. 
 
27 Commerce Comm. Report at 38 (emphasis added).   
28 House Manager’s Report at 7.   
29 Id. 
30 Id. 
31 Id. 
32 2015 Recommendation at 17–18; Section 1201 Report at 26. 
33 Section 1201 Report at 109. 
34 House Manager’s Report at 7.   

[PAGE 13]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
10 
3. Evidentiary Standards 
In considering whether to recommend an exemption, the Register inquires: “Are users of 
a copyrighted work adversely affected by the prohibition on circumvention in their ability to make 
noninfringing uses of a class of copyrighted works, or are users likely to be so adversely affected 
in the next three years?”35  This test breaks down into several elements. 
a. Copyrightable Works at Issue 
The first requirement for an exemption is that the class include at least some works 
protected by copyright.36  The statute refers to a “class of copyrighted works”37 and 
provides that the circumvention ban applies only to a TPM that controls access to “a 
work protected under this title.”38 
b. Noninfringing Use 
The second requirement is that the proposed uses are noninfringing under title 17.39  
Noninfringing uses include those the Office has protected by copyright exceptions, such 
as fair use (section 107), the exceptions for libraries and archives (section 108), and 
exceptions for adaptations of computer programs (section 117).  As the Office has 
explained: 
The Register will look to the Copyright Act and relevant judicial 
precedents when analyzing whether a proposed use is likely to be 
noninfringing.  The statutory language requires that the use is or is likely 
to be noninfringing, not merely that the use might plausibly be 
considered noninfringing.  As the Register has indicated previously, there 
is no “rule of doubt” favoring an exemption when it is unclear that a 
particular use is a fair or otherwise noninfringing use.  Thus, [the record] 
must show more than that a particular use could be noninfringing.  
Rather, the [record] must establish that the proposed use is likely to 
qualify as noninfringing under relevant law.
40  
While “this standard does not require ‘controlling precedent directly on point,’” “the 
rulemaking is not an appropriate venue for breaking new ground in fair use 
 
35 Section 1201 Report at 114–15; see 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 
36 Section 1201 Report at 115; see 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(A), (a)(1)(C). 
37 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 
38 Id. § 1201(a)(1)(A). 
39 Section 1201 Report at 115–17; see 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 
40 2015 Recommendation at 15 (footnotes omitted); see also Section 1201 Report at 115–16. 

[PAGE 14]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
11 
jurisprudence.”41  Proponents must therefore provide sufficient detail so that the 
proposed uses are cognizable for the Register to evaluate them and determine whether 
they are likely to be noninfringing under relevant statutory and case law. 
c. Causation 
The third requirement is that the statutory prohibition on circumventing access controls 
is the cause of the adverse effects.42  “ Adverse impacts that flow from other sources, or 
that are not clearly attributable to implementation of a technological protection measure, 
are outside the scope of the rulemaking.”43  For example, adverse effects stemming from 
“market-place trends, other technological developments, or changes in the roles of 
libraries, distributors or other intermediaries” are not cognizable harms under the 
statute.
44 
d. Adverse Effects and the Statutory Factors 
The final requirement is that users are either adversely affected, or are likely to be 
adversely affected, in their ability to make noninfringing uses during the next three 
years.45  Proponents must show a need for circumvention to avoid any alleged adverse 
effects.  This element is analyzed in reference to section 1201(a)(1)(C)’s statutory factors: 
(i) the availability for use of copyrighted works; 
(ii) the availability for use of works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and 
educational purposes;  
(iii) the impact that the prohibition on the circumvention of technological 
measures applied to copyrighted works has on criticism, comment, news 
reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research;  
(iv) the effect of circumvention of technological measures on the market for or 
value of copyrighted works; and  
(v) such other factors as the Librarian considers appropriate.
46   
 
41 Section 1201 Report at 116–17 (quoting 2010 Recommendation at 12). 
42 Id. at 115, 117; see 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 
43 Commerce Comm. Report at 37; House Manager’s Report at 6 (similar). 
44 House Manager’s Report at 6. 
45 Section 1201 Report at 115; see 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 
46 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C); see Section 1201 Report at 115, 118. 

[PAGE 15]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
12 
In applying these factors, the Register “balances ‘[t]he harm identified by a proponent of 
an exemption . . . with the harm that would result from an exemption.’”47  Weighing 
these factors may also require consideration of the benefits that the technological 
measure brings with respect to the overall creation and dissemination of works in the 
marketplace, in addition to any negative impact.  As the legislative history explains, “the 
rulemaking proceedings should consider the positive as well as the adverse effects of 
these technologies on the availability of copyrighted materials.”48 
Congress stressed that the “main focus of the rulemaking proceeding” should be on 
“whether a substantial diminution” of the availability of works for noninfringing uses is 
“actually occurring” in the marketplace.49  To prove the existence of adverse effects, it is 
necessary to demonstrate “distinct, verifiable and measurable impacts” occurring in the 
marketplace, as exemptions “should not be based upon de minimis impacts.”50  Thus, 
“mere inconveniences” or “individual cases” do not satisfy the rulemaking standard.51   
To the extent a proponent relies on claimed future impacts rather than existing impacts, 
such future adverse impacts must be “likely.”52  An exemption may be based upon 
anticipated, rather than actual, adverse impacts “only in extraordinary circumstances in 
which the evidence of likelihood of future adverse impact during that time period is 
highly specific, strong and persuasive.”53  
In sum, for a finding of adverse effects, the evidence in the record “cannot be 
hypothetical, theoretical, or speculative, but must be real, tangible, and concrete.  
Ultimately, the evidence must show that adverse effects are not merely possible, but 
probable (i.e., more likely than not to be occurring or likely to occur in the next three 
years).”54 
D. Streamlined Renewal Process 
Beginning with the seventh triennial rulemaking, and following a comprehensive policy 
study of section 1201, the Copyright Office introduced a streamlined process to renew 
 
47 Section 1201 Report at 118 (alteration and omission in original) (quoting Exemption to 
Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 
76 Fed. Reg. 60,398, 60,403 (Sept. 29, 2011)). 
48 House Manager’s Report at 6. 
49 Id. 
50 Commerce Comm. Report at 37. 
51 House Manager’s Report at 6.  
52 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(B), (C).   
53 House Manager’s Report at 6. 
54 Section 1201 Report at 120–21. 

[PAGE 16]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
13 
section 1201 exemptions.55  Previously, in recognition of legislative history stating that 
the basis of an exemption should be established de novo in each triennial proceeding,56 
the Office had always required the factual record to be developed anew.57  In its Section 
1201 Report, the Office evaluated the possibility of a renewal process, noting a “broad 
consensus in favor of streamlining the process for renewing exemptions to which there 
is no meaningful opposition.”58  The Office ultimately concluded that “the statutory 
language appears to be broad enough to permit determinations to be based upon 
evidence drawn from prior proceedings, but only upon a conclusion that this evidence 
remains reliable to support granting an exemption in the current proceeding.”59  The 
Office further concluded that renewal may be sought only for exemptions in their 
current form, without modification, and that the Register “must apply the same 
evidentiary standards in recommending the renewal of exemptions as for first-time 
exemption requests.”60   
The Office employed the streamlined process again in this proceeding and detailed the 
renewal process in its public notices.61  Streamlined renewal is based upon a 
determination that, due to a lack of legal, marketplace, or technological changes, the 
factors that led the Register to recommend adoption of the exemption in the prior 
rulemaking are expected to continue into the forthcoming triennial period.62  That is, the 
same material facts and circumstances underlying the previously adopted regulatory 
exemption may be relied on to renew the exemption.63  Because the statute itself requires 
that exemptions must be adopted upon a fresh determination concerning the next threeyear period,
64 the fact that the Librarian previously adopted an exemption creates no 
presumption that readoption is appropriate.  Instead, the Office solicited petitions 
summarizing the basis for claiming a continuing need and justification for the 
 
55 Id. at 127–28; see 2018 Recommendation at 17–19.      
56 See Commerce Comm. Report at 37 (explaining that for every rulemaking, “the assessment of 
adverse impacts on particular categories of works is to be determined de novo”).  
57 Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted Works, 82 Fed. Reg. 
29,804, 29,805 (June 30, 2017). 
58 Section 1201 Report at vi. 
59 Id. at 143. 
60 Id. at 145, 146. 
61 Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted Works, 85 Fed. Reg. 
37,399, 37,400–02 (June 22, 2020) (“NOI”); Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access 
Controls on Copyrighted Works, 85 Fed. Reg. 65,293, 65,294–95 (Oct. 15, 2020) (“NPRM”). 
62 NOI at 37,401–02; NPRM at 65,294. 
63 NOI at 37,401–02; NPRM at 65,294. 
64 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 

[PAGE 17]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
14 
exemption, and “petitioners also signed a declaration stating that, to the best of their 
personal knowledge, there ha[d] not been any material change in the facts, law, or other 
circumstances set forth in the prior rulemaking record such that renewal of the 
exemption would not be justified.”65  
Next, the Office solicited comments from participants opposing the readoption of the 
exemption.  Opponents were required to provide evidence that would allow the Register 
to reasonably conclude that the prior rulemaking record and any further information 
provided in the petitions were insufficient for her to recommend renewal without the 
benefit of a further developed record.66  For example, a change in case law might affect 
whether a particular use is noninfringing, new technological developments might affect 
the availability for use of copyrighted works, or new business models might affect the 
market for or value of copyrighted works.  If the appropriateness of renewing an 
exemption was meaningfully contested, that exemption would be automatically treated 
as a petition for a new exemption instead.  That is, it would be fully noticed for written 
comment and public hearing to generate an updated administrative record for the 
Register to evaluate whether to recommend readoption, modification, or elimination of 
that exemption to the Librarian.67 
Separately, as in prior rulemakings, the Office solicited petitions proposing that the 
Register recommend new exemptions.  Petitions seeking to expand upon a current 
exemption were considered as petitions for new exemptions, since a sufficient 
administrative record had not yet been created to consider such additional activities.68  
In considering requests to expand exemptions, however, the Register will evaluate the 
relevance, if any, of the prior administrative record where it has been established that 
there have been no material changes in the facts or law with respect to the existing 
contours of that exemption.  For example, as detailed below, the current proposed class 
10, which would expand the exemption to permit “unlocking” of additional devices to 
allow them to connect to alternate mobile carriers, was considered against the backdrop 
of the prior administrative record. 
Based on this process, the Register was able to recommend renewal of all exemptions 
adopted in the 2018 rulemaking, and to subsequently consider whether some of them 
 
65 NPRM at 65,294–95. 
66 NOI at 37,402. 
67 See id. at 37,403 (stating that if a renewal petition is meaningfully opposed, “[t]hose exemptions 
will instead be subject to the more comprehensive rulemaking procedure in order to build out the 
administrative record”). 
68 Id. at 37,401. 

[PAGE 18]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
15 
should be modified to accommodate additional new uses through the development of 
an expanded administrative record.  

[PAGE 19]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
16 
III. History of Eighth Triennial Proceeding 
The Office initiated the eighth triennial rulemaking proceeding by issuing a notice of 
inquiry (“NOI”) on June 22, 2020.69  The NOI requested petitions for renewals, petitions 
in opposition to renewal, and any petitions for new exemptions, including proposals to 
expand a current exemption.70  In response, the Office received thirty-two renewal 
petitions and fifteen comments in response to those petitions.71  Seven comments 
supported renewal of a current exemption, and eight raised discrete concerns with 
specific petitions, but did not oppose readoption of the relevant exemption.72  The Office 
also received twenty-six petitions for new exemptions,73 including thirteen seeking to 
expand certain current exemptions.74  
On October 15, 2020, the Office issued its notice of proposed rulemaking (“NPRM”) 
identifying the existing exemptions for which the Register intended to recommend 
renewal, and outlined the proposed classes for new exemptions, for which three rounds 
of public comments were initiated.75  Those proposals were organized into seventeen 
classes of works.  The Office received 161 total submissions in response to the NPRM.76 
 
69 NOI at 37,399. 
70 Id. at 37,400. 
71 NPRM at 65,295–96. 
72 Id. at 65,296.  The submissions received in response to the NOI are available on the Office’s 
website.  See Eighth Triennial Section 1201 Proceeding (2021), U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, 
https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2021/ (last visited Oct. 14, 2021).  References to these 
submissions are by party and class name (abbreviated where appropriate) followed by “Renewal 
Pet.,” “Renewal Comment,” or party name and class number followed by “Pet.,” “Initial,” 
“Opp’n,” or “Reply” for comments submitted in the first, second, or third round, as applicable.  
The comments filed by Joint Creators opposing new proposed classes had a technical issue that 
prevented the display of hyperlinks.  Joint Creators submitted corrected comments, and citations 
here refer to the corrected versions. 
73 NPRM at 65,301. 
74 In addition, the Organization for Transformative Works’ (“OTW”) renewal petition sought to 
amend the current regulatory language.  See OTW Noncom. Videos Renewal Pet. at 4 (“[T]he 
exemption should be renewed using the relatively simple language” from the 2008 rulemaking, 
as “[r]eturning to the simple, functionally similar language of the initial remix exemption (with 
the addition of Blu-ray) would clarify the exemption for ordinary users . . . .”).  The Office treated 
that request as a petition for expansion.   
75 NPRM at 65,293. 
76 One reply comment, from Pex, did not opine on a particular class but offered “general 
commentary on the importance of unfettered access to the content on platforms to the success of 
 

[PAGE 20]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
17 
After analyzing the written comments, the Office held seven days of public hearings 
from April 5–8 and April 19–21, 2021, via Zoom.  Video recordings for these hearings are 
available on the Office’s website and YouTube pages.77  In total, the Office heard 
testimony from 67 individuals on various panels, with nine additional participants 
offering views during an audience participation segment.  After the hearings, the Office 
issued written questions to hearing participants in eight proposed classes and received 
22 responses.78   
In the seventh triennial rulemaking, the Office determined that further informal 
communications with non-governmental participants might be beneficial in limited 
circumstances.79  The Office thus established guidelines for ex parte meetings, noting that 
the Office would not consider or accept any new documentary materials at these 
meetings, and requiring participants to provide a letter summarizing the meeting for the 
Office to include in the rulemaking record.80  In the current proceeding, the Office 
employed substantially the same process for ex parte communications.  The Office held 
13 ex parte meetings with participants concerning 10 proposed classes.81 
As required by section 1201(a)(1), the Register consulted with NTIA during this 
rulemaking.  NTIA provided input at various stages and participated in the virtual 
public hearings.  NTIA formally communicated its views on each of the proposed 
exemptions to the Register on October 1, 2021.  The Office addresses NTIA’s substantive 
views on the proposed classes below.  
 
efficient copyright protection.”  Pex Reply at 1.  The Office did not consider this comment in 
connection with the proposed classes of exemptions.  To the extent Pex’s comment was 
advocating for an exemption to permit circumvention for the purpose of monitoring content in 
connection with the DMCA’s notice and takedown procedures, see Pex Reply at 2, it may consider 
submitting a petition for a new exemption in the next rulemaking cycle. 
77 See Eighth Triennial Section 1201 Proceeding (2021), U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, 
https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2021/ (last visited Oct. 14, 2021); U.S. Copyright Office, 
YOUTUBE, https://www.youtube.com/uscopyrightoffice/ (last visited Oct. 14, 2021). 
78 Participants’ post-hearing letter responses are available on the Office’s website.  See PostHearing Questions, U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2021/post-hearing/ 
(last visited Oct. 18, 2021). 
79 NPRM at 65,310; see Section 1201 Report at 150–51 (documenting stakeholder desire for such a 
process). 
80 NPRM at 65,310; Ex Parte Communications, U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, 
https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2021/ex-parte-communications.html (last visited Oct. 18, 2021). 
81 See Ex Parte Communications, U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2021/exparte-communications.html (last visited Oct. 18, 2021).  

[PAGE 21]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
18 
IV. Renewal Recommendations 
As set forth in the NPRM, the Register received petitions to renew every one of the 
exemptions adopted in the seventh triennial rulemaking.  To the extent any renewal 
petition proposed uses beyond the current exemption, the Office disregarded those 
portions for purposes of considering renewal, and instead focused on whether the 
petition provided sufficient information to warrant readoption of the exemption in its 
current form.82  Eight comments in response to renewal petitions raised discrete 
concerns with specific petitions, but none opposed the verbatim readoption of an 
existing regulatory exemption or disputed the reliability of the previously analyzed 
administrative record.83   
The Register now finalizes the NPRM’s proposal to recommend renewal of these 
exemptions based on the information provided in the renewal petitions and the lack of 
meaningful opposition, which demonstrated that the conditions that led to adoption of 
the exemptions are likely to continue during the next triennial period.  The existing 
exemptions, and the bases for the recommendation to readopt each exemption in 
accordance with the streamlined renewal process, are briefly summarized below.  Where 
noted, these exemptions serve as a baseline in considering subsequent requests for 
expansion.  The recommended regulatory language for all exemptions in this 
rulemaking (including “straight renewals,” expanded exemptions, and wholly new 
exemptions), is set forth in the Appendix. 
A. Audiovisual works – educational and derivative uses   
Multiple individuals and organizations petitioned to renew the exemption codified at 37 
C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1), which contains multiple subparts covering use of short portions of 
motion pictures for various educational and derivative uses.84  The Office did not receive 
meaningful opposition to readoption of these exemptions.85  Petitions to renew the 
various subparts of the exemption are discussed below.  The existing exemption and its 
 
82 NPRM at 65,294.   
83 Id. at 65,295; see also NOI at 37,402 (describing “meaningful opposition” standard). 
84 See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1).  In the 2018 rulemaking, this recommended regulatory language 
was the result of consideration of one proposed class of works that grouped together five 
petitions.  See 2018 Recommendation at 31–34. 
85 While six comments were received in response to the renewal petitions regarding audiovisual 
works used for educational and derivative purposes, the Office noted that each petition did not 
object to the renewal of the related exemption or lacked meaningful opposition.  See NPRM at 
65,295–98. 

[PAGE 22]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
19 
various subparts collectively serve as the baseline in assessing whether to recommend 
any expansions in Class 1.  
1. Audiovisual works – criticism, comment, teaching, or scholarship 
– universities and K-12 educational institutions   
Multiple individuals and organizations petitioned to renew the exemption for motion 
pictures for educational purposes by college and university or K-12 faculty and 
students.86  The Office did not receive meaningful opposition to readoption of this 
exemption.87  The petitions demonstrated the continuing need and justification for the 
exemption, stating that educators and students continue to rely on excerpts from digital 
media for class presentations and coursework.  Peter Decherney, Katherine Sender, John 
Jackson, Console-ing Passions, the American Association of University Professors 
(“ AAUP”), International Communication Association (“ICA”), Library Copyright 
Alliance (“LCA”), and Society for Cinema and Media Studies (“SCMS”) (collectively, 
“Joint Educators I”) provided several examples of professors using DVD clips in the 
classroom.  For example, “Cornell University Communication professor Lee Humphreys 
samples short segments of movies and television shows for her lectures in her ‘Media 
Communication’ class” and has “shifted from using clips from YouTube because she 
wants to show higher quality clips and to avoid showing the attached advertisements to 
her students.”88  Brigham Young University (“BYU”) stated that “on countless 
occasions,” “numerous instructors” need to show clips from motion pictures in the 
course of their teaching activities.89 
In addition, co-petitioner Peter Decherney declared that he “continues to teach a course 
on Multimedia Criticism,” where his students “produce short videos analyzing 
media.”90  Joint Educators I more broadly asserted that the “entire field” of video essays 
or multimedia criticism “could not have existed in the United States without fair use and 
 
86 Decherney, Sender, Jackson, Int’l Commc’n Ass’n (“ICA”), Soc’y for Cinema and Media Studies 
(“SCMS”), Console-ing Passions, LCA, and Am. Ass’n of Univ. Professors (“ AAUP”) (collectively, 
“Joint Educators I”) AV Educ. Renewal Pet.; Brigham Young Univ. & Brigham Young Univ.—
Idaho (collectively, “BYU”) AV Educ. Renewal Pet.  
87 While the DVD Copy Control Association (“DVD CCA”) and the Advanced Access Content 
System Licensing Administrator (“ AACS LA”) filed comments in response to the renewal 
petition, the comments did not object to renewal of the existing exemption, but discussed several 
purported deficiencies in the renewal petitions.  See generally DVD CCA & AACS LA AV Educ. 
Renewal Comment. 
88 Joint Educators I AV Educ. Renewal Pet. at 3. 
89 BYU AV Educ. Renewal Pet. at 3. 
90 Joint Educators I AV Educ. Renewal Pet. at 3. 

[PAGE 23]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
20 
the 1201 educational exemption.”91  Through these submissions, petitioners 
demonstrated personal knowledge and experience with regard to this exemption based 
on their representation of thousands of digital and literacy educators and/or members 
supporting educators and students, combined with past participation in the section 1201 
triennial rulemaking. 
2. Audiovisual works – criticism and comment – massive open 
online courses (“MOOCs”)   
Peter Decherney, Katherine Sender, John Jackson, Console-ing Passions, ICA, LCA, and 
SCMS (collectively, “Joint Educators II”) and BYU petitioned to renew the exemption for 
motion pictures for educational uses in MOOCs.
92  The Office did not receive 
meaningful opposition to readoption of this exemption.93  The petitions demonstrated 
the continuing need and justification for the exemption, stating that instructors continue 
to rely on the exemption to develop, provide, and improve MOOCs, as well as increase 
the number of (and therefore access to) MOOCs in the field of film and media studies.  
Joint Educators II further noted that the “exemption has never been so relevant as it is 
now during the COVID–19 pandemic and the universal shift of our education systems to 
online learning.”
94  BYU noted that faculty and other educational professionals who 
create MOOCs “often need” to include clips from motion pictures as part of the 
curriculum.95  
3. Audiovisual works – criticism and comment – digital and media 
literacy programs  
LCA and Professor Renee Hobbs petitioned to renew the exemption for motion pictures 
for educational uses in nonprofit digital and media literacy programs offered by 
libraries, museums, and other nonprofits.96  No oppositions were filed against 
readoption of this exemption.  The petition demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption, and petitioners demonstrated personal knowledge and 
experience with regard to this exemption.  For example, the petition stated that 
 
91 Id. 
92 Joint Educators II AV Educ. MOOCs Renewal Pet. 
93 While DVD CCA & AACS LA filed comments in response to the renewal petition, the 
comments did not object to renewal of the existing exemption.  See DVD CCA & AACS LA AV 
Educ. MOOCs Renewal Comment at 1.  
94 Joint Educators II AV Educ. MOOCs Renewal Pet. at 3. 
95 BYU AV Educ. MOOCs Renewal Pet. at 3. 
96 LCA & Hobbs AV Educ. Nonprofits Renewal Pet. 

[PAGE 24]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
21 
librarians across the country have relied on the current exemption and will continue to 
do so for their digital and media literacy programs.97  
4. Audiovisual works – criticism and comment – multimedia ebooks 
Multiple petitioners jointly sought to renew the exemption for the use of motion picture 
excerpts in nonfiction multimedia e-books.98  The Office did not receive meaningful 
opposition to readoption of this exemption.99  The petition demonstrated the continuing 
need and justification for the exemption.  In addition, the petitioners demonstrated 
personal knowledge through Professor Bobette Buster’s continued work on an e-book 
series based on her lecture series, “Deconstructing Master Filmmakers: The Uses of 
Cinematic Enchantment,” which, they said, “relies on the availability of high-resolution 
video not available without circumvention of technological protection measures.”100 
5. Audiovisual works – criticism and comment – filmmaking 
Multiple organizations petitioned to renew the exemption for motion pictures for uses in 
documentary films or other films where use is in a parody or for the work’s biographical 
or historically significant nature.101  The Office did not receive meaningful opposition to 
readoption of this exemption.102  The petitions summarized the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption, and the petitioners demonstrated personal knowledge 
and experience with regard to this exemption.  For example, the International 
Documentary Association, Film Independent, and Kartemquin Educational Films 
(collectively, “Joint Filmmakers”)— which represent thousands of independent 
filmmakers across the nation—stated that TPMs such as encryption continue to prevent 
filmmakers from accessing needed material, and that this is “especially true for the kind 
of high fidelity motion picture material filmmakers need to satisfy both distributors and 
 
97 Id. at 3. 
98 Buster, Authors All. & AAUP Nonfiction Multimedia E-Books Renewal Pet. 
99 While DVD CCA & AACS LA filed a comment in response to the renewal petition that objected 
to the current regulatory language (i.e., nonfiction multimedia e-books), the Office determined 
that the opposition did not qualify as “meaningful.”  NPRM at 65,297.   
100 Buster, Authors All. & AAUP Nonfiction Multimedia E-Books Renewal Pet. at 3. 
101 Int’l Documentary Ass’n, Film Indep., and Kartemquin Educ. Films (collectively, “Joint 
Filmmakers”) Documentary Films Renewal Pet.; New Media Rights (“NMR”) Documentary 
Films Renewal Pet.   
102 While DVD CCA & AACS LA filed a comment in response to the renewal petition that 
objected to the characterization of the exemption filed by petitioners, the Office found that it was 
not “necessary to opine on the characterization of the petitions” and determined that petitioners 
sufficiently supported their renewal petition.  NPRM at 65,297. 

[PAGE 25]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
22 
viewers.”103  Petitioners stated that they personally know many filmmakers who have 
found it necessary to rely on this exemption and will continue to do so.104    
6. Audiovisual works – criticism and comment – noncommercial 
videos 
Two organizations petitioned to renew the exemption for motion pictures for uses in 
noncommercial videos.105  The Office did not receive meaningful opposition to 
readoption of this exemption.106  The petitions demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption, and the petitioners demonstrated personal knowledge 
and experience with regard to this exemption.  For example, one of the petitioners, the 
Organization for Transformative Works (“OTW”), has advocated for the noncommercial 
video exemption in past triennial rulemakings and stated that it has heard from “a 
number of noncommercial remix artists” who have used the exemption and anticipate 
needing to use it in the future.107  OTW included an account from an academic who 
stated that footage ripped from DVDs and Blu-ray is preferred for “vidders” 
(noncommercial remix artists) because “it is high quality enough to bear up under the 
transformations that vidders make to it.”108  Similarly, New Media Rights (“NMR”) 
stated that its staff personally knows “many video creators that have found it necessary 
to rely on this exemption during the current triennial period” and “who intend to make 
these types of uses in the next triennial period.”109 
B. Audiovisual works – accessibility 
Multiple organizations petitioned to renew the exemption for motion pictures for the 
provision of captioning and/or audio description by disability services offices or similar 
 
103 Joint Filmmakers Documentary Films Renewal Pet. at 3. 
104 Id. at 3; NMR Documentary Films Renewal Pet. at 3. 
105 NMR Noncom. Videos Renewal Pet.; OTW Noncom. Videos Renewal Pet. 
106 Two comments, one from DVD CCA & AACS LA and one from the Entertainment Software 
Association (“ESA”), the Motion Picture Association (“MPA”), and the Recording Industry 
Association of America (“RIAA”), objected to the proposed change in language sought by OTW, 
arguing that the proposed change requires a modification of the exemption.  DVD CCA & AACS 
LA Noncom. Videos Renewal Comment; ESA, MPA & RIAA Noncom. Videos Renewal 
Comment.  The Office agreed that the proposed modifications “are appropriately addressed” 
within the full rulemaking proceeding and included OTW’s renewal petition as part of the 
proposed classes for expanded exemptions.  NPRM at 65,298. 
107 OTW Noncom. Videos Renewal Pet. at 3. 
108 Id. 
109 NMR Noncom. Videos Renewal Pet. at 3. 

[PAGE 26]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
23 
units for students with disabilities at educational institutions.110  No oppositions were 
filed against readoption of this exemption.  The petitions demonstrated the continuing 
need and justification for the exemption, and the petitioners demonstrated personal 
knowledge and experience as to the exemption.  For example, BYU asserted that its 
disability services offices “sometimes need to create accessible versions of motion 
pictures” to accommodate its students with disabilities.111  Both petitions stated that 
there is a need for the exemption going forward; indeed, one group of petitioners stated 
that “the need is likely to increase significantly in light of the ongoing COVID–19 
pandemic as many educational institutions shift to online learning and the use of digital 
multimedia by faculty increases.”112 
This existing exemption serves as the baseline in assessing whether to recommend any 
expansions in Class 3. 
C. Literary works distributed electronically – accessibility 
Multiple organizations petitioned to renew the exemption for literary works distributed 
electronically (i.e., e-books) for use with assistive technologies for persons who are blind, 
visually impaired, or have print disabilities.113  No oppositions were filed against 
readoption of this exemption.  The petitions demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption, stating that individuals who are blind, visually impaired, 
or print disabled are significantly disadvantaged with respect to obtaining accessible ebook content because TPMs interfere with the use of assistive technologies.114  Petitioners 
noted that the record underpinning this exemption “has stood and been re-established 
in the past six triennial reviews dating back to 2003,” and that the “accessibility of 
ebooks is frequently cited as a top priority” by their members.115  In addition, petitioners 
noted the unique challenges COVID–19 poses to the blind, visually impaired, and print 
disabled due to limited physical access to libraries and the shift to virtual learning.116  
Finally, petitioners demonstrated personal knowledge and experience with regard to the 
assistive technology exemption; they are all organizations that advocate for the blind, 
visually impaired, and print disabled. 
 
110 Ass’n of Transcribers and Speech-to-Text Providers (“ ATSP”), Ass’n on Higher Educ. and 
Disability (“ AHEAD”) & LCA Captioning Renewal Pet.; BYU Captioning Renewal Pet. 
111 BYU Captioning Renewal Pet. at 3. 
112 ATSP, AHEAD & LCA Captioning Renewal Pet. at 3. 
113 Am. Council of the Blind (“ ACB”), Am. Found. for the Blind (“ AFB”), Nat’l Fed’n of the Blind 
(“NFB”), LCA, Benetech/Bookshare, and HathiTrust Assistive Technologies Renewal Pet. 
114 Id. at 4. 
115 Id. at 3–4. 
116 Id. at 4. 

[PAGE 27]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
24 
This existing exemption serves as the baseline in assessing whether to recommend any 
expansions in Class 8. 
D. Literary works – medical device data 
Hugo Campos petitioned to renew the exemption covering access to patient data on 
networked medical devices.
117  No oppositions were filed against readoption of this 
exemption, and Consumer Reports submitted a comment in support of the renewal 
petition.118  Mr. Campos’s petition demonstrated the continuing need and justification 
for the exemption, stating that patients continue to need access to data output from their 
medical devices to manage their health.
119  Mr. Campos demonstrated personal 
knowledge and experience with regard to this exemption, as he is a patient needing 
access to the data output from his medical device and is a member of a coalition whose 
members research, comment on, and examine the effectiveness of networked medical 
devices.
120 
This existing exemption serves as the baseline in assessing whether to recommend any 
expansions in Class 9. 
E. Computer programs – unlocking 
Multiple organizations petitioned to renew the exemption for computer programs that 
operate cellphones, tablets, mobile hotspots, or wearable devices (e.g., smartwatches), to 
allow connection of a new or used device to an alternative wireless network 
(“unlocking”).121  No oppositions were filed against readoption of this exemption, and 
Consumer Reports submitted a comment in support of the renewal petition.122  The 
petitions demonstrated the continuing need and justification for the exemption, stating 
that consumers of the enumerated products continue to need to be able to unlock the 
devices so they can switch network providers.  For example, the Institute of Scrap 
Recycling Industries, Inc. (“ISRI”) stated that its members continue to purchase or 
acquire donated cell phones, tablets, and other wireless devices and try to reuse them, 
but that wireless carriers still lock devices to prevent them from being used on other 
carriers.
123  In addition, petitioners demonstrated personal knowledge and experience 
 
117 Campos Medical Devices Renewal Pet. 
118 Consumer Reports Medical Devices Renewal Comment. 
119 Campos Medical Devices Renewal Pet. at 3. 
120 Id. at 3. 
121 Competitive Carriers Ass’n (“CCA”) Unlocking Renewal Pet.; ISRI Unlocking Renewal Pet.   
122 Consumer Reports Unlocking Renewal Comment. 
123 ISRI Unlocking Renewal Pet. at 3. 

[PAGE 28]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
25 
with regard to this exemption.124  Competitive Carriers Association (“CCA”) and ISRI 
represent companies that rely on the ability to unlock cellphones.  Both petitioners also 
participated in past 1201 triennial rulemakings relating to unlocking lawfully-acquired 
wireless devices. 
This existing exemption serves as the baseline in assessing whether to recommend any 
expansions in Class 10. 
F. Computer programs – jailbreaking 
Multiple organizations petitioned to renew the exemptions for computer programs that 
operate smartphones, tablets and other portable all-purpose mobile computing devices, 
smart TVs, or voice assistant devices to allow the device to interoperate with or to 
remove software applications (“jailbreaking”).125  No oppositions were filed against 
readoption of this exemption, and Consumer Reports submitted a comment in support 
of the renewal petition.126  The petitions demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption, and that petitioners have personal knowledge and 
experience with regard to this exemption.127  For example, regarding smart TVs 
specifically, the Software Freedom Conservancy (“SFC”) asserted that it has “reviewed 
the policies and product offerings of major Smart TV manufacturers (Sony, LG, 
Samsung, etc.) and they are substantially the same as those examined during the earlier 
rulemaking process.”128  The petitions stated that, absent an exemption, TPMs applied to 
the enumerated products would have an adverse effect on noninfringing uses, such as 
being able to install third-party applications on a smartphone or download third-party 
software on a smart TV to enable interoperability.129  For example, Electronic Frontier 
Foundation’s (“EFF”) petition outlined its declarant’s experience with instances where it 
was necessary to replace the software on a smartphone, smart TV, and tablet.130 
This existing exemption serves as the baseline in assessing whether to recommend any 
expansions in Class 11. 
 
124 CCA Unlocking Renewal Pet. at 3; ISRI Unlocking Renewal Pet. at 3. 
125 EFF Jailbreaking Renewal Pet.; NMR Jailbreaking Renewal Pet.; Software Freedom 
Conservancy (“SFC”) Jailbreaking Renewal Pet. 
126 Consumer Reports Jailbreaking Renewal Comment. 
127 EFF Jailbreaking Renewal Pet. at 3–4; NMR Jailbreaking Renewal Pet. at 3; SFC Jailbreaking 
Renewal Pet. at 3. 
128 SFC Jailbreaking Renewal Pet. at 3. 
129 EFF Jailbreaking Renewal Pet. at 3; SFC Jailbreaking Renewal Pet. at 3; see NMR Jailbreaking 
Renewal Pet. at 3. 
130 EFF Jailbreaking Renewal Pet. at 3–4. 

[PAGE 29]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
26 
G. Computer programs – repair of motorized land vehicles   
Multiple organizations petitioned to renew the exemption for computer programs that 
control motorized land vehicles, including farm equipment, for purposes of diagnosis, 
repair, or modification of a vehicle function.131  The Office did not receive meaningful 
opposition to readoption of this exemption,132 and Consumer Reports submitted a 
comment in support of the renewal petition.133  The petitions demonstrated the 
continuing need and justification for the exemption.  For example, the Motor & 
Equipment Manufacturers Association (“MEMA”) stated that over the past three years, 
its membership “has seen firsthand that the exemption is helping protect consumer 
choice and a competitive market, while mitigating risks to intellectual property and 
vehicle safety.”134  The Auto Care Association (“ ACA”) stated that “[u]nless this 
exemption is renewed, the software measures manufacturers deploy for the purpose of 
controlling access to vehicle software will prevent Auto Care members from lawfully 
assisting consumers in the maintenance, repair, and upgrade of their vehicles.”135  The 
Specialty Equipment Market Association (“SEMA”) stated that it “is unaware of any 
factor, incident or reason to change the exemption and the need for the exemption 
remains valid and imperative.”
136  The petitioners demonstrated personal knowledge 
and experience with regard to this exemption; each either represents or gathered 
information from individuals or businesses that perform vehicle service and repair.137  
 
131 Auto Care Ass’n (“ ACA”) Vehicle Repair Renewal Pet.; Am. Farm Bureau Fed’n (“ AFBF”) 
Vehicle Repair Renewal Pet.; Consumer Tech. Ass’n (“CTA”) Vehicle Repair Renewal Pet.; Motor 
& Equip. Mfrs. Ass’n (“MEMA”) Vehicle Repair Renewal Pet.; Specialty Equip. Mkt. Ass’n 
(“SEMA”) Vehicle Repair Renewal Pet. 
132 While the Alliance for Automotive Innovation (“ AAI”) did not oppose renewal of the current 
exemption, AAI raised concerns with both ACA’s and MEMA’s renewal petitions on the issue of 
third-party assistance.  AAI Vehicle Repair Renewal Comment at 2.  The Office addressed this 
issue in the NPRM, see NPRM at 65,300, and provides further analysis below in its discussion of 
proposed Class 12. 
133 Consumer Reports Vehicle Repair Renewal Comment.  
134 MEMA Vehicle Repair Renewal Pet. at 3. 
135 ACA Vehicle Repair Renewal Pet. at 3. 
136 SEMA Vehicle Repair Renewal Pet. at 3.  
137 ACA Vehicle Repair Renewal Pet. at 3; AFBF Vehicle Repair Renewal Pet. at 3; CTA Vehicle 
Repair Renewal Pet. at 3; MEMA Vehicle Repair Renewal Pet. at 3; SEMA Vehicle Repair Renewal 
Pet. at 3. 

[PAGE 30]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
27 
H. Computer programs – repair of smartphones, home appliances, and 
home systems 
Multiple organizations petitioned to renew the exemption for computer programs that 
control smartphones, home appliances, or home systems, for diagnosis, maintenance, or 
repair of the device or system.138  The Office did not receive meaningful opposition to 
readoption of this exemption,139 and Consumer Reports submitted a comment in 
support of the renewal petition.140  The petitions demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption.  For example, EFF, the Repair Association, and iFixit 
asserted that “[m]anufacturers of these devices continue to implement technological 
protection measures that inhibit lawful repairs, maintenance, and diagnostics, and they 
show no sign of changing course.”141   
This existing exemption, as well as the existing exemption pertaining to repair of 
motorized land vehicles, serve as the baseline in assessing whether to recommend any 
expansions in Class 12. 
I. Computer programs – security research 
Multiple organizations and security researchers petitioned to renew the exemption 
permitting circumvention for purposes of good-faith security research.142  No 
oppositions were filed against readoption of this exemption, and Consumer Reports 
submitted a comment in support of the renewal petition.143  The petitioners 
demonstrated the continuing need and justification for the exemption, as well as 
personal knowledge and experience with regard to this exemption.  For example, 
 
138 EFF Device Repair Renewal Pet.; EFF, Repair Ass’n & iFixit Device Repair Renewal Pet. 
139 While DVD CCA & AACS LA did not oppose renewal of the current exemption, they 
requested that the Office “expressly . . . reject the implied assertion that some of the activity used 
as examples in the renewal petition” are permitted by the current exemption.  DVD CCA & 
AACS LA Device Repair Renewal Comment at 1, 3–4.  In the NPRM, the Office stated that it is 
“beyond the scope of the renewal phase” for the Office “to opine on examples of particular uses” 
and that the “sufficiency of the petitions do not depend on whether this specific example 
qualifies under the current exemption.”  NPRM at 65,300. 
140 Consumer Reports Device Repair Comment. 
141 EFF Device Repair Renewal Pet. at 3; EFF, Repair Ass’n & iFixit Device Repair Renewal Pet. at 
3. 
142 Blaze & Bellovin Security Research Renewal Pet.; Halderman, Ctr. for Democracy & Tech. 
(“CDT”), and U.S. Tech. Policy Comm. of the Ass’n for Computing Mach. (“ ACM”) Security 
Research Renewal Pet.; MEMA Security Research Renewal Pet. 
143 Consumer Reports Security Research Comment; see also Campos Medical Devices Renewal Pet. 
at 4 (“[W]e also support the petition for an exemption for good-faith security research, which is 
critical to ensure our medical devices are secure from vulnerabilities.”). 

[PAGE 31]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
28 
Professor J. Alex Halderman, the Center for Democracy and Technology (“CDT”), and 
the U.S. Technology Policy Committee of the Association for Computing Machinery 
(“ ACM”) highlighted the need to find and detect vulnerabilities in voting machines and 
other election systems, the increased proliferation of consumer Internet of Things 
devices, and the increasing reliance on digital systems combined with greater 
aggressiveness on the part of threat actors, including other nation states.144  The petition 
from Professors Matt Blaze and Steven Bellovin asserted that in the past three years, 
“one of us has received threats of litigation from copyright holders in connection with 
his security research on software in voting systems.”145  Finally, MEMA stated that its 
membership “experienced firsthand that the exemption is helping encourage innovation 
in the automotive industry while mitigating risks to intellectual property and vehicle 
safety,” and opined that the current exemption strikes an “appropriate balance.”146 
This existing exemption serves as the baseline in assessing whether to recommend any 
expansions in Class 13. 
J. Computer programs – software preservation 
The Software Preservation Network (“SPN”) and LCA petitioned to renew the 
exemption for computer programs other than video games, for the preservation of 
computer programs and computer program-dependent materials by libraries, archives, 
and museums.
147  No oppositions were filed against readoption of this exemption.  The 
petition stated that libraries, archives, and museums continue to need the exemption to 
preserve and curate software and materials dependent on software.  For example, the 
petition asserted that “researchers at [the University of Virginia] designed a project in 
order to access the ‘Peter Sheeran papers’—a collection of drawings and plans from a 
local Charlottesville architecture firm,” and that without the exemption, “the outdated 
Computer Aided Design (‘CAD’) software used to create many of the designs in the 
Sheeran papers may have remained inaccessible to researchers, rendering the designs 
themselves inaccessible, too.”
148  In addition, petitioners demonstrated personal 
knowledge and experience with regard to this exemption through their representation of 
major library associations with members who have relied on this exemption.149 
 
144 Halderman, CTD & ACM Security Research Renewal Pet. at 4. 
145 Blazer & Bellovin Security Research Renewal Pet. at 3. 
146 MEMA Security Research Renewal Pet. at 3. 
147 SPN & LCA Software Preservation Renewal Pet. 
148 Id. at 3. 
149 Id. 

[PAGE 32]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
29 
K. Computer programs – video game preservation 
SPN and LCA petitioned to renew the exemption for preservation of video games for 
which outside server support has been discontinued.150  No oppositions were filed 
against readoption of this exemption, and Consumer Reports submitted a comment in 
support of the renewal petition.151  The petition stated that libraries, archives, and 
museums continue to need the exemption to preserve and curate video games in 
playable form.  For example, the petition highlighted the Georgia Tech University 
Library’s Computing Lab, retroTECH, which has a significant collection of recovered 
video game consoles, made accessible for research and teaching uses pursuant to the 
exemption.152  In addition, the Museum of Digital Arts and Entertainment in Oakland, 
California relied on the exemption to restore a recent PC game, in collaboration with 
Microsoft and the original developers, despite potential digital rights management 
issues.
153  Petitioners demonstrated personal knowledge and experience with regard to 
this exemption through their representation of members who have relied on this 
exemption. 
This existing exemption, as well as the above exemption pertaining to software 
preservation, serve as the baseline in assessing whether to recommend any expansions 
in Class 14. 
L. Computer programs – 3D printers 
Michael Weinberg petitioned to renew the exemption for computer programs that 
operate 3D printers to allow use of alternative feedstock.154  No oppositions were filed 
against readoption of this exemption.  The petition demonstrated the continuing need 
and justification for the exemption, and the petitioner demonstrated personal 
knowledge and experience regarding the exemption.  Specifically, Mr. Weinberg 
declared that he is a member of the 3D printing community and has been involved with 
this exemption request “during each cycle it has been considered by the Copyright 
Office.”
155  In addition, the petition stated that manufacturers of 3D printers continue to 
limit the types of materials that may be used with the devices.156 
 
150 SPN & LCA Abandoned Video Game Renewal Pet. 
151 Consumer Reports Abandoned Video Game Renewal Comment. 
152 SPN & LCA Abandoned Video Game Renewal Pet. at 3. 
153 Id. 
154 Weinberg 3D Printers Renewal Pet. 
155 Id. at 3. 
156 Id. 

[PAGE 33]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
30 
This existing exemption serves as the baseline in assessing whether to recommend any 
expansions in Class 15. 
  

[PAGE 34]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
31 
V. Discussion of New Proposed Classes 
A. Proposed Class 1: Audiovisual Works—Criticism and Comment    
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemptions 
Three petitions seek expansion of the existing exemption allowing circumvention of 
access controls protecting excerpts of motion pictures on DVDs, Blu-ray discs, and 
digitally transmitted video for purposes of criticism and comment, including for 
educational purposes by certain users.157  The current exemption, codified at 37 C.F.R. 
§ 201.40(b)(1), permits circumvention by various users, including creators of 
noncommercial videos, college and university faculty and students, kindergarten 
through twelfth grade educators and students, and faculty of massive open online 
courses (“MOOCs”) offered at accredited, nonprofit institutions.  Because the new 
proposals raise some shared concerns, including the impact of TPMs on the alleged 
noninfringing uses of motion pictures and whether alternative methods of accessing the 
content could alleviate potential adverse impacts, the Office grouped these petitions into 
one class.   
i. Noncommercial Videos  
OTW proposes broadening the existing exemption for noncommercial videos by 
eliminating multiple limitations (discussed below).  OTW’s initial comment included the 
following suggested language: 
Motion pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in 17 U.S.C. 
101, where circumvention is undertaken solely in order to make use of short 
portions of the motion pictures for the purpose of criticism or comment in 
noncommercial videos, and where the person engaging in circumvention 
believes and has reasonable grounds for believing that circumvention is 
necessary to fulfill the purpose of the use.  For purposes of this exemption, 
“noncommercial videos” includes videos created pursuant to a paid commission, 
provided that the commissioning entity’s use is noncommercial.
158 
Professor Francesca Coppa, Professor of English and Film Studies and Director of 
Women’s Studies at Muhlenberg College, filed reply comments in support of OTW’s 
 
157 One petition, from OTW, was styled as a petition for renewal of the existing exemption.  
However, because it proposed significant revisions to the existing exemption, the Office has 
treated it as a petition for a new exemption.  NPRM at 65,298. 
158 OTW Class 1 Initial at 2. 

[PAGE 35]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
32 
proposal.159  The petition was opposed by Joint Creators, DVD Copy Control Association 
(“DVD CCA”), and the Advanced Access Content System Licensing Administrator 
(“ AACS LA”), with the latter two filing a joint opposition.160 
ii. Universities and K-12 Educational Institutions  
As noted above, the 2018 rulemaking resulted in an exemption to permit the use of 
excerpts of motion pictures on DVDs, Blu-ray discs, and digitally transmitted video by 
educators and students for purposes of comment and criticism under varying 
conditions.161  Brigham Young University (“BYU”) and Brigham Young University-Idaho 
(“BYU-Idaho”)162 filed a petition to expand the exemption to permit circumvention for 
“a noninfringing use under 17 U.S.C. §§ 107, 110(1), 110(2), or 112(f).” 163  It proposes the 
following language: 
Motion pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in 17 U.S.C. 
101, where the motion picture is lawfully made and acquired on a DVD 
protected by the Content Scramble System, on a Blu-ray disc protected by the 
Advanced Access Content System, or via a digital transmission protected by a 
technological measure, where circumvention is undertaken by college and 
university employees or students or by kindergarten through twelfth-grade (K-
12) educators or students (where the K-12 student is circumventing under the 
direct supervision of an educator), including of accredited general educational 
development (GED) programs, for a noninfringing use under 17 U.S.C. §§ 107, 
110(1), 110(2), or 112(f).164 
iii. Massive Open Online Courses (“MOOCs”)  
Peter Decherney, Professor of Cinema and Media Studies and English at the University 
of Pennsylvania, on behalf of himself and a group of educators, the Library Copyright 
Alliance (LCA), and executives of several online platforms offering instructional 
 
159 Francesca Coppa Class 1 Reply. 
160 Joint Creators Class 1 Opp’n; DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n. 
161 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1) (2020). 
162 BYU and BYU-Idaho filed a joint petition and joint comments in Class 1.  Therefore, they are 
collectively referred to here as “BYU.”  However, both parties filed separate post-hearing 
responses.  The responses will be separately identified by the filing party. 
163 BYU Class 1 Pet. at 2. 
164 Id. 

[PAGE 36]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
33 
materials (collectively “Joint Educators”165) seek to expand the current exemption to 
cover “educators and preparers of online learning materials” “for the purpose of 
criticism, comment, illustration and explanation in offerings for registered learners on 
online learning platforms when use of the film and media excerpts will contribute 
significantly to learning.”166  They proposed the following language: 
 
To allow educators and preparers of online learning materials to use short 
portions of motion pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined 
in 17 U.S.C. 101, for the purpose of criticism, comment, illustration and 
explanation in offerings for registered learners on online learning platforms 
when use of the film and media excerpts will contribute significantly to learning. 
The online provider will limit these online learning materials, to the extent 
technologically feasible, to registered learners of the online learning platform, 
institute copyright policies, and provide copyright information to educators and 
preparers of online learning materials, learners, and relevant staff members. 
Further, the online provider, to the extent technologically feasible, will work to 
reasonably prevent unauthorized further dissemination of online learning 
materials in accessible form to others, including after the registration period 
ends.167 
For the reasons discussed below, the Register recommends that the Librarian grant 
some, but not all, of the proposed expansions. 
b. Overview of Issues 
The three petitions share the desire to circumvent TPMs employed on DVDs and Blu-ray 
discs, and by various online streaming services, to protect motion pictures.168  The 
 
165 Ruth Farmer was not listed as part of the Joint Educators group in the petition; however, she 
was part of the group when they submitted comments.  This is the only difference between the 
two groups.  Therefore, we refer to them, both for the petition and the comments, as the Joint 
Educators. 
166 Joint Educators Class 1 Pet. at 2. 
167 Id. at 2–3. 
168 Although OTW’s proposed exemption language eliminates references to mediums on which 
TPMs apply under the existing exemption (i.e., DVDs, Blu-ray discs, and digital transmissions), 
the Office understands OTW’s request as permitting circumvention of such TPMs.  See OTW 
Class 1 Initial at 2 (“The TPMs and methods of circumvention addressed are the same as those in 
the existing exemption.”); Tr. at 240:11–14 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Rosenblatt, OTW) (“[W]e’re not wedded 
to removing any reference to medium.  Our concern is we want to make sure that DVD, Blu-ray, 
and streams are included.”). 

[PAGE 37]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
34 
current proposals, some of which echo proposals from previous rulemakings, describe 
several uses of motion pictures that proponents contend are noninfringing and that they 
believe are likely to be adversely affected by section 1201’s prohibition on circumvention 
of access controls.  While the proposed uses are more specifically discussed below, the 
record reveals certain commonalities. 
Two of the three proposals (the exception being BYU’s proposal which seeks use of fulllength works), are limited to uses of short portions of motion pictures, including 
television shows and videos.  Under section 101 of the Copyright Act, “motion pictures” 
are defined as a broad subset of “audiovisual works” that includes television shows, 
online videos, news, commercials, and other works “consisting of a series of related 
images which, when shown in succession, impart an impression of motion, together 
with accompanying sounds, if any.”169  Petitioners did not request an exemption to 
circumvent TPMs on audiovisual works that are not motion pictures. 
In addition, the proposed expansions implicate the same types of TPMs regardless of the 
proposed noninfringing use, namely the Content Scramble System (“CSS”) on DVDs, the 
Advanced Access Content System (“ AACS”) on Blu-ray discs, and various TPMs 
applicable to online distribution services.
170  
i. Screen-Capture Technology 
In the 2015 rulemaking, the Register concluded that certain uses of motion picture clips 
for criticism and comment do not require access to higher quality content, and that 
screen capture technology may be an alternative to circumvention.171  The Register 
noted, however, that it can be unclear to users as to whether screen-capture technology 
may in fact involve circumvention.172  The Acting Register reached similar conclusions in 
the 2018 rulemaking.173  Accordingly, the existing exemption includes a screen-capture 
provision to address the possibility of circumvention when using this technology.174  In 
addition, to accommodate instances where screen capture is not an adequate alternative, 
the exemption allows circumvention for certain uses if “the person engaging in 
circumvention . . . reasonably believes that non-circumventing alternatives are unable to 
produce the required level of high-quality content.”175 
 
169 17 U.S.C. § 101 (definition of “motion pictures”). 
170 See 2018 Recommendation at 34 & n.163. 
171 2015 Recommendation at 99. 
172 Id. 
173 2018 Recommendation at 84–85. 
174 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1). 
175 Id. 

[PAGE 38]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
35 
BYU and Joint Educators now seek to remove references to screen-capture technology, 
arguing that it frequently is not a viable alternative because it results in degradedquality (and thus unusable) content,176 and that such references are confusing.177  
Although OTW’s written comments express concern regarding screen-capture 
technology generally,178 its representative made clear during the hearing that OTW is not 
“requesting the removal of screen capture from the exemption,” but rather “removing 
the requirement of evaluating screen capture” before engaging in circumvention.179  
OTW’s exemption language proposes a similar evaluation by changing the phrase “the 
person engaging in circumvention . . . reasonably believes that non-circumventing 
alternatives are unable to produce the required level of high-quality content” to “where 
the person engaging in circumvention believes and has reasonable grounds for believing 
that circumvention is necessary to fulfill the purpose of the use.”
180  OTW seeks to clarify 
that, when considering the need for circumvention, a user is not required to use screencapture technology to determine that it is unable to produce the required level of highquality content.181   
Opponents assert that screen-capture technology has improved and remains an 
adequate alternative to circumvention for many of the proposed uses.182  DVD CCA and 
AACS LA maintain that OTW’s proposal would “no longer require the beneficiary to 
consider whether the planned use could be achieved without circumvention (e.g., by 
making use of screen capture technology).”183  They note that “[t]he 2012 
Recommendation establishing screen capture as an alternative to circumvention resulted 
 
176 BYU Class 1 Initial at 23; Joint Educators Class 1 Initial at 7; see 2018 Recommendation at 35. 
177 BYU Class 1 Initial at 23.   
178 See OTW Class 1 Initial at 3–4; OTW Class 1 Reply at 2–3. 
179 Tr. at 160:02–13 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Rosenblatt, OTW). 
180 OTW Class 1 Initial at 2. 
181 Tr. at 256:10–13 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Turk, OTW) (“The existing language can be read to suggest that 
people have to screen capture before they can rip, and that seems silly and unnecessarily 
ambiguous.”); Tr. at 258:09–12 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Rosenblatt, OTW) (seeking clarification in the 
regulatory language that it is not necessary to attempt screen capture before circumventing). 
182 See Joint Creators Class 1 Opp’n at 11 (“[S]ome of the expressed concerns with the quality of 
screen capture clips are overrated, as the quality of screen capture services continues to 
improve”) (citing Daryl Baxter, The Best Free Screen Recorders for Home for WFH in 2021, 
TECHRADAR, https://www.techradar.com/news/the-best-free-screen-recorder#1-obs-studio (last 
updated Sept. 24, 2021); Paul Bender, 13 Best Screen Recording Software for Windows PCs – Free and 
Paid, ISPRING: INSTRUCTIONAL DESIGN (Oct. 11, 2021), https://www.ispringsolutions.com/blog/10-
best-screen-recording-software-for-windows-free-and-paid); DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 
Opp’n at 4–6, 39. 
183 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 3. 

[PAGE 39]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
36 
from a more developed record . . . , which demonstrated how screen capture technology 
could serve for some of the proposed uses,”184 and that “[i]n the 2015 Recommendation, 
the Register again found that screen capture technology was satisfactory for uses that 
did not require high-quality images.”185  They also state that in the 2018 
Recommendation, “[t]he Acting Register assumed the suitability of screen capture for 
some uses by noting that the record shows screen capture is insufficient for certain other 
uses.”186  In addition, they state that “any effort to make the exemption simple and 
concise should not be done at the expense of ignoring the law in favor of artistic 
preferences.”187 
Similarly, Joint Creators cite the Register’s 2018 Recommendation, stating that “a 
requirement that users consider whether it is really necessary to engage in 
circumvention before doing so is consistent with the aims of the rulemaking.”188  They 
maintain further that Congress intended that “exemptions should be narrowly tailored 
to avoid swallowing the general rule against circumvention,”
189 and that “screen-capture 
is the most narrowly tailored and appropriate method of obtaining access.”190  Finally, 
Joint Creators note that “the existing exemption does not require the use of screen 
capture and expressly allows for circumvention where a user ‘reasonably believes that 
non-circumventing alternatives are unable to produce the required level of high-quality 
content.’”191 
ii. Universities and K-12 Educational Institutions 
In the 2018 rulemaking, the Acting Register recommended expansion of the exemption 
to recognize the need for K-12 and university faculty and students to engage with 
motion picture excerpts of high quality.  Specifically, the exemption eliminated 
distinctions between K-12 institutions and universities and colleges, as well as between 
faculty and students (K-12 students, however, are required to act under the direct 
supervision of K-12 educators).  The exemption also was expanded to allow uses for 
 
184 Id. at 5. 
185 Id. at 6. 
186 Id. 
187 Id. at 13.   
188 Joint Creators Class 1 Opp’n at 10 (quoting 2018 Recommendation at 84–85). 
189 Id. 
190 Id. at 10–11. 
191 Id. at 11 (quoting 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1).  See Tr. at 166:15–19 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Williams, Joint 
Creators) (stating that “it’s good to keep the language [regarding screen capture] in for the reason 
that just using the word ‘necessary’ doesn’t inform the reader that this is another option that’s out 
there that should be considered”). 

[PAGE 40]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
37 
commentary and criticism beyond film studies or other courses requiring close analysis 
of excerpts, as well as for teaching or scholarship more generally.192  The Acting Register 
stated that the language of the exemption “appears broad enough to encompass 
exempted uses under sections 110(1) and 110(2) (i.e., face-to-face and distance teaching),” 
and while “specific references to section 110(1) and 110(2) [were] not necessary,” users 
“should have comfort that the proposed language encompasses uses permitted under 
sections 110(1) and 110(2), subject to the short portions limitation.”193  The Acting 
Register recommended against expansion to cover full-length motion pictures,194 
however, finding that such proposed use could not be found noninfringing under 
sections 110(1), 110(2), or 112(f), or on fair use grounds.195  
BYU now proposes several expansions.  It maintains that the existing exemption should 
be adjusted to use the phrase “reasonable and limited portions” instead of “short 
portions” to track the language of section 110(2).196  It also seeks to eliminate the 
“educational purpose” requirement, as well as the phrase “the person engaging in 
circumvention . . . reasonably believes that non-circumventing alternatives are unable to 
produce the required level of high-quality content.”197  BYU further requests to expand 
the class of eligible users to include “college and university employees” (i.e., not just 
college and university faculty), maintaining that faculty do not generally possess the 
technical knowledge required for circumvention.198  Most significantly, BYU seeks to 
expand the permitted uses to “a noninfringing use under 17 U.S.C. §§ 107, 110(1), 110(2), 
or 112(f),”199 as opposed to “criticism, comment, teaching, or scholarship.”200  While 
BYU’s proposed exemption language is very broad—including “a nonin fringing use 
under [section] 107,”—its written comments and examples of proposed activities  are 
more limited, echoing its 2018 proposal to permit circumvention for the purpose of 
 
192 2018 Recommendation at 86. 
193 Id. 
194 Id.; see 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1) (2020). 
195 2018 Recommendation at 46–53. 
196 BYU Class 1 Initial at 10; see BYU Class 1 Initial at 9–13 (discussing the “short portions” 
language).  Compare 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1) (containing “short portions” language), with BYU 
Class 1 Pet. at 2 (omitting that language). 
197 BYU Class 1 Pet. at 2. 
198 Id.; Tr. at 221:11–13 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Midgley, BYU). 
199 BYU Class 1 Pet. at 2. 
200 Compare 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1)(ii)(A), with BYU Class 1 Pet. at 2. 

[PAGE 41]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
38 
performing full-length motion pictures under section 110(1) and “reasonable and limited 
portions” thereof under section 110(2).201   
In addition, BYU seeks clarification about the permitted copying under the existing 
exemption, stating that “[w]hile the performance [under the TEACH Act] can be of no 
more than reasonable and limited portions of the work, due to the nature of the 
technology, the copy must necessarily be of the entire work.”202    
iii. MOOCs 
The 2015 Recommendation described MOOCs as “typically consist[ing] of pre-recorded 
lectures that may be illustrated, as appropriate, with short clips and still images from 
audiovisual works.”203  In this rulemaking, similar to their request in the 2018 
proceeding, the Joint Educators request expansion to allow “educators and preparers of 
online learning materials” to use short portions of motion pictures “for the purpose of 
criticism, comment, illustration and explanation . . . when use of the film and media 
excerpts will contribute significantly to learning,” in “offerings for registered learners on 
online learning platforms,” including those offered by for-profit and unaccredited 
educational institutions.204  Joint Educators maintain that in light of the coronavirus 
pandemic, “it is essential that online learners can access the same quality of education as 
 
201 See, e.g., BYU Class 1 Initial at 27 (providing example of twelve full-length films on DVDs or 
Blu-ray discs not being able to be shown through distance learning, due to classes not being in 
person and the films not being available for institutional licensing through academic streaming 
providers); BYU Class 1 Reply at 20–21 (providing examples of a theatre art course, a humanities 
course, and a film studies course needing to be changed after Hunt for the Wilderpeople, Bread and 
Tulip, and Bicycle Thief, respectively, were removed from the streaming provider Swank); BYU 
Class 1 Initial at 4 (The “proposed exemption seeks nothing more than a restoration of educators’ 
ability to actually use the motion pictures their institutions have acquired.”); see also Tr. at 171:12–
20 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Midgley, BYU) (“[The] proposed language removes an express reference to 
educational purposes because . . . those purposes are inherent given the category of users to 
which the proposed exemption applies,” and “[i]t’s limited to circumvention undertaken by 
college and university employees and students by limiting the exemption to that category of 
users” and “further limited by the specific statutory provisions that are relevant to educational 
users.”). 
202 BYU Class 1 Initial at 13–14; see BYU Class 1 Initial at 14 (“If the current exemption 
inadvertently excluded copying full motion pictures under Section 112(f) due to an oversight, it 
should be corrected in the current rulemaking.  On the other hand, if such noninfringing copies 
were purposely excluded from the exemption, then [BYU] respectfully request[s] that the 
Register clarify the reason that these noninfringing uses should continue to be excluded.”). 
203 2015 Recommendation at 31 (quoting 2015 Joint Educators Class 1 Pet. at 4). 
204 Joint Educators Class 1 Pet. at 2; see 2018 Recommendation at 37 (discussing Joint Educators’ 
desired expansion to “all online courses,” so that “all online learners and teachers have the same 
access to effective educational methods”).  

[PAGE 42]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
39 
they would in person—especially during a time where students cannot access traditional 
in-person instruction.”205  Their proposed exemption language states that online 
providers, “to the extent technologically feasible, will work to reasonably prevent 
unauthorized further dissemination of online learning materials in accessible form to 
others, including after the registration period ends.”206  Although Joint Educators’ 
written comments suggest eliminating the express reference to section 110(2), their 
representative made clear during the hearing that “all of the existing 110(2) restrictions  
. . . should still apply,”207 and that they primarily are seeking expansion to online courses 
offered by unaccredited and for-profit educational institutions.208   
 
2. Discussion 
a. AACS2 and Ultra HD Content 
Before considering the specific proposals in this class, the Register first addresses 
whether the exemption should be expanded to include AACS2 technology, which is 
employed to protect ultra-high-definition content distributed on Ultra HD Blu-ray 
discs.209  BYU states that its proposed exemption “includes motion pictures . . . on Bluray discs protected by the Advanced Access Content System (AACS), including Ultra 
HD Blu-ray discs protected by AACS2 technology.”210  It argues that AACS2 technology 
is “very similar to AACS LA and that the exemption should include media available in 
that format as well.”
211  In response, DVD CCA and AACS LA maintain that the record 
does not support extending the ability to circumvent access controls to AACS2,212 as 
“ AACS2 is a distinct technology that protects audiovisual content distributed on Ultra 
HD (UHD) Blu-ray discs, a distinct optical disc format which will not play on legacy 
 
205 Joint Educators Class 1 Initial at 3. 
206 Joint Educators Class 1 Pet. at 3; Joint Educators Class 1 Initial at 12. 
207 Tr. at 175:25–176:01 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Decherney, Joint Educators). 
208 See Joint Educators Class 1 Pet. at 2; Joint Educators Class 1 Initial at 3, 19; Tr. at 229:11–18 
(Apr. 6, 2021) (Decherney, Joint Educators) (stating that proposed exemption covers “educator[s] 
and preparers of educational material, . . . being used for educational purposes, short portions, 
comment and criticism, and then all of the various limitations that 110(2) already puts on other 
kinds of organizations,” with “[t]he only difference . . . [of] extend[ing] beyond the already 
granted exemption for accredited and nonprofits”). 
209 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at ii, 1 (discussing AACS2 technology). 
210 BYU Class 1 Initial at 4.   
211 Tr. at 157:25–158:02 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Midgley, BYU). 
212 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 1–2. 

[PAGE 43]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
40 
(HD) Blu-ray players.”213  BYU did not provide evidence to the contrary.214  Although 
OTW mentions Ultra HD in passing in its reply comments, it does not directly advocate 
for its inclusion in the exemption.215   
As in 2018, the Register finds the record insufficient to support extending the proposed 
class to AACS2.
216  In past rulemakings, “exemptions to permit circumvention of new 
technology have been adopted only upon showings of a need to access works protected 
by that specific technology.”
217  Here, the record does not support a finding that AACS2 
technology is adversely affecting noninfringing uses or that it is sufficiently similar to 
AACS1 to be covered by the current exemption.218  Proposed Class 1 thus addresses only 
TPMs employed on DVDs and Blu-ray discs, and by various online streaming services, 
to protect motion pictures. 
b. Proposed Expansion for Noncommercial Videos  
OTW proposes adjusting the current exemption for noncommercial videos “based on the 
2010 Recommendation, as amended by later clarification in the 2012 Recommendation 
about the meaning of ‘noncommercial’ and the 2015 Recommendation’s reformulation of 
the exemption to encompass non-DVD sources in recognition of the rise of Blu-ray and 
streaming as increasingly the only feasible means of access to many works.”219  OTW 
maintains that the language of the current exemption is “overly complex” and serves as 
a “trap[] for the unwary.”220  In particular, OTW wishes to change what it views as a 
“division of exemptions into screencapture/not screencapture.”221   
The Register concludes that the existing exemption already covers OTW’s proposed use, 
so no changes are warranted at this time.  Specifically, OTW’s representative confirmed 
during the hearing that the “existing exemption is enough in the sense that it provides 
 
213 Id. at ii; see also Tr. at 158:18–22 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Ayers, DVD CCA & AACS LA).   
214 See Tr. at 158:10–14 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Midgley, BYU). 
215 See OTW Class 1 Reply at 2. 
216 See 2018 Recommendation at 41. 
217 Id. at 40; see also 2012 Recommendation at 135 (finding “the record [did] not reflect a substantial 
adverse impact due to the inability to use motion picture materials contained on Blu-ray discs”). 
218 Similarly, the Register declines to adjust the language of the exemption to “shift along” as 
“technology shifts.”  See Tr. at 245:19–21 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Rosenblatt, OTW) (“[As] technology 
shifts, we would want this exemption to shift along with it to the extent that any shift is 
necessary.”). 
219 OTW Class 1 Initial at 2. 
220 Id. 
221 Id. at 3. 

[PAGE 44]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
41 
an exemption for what vidders do.”222  She expressed concern, however, that the existing 
exemption “requires vidders to make an evaluation of the fitness of one potential 
circumvention technique before engaging in the circumvention technique that makes 
more sense.”223  As discussed, OTW objects to the phrase “the person engaging in 
circumvention . . . reasonably believes that non-circumventing alternatives are unable to 
produce the required level of high-quality content.”224  In its view, that phrase could be 
read to suggest that a user must actually use screen-capture technology as part of its 
assessment of the suitability of non-circumventing alternatives.225   
The Register emphasizes that the existing exemption does not require creators of 
noncommercial videos to attempt to use screen capture technology before engaging in 
circumvention.226  Rather, it requires only that users evaluate whether screen capture 
technology would produce video clips of sufficient quality; if the user reasonably 
believes it would not, circumventing is permissible.227  It appears from the record that 
many vidders in fact already make such an evaluation.  According to proponents, some 
vidders use screen capture when appropriate,228 while others may reasonably believe 
that such technology is inadequate.229  Such evaluations are consistent with the intent 
 
222 Tr. at 252:18–20 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Rosenblatt, OTW).  “Vidders” have been described as “a subcommunity of remixers who create fan videos that remix footage from television shows or films 
into montages set to new soundtracks, at times altering the footage to create various effects.”  
2015 Recommendation at 42 (citing 2015 EFF & OTW Class 7 Initial at 3–4). 
223 Tr. at 252:18–24 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Rosenblatt, OTW). 
224 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1). 
225 Tr. at 256:10–13 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Turk, OTW); see also Tr. at 258:09–12 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Rosenblatt, 
OTW) (asking for clarification that attempting screen capture is not necessary before 
circumventing). 
226 See Joint Creators Class 1 Opp’n at 11 (“[T]he existing exemption does not require the use of 
screen capture.”). 
227 See 2018 Recommendation at 84–85 (“[A] requirement that users consider whether it is really 
necessary to engage in circumvention before doing so is consistent with the aims of the 
rulemaking.”); 2012 Recommendation at 140 (“Creators and educators should consider whether 
there is an adequate alternative before engaging in circumvention under a recommended 
exemption.”). 
228 Tr. at 161:19–20 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Rosenblatt, OTW); see also Francesca Coppa Class 1 Reply at 2 
(“Screen capture has also improved significantly and may be used when DVDs do not (or do not 
yet) exist.”). 
229 OTW Class 1 Reply at 2–3; see Francesca Coppa Class 1 Reply at 2; Tr. at 247:19–248:13 (Apr. 6, 
2021) (Coppa, OTW) (explaining why vidders would prefer to circumvent DVD TPMs rather than 
use screen-capture technology); Tr. at 168:19–169:25 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Coppa, OTW). 

[PAGE 45]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
42 
and language of the current exemption.  The Office is hopeful that this clarification 
provides users with useful guidance going forward. 
The Register also concludes that OTW’s proposal to remove the screen-capture provision 
to address the possibility that use of this technology could be deemed circumventing is 
unnecessary.230  Indeed, OTW’s representative expressed uncertainty during the hearing 
whether screen-capture technologies circumvent or not.231  The Register thus 
recommends retaining a screen-capture provision to address the possibility that use of 
this technology could be deemed to involve circumvention.  Inclusion of this provision 
“can give a user comfort that if he or she uses technology that was marketed as a noncircumventing screen-capture tool, then the user can use the technology without fear of 
violating section 1201 regardless of its actual technological operation.”232   
Finally, the Register concludes that OTW’s other proposed changes are not necessary to 
address its concerns.  For example, although OTW’s proposed exemption language 
eliminates references to media on which TPMs apply under the existing exemption (i.e., 
DVDs, Blu-ray discs, and digital transmissions), OTW’s representative confirmed during 
the hearing that OTW is “not wedded to removing any reference to medium” in the 
exemption.233  Similarly, although OTW’s proposed language removes the “lawfully 
made and acquired” limitation,234 OTW’s representative clarified during the hearing that 
“[t]he current language speaks about lawfully obtained and makes no reference to 
ownership, so we actually don’t think that any change is necessary there.”235  
c. Works Protected by Copyright 
With respect to the requirement that the relevant TPMs control access to copyrightable 
works, this class again involves the use of motion pictures for purposes of criticism, 
comment, or educational uses.  Therefore, like the 2018 rulemaking, the Register finds 
that at least some works included in the proposed expanded class are protected by 
copyright. 
 
230 See OTW Class 1 Initial at 2 (eliminating relevant screen-capture provision in proposed 
language). 
231 Tr. at 165:05–19 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Rosenblatt, OTW) (“I think it comes down principally to the fact 
that no one can say whether screen capture is or is not circumvention, and so there’s, as it stands, 
an ambiguity in that.”); see 2018 Recommendation at 83–85 (reaching similar conclusion). 
232 2018 Recommendation at 85. 
233 Tr. at 240:11–14 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Rosenblatt, OTW). 
234 OTW Class 1 Initial at 2. 
235 Tr. at 245:21–24 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Rosenblatt, OTW); see Tr. at 241:18–21 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Rosenblatt, 
OTW) (“Lawfully acquired is . . . a reasonable limitation as long as it encompasses all different 
sorts of acquisition, including borrowing and ownership.”). 

[PAGE 46]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
43 
d. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Proponents contend that the proposed uses fall within the favored purposes of criticism 
and comment referenced in the preamble of section 107 and are therefore likely to be 
fair.236  While otherwise analyzing each set of proposed uses separately below, the 
Register notes that the second and third factors governing the fair use analysis under 
section 107 remain relatively constant across the proposed uses.  Under factor two—the 
nature of the copyrighted work—it is well established that motion pictures are creative 
and thus at the core of copyright’s protective purposes.237  But in the case of uses 
involving a favored purpose under the law, the second factor may be of relatively 
limited importance to the overall analysis.238  As in 2012, 2015, and 2018, the Register 
concludes that the second fair use factor slightly disfavors the proposed expansion, but 
is not especially relevant to most of the proposed uses.239 
Under the third factor—the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to 
the copyrighted work as a whole—the Register concludes that with the exception o f 
BYU’s proposal, the limitation to circumvention for uses of “short portions” of motion 
pictures is integral to the various proposals.240  While recognizing that the extent of 
permissible copying may vary, for purposes of this class, the “short portions” limitation 
provides useful guidance as to what is generally likely to be a fair use without imposing 
a wholly inflexible rule as to length.
241   
i. Universities and K-12 Educational Institutions 
BYU contends that because its proposed exemption “applies only when circumvention is 
undertaken ‘for a noninfringing use under 17 U.S.C. §§ 107, 110(1), 110(2), or 112(f),’” “the 
proposed uses must, by definition, be noninfringing” and that “[i]f circumvention is 
undertaken for any use deemed to be infringing, the proposed exemption will not apply, 
and the user will be liable for possibly violating Section 1201, in addition to any 
copyright infringement liability.”242  As in the 2018 rulemaking, BYU maintains that its 
 
236 See 17 U.S.C. § 107. 
237 See 2018 Recommendation at 45; 2015 Recommendation at 70; 2012 Recommendation at 128. 
238 See Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 586 (1994). 
239 See 2018 Recommendation at 45; 2015 Recommendation at 70; 2012 Recommendation at 128. 
240 See 2018 Recommendation at 46; 2015 Recommendation at 70; 2012 Recommendation at 128. 
241 See 2018 Recommendation at 46. 
242 BYU Class 1 Initial at 7.  A mere requirement that a use be “noninfringing” or “fair” does not 
satisfy Congress’s mandate to craft “narrow and focused” exemptions.  2015 Recommendation at 
100; see Commerce Comm. Report at 38.  For this reason, the Register has previously rejected 
broad proposed categories, such as “fair use works” or “educational fair use works,” as beyond 
 

[PAGE 47]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
44 
proposed activities—performances of full -length motion pictures under section 110(1) 
and “reasonable and limited portions” thereof under section 110(2) for nonprofit 
educational purposes—are noninfringing because sections 110(1) and 110(2) allow for 
such public performances by nonprofit educational institutions.243  In the 2018 
rulemaking, BYU acknowledged, however, that digital copies would need to be made 
and stored to facilitate the proposed uses.244  BYU echoes its 2018 arguments that any 
server copies or other reproductions made would be covered either under section 
112(f)’s exception for nonprofit educational institutions to make copies when making 
transmissions authorized under section 110(2), or under section 107 as fair use.
245 
1) Sections 110(1), 110(2), and 112(f) 
Section 110(1) allows for the public performance and display of copyrighted works for 
educational purposes, subject to certain conditions: the performance must be made “by 
instructors or pupils in the course of face-to-face teaching activities of a nonprofit 
educational institution, in a classroom or similar place devoted to instruction,” and not 
knowingly using unlawfully made copies.246  Because section 110(1) does not restrict the 
amount of the motion picture that can be used, either short clips or an entire motion 
picture may be shown within a classroom, subject to the other conditions.247 
Section 110(2), also referred to as the TEACH Act, provides an exception for certain uses 
of copyrighted works by nonprofit educators in distance education.248  Section 110(2) has 
a number of requirements.  First, the transmitter must be “a governmental body or an 
accredited nonprofit educational institution.”249  Second, the use must be made at the 
direction of an instructor teaching a class session as “a regular part of the systematic 
 
the scope of the statute.  2006 Recommendation at 17–19.  An exemption should provide 
reasonable guidance to the public in terms of what uses are permitted, while at the same time 
mitigating undue consequences for copyright owners.  2006 Recommendation at 19 (noting that 
“if a class is too broad” it could “lead to undue harm to copyright owners,” and therefore it 
would be “difficult to justify the exemption at all”). 
243 BYU Class 1 Initial at 10, 18. 
244 2018 Recommendation at 46 n.251. 
245 See BYU Class 1 Initial at 13–16. 
246 17 U.S.C. § 110(1) (“The performance or display of certain works in certain educational settings 
does not constitute infringement “unless, in the case of a motion picture . . ., the performance . . . 
is given by means of a copy that was not lawfully made under this title, and that the person 
responsible for the performance knew or had reason to believe was not lawfully made.”). 
247 See id. 
248 Id. § 110(2); see also U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, REPORT ON COPYRIGHT AND DIGITAL DISTANCE 
EDUCATION (1999), https://www.copyright.gov/reports/de_rprt.pdf.  
249 17 U.S.C. § 110(2). 

[PAGE 48]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
45 
mediated instructional activities”—and for motion pictures, only in “reaso nable and 
limited portions.”250  Third, as with 110(1), any copies involved in transmitting the 
performance must be lawfully made and acquired.251  Fourth, the reception of the 
transmission must be limited, to the extent technologically feasible, to students officially 
enrolled in the course.252  Fifth, the transmitting educational institution must institute 
policies and provide notice regarding copyright protection to students, faculty, and 
relevant staff members.253  Finally, the transmitting body must apply technological 
measures that limit the retention and unauthorized further dissemination of the work in 
accessible form.254 
Section 112(f), which authorizes copies created in making transmissions under section 
110(2), states: 
[I]t is not an infringement of copyright for a governmental body or other 
nonprofit educational institution entitled under section 110(2) to transmit a 
performance . . . to make copies . . . of a work that is in digital form . . . to be used 
for making transmissions authorized under section 110(2), if— 
(A) such copies . . . are retained and used solely by the body or institution 
that made them, and no further copies . . . are reproduced from them, 
except as authorized under section 110(2); and 
(B) such copies . . . are used solely for transmissions authorized under 
section 110(2).
255 
On its face, section 112(f) permits copying only for transmissions authorized under 
section 110(2); it does not permit nonprofit educational institutions to make copies to 
facilitate performances under section 110(1) (e.g., performances of full-length motion 
pictures).256 
In the 2018 rulemaking, the Acting Register found that copying for purposes of showing 
a full-length motion picture in face-to-face teaching was unlikely to be noninfringing 
 
250 Id. 
251 Id. 
252 Id. § 110(2)(C)(i). 
253 Id. § 110(2)(D)(i). 
254 Id. § 110(2)(D)(ii)(I). 
255 Id. § 112(f)(1)(A)–(B). 
256 Id. § 112(f)(1)(B); see 2018 Recommendation at 49; see also H.R. REP. NO. 107-687, at 3 (2002) 
(“The [TEACH Act] also amends section 112 . . . to permit storage of copyrighted material on 
servers in order to permit the performances and displays authorized by section 110(2) to be made 
asynchronously in distance education courses.”). 

[PAGE 49]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
46 
under sections 110 and 112(f). 257  Specifically, she concluded that BYU’s “proposed 
exemption implicate[d] the rights of reproduction and distribution rather than public 
performance or display,” as “circumvention is required to make copies, not to show a 
film in a classroom from a lawfully acquired disc.”258  The Acting Register determined 
that “[s]ection 110 cannot, by itself, establish” that circumventing TPMs preventing the 
copying and storing of films on a server, so users can show the films in multiple 
classrooms without purchasing additional copies or equipment, “is likely to be 
noninfringing, since any performances of motion pictures under sections 110(1) and 
110(2) must originate from lawfully acquired copies.”
259  Because “section 112(f) does 
not permit nonprofit educational institutions to make copies to facilitate performances 
under section 110(1),” the Acting Register found BYU’s reliance on section 112(f) 
“unhelpful to support its request to make copies to facilitate performances” of fulllength motion pictures in face-to-face teaching under section 110(1).
260  While the Acting 
Register found that “[s]ection 112(f) does support a conclusion that making and 
temporarily storing digital copies of motion pictures to perform ‘reasonable and limited 
portions’ in distance teaching would be noninfringing, assuming the other requirements 
of section 110(2) are met,” the then-existing exemption for educational uses already 
appeared to cover this proposed use.261 
In the current rulemaking, BYU has not presented any evidence of a change in law to 
support a different conclusion.262  Therefore, the Register adheres to the Office’s prior 
conclusion that section 112(f) does not support allowing copies to be made for the 
purpose of performing full-length motion pictures.  Nor has BYU provided any 
examples of proposed uses of motion picture clips that would not be covered by the 
phrase “short portions” in the existing exemption so as to warrant changing that 
language to “reasonable and limited portions.”
263     
2) Fair Use 
BYU contends that “space-shifting”—copying works from one medium to another to 
facilitate use—for educational purposes is likely a fair use. 264  BYU cites to Authors Guild, 
 
257 2018 Recommendation at 48–50; see also NPRM at 65,303. 
258 2018 Recommendation at 48. 
259 Id. at 49 (citing 17 U.S.C. § 110(1)–(2)). 
260 Id. at 49–50. 
261 Id. at 50. 
262 See Tr. at 194:07–12 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Wise, BYU) (“It’s not so much in the law . . . as it is in the 
environment we’re in.”). 
263 See BYU Class 1 Initial at 10. 
264 Id. at 14–21. 

[PAGE 50]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
47 
Inc. v. HathiTrust,265 Authors Guild v. Google, Inc., 266 Fox News Network, LLC v. TVEyes, 
Inc.,267 and Fox Broadcasting Co. v. Dish Network, LLC,268 cases that the Office has already 
considered and concluded do not support a finding of fair use for BYU’s proposed 
space-shifting for educational purposes. 
In the 2018 rulemaking, the Acting Register concluded that space-shifting for purposes 
of performing full-length motion pictures in face-to-face teaching was not likely to be 
deemed fair use.269  While the Acting Register found that the then-existing record 
demonstrated that many of the educational uses of short motion picture clips proposed 
by BYU were likely to be fair,
270 “[t]he same logic [did] not extend . . . to the copying of 
full motion pictures for [full-length] performances in face-to-face teaching.”271  The 
Acting Register considered Authors Guild, Inc. v. HathiTrust and Authors Guild v. Google, 
Inc. in reaching that conclusion.272  Specifically, the Acting Register found that those 
“opinions . . . distinguished the proposed uses . . . from performing the works 
themselves, and carefully considered the risk that those circumscribed uses might act as 
market substitutes.”273  By contrast, BYU’s proposed creation of “full length copies of 
motion pictures to facilitate performances under section 110(1) [were] supposed to 
substitute for the original works in disc form.”274  In a separate class specifically seeking 
 
265 755 F.3d 87 (2d Cir. 2014). 
266 804 F.3d 202 (2d Cir. 2015) (“Google Books”). 
267 883 F.3d 169 (2d Cir. 2018). 
268 160 F. Supp. 3d 1139 (C.D. Cal. 2015). 
269 2018 Recommendation at 52–53.  Although BYU did not label its proposed use as “spaceshifting” in 2018, its proposed use required the making and storing of digital copies to facilitate 
performances of full-length motion pictures under section 110(1) and short portions thereof 
under section 110(2) for nonprofit educational purposes.  See id. at 46; BYU Class 1 Initial at 14 
(discussing the Acting Register’s conclusions regarding space-shifting in the 2018 
Recommendation).  
270 2018 Recommendation at 51. 
271 Id. at 52. 
272 Id. 
273 Id. (citing Google Books, 804 F.3d at 224–25 (finding that even though the search function 
allowed the user to view “snippets” of the book in which the search term appears in the book, it 
did not effectively substitute for the original works because viewers were seeing such a small 
percentage of the book); HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 101 (finding that a full-text search function did 
not serve as a substitute for the original books because the search results did not display any text 
from the underlying works)). 
274 Id.; see also Google Books, 804 F.3d at 224–25 (finding that even though the search function 
allowed the user to view “snippets” of the book in which the search term appears in the book, it 
 

[PAGE 51]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
48 
circumvention for purposes of space-shifting, the Acting Register found “no basis to 
depart from the fair use analysis and ultimate conclusion reached in the 2015 
proceeding, where ‘the Register [was] unable to determine’” that circumvention of 
access controls on lawfully made and acquired literary works distributed electronically 
for the purpose of noncommercial space-shifting or format-shifting was noninfringing.275   
In the 2015 rulemaking, discussing the district court decision in TVEyes, the Register 
found that the case “confirms that courts do not accept the proposition that spaceshifting as a general matter constitutes a fair use.”276  The Register stated that “the 
TVEyes court rejected defendant TVEyes’ argument that offering a downloading service 
was ‘absolutely critical’ to allow subscribers to view the monitored clips offline,” and 
that “the court cited a long line of precedent, including cases holding that the 
photocopying of physical journals and a digital service designed to allow subscribers to 
access music purchased on CDs via the internet, were not fair uses.”277  Regarding Dish, 
the Register determined that the “court engaged in only minimal analysis of the fair use 
issue, reaching its conclusion in a single paragraph without discussing the statutory fair 
use factors.”278  Moreover, the use in Dish—a “Hopper” service that allowed users to 
record a television program for viewing at a more convenient time—was analogous to 
time-shifting as a fair use, not space-shifting as proposed by BYU.
279   
The Register also declines BYU’s suggestion that a different conclusion should result in 
light of the COVID-19 pandemic’s effect on education.280  While there is undoubtedly a 
strong public interest in ensuring continued access to educational materials during the 
pandemic, “[i]f exigent circumstances are factored into a fair use analysis, it does not 
necessarily follow that they would provide an unconditional expansion of the scope of 
 
did not effectively substitute for the original works because viewers were seeing such a small 
percentage of the book); HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 101 (finding that a full-text search function did 
not serve as a substitute for the original books because the search results did not display any text 
from the underlying works). 
275 2018 Recommendation at 121–22 (alteration in original) (citing 2015 Recommendation at 122–
124; 2012 Recommendation at 162–65). 
276 2015 Recommendation at 122; see Fox News Network, LLC v. TVEyes, Inc., 124 F. Supp. 3d 325, 
336–37 (S.D.N.Y. 2015) (holding that allowing viewers to download clips for offline viewing was 
not fair use), aff’d in part, rev’d in part, 883 F.3d 169 (2d Cir. 2018). 
277 2015 Recommendation at 122.  In 2018, the Second Circuit held that TVEyes’ service was not 
fair use.  TVEyes, 883 F.3d at 180–81.  The court of appeals’ decision “subsume[d] and obviate[d] 
consideration of” the specific functions enjoined by the district court.”  Id. at 176. 
278 2015 Recommendation at 122 (citing Dish, 160 F. Supp. 3d at 1178–79). 
279 See Dish, 160 F. Supp. 3d at 1153–56, 1161–62 (describing the DISH Hopper and Sling services 
and finding that they do not lead to an actual public performance of the works). 
280 See BYU Class 1 Initial at 25–27 (discussing adverse impact). 

[PAGE 52]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
49 
fair use.”281  The copyright owners’ interests must also be considered in the balance.  In 
this case, the Register is not convinced that the benefits of full-length space-shifting 
outweigh the considerations of potential market harm. 
The Register does find, however, that expansion of the existing exemption from “college 
and university faculty” to “college and university employees” is warranted, provided 
circumvention is at the direction of the faculty member for the purpose of teaching a 
course.282  Indeed, DVD CCA and AACS LA acknowledge that “it’s long been our 
position that members of the community[,] . . . be they staff or faculty[,] could engage in 
acts of circumvention, and there was never an expectation that the professors themselves 
had to do it.”283 
ii. MOOCs 
Joint Educators seek an expansion to allow “educators and preparers of online learning 
materials” to use short portions of motion pictures “for the purpose of criticism, 
comment, illustration and explanation . . . when use of the film and media excerpts will 
contribute significantly to learning,” in “offerings for registered learners on online 
learning platforms,” including those offered by for-profit and unaccredited educational 
institutions.284  Joint Educators also propose expansion from use in “film studies or other 
courses requiring close analysis of film and media excerpts” to online offerings more 
generally.285   
The 2018 rulemaking identified fair use as the noninfringing basis for the current 
exempted use for MOOCs, and the proposed expansion to “online learning platforms” is 
evaluated on the same grounds.286  First, however, the Register must address how the 
terms “online learning platforms” and “online learning materials” are to be defined.  
Joint Educators’ representative stated that “online learning platforms” “are created by 
 
281 Letter from Maria Strong, Acting Register of Copyrights and Dir., U.S. Copyright Office, to 
Senator Tom Udall, at 21 (May 15, 2020), available at 
https://www.copyright.gov/laws/hearings/Sen-Udall-Response-National-Emergency-Library.pdf.  
See Joint Creators Class 1 Post-Hearing Resp. at 3 (May 14, 2021) (asserting that any special 
dispensation for the pandemic “would be ill advised”). 
282 See 2018 Recommendation at 50–51 (noting possible uses by teachers and students as evidence 
“a significant number of the proposed uses are likely to be fair”).  When employees circumvent at 
the direction of a faculty member for the purpose of teaching a course, the same conclusion 
applies. 
283 Tr. at 221:21–25 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Taylor, DVD CCA & AACS LA). 
284 Joint Educators Class 1 Pet. at 2. 
285 Id. 
286 See 2018 Recommendation at 53.  See generally Joint Educators Class 1 Initial at 13–14.   

[PAGE 53]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
50 
educators . . . on registered platforms” and “would be for educational purposes,”287 but 
acknowledged that the line between academic institutions and businesses wanting to 
offer online educational courses “can be blurry.”288  According to Joint Educators, 
“online learning materials” would include “video material that includes short portions 
for comment and criticism that’s being used by educators, prepared by educators and 
support staff.”289 
In first recommending the existing exemption in 2015, the Register acknowledged the 
growth and importance of online education.290  Nevertheless, she credited opponents’ 
concern that an “‘unbounded exemption’ where ‘[a]nybody can declare that they’re 
teaching a MOOC’ and ‘anyone can be a student’” would be “anathema to the 
exemption process as envisioned by Congress.”291  As in 2015 and 2018, Joint Educators’ 
current “broadly framed proposal would seemingly encompass any online video that 
could be characterized as an educational experience.”
292  Accordingly, the record does 
not justify expansion to “online learning materials” offered by “online learning 
platforms.” 
With respect to whether the exemption should be expanded to include MOOCs offered 
by for-profit and unaccredited educational institutions, Joint Educators contend that 
their proposed uses are fair.
293  They provide several examples: clips from the movie 
Hidden Figures and television show The Big Bang Theory to inspire girls to seek careers in 
science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) subjects;294 clips from television 
shows such as Doc McStuffins, Girl Meets World, The Fosters, and Blackish to show 
aspirational role models for underrepresented students;295 clips from the television show 
Mr. Robot to illustrate unethical uses of programming;296 clips from the series Game of 
Thrones to demonstrate “the isolation and pain sometimes experienced by those with 
 
287 Tr. at 228:14–16 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Decherney, Joint Educators). 
288 Tr. at 234:07–09 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Decherney, Joint Educators).  
289 Tr. at 232:18–21 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Decherney, Joint Educators). 
290 2015 Recommendation at 72. 
291 2015 Recommendation at 72 (alteration in original) (quoting Tr. at 119:18–121:16 (May 27, 2015) 
(Turnbull, DVD CCA & AACS LA)) (citing Tr. at 129:03–130:24 (May 27, 2015) (Williams, Joint 
Creators)); see 2018 Recommendation at 54. 
292 2018 Recommendation at 54 (quoting 2015 Recommendation at 102). 
293 Joint Educators Class 1 Initial at 15–17; Joint Educators Class 1 Reply at 10–12. 
294 Joint Educators Class 1 Initial at 6–7; Joint Educators Class 1 Reply at 6. 
295 Joint Educators Class 1 Initial at 17. 
296 Id. at 10. 

[PAGE 54]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
51 
dwarfism;”297 clips from the movie The King’s Speech showing a character overcoming a 
speech impediment to encourage confidence in public speaking;298 and clips from the 
series Stranger Things to illustrate aspects of the medical condition cleidocranial 
dysplasia.299  In addition, Joint Educators propose using clips of well-known musicians 
in music instructional videos by companies such as Musora Media,300 as “[l]earners need 
short clips of musical performances from movies and TV shows incorporated in their 
online music learning to maximize their understanding of often nuanced techniques 
through an ability to scrutinize and watch clips of the musical heroes that inspire 
learners to want to play.”301  Most of Joint Educators’ examples appear to relate to 
unaccredited for-profit companies Osmosis.org, LinkedIn Learning, and Musora 
Media.302  Joint Educators also point to proposed uses by CSforALL, an unaccredited 
nonprofit organization that “serves as a central resource for over 1100 member 
organizations” and works with, among others, accredited public or private schools and 
districts and nonprofit organizations.303 
Regarding the first fair use factor, Joint Educators maintain that it favors fair use because 
the proposed use is for educational purposes and is “highly transformative.”304  They 
argue that “[r]epurposing short specific scenes from movies and TV shows into an 
educational tool that helps learners understand complex concepts is highly 
transformative and does not supplant the use of the original work.”305  Opponents 
respond that several of the proffered examples are not particularly transformative, as the 
works are being used for precisely the purpose for which they were made.  Specifically, 
regarding the Hidden Figures and Mr. Robot examples, DVD CCA and AACS LA state 
that these are uses that “simply supplant the use of the original work.”
306  Opponents 
 
297 Id. at 7. 
298 Joint Educators Class 1 Reply at 6–7. 
299 Joint Educators Class 1 Initial at 8.   
300 Id. at 9; Joint Educators Class 1 Reply at 7. 
301 Joint Educators Class 1 Reply at 7. 
302 Joint Educators Class 1 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2 (May 14, 2021).  
303 Id. 
304 Joint Educators Class 1 Initial at 15–16. 
305 Joint Educators Class 1 Reply at 11 (citing Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 580 
(1994) (stating that the central purpose of the first factor in a fair use enquiry is to see whether the 
new work merely “supersede[s] the objects” of the original creation, or instead adds something 
new, with a further purpose of different character); Google Books, 804 F.3d at 214 (“[A] 
transformative use is one that communicates something new and different from the original or 
expands its utility, thus serving copyright’s overall objective of contributing to public 
knowledge.”)). 
306 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 37. 

[PAGE 55]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
52 
also stress that most of the entities seeking to use the proposed exemption are for-profit 
businesses that intend to “use the works for commercial purposes.”307  In response, Joint 
Educators assert that a commercial purpose does not disqualify a use from being 
considered fair.308 
On the record presented, it is unclear to what extent the commercial aspects of the 
proposed uses predominate over their educational purpose.  Most of Joint Educators’ 
examples appear to relate to for-profit companies,309 and Joint Educators acknowledge 
that the line between academic institutions and businesses wanting to offer online 
educational courses “can be blurry.”310  Accordingly, although a commercial purpose is 
not disqualifying, the for-profit nature of most of the examples indicates that the first 
fair use factor weighs at least slightly against a finding of fair use.    
Regarding the fourth fair use factor, Joint Educators contend that “[t]he proposed use 
under this exemption is identical to the uses found in the K-12, university, and MOOC 
educational exemptions,” and that because the proposed use “would limit use to short 
portions of audiovisual works for educational purposes and the use is highly 
transformative, it is very unlikely that employing a short clip in an online course would 
be a sufficient substitute to watching a full-length movie for entertainment.”311  By 
contrast, opponents Joint Creators contend that the proposed uses “would pose a 
significant threat to the value of copyrighted works”312 and point to the availability of 
licensed clips as a market threatened by the proposed use.313 
On balance, the Register concludes that the commercial nature of the companies desiring 
to make proposed uses of motion picture excerpts tips the fourth factor against fair use.  
Overall, given the substantial prevalence of commercial uses in the proposal, and the 
difficulty of separating truly educational uses from ordinary commercial uses, the 
Register is unable to conclude that the proposed uses are likely to be noninfringing, at 
least to the extent they pertain to for-profit entities.   
 
307 Id. 
308 Joint Educators Class 1 Initial at 16. 
309 See Tr. at 233:07–19 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Decherney, Joint Educators) (“[I]t could be a corporate— a 
business, a for-profit business that creates MOOCs.”).  
310 Tr. at 234:07–09 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Decherney, Joint Educators); see Tr. at 234:15–16 (Apr. 6, 2021) 
(Decherney, Joint Educators) (stating that “Google teaches MOOCs . . . on Coursera”).  
311 Joint Educators Class 1 Initial at 17. 
312 Joint Creators Class 1 Opp’n at 9. 
313 Id.; see DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 37 (“This use threatens the existing clip 
licensing business.”). 

[PAGE 56]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights  
53 
As to non-accredited, nonprofit institutions, proponents provided only the example of 
CSforALL, and the nature of its activities—“ serv[ing] as a central resource for over 1100 
member organizations” for students “both in and out of school,” “connect[ing] 
providers, schools and districts, funders, and researchers”314—is not entirely clear.  
Moreover, although the fair use inquiry is not limited by the scope of specific statutory 
exceptions, the Register continues to believe that section 110(2) “provides useful and 
important guidance as to Congress’ intentions regarding the need for and nature of 
excepted uses to permit certain performances and displays of copyrighted works for 
distance learning.”
315  That provision is expressly limited to accredited nonprofit 
educational institutions.316  Thus, while not foreclosing the possibility that a different 
conclusion might be warranted upon a fuller record, the Register cannot conclude that 
the current evidence regarding non-accredited institutions establishes that their uses are 
likely noninfringing. 
Finally, considering whether the exemption should be expanded to employees of the 
eligible educational institutions offering MOOCs under the exemption (i.e., not just 
faculty), Joint Educators contend that “there hasn’t been opposition to having assistants 
helping the educators make the clip,” and that is “the same kind of distinction [they are] 
trying to make.”
317  The Register agrees.  For the same reasons discussed above 
regarding college and university employees, the Register is persuaded that employees of 
eligible educational institutions offering MOOCs, in addition to their faculty, should be 
covered by the exemption when circumventing under the direction of faculty members 
for the purpose of offering a course. 
e. Causation
The Register finds that BYU and Joint Educators have met their burden of showing that 
the statutory prohibition on circumvention of access controls limits their ability to 
engage in the proposed uses.  But for the prohibition, users likely could gain lawful 
access to the copyrighted motion pictures for those purposes. 
f. Asserted Adverse Effects
                                                  i. Universities and K-12 Educational Institutions
BYU argues that the statutory factors set forth in section 1201(a)(1) favor expanding the 
exemption to permit copying of motion pictures to a server for performances under 
sections 110(1) and 110(2).  As with its fair use arguments, BYU focuses mostly on 
314 Joint Educators Class 1 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2 (May 14, 2021). 
315 2015 Recommendation at 74. 
316 17 U.S.C. 110(2). 
317 Tr. at 231:19-23 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Decherney, Joint Educators). 

[PAGE 57]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
54 
proposed uses that would allow for the full-length performances of motion pictures for 
educational purposes. 
With respect to first statutory factor, the availability for use of copyrighted works, BYU 
states that “although motion pictures are widely available, access to the motion pictures 
is almost always controlled by restrictive TPMs put in place by rightsholders,” and that 
“[t]he proliferation of TPMs on motion pictures has caused the exact kind of adverse 
effects that Congress contemplated when initiating this rulemaking process.”318  
As in 2018, the Register finds that the first factor does not support extending the 
exemption to the performance of full-length motion pictures.319  Such use “could 
ultimately decrease the availability of motion pictures by undermining the value of the 
market for works in those formats,” and “the 1201 exemption process is meant to ensure 
that users have access to copyrighted works; it is not meant to guarantee consumers the 
ability to access content through their preferred method or format.”320 
Regarding the second and third statutory factors—the availability for use of works for 
educational purposes, and the impact on teaching, scholarship, or research—BYU states 
that “the current exemption for educational purposes is too restrictive and narrow, 
effectively making motion pictures unavailable for many noninfringing educational 
uses.”321  As discussed above, however, the Register does not believe that the proposed 
uses are likely to be noninfringing.  Thus, although the proposed uses may assist 
educational institutions in their teaching, consistent with the second and third factors, 
the section 1201 factors presume noninfringing uses.  Regarding the fourth statutory 
factor—the effect of circumvention on the market for or value of copyrighted works —as 
previously noted, brief, educational uses are unlikely to undermine the value of 
copyright-protected motion pictures, but the use of full-length motion pictures would 
likely affect their digital market.
322  Therefore, the Register cannot conclude that the 
factors favor BYU’s proposed expansion. 
ii. MOOCs 
Joint Educators argue that the exemption’s limitation to nonprofit accredited MOOCs is 
causing an adverse effect on noninfringing uses.  Regarding the first section 1201 
statutory factor, they maintain that “our nation’s learners, young and old, virtually all 
online now, will be adversely affected . . . if educators and preparers of educational 
 
318 BYU Class 1 Initial at 22. 
319 2018 Recommendation at 70. 
320 Id. (quoting 2015 Recommendation at 124). 
321 BYU Class 1 Initial at 23. 
322 2018 Recommendation at 71. 

[PAGE 58]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
55 
materials for online learning platforms . . . are not allowed to make noninfringing uses of 
copyrighted works as discussed here.”323  They assert that the prohibition against 
circumvention “prevents many online learning platforms from accessing [materials on 
DVDs, Blu-ray discs, and streaming services] to incorporate short clips into their 
courses,”324 and that many worthwhile materials will not be made available to potential 
users.  Joint Educators contend that expansion to unaccredited and for-profit platforms 
is necessary to facilitate the distribution of educational materials to a wider audience.325   
As to the second statutory factor, Joint Educators state that they “are not aware of any 
market offerings that provide educators and preparers of [online] educational materials 
for online learning platforms with the clips they need.”326  Regarding the third statutory 
factor, they maintain that “[i]ncluding short clips of movies and television shows in 
online courses has the ability to capture students’ attention and get them to engage more 
actively with the material,” and that short clips can “provid[e] visual examples of a 
concept being taught, encourag[e] commentary and critique of the work, inspire[e] 
students to think bigger, and allow[] them to engage with the shared experiences of the 
characters depicted onscreen.”327  Further, Joint Educations contend that maintaining the 
current exemption “will only serve to heighten the unequal access issues that already 
pervade the educational system.”
328  As to the fourth statutory factor, Joint Educators 
contend that the proposed use “would be strictly limited to minimize the potential effect 
on the market or value of copyrighted works,” and that “[t]he clips being excerpted are 
meant for the limited purpose of educating students . . . , so it is unlikely that those 
accessing the clips would reuse them.”329  Moreover, they assert that the clips may 
encourage students “to seek out the full version of the work,” thus expanding the 
potential market for the full-length work.330   
Opponents contend that the section 1201 statutory factors do not favor the proposed 
exemption.  They argue that the proposal “will not result in the availability of more 
works,” as “[n]othing suggests that online learning platforms are presently unable to 
make or prepare educational materials.”331  They acknowledge that works created under 
the proposed exemption would be for educational purposes, consistent with the second 
 
323 Joint Educators Class 1 Initial at 18. 
324 Id. at 19. 
325 Id. at 3. 
326 Id. at 19. 
327 Id. at 20. 
328 Id. 
329 Id. 
330 Id. 
331 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 41. 

[PAGE 59]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
56 
factor.332  As to the third factor, opponents essentially maintain that adequate 
alternatives to circumvention exist.333  Regarding the fourth factor, opponents stress the 
commercial nature of most of the proposed uses, and state that licensed clips are 
available for those uses.334   
The Register concludes that proponents have established a likely adverse effect to the 
extent the current exemption does not cover employees of qualifying MOOCs acting 
under the direction of faculty members for the purpose of offering a course.  Regarding 
the first statutory factor, the record shows that a limited expansion to allow 
circumvention by employees likely would increase the availability of copyrighted works 
for certain uses of motion picture clips.  The second and third statutory factors favor the 
uses in question for the same reasons as are applicable to the current exemption: 
circumvention by employees will increase the availability of work for educational 
purposes and for teaching, scholarship, and research.  Finally, under the fourth statutory 
factor, there is no evidence that expansion of the exemption to MOOC employees acting 
at the direction of a faculty member will adversely affect the market for or value of 
copyrighted works. 
With respect to the proposed expansion to for-profit entities, in light of the Register’s 
finding that proponents have failed to establish a noninfringing use, it is unnecessary to 
address whether they have demonstrated an adverse impact on such use.  Regarding the 
offering of MOOCs by unaccredited nonprofit educational institutions, the Register 
finds that the current record is insufficient to support a finding of adverse effects.  As 
noted, proponents provided only one example of a non-accredited entity seeking to 
engage in the proposed uses, and the nature of its activities is unclear based on the 
evidence submitted.  The Register therefore cannot assess whether, or to what extent, an 
expansion to such entities might affect the availability of copyrighted works for 
educational purposes or any impacts their activities may have on the relevant markets.  
The Register is open to revisiting this issue in the future should a more robust record be 
provided. 
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA generally supports the proposed expansions in this class, with certain 
modifications.  First, it recommends elimination of the requirement that users evaluate 
whether screen-capture technology provides sufficient detail for the intended use, 
believing that language “is the cause of much confusion and actually adds ambiguity to 
 
332 Id. at 42.     
333 Id. at 43. 
334 Id. at 44. 

[PAGE 60]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
57 
the exemption.”335  In its view, such a requirement is unnecessary because other 
language in the exemption “requires that the user determine whether there are noncircumventing alternatives available for their purposes.”336  As discussed, however, the 
Register continues to believe that the screen-capture language has the benefit of assuring 
users that use of such technology pursuant to the exemption will not subject them to 
circumvention liability.  Moreover, the Register notes that users merely are required to 
evaluate the possibility of using screen capture; they are not required to use it if it will 
not produce images of sufficient quality for their intended use.337 
Regarding BYU’s proposals, NTIA agrees with the Register that the exemption should 
be extended to university employees acting at the direction of faculty members for the 
purpose of teaching a course.  In addition, it generally supports BYU’s request to permit 
space-shifting of full-length motion pictures to facilitate use in both classroom and 
virtual classroom settings, subject to a lack of market availability.338   However, it does 
not support BYU’s request to eliminate “educational uses” from the language of the 
exemption.339  NTIA argues that the pandemic has heightened the need for spaceshifting to foster online teaching,340 and that the unavailability of various titles for 
licensed streaming, as noted by BYU and other proponents of this change, constitutes a 
“market failure.”
341  Further, NTIA supports, with some modifications, BYU’s proposal 
to allow such uses as long as the institution has policies to insure that “all uses are 
noninfringing as guided by . . . §§ 107, 110(1), and 110(2).”342   
For the reasons discussed above, the Register declines to recommend these changes.  
With regard to the “educational uses” language, the Register continues to believe that 
this provision provides an important boundary to ensure that the covered activities are 
likely to constitute fair use.  As to space-shifting of full-length motion pictures, the 
Register disagrees that the uses proposed by BYU are likely to be noninfringing.  As 
discussed above, the statutory limits and the case law make it doubtful that such activity 
would be found noninfringing, and NTIA does not cite any new authority to the 
 
335 Letter from Evelyn L. Remaley, Acting Assistant Sec’y for Commc’ns & Info. & Adm’r, Nat’l 
Telecomms. & Info. Admin., U.S. Dep’t of Commerce, to Shira Perlmutter, Register of Copyrights 
and Dir., U.S. Copyright Office, at 16 (Oct. 1, 2021) (“NTIA Letter”). 
336 Id. at 17. 
337 Contra id. at 15 (quoting BYU Class 1 Initial Comments at 23) (referring to the “obligation to 
use screen capture technologies”). 
338 Id. at 21–23. 
339 Id. at 18–19. 
340 Id. at 21. 
341 Id. at 21–22. 
342 Id. at 25 (emphasis omitted). 

[PAGE 61]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
58 
contrary.  Further, while the Register acknowledges that the market for full-length 
motion pictures for educational use is imperfect, the record indicates that it is improving 
and that the proposed exemption could inhibit its further development. 
Finally, with regard to Joint Educators’ proposals, NTIA supports the proposed 
expansion to include for-profit educational platforms.343  In its view, “this exemption 
should be limited to educational entities that employ educators or demonstrate that they 
themselves are educators that provide or develop content whether or not they are 
accredited or are for-profit or not-for-profit.”344  It states further that “[t]he definition of 
educators and educational entities in this context should be construed as broadly as 
possible,”345 and that the exemption “favors small businesses formed to be educational 
entities and can allow for those that are experts in their field to develop educational 
materials and specialized online courses utilizing that expertise.”
346  NTIA stresses the 
desirability of facilitating online education during the pandemic and beyond.347  The 
Register believes, however, that the predominantly commercial nature of most of the 
proposed beneficiaries is significant.  Indeed, NTIA acknowledges that “it would be 
difficult to draw the line between certain entities.”348  The Register also disagrees with 
NTIA’s view that requiring MOOCs to follow the restrictions in the current exemption 
relating to student registration and unauthorized content dissemination would be a 
sufficient safeguard against misuse of the exemption.
349 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
As detailed above, the proponents seeking expansions for certain educational uses have 
demonstrated that various technological measures interfere with their ability to make 
additional desired uses of motion pictures and that a number of those uses are likely 
noninfringing.  The Register thus recommends that the current exemption be expanded 
in certain ways to reflect this additional record.  But because proponents have not 
provided a record showing the need to circumvent audiovisual works protected by 
AACS2, the Register does not recommend inclusion of those works in the exemption. 
For all categories of uses, the regulatory text expressly permits the use of screen-capture 
technology.  As noted above, the Register recommends retaining a screen-capture 
 
343 Id. at 8–12. 
344 Id. at 11. 
345 Id. (citing Joint Educators Class 1 Post-Hearing Resp. at 6 (May 14, 2021)). 
346 Id. (citing Joint Educators Class 1 Post-Hearing Resp. at 6 (May 14, 2021)).  
347 Id. at 10. 
348 Id. at 11.  
349 See id. at 12. 

[PAGE 62]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
59 
provision to address the possibility that use of this technology could be deemed to 
involve circumvention.   
The Register again recommends against expansion to allow circumvention to copy and 
perform full-length motion pictures for educational purposes.  Proponents have not 
demonstrated any changes in the law to justify a finding of noninfringing use.  Similarly, 
proponents have not provided evidence that the existing exemption does not cover 
certain proposed uses of motion picture clips so as to warrant adjusting the phrase 
“short portions” to “reasonable and limited portions.”  The Register does, however, 
recommend expanding the exemption to permit employees of colleges and universities, 
in addition to their faculty, to perform the circumvention at the direction of a faculty 
member of the institution for the purpose of teaching a course. 
In evaluating the proposed expansions for MOOCs, the Register finds that the record 
lacks support to expand the existing exemption to for-profit and/or unaccredited 
educational companies and organizations.  Moreover, the Register does not recommend 
adoption of proponents’ broadly framed proposal to encompass “online learning 
materials” of “online learning platforms,” as it would seemingly encompass any online 
video that could be characterized as an educational experience.  Similar to the provision 
regarding colleges and universities, the Register does recommend expanding the 
exemption to permit circumvention by both faculty and employees acting at the 
direction of faculty of accredited nonprofit educational institutions for purposes of 
offering MOOCs already eligible under the existing exemption. 
Accordingly, the Register recommends that the Librarian designate the following class: 
 
Motion pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in 17 
U.S.C. 101, where the motion picture is lawfully made and acquired on a DVD 
protected by the Content Scramble System, on a Blu-ray disc protected by the 
Advanced Access Content System, or via a digital transmission protected by a 
technological measure, and the person engaging in circumvention under 
paragraphs (b)(1)(i) and (b)(1)(ii)(A) and (B) of this section reasonably believes 
that non-circumventing alternatives are unable to produce the required level 
of high-quality content, or the circumvention is undertaken using screencapture technology that appears to be offered to the public as enabling the 
reproduction of motion pictures after content has been lawfully acquired and 
decrypted, where circumvention is undertaken solely in order to make use of 
short portions of the motion pictures in the following instances: 
(i) For the purpose of criticism or comment: 

[PAGE 63]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
60 
(A) For use in documentary filmmaking, or other films where the 
motion picture clip is used in parody or for its biographical or 
historically significant nature; 
(B) For use in noncommercial videos (including videos produced for a 
paid commission if the commissioning entity’s use is noncommercial); 
or 
(C) For use in nonfiction multimedia e-books. 
(ii) For educational purposes: 
(A) By college and university faculty and students or kindergarten 
through twelfth-grade (K-12) educators and students (where the K-12 
student is circumventing under the direct supervision of an educator), 
or employees acting at the direction of faculty of such educational 
institutions for the purpose of teaching a course, including of 
accredited general educational development (GED) programs, for the 
purpose of criticism, comment, teaching, or scholarship; 
(B) By faculty of accredited nonprofit educational institutions and 
employees acting at the direction of faculty members of those 
institutions, for purposes of offering massive open online courses 
(MOOCs) to officially enrolled students through online platforms 
(which platforms themselves may be operated for profit), in film 
studies or other courses requiring close analysis of film and media 
excerpts, for the purpose of criticism or comment, where the MOOC 
provider through the online platform limits transmissions to the extent 
technologically feasible to such officially enrolled students, institutes 
copyright policies and provides copyright informational materials to 
faculty, students, and relevant staff members, and applies technological 
measures that reasonably prevent unauthorized further dissemination 
of a work in accessible form to others or retention of the work for 
longer than the course session by recipients of a transmission through 
the platform, as contemplated by 17 U.S.C. 110(2); or 
(C) By educators and participants in nonprofit digital and media 
literacy programs offered by libraries, museums, and other nonprofit 
entities with an educational mission, in the course of face-to-face 
instructional activities, for the purpose of criticism or comment, except 
that such users may only circumvent using screen-capture technology 
that appears to be offered to the public as enabling the reproduction of 
motion pictures after content has been lawfully acquired and 
decrypted.  

[PAGE 64]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
61 
B. Proposed Class 2: Audiovisual Works—Texting  
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption 
Petitioner SolaByte Corp. (“SolaByte”) requests an exemption to access “licensed 
audio/video works stored on optical disc media for the purpose of creating short (10 
seconds or less) A/V clips that enhance communication effectiveness and understanding 
when using TEXTing messages.”350  The proposed class “[i]ncludes movies, TV shows, 
music video, other copyrighted works” that are stored on “[p]ackaged and replicated 
DVD or Blu-ray discs playable on computer or CE player hardware.”
351  Eligible users 
would include persons “who want to create expressive clips that convey their thoughts 
when texting.”
352  Following the initial petition, SolaByte did not submit legal arguments 
or evidence or participate in the public hearings in support of their petition.  Free 
Software Foundation (“FSF”) filed comments generally supporting this exemption, but 
did not provide any evidence or substantive argument regarding the merits of the 
specific proposal.353  Joint Creators and DVD CSS & AACS LA both filed comments 
opposing the proposed exemption. 
b. Overview of Issues 
Sending text messages has become a daily form of communication for many, and FSF 
suggests that “short clips and images are increasingly how people communicate.”354  
SolaByte argues that the proposed class would “enhance communication and 
understanding in an abbreviated or compressed TEXTing environment” by allowing 
users to circumvent TPMs on DVDs and Blu-rays to “extract[], edit[] and creat[e] usable 
clips” that communicate for the user.355  
The covered works of the proposed class were not clear.  In opposing the class, Joint 
Creators argue that because the petition sought an exemption for “ A/V content stored on 
DVD and Blu-rays,” it should be read to include motion pictures only, and not other 
audiovisual works, such as video games.356  
 
350 SolaByte Class 2 Pet. at 2. 
351 Id. 
352 Id. 
353 FSF Class 2 Initial at 2. 
354 Id. 
355 SolaByte Class 2 Pet. at 2. 
356 Joint Creators Class 2 Opp’n at 2. 

[PAGE 65]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
62 
It is not apparent whether SolaByte seeks an exemption for non-infringing uses, nor, 
assuming the uses are non-infringing, whether an exemption is needed to access the 
covered works (read broadly or narrowly).  SolaByte offers no legal argument for why 
the intended uses would be non-infringing.  FSF claims that texting video clips for 
expressive purposes is non-infringing because it is protected by the fair use doctrine, but 
their cursory comment offers no legal basis for deeming all such uses fair uses.  Joint 
Creators argue that at least some of the targeted uses “are likely infringing in many 
instances,” noting an existing “market for licensing motion picture clips.”357 
Assuming the uses are non-infringing, the proponents do not explain why an exemption 
is needed.  SolaByte notes that “A/V content stored on DVD and Blu-ray disc is 
encrypted[,] thereby preventing users from extracting, editing and creating usable 
clips,”358 but does not address whether some of these uses would already be covered by 
an existing exemption or can be accomplished without circumvention.  Indeed, both 
opponents, Joint Creators and DVD CCA & AACS LA, argue that because proponents 
have not substantiated the need for this exemption, it should be rejected.359 
2. Discussion 
SolaByte appears to have proposed a broad exemption for any user who wants to use 
audiovisual clips to express themselves when texting (similar to individuals sending 
GIFs in texts, but with audio).  It is not clear from the petition if that activity would be 
limited to films, TV, music videos, and similar types of copyrighted works or would 
include video games, multimedia works, and other types of copyrighted works.  While 
FSF urges a broad class that would include “all audiovisual works and all users,” it did 
not explain why the exemption should be so drawn, other than to claim that “all users 
have a legitimate right to circumvent controls on audiovisual works, regardless of the 
medium or the particular use involved.”360   
In any event, the Office need not determine the appropriate scope of covered works 
because the rest of the record is insufficiently developed as well.  The NPRM explicitly 
called for additional details about numerous aspects of the proposed exemption, 
including whether it would be available to commercial services.
361  Proponents did not 
provide a response.  As the Register has stated in past triennial reviews, proponents 
 
357 Id. at 3. 
358 SolaByte Class 2 Pet. at 2. 
359 Joint Creators Class 2 Opp’n at 2; DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 2 Opp’n at 3–4. 
360 FSF Class 2 Initial at 2. 
361 NPRM at 65,303. 

[PAGE 66]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
63 
must provide more than a “de minimis showing made in support of the proposed 
exemption.”362 
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA agrees with the Register that an exemption for this class is not warranted.  NTIA 
recognizes that “[p]roponents did not provide sufficient evidence on the record to define 
the exact scope and underlying circumstances to support this petition.”363  Moreover, it 
notes that “proponents failed to file any further comments or otherwise present 
evidence at the hearings.”364  Although “NTIA believes this proposed use may not be 
clearly covered by current exemptions and therefore warrants future discussion 
regarding this issue,” it agrees with the Register that “proponents did not meet their 
burden in this round.”
365 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
While the Office recognizes that texting is an important medium of communication and 
that users may wish to send audiovisual clips as part of their text messages, many 
questions remain regarding whether an exemption under section 1201 is warranted. 
These include the types of works eligible, the extent to which uses would be noninfringing, and whether and which TPMs prevent users from making non-infringing 
uses of audiovisual clips for texting.  The current record does not address these 
questions, and therefore the Register does not recommend adoption of proposed Class 2. 
 
 
 
362 2006 Recommendation at 76. 
363 NTIA Letter at 27. 
364 Id. at 27–28. 
365 Id. at 28. 

[PAGE 67]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
64 
C. Proposed Class 3: Audiovisual Works—Accessibility  
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption 
Petitioners Association of Transcribers and Speech-to-Text Providers, Association on 
Higher Education and Disability, and Library Copyright Alliance (collectively, 
“Accessibility Petitioners”)366 seek to expand a current exemption that permits the 
circumvention of TPMs protecting motion pictures so that disability services 
professionals at educational institutions can add captioning and/or audio description to 
create accessible versions.  Specifically, proponents request the following modifications: 
(1) including faculty and staff as beneficiaries in addition to students;367 (2) allowing 
reuse of previously remediated materials created under the exemption;368 (3) permitting 
circumvention to create accessible versions that are likely to be the subject of 
accommodations requests (i.e., proactive remediation);369 (4) allowing circumvention 
where a motion picture is represented as “accessible” but errors in captions or audio 
description make the work not of “sufficient quality” for individuals with disabilities;370 
and (5) clarification of the requirement to make “reasonable efforts” to obtain an 
accessible version of an audiovisual work at a “fair price.”371   
Proponents’ requested language is as follows, with proposed deletions indicated with 
strikethroughs and proposed additions indicated in italics: 
(i) Motion pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in 17 
U.S.C. 101, where the motion picture is lawfully acquired on a DVD protected by 
the Content Scramble System, on a Blu-ray disc protected by the Advanced 
Access Content System, or via a digital transmission protected by a technological 
measure, where: 
(A) Circumvention is undertaken by a disability services office or other 
unit of a kindergarten through twelfth-grade educational institution, 
college, or university engaged in and/or responsible for the provision of 
 
366 Some of these organizations also filed comments in support of Classes 8 and 17.  For 
simplicity, in this section, “ Accessibility Petitioners” refers to the coalition of accessibility groups 
who filed comments in support of Class 3. 
367 Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Initial at 10–11. 
368 Id. at 14–15. 
369 Id. at 11–12 
370 Id. at 12–13. 
371 Id. at 13–14. 

[PAGE 68]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
65 
accessibility services to students, for the purpose of adding captions 
and/or audio description to a motion picture to create an accessible 
version as a necessary accommodation for a student or students with 
disabilities under an applicable disability law, such as the Americans 
With Disabilities Act, the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, 
or Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act; for students, faculty, or staff 
with disabilities; 
(B) The educational institution unit in paragraph (b)(2)(i)(A) of this 
section has, after a reasonable effort, determined that an accessible 
version of sufficient quality cannot be obtained at a fair market price or 
in a timely manner, including where a copyright holder has not included 
an accessible version of a motion picture included with a digital 
textbook; and 
(C) The accessible versions are provided to students or educators and 
stored by the educational institution in a manner intended to reasonably 
prevent unauthorized further dissemination of a work, except for storage 
that allows for future reuse of the material by students, faculty, or staff 
with disabilities pursuant to subparagraphs (A) and (B). 
(ii) For purposes of this paragraph (b)(2), “audio description” means an oral 
narration that provides an accurate rendering of the motion picture.372 
FSF filed a comment expressing general supporting this exemption but did not 
provide evidence or substantive argument regarding the specific proposal.373  
Joint Creators, as well as DVD CCA and AACS LA, filed opposition comments 
largely agreeing with proponents’ requested changes, while seeking additional 
clarification on a few modifications.374   
Because the hearings revealed substantial agreement among the parties, the 
Office issued a post-hearing letter requesting the parties to confer and, if they 
were able to reach consensus, to jointly propose regulatory language.375  The 
parties reported that they were unable to agree on regulatory language, but 
 
372 Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Initial at 5–6.   
373 FSF Class 3 Initial at 2. 
374 Joint Creators Class 3 Opp’n at 4–5 (questioning when captions would be considered “not of 
sufficient quality” and opposing permitting proactive remediation in advance of an accessibility 
request); DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 3 Opp’n at 3–4 (suggesting the Register limit when 
proactive remediation would be permitted and require objective indicia for determining when 
captions were not of “sufficient quality”). 
375 Copyright Office Class 3 Post-Hearing Letter (Apr. 16, 2021).   

[PAGE 69]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
66 
proponents and opponents separately offered language with considerable 
similarities.376  Proponents suggested the following changes to their initial 
proposal: (1) removing the word “digital” from the phrase “motion picture 
included with a digital textbook”; (2) modifying subparagraph (i)(C) “to clarify 
that reuse of already-remediated works is permitted”; (3) adding language that 
would permit proactive remediation where an educational unit has a reasonable 
belief that a particular work will be used for a specific future activity; and (4) 
clarifying the situations under which an accessible version is of sufficient quality 
for purposes of the market check requirement.377  In their submission, Joint 
Creators, DVD CCA, and AACS LA proposed adjustments to “the language 
describing the requisite security measures to be used by exemption beneficiaries 
and the language used to describe the market check requirement.”378   
b. Overview of Issues 
In 2018, the Acting Register recommended adoption of the current exemption, finding 
that proponents made a “compelling case” that “converting motion pictures into 
accessible formats for students with disabilities by adding captions and/or audio 
description is a noninfringing fair use”
379 and that the prohibition on circumvention 
adversely affected individuals seeking to engage in that activity.380  The 
recommendation noted that “public policy favors removing impediments to access for 
individuals with disabilities,”381 and that “[a]n exception to promote accessibility ‘is not 
merely a matter of convenience, but is instead intended to enable individuals [with 
disabilities] to have meaningful access to the same content that individuals without such 
impairments are able to perceive.’”382  The Acting Register was mindful, however, that 
the exemption “must also take into account that for a significant number of feature films 
and other audiovisual works, the market already provides accessible versions, which 
may alleviate the need to circumvent certain works,”383 and thus recommended that the 
 
376 See Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Post-Hearing Resp. (May 14, 2021); Joint Creators et al. 
Class 3 Post-Hearing Resp. Attachment (May 14, 2021). 
377 Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2–3 (May 14, 2021). 
378 See Joint Creators et al. Class 3 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1 (May 14, 2021). 
379 2018 Recommendation at 101 (finding noninfringement conclusion supported by “the 
legislative history of the 1976 Copyright Act, the Chafee Amendment, the HathiTrust decision, 
and other existing disability laws”). 
380 Id. at 101–06. 
381 Id. at 104 (quoting 2012 Recommendation at 21). 
382 Id. (quoting 2015 Recommendation at 136, 2012 Recommendation at 22). 
383 Id. at 105. 

[PAGE 70]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
67 
exemption “take into account and further incentivize the marketplace offerings, 
including by requiring a reasonable market check for usable copies.”384 
Proponents explain that the existing exemption “has been widely used and appreciated 
by disability services professionals that must circumvent technological measures 
protecting audiovisual works to provide remediated versions for students at educational 
institutions,”385 and that it “was a good first step towards helping students with 
disabilities have access to necessary resources for their classes.”386  The proposed 
expansions seek to “ensure that disability services professionals can do their jobs to 
improve accessibility for students, faculty, and staff with disabilities” and “empower 
them to make works accessible for people with disabilities in educational contexts.”387  
For the reasons discussed below, the Register agrees that the expansions should be 
adopted, with certain modifications. 
Before turning to the specific proposals for clarification or expansion of this exemption, 
the Register first addresses an argument by DVD CCA and AACS LA that the exemption 
should not be expanded to include AACS2 technology, which is employed to protect 
ultra-high-definition or “4K” content distributed on Ultra HD Blu-ray discs.388  As noted 
above for Class 1, the Office has previously rejected requests to cover AACS2 technology 
where proponents had provided “very little in the record” showing the need to 
circumvent AACS2 to access motion pictures.389  In such cases, “the Register has 
declined to include new technology where the record did not demonstrate a need, and 
exemptions to permit circumvention of new technology have been adopted only upon 
showings of a need to access works protected by that specific technology.”390  Here, 
proponents do not reference AACS2 in their petition or initial comments.391  After DVD 
CCA and AACS LA opposed expansion to AACS2 and argued that it is “a distinct 
 
384 Id. at 106. 
385 Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Initial at 4. 
386 Id. at 31. 
387 Id. at 4. 
388 See DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 3 Opp’n at –2 (arguing that AACS2 is a “distinct 
technology” from AACS and that “[t]o the extent a proposal mentions CSS and/or AACS, but 
does not explicitly include AACS2, such mention should not be inferred to include AACS2”). 
389 2018 Recommendation at 40–41.  The proponents of the current accessibility exemption did not 
raise AACS2 in the 2018 record for that class. 
390 2018 Recommendation at 40. 
391 See Accessibility Petitioners Class Pet. at 2 (describing Class 3 as “expanding the current 
exemption in 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(2),” which refers only to AACS); Accessibility Petitioners Class 
3 Initial at 7 (stating TPMs at issue in Class 3 are “substantially the same as the TPMs that were in 
use and considered during the last triennial review”). 

[PAGE 71]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
68 
technology” from AACS,392 proponents asserted that the Office should “interpret the 
scope of the existing exemption’s coverage of AACS broadly to cover AACS2,” but did 
not offer evidence of the need to circumvent AACS2, including addressing whether 
access to materials in formats protected by other TPMs (e.g., non-ultra HD Blu-ray or 
DVDs) would be sufficient for the desired uses.393  Because of the lack of evidence 
showing a need to circumvent AACS2, and for the same reasons discussed in the 
Register’s recommendation for Class 1, the Register finds the record insufficient to 
support extending the proposed class to AACS2. 
2. Discussion 
In 2018, the Acting Register concluded that proponents had offered “credible support for 
their claim that converting motion pictures into accessible formats for students with 
disabilities by adding captions and/or audio description is a noninfringing fair use.”394  
The Register must now determine whether the additional activities permitted by the 
requested modifications are likewise noninfringing.395 
First, the Office considers the request to expand the exemption to permit circumvention 
to create accessible materials for faculty and staff, in addition to students.  Proponents 
note that educational institutions are required under disability law to create accessible 
version of audiovisual works for faculty and staff, just as they are required to remediate 
for students.396  Proponents further assert that this change falls within the scope of the 
Office’s 2018 fair use analysis of the current exemption.397  There was no opposition to 
this requested change.398  The Register agrees that this adjustment would not change the 
Office’s prior fair use analysis.  As the Acting Register noted in 2018, “adding captions 
or audio description to a motion picture for purposes of creating accessible versions for 
 
392 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 3 Opp’n at 2. 
393 See Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Reply at 6–7; Tr. at 12:10–14 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Goodstein, 
Association of Transcribers and Speech-to-Text Providers (“ ATSP”)) (“We weren’t explicit in our 
comment regarding AACS2 because we feel that there is no real distinction in principle between 
captioning a video that is in AACS format and captioning a video that’s in AACS2 format”); Tr. at 
12:24–13:02 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Reid, ATSP) (“in consulting with our clients and disability services 
professionals, it doesn’t sound like there is a strong need to circumvent AACS2 videos”). 
394 2018 Recommendation at 101. 
395 See Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Pet. at 2 (describing class as “expanding the current 
exemption in 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(2)”).  The scope of copyrighted works affected is the same as in 
2018. 
396 Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Initial at 10–11 (citing 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A) (requiring 
employers to make reasonable accommodations to employees with disabilities)). 
397 Id. at 16, 22. 
398 See Joint Creators Class 3 Opp’n at 3; DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 3 Opp’n at 3. 

[PAGE 72]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
69 
students with disabilities, in compliance with disability laws, is a ‘valid purpose,’ 
weighing in favor of fair use.”399  Because educational institutions similarly have legal 
obligations with respect to faculty and staff with disabilities, and because the expansion 
is directed at the same uses the Office has previously concluded are likely to be fair, the 
Register finds that proponents have met their burden of showing that the proposed 
expansion to faculty and staff is likely to be fair use.  
Second, the Office considers proponents’ request for language specifically permitting 
reuse of motion pictures previously remediated under the exemption.  Proponents 
explain that because the current exemption does not expressly refer to reusing 
remediated material, the regulation could be interpreted as requiring repeated 
remediation of a motion picture (and thus repeated circumvention of TPMs) when used 
by different students across different semesters.400  DVD CCA and AACS LA do not 
object to this proposal,401 and Joint Creators agree that “[d]isability services departments 
should not have to repeat the effort of remediating the same work within the same 
institution multiple times,” provided the works are stored securely to prevent 
unauthorized further dissemination.
402  The Register agrees that permitting remediated 
material to be used for other exemption beneficiaries does not materially change the fair 
use analysis, particularly given the requirement that accessible works created under the 
exemption be “stored by the educational institution in a manner intended to reasonably 
prevent unauthorized further dissemination of a work.”403  Nor does the record suggest 
that this change is likely to negatively affect the market for these copyrighted works.  
Moreover, an educational institution’s inability to use a previously remediated copy for 
these purposes would result in the same adverse impacts that justified the current 
exemption.404 
Third, proponents also seek to permit educational institutions to proactively create 
accessible versions of materials in advance of a specific accommodations request.  
Proponents contend that this expansion will allow disability services professionals “to 
retain the ability to make professional judgments about compliance with [disability] 
 
399 2018 Recommendation at 97 (citing Authors Guild v. HathiTrust, 755 F.3d 87, 102 (2d. Cir. 2014)). 
400 Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Initial at 14–15; Tr. at 17:08–18:16 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Kapcala, West 
Virginia University) (noting that where a “curriculum stays the same or stays fairly consistent 
from year to year,” having to caption the same work multiple times “would represent a 
significant amount of time” and divert resources from in-class transcription). 
401 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 3 Opp’n at 3. 
402 Joint Creators Class 3 Opp’n at 3–4. 
403 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(2)(i)(C). 
404 See 2018 Recommendation at 104 (exemption was justified because it would “allow[] the wide 
range of motion pictures that are available to the general population to be accessed and enjoyed 
by students with disabilities”). 

[PAGE 73]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
70 
laws,”405 as well as to address instances where students do not submit an 
accommodation request because they do not self-identify as having a disability.406  
Proponents also note that allowing proactive remediation would afford disability 
services professionals the flexibility to space out remediation work to avoid backlogs or 
to accommodate specific campus policies.407 
In response, DVD CCA and AACS LA agree that it is important to avoid delay in 
providing remediated copies to students requiring accommodation, but propose limiting 
proactive remediation to “no earlier than at the point the instructor knows or reasonably 
believes his or her course will make use of a particular work,” or when a school has not 
identified an instructor but knows a course will likely use a work.408  Joint Creators do 
not object to proactive remediation so long as an institution knows a work will be used 
in the classroom, such as when it is added to a course syllabus.409 
 
405 Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Reply at 11 (because disability laws do not provide specific 
criteria for sufficiency of accommodations, “it is critical for EIU professionals to retain the ability 
to make professional judgments about compliance with these laws”). 
406 Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Initial at 28 (Statement of Jason Kapcala, West Virginia 
University) (“We also project that only about 1/3 of students with disabilities on our campus 
request accommodations.  That does not obviate our responsibility to provide equal access for the 
other 2/3 who choose not to self-identify.”). 
407 See Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Initial at 11–12 (noting that remediating material is time 
consuming and making some works accessible in advance of a request can avoid delays and 
adverse impacts on students); Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Initial at 29 (statement of Jason 
Kapcala, West Virginia University) (estimating it takes seven hours to caption a one-hour video 
and the ability to proactively remediate would benefit students early in a semester choosing what 
classes to add or drop); Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Initial at 31 (statement of Anonymous 
Disability Service Professional) (“There is a blanket mandate under our university’s policy that all 
videos need to be captioned.  It would not be possible to caption at the volume that we do if we 
had to wait for a student accommodation request before remediating classroom materials.”); Tr. 
at 32:08–33:10 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Reid, ATSP) (noting that some educational institutions require 
formal accommodations requests, some require all material to be accessible, potentially because a 
large portion of the student population has disabilities, and many institutions fall between those 
positions). 
408 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 3 Opp’n at 4.   
409 Tr. at 9:17–10:07 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Williams, Joint Creators) (Joint Creators do not object to 
proactive remediation where a work was already “on a course syllabus” or when the school 
otherwise knew the work would be used in a class, so long as the exemption does not “allow[] for 
the entire library catalogue to be circumvented in advance so that when something is added to a 
class, it can be rendered accessible”); see also Tr. at 43:03–18 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Williams, Joint 
Creators) (similar). 

[PAGE 74]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
71 
After considering the record in this proceeding, the 2018 fair use analysis, and proposed 
language from the parties,410 the Register concludes that proactive remediation of 
motion pictures that an instructor or educational institution knows or reasonably 
believes will be used for a future activity of the institution is likely to be a fair use.411  
The Office has previously determined that the creation of accessible versions for 
students, faculty, and staff with disabilities is a “valid purpose” weighing in favor of fair 
use.
412  Proponents have provided convincing evidence that proactive remediation will 
enable these users to benefit from accessible materials.413  Proponents have also provided 
evidence that remediation is sufficiently time-consuming that institutions typically will 
not do so absent a legitimate need.414  In light of this showing, as well as for the reasons 
explained in 2018, the Register concludes that proactive remediation is likely to be fair 
use.415  The Register accordingly will recommend language to this effect in the 
regulatory text. 
To reflect this change, Accessibility Petitioners suggest removing the requirement that 
circumvention be part of a necessary accommodation under a particular disability law 
and instead permit circumvention “to create an accessible version for students, faculty, 
 
410 See Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1–2 (May 14, 2021); Joint Creators et 
al. Class 3 Post-Hearing Resp. Attachment (May 14, 2021). 
411 The Register bases her conclusion partially on the fact that the existing exemption includes a 
market check requirement.  See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(2)(B) (requiring educational institution to use 
“reasonable effort” to determine whether “an accessible version can be obtained at a fair price or 
timely manner”).  As the Acting Register noted in 2018, the fourth fair use factor, which looks to 
the market for the copyrighted works,“weighs in favor of fair use when there is a market check 
requirement because “[w]hen an accessible version is not available in the marketplace, the 
proposed use is less likely to interfere with the primary or derivative markets for the motion 
picture.”  2018 Recommendation at 100. 
412 2018 Recommendation at 97 (citing HathiTrust); see also id. at 100–01.  
413 See Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Initial at 28 (Statement of Jason Kapcala, West Virginia 
University) (estimating two thirds of students do not self-identify as having a disability); Tr. at 
29:08–30:12 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Reid, ATSP) (students may decline to make formal accommodations 
request due to concerns of professional consequences); Tr. at 30:22–31:06 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Kapcala, 
West Virginia University) (students may also not self-identify out of discomfort or not 
recognizing extent of their disability). 
414 See Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Initial at 29 (Statement of Jason Kapcala, West Virginia 
University) (estimating it takes seven hours to caption a one-hour video); Tr. at 53:24–54:06 (Apr. 
5, 2021) (Kapcala, West Virginia University) (educational institutions “don’t have the resources, 
the personnel, the money, the budgetary considerations to caption things that don’t really need 
it”). 
415 See 2018 Recommendation at 98–100.  

[PAGE 75]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
72 
or staff with disabilities.”416  At the hearing, proponents stated that removing the 
reference to disability law was “part of the mechanical change that we suggested for 
allowing proactive remediation” because in some instances, “the extent to which 
disability law binds the university is not clear and there might actually be . . . diverging 
opinions” on whether proactive remediation is required under existing law.417  In light of 
her conclusion that proactive remediation likely constitutes fair use where an 
educational institution reasonably believes that the accessible copy will be used for a 
future activity of the institution, the Register agrees that it is unnecessary to include a 
specific reference to a “necessary accommodation” pursuant to other laws.  The 
recommended exemption therefore removes that language. 
Fourth, proponents seek to clarify that they may invoke the exemption when a motion 
picture is represented as accessible, but the version “has captions or descriptions with 
insufficient quality, in the [Educational Institution Unit (EIU)]’s judgment, to facilitate 
equal access to the video.”418  Proponents have testified that where educational 
institutions have identified motion pictures with errors such as incomplete captions, 
misspellings, and missing words, they were unsure if the existing exemption would 
apply so such errors could be corrected.
419  Proponents did not propose specific 
regulatory language to address when captions or descriptions would be of insufficient 
quality, and opponents raise questions about how this provision would operate in 
practice, such as whether it would be tied to regulations promulgated by the Federal 
Communications Commission.
420  Proponents object to tying quality to particular legal 
requirements, describing the captioning and description process as “a subjective 
determination” that is not governed by objective standards for every educational 
context.421  Proponents explain that this subjectivity is driven by the particularized needs 
of students with disabilities, including as set forth in a student’s Individualized 
 
416 Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Initial at 5.  
417 Tr. at 20:09–21:13 (Reid, ATSP).  
418 Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Initial at 12. 
419 See id. at 12–13; Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Initial at 29 (Statement of Jason Kapcala, West 
Virginia University) (describing test of machine-generated captioning product that converted 
“These captions are terrible” to “These captions are bearable” and noting “similar issues with the 
auto-captioning” on YouTube); Tr. at 55:03–07 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Reid, ATSP) (“we’re talking about 
incomplete captions, missing words, misspellings of proper nouns, lack of punctuation”). 
420 See DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 3 Opp’n at 4 (noting a lack of objective criteria for making 
quality determination and that “[w]ithout meaningful objective criteria, there is a concern that a 
resulting exemption would be effectively unbounded”); Joint Creators Class 3 Opp’n at 3–4 (Joint 
Creators “do not oppose this expansion in principle” but cautioning against adoption of “a 
subjective standard that is difficult to measure”).  
421 Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Reply at 9–10. 

[PAGE 76]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
73 
Education Program (IEP) plan.422  Proponents also emphasized the lack of objective legal 
criteria to follow in making specific decisions about the quality and presentation of 
captions and audio descriptions.423 
After considering the record, the Register concludes that proponents have provided 
convincing evidence of a legitimate need to remediate motion pictures with captions 
bearing significant errors.  For example, proponents testified that YouTube provides 
auto-generated captions (but not audio description) and that machine-generated 
captions are generally not of sufficient quality for accessibility purposes.
424  Such works 
are not “accessible” as contemplated under the current regulatory language, the purpose 
of which is to permit “educational institutions to offer accessible formats of motion 
pictures on an equal basis in conformance with their legal responsibilities.”
425  Because 
the existing exemption permits circumvention “for the purpose of adding captions 
and/or audio description to a motion picture to create an accessible version,” the 
Register concludes that correcting errors in captions or audio description falls 
comfortably within the ordinary meaning of “creat[ing] an accessible version.”  To avoid 
future uncertainty, however, the Register will recommend modifying the regulatory 
language to clarify that the relevant works for the market check requirement are 
“accessible version[s] of sufficient quality.”   
The Register is also persuaded that disability services professionals should have 
appropriate discretion to assess questions of caption or audio description quality based 
on the needs of individual students.  In general, disability laws do not appear to provide 
precise guidance on when captions and descriptions are of sufficient quality, or at least 
are not uniform on that issue.  For example, the FCC’s recommendations for audio 
descriptions provide broad suggestions such as identifying “key visual elements” in 
 
422 See Tr. at 45:16–46:06 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Reid, ATSP). 
423 See Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Reply at 10–11 (noting FCC regulations only address 
broadcast television and permit “de minimis” errors that might not be appropriate in educational 
settings and that FCC recommendations for audio description have not been adopted as binding 
regulation); Tr. at 47:20–49:14 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Reid, ATSP) (testifying that disability laws “don’t 
have detailed regulations for the quality of accommodations” and providing examples). 
424 Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Initial at 29 (Statement of Jason Kapcala, West Virginia 
University) (testifying his university created guidelines for when captioned media is of sufficient 
quality for classroom use, including “punctuation, speaker identifiers, non-verbals, line breaking, 
timing, visual contrast, and caption placement/orientation” and that he and his colleagues “have 
yet to encounter a machine-generated or autogenerated caption program that has been able to 
meet these standards”); Tr. at 55:03–56:21 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Reid, ATSP) (testifying that sometimes 
machine captions “just go[] off the rails” and that in the case of YouTube, videos with autogenerated captions frequently have errors and are missing audio descriptions); see also 
Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Initial at 12–13. 
425 2018 Recommendation at 107. 

[PAGE 77]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
74 
writing a script, and providing examples of things like “facial expressions,” “visual 
comedy,” and “clothing” as items that may, in some circumstances, be key visual 
elements.426  Disability services professionals must therefore exercise judgment when 
remediating inaccessible material, taking into account particular needs of student 
populations.
427  Opponents largely acknowledged the need for flexibility in this 
context.428  The Register therefore will not recommend that the term “sufficient quality” 
be tied to a particular disability law or legal standard.429  
Fifth and finally, proponents seek to revise the regulatory requirement that institutions 
make “reasonable efforts” to obtain an accessible version of an audiovisual work at a 
“fair price.”  Proponents express concern that ”publishers may have latitude to deny the 
application of the exemption by offering to make an accessible version of videos 
included in a textbook available, but at a price higher than the market rate that the EIU 
would pay to caption or describe the video itself or at an untenably later date.”
430  They 
further maintain that “[w]hile an EIU could pay the additional cost, doing so would 
effectively allow the publisher a windfall, at the EIU’s expense, for price discriminating 
against students, faculty, and staff with disabilities on the basis of accessibility, and 
potentially delay the delivery of captions,” and that “the exemption should be modified 
to specify that ‘accessible versions’ must exist at the time an EIU undertakes the 
 
426 Recommendation of the Federal Communications Commission Disability Advisory Committee 
(Oct. 14, 2020), Appendix A, https://www.fcc.gov/file/19830/download.  See also 42 U.S.C. § 
12181(7)(J) (classifying specific educational settings as public accommodations); 28 C.F.R. § 
36.303(a) (public accommodations must “take those steps that may be necessary to ensure that no 
individual with a disability is excluded, denied services, segregated or otherwise treated 
differently”), (b) (providing “examples” of auxiliary aids and services that may be required). 
427 Tr. at 45:16–46:06 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Reid, ATSP) (testifying that remediation is “a conversation 
with a disability services professional about what a student needs in class”). 
428 See Tr. at 28:03–05 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Marks, AACS LA) (“We’re talking about disability services 
officers and professionals, and I think we have confidence in their good-faith judgment”); Tr. at 
51:03–07 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Williams, Joint Creators) (“[W]e would prefer some kind of standard 
here, but we do understand where the other participants are coming from on this, and we 
certainly don’t want to suggest that disability services officers are commonly engaging in 
improper conduct.”). 
429 See, e.g., Tr. at 53:24–54:06 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Kapcala, West Virginia University) (disability services 
professionals “don’t want to caption things” because they “don’t have the resources, the 
personnel, the money, the budgetary considerations to caption things that don’t really need it”).  
The Register is also mindful that tying the sufficiency of captions to FCC regulatory requirements 
could result in circumvention and remediation not desired by a particular student, faculty 
member, or staff member.  See also Tr. at 46:07–16 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Reid, ATSP) (testifying that some 
students are satisfied with captions of less accuracy than FCC requirements, such as a hard-ofhearing student using “good enough” captions to supplement audiovisual material). 
430 Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Initial at 13. 

[PAGE 78]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
75 
‘reasonable effort’ and be available at no additional cost beyond the cost of the 
inaccessible version of the work.”431  To effect this change, proponents request 
modifying the market check language to state that the inability to obtain an accessible 
work includes situations “where a copyright holder has not included an accessible 
version of a motion picture included with a textbook.”432  DVD CCA, AACS LA, and 
Joint Creators do not oppose clarification of the “reasonable efforts” requirement, 
provided any regulatory changes “adhere closely to the factual scenario presented.”433 
The Register agrees that educational institutions should not need to contact publishers 
about creating a new, accessible work of a video that is provided with a textbook.  But 
the Register reiterates that the existing regulatory language does not, and was not 
intended to, require such a situation.
434  As proponents note, the Acting Register in 2018 
crafted the “reasonable efforts” requirement to “to take into account and further 
incentivize the marketplace offerings, including by requiring a reasonable market check 
for usable copies.”435  This is why the 2018 Recommendation discussed the availability of 
audiovisual works on “mainstream platforms such as Netflix or Google Play,” and 
commercial listings on Amazon.436  The market check requirement was described as “a 
reasonable search of available platforms” to determine whether an accessible version 
was already available on the market for purchase.437  Such a requirement does not 
require specific outreach to a publisher to create a new accessible version of a work; it 
simply requires educational institutions to confirm that an accessible version of the work 
is not already available for sale.  The narrow regulatory language offered by proponents 
to clarify this application of the market check requirement is consistent with the 
Register’s understanding of the rule, and the Register therefore recommends its 
inclusion. 
Turning to the section 1201 statutory factors, the Register finds that they favor the 
modifications requested by proponents.  As the Office noted in 2012 and 2018, 
“[g]enerally, public policy favors removing impediments to access for individuals with 
 
431 Id. at 14. 
432 Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2 (May 14, 2021). 
433 Joint Creators Class 3 Opp’n at 4; see also DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 3 Opp’n at 3 (“the 
proposed modifications seem to address real-life uncertainties that the Register should address”). 
434 See 2018 Recommendation at 109 (“By adding a ‘reasonable’ market check requirement, the 
Acting Register does not expect disability services professionals to scour the market, spend 
exorbitant fees, or wait months for an accessible version to arrive from a seller.”). 
435 Id. at 106. 
436 Id. at 105–06. 
437 Id. at 109–10. 

[PAGE 79]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
76 
disabilities.”438  For the first three factors, providing additional flexibility and clarity to 
disability services providers so they can provide accessible motion pictures to students, 
faculty, and staff should increase the availability for use of inaccessible copyrighted 
works, including for educational uses, as well as uses such as criticism, comment, and 
research.  For the fourth statutory factor, because the exemption will still require 
educational institutions to check if accessible versions are available in the market for a 
fair price before engaging in circumvention, the exemption encourages copyright 
owners to create accessible versions and benefit from added sales.   
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA recommends modifying the current exemption to adopt each of proponents’ 
requested expansions, and it proposes adopting the regulatory language in proponents’ 
post-hearing letter.439  NTIA agrees that it is appropriate to expand the class of 
exemption beneficiaries to include faculty and staff, “noting that the uses for staff and 
faculty who may [have] disabilities and who serve at the educational institutions will 
still be largely the same educational uses” as those for students.
440  NTIA supports 
permitting the reuse of remediated materials, subject to “reasonable limitations” such as 
Joint Creators’ suggestion that material be stored in a way that reasonably prevents 
unauthorized dissemination.
441  And NTIA supports modifying the exemption to permit 
proactive remediation and clarifying that the market check requirement is limited to 
works of “sufficient quality.”442 
As explained below, the Register agrees that proponents have met their burden for their 
requested modifications but declines to recommend the specific regulatory language in 
proponents’ post-hearing letter. 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
Proponents have demonstrated that, absent modifications to the current audiovisual 
works exemption for accessibility, students, faculty, and staff at educational institutions 
will face adverse effects in their ability to make noninfringing use of copyrighted 
audiovisual works.  The Register concludes that the requested adjustments will improve 
the operation of this existing exemption.   
In implementing these changes, however, the Register has crafted her own regulatory 
language rather than adopting the language proposed by hearing participants in their 
 
438 Id. at 104 (quoting 2012 Recommendation at 21) (citation omitted). 
439 NTIA Letter at 29, 33 & n.159. 
440 Id. at 30.   
441 Id. at 30–31. 
442 Id. at 32. 

[PAGE 80]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
77 
post-hearing letters.443  The Register appreciates that the parties tried to reach agreement 
on how to implement this exemption, and some of those areas of agreement formed the 
basis for the new regulatory language.444  But for the reasons explained below, aspects of 
both proposals were determined to be inappropriate for inclusion. 
First, the Register has not included changes that would narrow the scope of the current 
exemption.  For example, Joint Creators, DVD CCA, and AACS LA proposed that 
remediation be permitted only for “educational uses,”
445 but the current regulations 
require only that circumvention be part of “a necessary accommodation” under 
disability law.
446  The current exemption language also does not require, as these parties 
proposed, that the addition of captions be done “promptly” after circumvention or that 
users implement specific technical protection measures for the remediated material.447  
Because the Register has already determined that petitioners have made a sufficient 
showing for renewal of the existing exemption,448 she will not consider proposals that 
would have the effect of narrowing its reach.  
In addition, while the Register has declined some limitations suggested by Joint 
Creators, DVD CCA, and AACS LA, the proposed language substantially addresses the 
concerns targeted by those proposals.  For example, while the Register declines to 
 
443 See Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Post-Hearing Resp. (May 14, 2021); Joint Creators et al. 
Class 3 Post-Hearing Resp. Attachment (May 14, 2021). 
444 For example, the Register substantially adopts the language the parties proposed to permit 
proactive remediation and address accessible material of poor quality.  She has, however, slightly 
adjusted proponent’s requested market check language to avoid repetition and provide 
additional clarity.  The Register’s recommended language reads: “including where a copyright 
holder has not provided an accessible version of a motion picture that was included with a 
textbook.”  
445 Joint Creators et al. Class 3 Post-Hearing Resp. Attachment (May 14, 2021) (proposed 
paragraph (i)(A)) (proposing that circumvention be done “to create an accessible version for 
educational uses for individuals with disabilities”). 
446 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(2)(i)(A).  While educational institutions largely provide educational 
programming, they may offer programming that is arguably not educational, such as movie 
nights or performances for students who live on-campus.  Whether an institution has a legal 
obligation to provide accessible material turns on the accessibility needs of students, faculty, and 
staff, not whether a particular activity the institution engages in is “educational.”  For that reason, 
the exemption for this class ties circumvention to the “accessibility needs” of individuals with 
disabilities.  
447 See Joint Creators et al. Class 3 Post-Hearing Resp. Attachment (May 14, 2021) (proposed 
paragraphs (iv), (vii)). 
448 NPRM at 65,298 (“Based on the information provided in the renewal petition and the lack of 
opposition, the Office believes that the conditions that led to adoption of this exemption are likely 
to continue during the next triennial period.”). 

[PAGE 81]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
78 
modify the market check requirement to address “accessing” a version of sufficient 
quality, including by digital transmission, the market check already includes those 
concerns.  As explained in 2018, the market check envisions “a reasonable search of 
available platforms such as . . . Netflix,” making clear that streaming services are within 
the scope of the requirement.449    And although the Register declines to require the 
“prompt” creation of an accessible version after circumvention, the exemption does not 
permit educational institutions to circumvent a large body of works based on 
speculation about future needs.  Circumvention must be done “for the purpose of 
adding captions and/or audio description . . . to create an accessible version,” and the 
educational institution must first “ha[ve] a reasonable belief that the motion picture will 
be used for a specific future activity of the institution.” 
Accordingly, the Register recommends that the Librarian designate the following class:  
(i) Motion pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in 17 
U.S.C. 101, where the motion picture is lawfully acquired on a DVD protected 
by the Content Scramble System, on a Blu-ray disc protected by the Advanced 
Access Content System, or via a digital transmission protected by a 
technological measure, where:  
(A) Circumvention is undertaken by a disability services office or other 
unit of a kindergarten through twelfth-grade educational institution, 
college, or university engaged in and/or responsible for the provision 
of accessibility services for the purpose of adding captions and/or 
audio description to a motion picture to create an accessible version for 
students, faculty, or staff with disabilities;  
(B) The educational institution unit in paragraph (b)(2)(i)(A) of this 
section has a reasonable belief that the motion picture will be used for 
a specific future activity of the institution and, after a reasonable effort, 
has determined that an accessible version of sufficient quality cannot 
be obtained at a fair market price or in a timely manner, including 
where a copyright holder has not provided an accessible version of a 
motion picture that was included with a textbook; and  
(C) The accessible versions are provided to students or educators and 
stored by the educational institution in a manner intended to 
reasonably prevent unauthorized further dissemination of a work.  
(ii) For purposes of paragraph (b)(2) of this section, 
 
449 2018 Recommendation at 109–10.   

[PAGE 82]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
79 
(A) “Audio description” means an oral narration that provides an 
accurate rendering of the motion picture; 
(B) “Accessible version of sufficient quality” means a version that in the 
reasonable judgment of the educational institution unit has captions 
and/or audio description that are sufficient to meet the accessibility 
needs of students, faculty, or staff with disabilities and are 
substantially free of errors that would materially interfere with those 
needs; and 
(C) Accessible materials created pursuant to this exemption and stored 
pursuant to paragraph (b)(2)(i)(C) of this section may be reused by the 
educational institution unit to meet the accessibility needs of students, 
faculty, or staff with disabilities pursuant to paragraphs (b)(2)(i)(A) and 
(B) of this section. 
 
  

[PAGE 83]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
80 
D. Proposed Class 4: Audiovisual Works—Livestream Recording  
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption 
Petitioner FloSports, Inc. filed a petition requesting an exemption to:  
enable a livestreaming service to provide individual viewers, via a virtual 
digital video recorder (‘vDVR’), with access to a recording on a server for 
fair use purposes.”  Users obtaining access to the copyrighted works 
would be authenticated users of such a livestream service.  Current 
technological barriers to circumvention . . . are the livestreaming 
technologies used, which are intended to result in only ephemeral 
recordings.450  
Following this initial petition, FloSports did not submit legal arguments or evidence or 
participate in the public hearings in support of its petition.  FSF filed comments 
generally supporting this exemption, but did not provide any evidence or substantive 
argument regarding the merits of the specific proposal.451  Joint Creators filed brief 
comments opposing the proposed exemption as “fatally unclear” as well as likely 
infringing, and noting the lack of administrative record received in support of the 
exemption.452 
b. Overview of Issues 
FloSports generally describes the proposed class as covering livestreams of “sports and 
other competitive events” but elsewhere states that the relevant works are “audiovisual 
recordings of musical performances as identified in 17 U.S.C. 102(a)(6) and 17 U.S.C. 
106(a)(5),” including “any and all works for which audiovisual recordings may be made 
and used as fair use” and “individual school performances.”453  FloSports states that it 
cannot access these works because “access to live stream audiovisual works is controlled 
by HTTP Live Streaming,” and argues that this restricts a user’s ability “to view the 
broadcast at a later time.”454  FSF, supporting FloSports, argues that these restrictions 
 
450 FloSports Class 4 Pet. at 2. 
451 FSF Class 4 Initial at 2. 
452 Joint Creators Class 4 Opp’n at 2. 
453 FloSports Class 4 Pet. at 2. 
454 Id. 

[PAGE 84]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
81 
limit users’ ability to make fair uses of the live stream content, such as “for the purpose 
of commentary or criticism.”455 
Joint Creators, in opposing the proposed class, argue that “it is very unlikely FloSport’s 
uses of [the copyrighted works] would be lawful, even if only excerpts were used.”456 
2. Discussion 
As noted in the NPRM, the petition in this class is insufficiently clear to meet the 
statutory requirement to identify “a particular class of copyrighted works.”457  Because it 
appeared from the petition that FloSports operates a commercial livestreaming service, 
the Office further requested “additional information regarding the intended 
noninfringing uses, including whether it would be appropriate to clarify that the 
petition is directed at facilitating educational, noncommercial uses.”
458  Additionally, the 
Office asked for supporting evidence that the claimed adverse effects were attributable 
to TPMs and not simply to licensing markets.
459  The NPRM stated that “absent such 
clarification, the Office will decline further consideration of the petition.”460  FloSports 
did not file subsequent comments or participate in the public hearings.  
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA agrees with the Register that an exemption for this class is not warranted because 
the record lacks “evidence or further details to support or clarify this petition.”
461  NTIA 
notes that the Office sought further clarification for this petition in the NPRM, but 
proponents did not file any comments or participate in the hearings.  Moreover, “NTIA 
concurs in the assessment that this petition is overly broad.”
462  Though NTIA states that 
“in certain limited circumstances” livestream recording of “short clips may qualify as 
fair use,”
463 it concludes that in this proceeding “the petitioner did not write a clear and 
concise petition that the Librarian could act upon in this round and did not respond to 
requests for clarification.”464 
 
455 FSF Class 4 Initial at 2. 
456 Joint Creators Class 4 Opp’n at 2. 
457 NPRM at 65,304. 
458 Id. 
459 Id. 
460 Id. 
461 NTIA Letter at 35. 
462 Id. at 36. 
463 Id.  
464 Id. 

[PAGE 85]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
82 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
It remains unclear what types of works FloSports seeks to have included in Class 4. 
Similarly, the record contains no information to suggest that the class would be limited 
to non-infringing uses.  The Office made clear in the NPRM that these ambiguities must 
be resolved before the Register could consider any recommendation.  FloSports, 
however, filed no additional comments nor participated in the public hearings.  In light 
of the unanswered questions regarding scope of the copyrighted works and uses to 
which the exemption would apply, the Register cannot recommend adoption of 
proposed Class 4. 
  

[PAGE 86]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
83 
E. Proposed Class 5: Audiovisual Works—Preservation and Replacement  
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption 
Proposed Class 5 seeks to permit circumvention of technological protection measures on 
motion pictures (including television shows and videos) stored on DVDs or Blu-ray 
discs that are no longer reasonably available in the marketplace, to enable libraries, 
archives, and museums to make preservation and replacement copies of those works.465 
The exemption was proposed by LCA, which explains that the exemption is 
“necessitated by the deterioration of the discs in the collections of libraries, archives, and 
museums, for which replacements often are not available.”466  LCA’s proposal would 
permit libraries, archives, and museums to create preservation copies of discs that are 
damaged or deteriorating, as well as to engage in “preemptive preservation” of discs 
that have not yet begun to deteriorate.467 
In response to concerns raised by opponents that the initial proposal was overbroad, in 
its reply comments LCA proposed narrower regulatory language.  The updated 
proposal specified that circumvention may not be carried out for commercial advantage, 
and the institution would have to make a reasonable effort to obtain an unused and 
undamaged replacement copy at a fair price prior to the circumvention.  
LCA’s current proposed language is as follows: 
(i) Motion pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in 17 
U.S.C. § 101, where the motion picture is lawfully acquired on a DVD protected 
by the Content Scramble System, or on a Blu-ray disc protected by the Advanced 
Access Content System, solely for the purpose of lawful preservation of the 
motion picture, by an eligible library, archives, or museum, where:  
(A) such activity is carried out without any purpose of direct or indirect 
commercial advantage;  
(B) the eligible institution, after a reasonable effort, determined that an unused 
and undamaged replacement copy cannot be obtained at a fair price; and  
(C) the preservation copy is not distributed or made available outside of the 
physical premises of the eligible library, archives, or museum.  
 
465 LCA Class 5 Pet. at 2.  
466 LCA Class 5 Initial at 2.  
467 Id. at 2–3. 

[PAGE 87]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
84 
(ii) For purposes of the exemption in paragraph (i) of this section, a library, 
archives, or museum is considered “eligible” if—  
(A) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are open to the public 
and/or are routinely made available to researchers who are not affiliated with the 
library, archives, or museum;  
(B) The library, archives, or museum has a public service mission;  
(C) The library, archives, or museum’s trained staff or volunteers provide 
professional services normally associated with libraries, archives, or museums;  
(D) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are composed of lawfully 
acquired and/or licensed materials; and  
(E) The library, archives, or museum implements reasonable digital security 
measures as appropriate for the activities permitted by this paragraph.468 
Further, LCA notes that proposed classes 14(a) and 14(b) seek to expand the videogame 
and software preservation exemptions to include off-premises uses, and requests that 
the Class 5 exemption be expanded to include off-premises uses of the preserved motion 
pictures if the Register recommends granting those petitions.469 
Additional comments in support of the petition were filed by Alisha Cunzio and FSF.  
Comments in opposition were filed by Joint Creators and DVD CCA and AACS LA.   
 
b. Overview of Issues 
Libraries, archives, and museums have large collections of motion pictures stored on 
DVDs and Blu-ray discs.  The reflective aluminum data layer on those DVDs and Bluray discs can be damaged as a result of chemical reactions, light, and scratches.
470  Many 
factors lead to this damage, including user errors, improper storage, playing discs on 
laptops, and manufacturing or packaging errors.471  As a result, a substantial percentage 
of the DVDs and Blu-ray discs in the institutions’ possession are currently damaged or 
deteriorating.472  Proponents claim that in some cases, particularly for niche or art house 
 
468 LCA Class 5 Reply at 6.  
469 LCA Class 5 Initial at 2.  
470 Id. at 4–5.   
471 Id. at 5–7.   
472 See, e.g., id. at 7 (Ms. Tanasse reporting that 30 percent of University of California, Berkeley’s 
DVD collection is damaged or deteriorating).   

[PAGE 88]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
85 
motion pictures, replacements are not reasonably available.473  Proponents seek an 
exemption that would permit libraries, archives, and museums to circumvent TPMs on 
DVDs and Blu-ray discs for the purpose of preserving and creating replacement copies 
of the motion pictures stored on those media to enable researchers and students to 
access them.    
Proponents argue that the proposed uses are likely non-infringing based on section 108 
and fair use.  They contend that the exemption builds on existing exemptions for the 
preservation of video games and software, in which the Register concluded that the 
creation of preservation and replacement copies by libraries, archives and museums was 
likely to be non-infringing when the copyrighted works were not reasonably available in 
the marketplace.
474  Opponents counter that the market for motion pictures differs 
considerably from the market for outdated video games and computer software.  Joint 
Creators argue that “[r]elatively few people want to use old software programs outside 
of research uses, whereas back-catalogue motion pictures are frequently commercially 
viable, in high demand, and actively made available in a variety of formats by copyright 
owners through legitimate distribution channels.”
475  Additionally, according to DVD 
CCA and AACS LA, the “distribution strategies for motion pictures are dynamic and 
varied, from movie windowing among platforms, to custom licenses for varied uses and 
users, including libraries.”476   
The proposed exemption would permit qualifying institutions to make physical or 
digital copies of the motion pictures and to make any digital copies available outside the 
premises of the institution.  Proponents argue that it would be nonsensical to require 
preservation and replacement copies to be made on discs when those discs will 
themselves degrade over time.477  Opponents are concerned that if digital copies are 
permitted, institutions will seek to “space-shift their collection of copies of films 
distributed on DVD and Blu-ray discs to computers, and subsequently launch online 
streaming services.”478  They therefore argue that any preservation or replacement copies 
should be made on DVDs or Blu-ray discs rather than stored on computer servers.479  If 
server copies are permitted, opponents insist that the copies should be accessible only on 
 
473 Tr. at 603:15-19 (Apr. 19, 2021) (Band, LCA) (describing research value of “niche films, foreign 
films . . . T.V. programs that are dated” that will not be released again). 
474 LCA Class 5 Initial at 4.   
475 Joint Creators Class 5 Opp’n at 3.   
476 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 5 Opp’n at 1.   
477 Tr. at 605:20–606:10, 607:4–15 (Apr. 19, 2021) (Band, LCA; Tanasse, University of California, 
Berkeley).     
478 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 5 Opp’n at 21.   
479 Id. at 5–6.   

[PAGE 89]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
86 
the premises of the copying institution to avoid interfering with the existing marketplace 
for selling and streaming motion pictures.480 
Proponents seek to allow qualifying institutions to engage in “preemptive preservation” 
of discs that have not yet begun to deteriorate.481  Proponents reason that “the objective 
of preservation is better achieved if the preservation occurs before the copy of the 
motion picture is damaged or deteriorating.”
482  They fear it may not be possible to 
effectively capture a motion picture if the institution must wait until the discs are 
already damaged before it can make preservation or replacement copies.  Opponents 
argue that preemptive preservation is simply space-shifting and unlikely to be noninfringing.
483  In their view, section 108 does not authorize preemptive preservation, and 
such activity is unlikely to be fair use because it will interfere with the existing and 
potential market for motion pictures.484      
Finally, opponents argue that the numerous services offering downloadable or streamed 
copies of motion pictures make it unlikely that many motion pictures will become 
inaccessible to researchers and students, and therefore no exemption is warranted.485  In 
their view, should an exemption nevertheless be granted, any market check requirement 
should include determination of whether unused and undamaged DVDs or Blu-ray 
discs are available for purchase, as well as whether the motion picture at issue is 
available for streaming through a licensed source.486 
For the reasons discussed below, the Register recommends that the proposed exemption 
be granted in part.   
2. Discussion 
a. Works Protected by Copyright 
This class involves the use of motion pictures contained on DVDs or Blu-ray discs.  
There is no dispute that at least some of these works are protected by copyright,487 and 
 
480 Joint Creators Class 5 Opp’n at 11–12. 
481 LCA Class 5 Initial at 2–3. 
482 LCA Class 5 Reply at 3.   
483 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 5 Opp’n at 3–4.   
484 Joint Creators Class 5 Opp’n at 4, 8.   
485 Id. at 3.   
486 Id. at 11.   
487 See 2015 Recommendation at 83 (“copyrighted motion pictures are not widely available in 
formats not subject to technological protections”).  

[PAGE 90]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
87 
therefore proponents have successfully established that the relevant TPMs control access 
to copyrightable works. 
b. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Proponents advance two bases for finding their proposed activities to be noninfringing: 
(1) the section 108 exceptions for library and archival preservation and replacement 
copies, and (2) the fair use doctrine.   
i. Section 108 
Section 108(c) permits an eligible library or archives to make three copies of a published 
work solely for the purpose of replacing a copy that is damaged, deteriorating, lost, or 
stolen, “or if the existing format in which the work is stored has become obsolete.”488  To 
qualify for this exception, the institution must have made a reasonable effort to identify 
an unused replacement that can be obtained at a fair price.489  If the library or archives 
makes a replacement copy in digital format, it may not distribute or make the digital 
copy available to the public outside its premises.490 
Proponents contend that certain of the activities for which they seek an exemption are 
within the scope of section 108(c).  The proposed exemptions adopts many aspects of 
section 108(c), including permitting eligible institutions to make up to three copies of 
works that are damaged or deteriorating, and requiring eligible institutions to make a 
reasonable effort to determine that no unused and undamaged replacement copy can be 
obtained at a fair price.  The Register thus agrees that insofar as proponents’ request 
would authorize libraries and archives to make up to three copies of a motion picture for 
on-premises replacement purposes from a disc that is damaged or deteriorating, after a 
market search for unused replacement copies, the uses likely are noninfringing under 
section 108(c). 
Section 108 does not, however, authorize all of the exemption’s proposed uses.  First, the 
exemption seeks to allow the creation of preservation copies, in addition to replacement 
copies, of the copyrighted works.  Section 108(b) authorizes libraries and archives to 
make three preservation copies of unpublished works, but section 108 contains no 
provision for creating preservation copies of published works such as the motion 
pictures at issue here.  Second, even with respect to replacement copies, section 108(c) on 
its own does not allow libraries and archives to make more than three copies.
491  As 
noted in the Register’s 2018 Recommendation, the Copyright Office has a “longstanding 
 
488 17 U.S.C. § 108(c).  
489 Id. § 108(c)(1).  
490 Id. § 108(c)(2). 
491 LCA Class 5 Initial at 3.  

[PAGE 91]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
88 
view that the three-copy limit does not adequately accommodate the requirements of 
modern digital preservation practices.”492  Finally, the exemption seeks authorization for 
libraries and archives to preemptively create preservation and replacement copies of 
discs that are not yet damaged or deteriorated and for institutions to be permitted to 
provide off-premises access to digital replacement copies of the motion pictures.  Each of 
those proposals goes beyond what is authorized by section 108(c).   
Because not all of the proposed uses are protected by section 108, proponents must 
demonstrate that their additional proposed activities are likely noninfringing on 
separate legal grounds.     
ii. Fair Use 
1) Applicability of Fair Use 
The Register first addresses a threshold contention by opponents that preservation uses 
should be analyzed only pursuant to section 108 and that the Register therefore should 
not look to fair use as a basis for expanding the exemption beyond the limitations of 
section 108.
493   
The Acting Register rejected this argument in her analysis of the 2018 proposed 
exemption to permit circumvention for the purpose of preserving software and 
software-dependent materials.494  The Acting Register detailed the Office’s long history 
in finding that certain preservation activities beyond the scope of section 108 can be 
noninfringing fair uses.495  Similarly, in her 2015 Recommendations, the Register noted 
that section 108 “provides useful and important guidance as to Congress’s intent 
regarding the nature and scope of legitimate preservation activities,” but nonetheless 
analyzed the proposed exemption for video game preservation under fair use.496  
Likewise, here the Register will consider proponents’ arguments that their activities are 
likely fair uses. 
 
492 2018 Recommendation at 237.   
493 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 5 Opp’n at 4 (“preservation of a copy of a movie distributed on 
optical disc is limited to the statutory framework provided by Section 108.”); Joint Creators Class 
5 Opp’n at 4–5 (encouraging Office to use only Section 108 as a guideline to assess whether the 
preservation uses at issue are noninfringing).   
494 2018 Recommendation at 238–40.   
495 Id. at 239–40 (citing 2015 Recommendation at 169, 234–37, 300–03, 368–71; 2006 
Recommendation at 29–30; 2003 Recommendation at 54–55). 
496 2015 Recommendation at 342. 

[PAGE 92]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
89 
2) Fair Use Analysis 
As discussed above, the proposed uses not protected under section 108 are the copying 
published works for the purpose of preservation, making more than three copies of a 
work for use as a replacement copy for one that is damaged or deteriorating, making 
copies from discs that are not damaged or deteriorating, and permitting off-premises use 
of digital replacement copies.   
With respect to the first fair use factor, the purpose and character of the use, proponents 
rely heavily on the Office’s previous findings that reproduction by libraries, archives, 
and museums for the purpose of preservation is a “favored purpose.”497  The Office 
reached that conclusion based on the legislative history of the Copyright Act and case 
law.  A 1976 House Report accompanying the Act indicated that “the making of 
duplicate copies for purposes of archival preservation certainly falls within the scope of 
‘fair use.’”498  Courts have also recognized that copying for preservation purposes is of 
benefit to the public.499   
Opponents assert that creating preservation and replacement copies of motion pictures 
is not transformative because it allows patrons to view the original works in their 
entirety without adding any new material that has a different purpose or character.
500  
DVD CCA and AACS LA characterize proponents’ claim that the purpose of the 
reproduction is for preservation as “pretext,” and argue that the real purpose is to create 
server copies, which they believe amounts to non-transformative space-shifting.501  DVD 
CCA and AACS LA argue that the not-for-profit nature of the libraries does not override 
the character and use of this space-shifting because the libraries stand to profit from the 
use of the motion pictures without paying the customary price.502  Similarly, Joint 
 
497 2018 Recommendation at 242.  
498 H.R. REP. NO. 94-1476, at 73, reprinted in 1976 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 5687. 
499 See, e.g., Sudeman v. Seajay Soc’y, Inc., 142 F.3d 194, 203 (4th Cir. 1998); Authors Guild, Inc. v. 
Google Inc., 954 F. Supp. 2d 282, 293 (S.D.N.Y. 2013).  
500 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 5 Opp’n at 9–11 (citing Disney Enterprises, Inc. v. VidAngel, Inc., 
869 F.3d 848 (9th Cir. 2017) and Kelly v. Arriba, 336 F.3d 811 (9th Cir. 2003)); Joint Creators Class 5 
Opp’n at 7 (“[t]he purpose and character of replacement copies is not transformative: the 
institutions would simply create new copies of works and provide access to them to patrons who 
would view them in their entirety, all without payment to copyright owners.”).   
501 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 5 Opp’n at 9. 
502 Id. at 11, 13 (citing Harper & Row Publishers, Inc. v. Nation Enters., 471 U.S. 539, 562 (1985)). 

[PAGE 93]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
90 
Creators argue that copying by libraries is commercial even if consumers do not pay to 
view the motion pictures because “it supplants marketplace transactions.”503 
With respect to creating preservation copies, even if the reproduction is not considered 
transformative, the Register agrees with proponents that the legislative history of section 
107 and case law suggest that library and archival preservation is a favored purpose 
under fair use analysis.  Congress also recognized the importance of preservation when 
enacting section 108(b).  The proposed exemption includes the key conditions of sections 
108(a) and (b) for preservation copies, including requiring the institution to meet certain 
eligibility requirements and to have a copy of the work in its possession, and prohibiting 
the use from being made for purposes of commercial advantage. 504  An institution’s 
creation of a copy for strictly preservation purposes is also not commercial.  Thus, the 
first factor weighs in favor of fair use for the creation of preservation copies of published 
works.   
This conclusion is not altered by the fact that an eligible institution would be permitted 
to store the replacement copies on a computer server, and would not be limited to 
keeping them on new DVD or Blu-ray discs.  Opponents argue that “the fact that one 
library bought one copy of a DVD twenty years ago certainly does not entitle the library 
to copy and make that movie available in the manner and format it sees fit, to its patrons 
and potentially the entire world, in perpetuity, without permission from or 
compensation to the copyright owner.”505  As noted, however, the Office has previously 
taken into account the legitimate interest that libraries, archives, and museums have in 
preserving materials in a manner consistent with current best practices.  Here, 
proponents note that it would make little sense to require libraries to copy motion 
pictures onto discs when those discs will degrade over time and will not reliably and 
effectively preserve the motion pictures.506  Moreover, the creation of a server copy 
under the proposed exemption is narrowly tailored to situations in which reproduction 
is necessary for preservation and replacement because the disc is damaged or 
deteriorating and copies of the motion picture are not commercially available.  The 
 
503 Joint Creators Class 5 Opp’n at 7 (citing Wall Data Inc. v. Los Angeles Cty. Sheriff’s Dep’t, 447 F.3d 
769, 781–82 (9th Cir. 2006) (“We believe that ‘widespread use’ of hard drive imaging in excess of 
one’s licenses could seriously impact the market for Wall Data’s product.”); A&M Records, Inc. v. 
Napster, Inc., 239 F.3d 1004, 1017 (9th Cir. 2001) (“Having digital downloads available for free on 
the Napster system necessarily harms the copyright holders’ attempts to charge for the same 
downloads.”)). 
504 See 17 U.S.C. § 108(a), (b).  
505 Joint Creators Class 5 Opp’n at 8.  
506 Tr. at 605:20–606:10, 607:04–15 (Apr. 19, 2021) (Band, LCA; Tanasse, University of California, 
Berkeley).     

[PAGE 94]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
91 
purpose of the copies is to serve as a replacement for discs that are damaged or 
deteriorating, not merely to create a copy in a preferred format. 
The same cannot be said for preemptive preservation, which would allow institutions to 
make replacement copies even where the discs are not currently damaged or 
deteriorating.  Neither the legislative history of fair use nor the text of section 108 
indicates that the replacement of non-damaged copies would be non-infringing.  
Proponents have cited no authority for the proposition that making replacement copies 
of undamaged works is fair use.  Making copies of discs because they might be damaged 
in the future is purely speculative and does not serve a current purpose that benefits the 
public.  In this sense, preemptive preservation is essentially a type of format-shifting, 
which the Office has repeatedly found unlikely to be a fair use.507  The Register 
accordingly finds that the first fair use factor weighs against fair use with respect to 
making replacement copies of works that are not damaged or deteriorating.  
The Register concludes that the second fair use factor, the nature of the copyrighted 
work, weighs against a finding of fair use.  It is well established that motion pictures are 
creative and thus at the “core” of copyright’s protective purposes.508  This factor, 
however, is of limited significance in the analysis of this class.509   
Under the third fair use factor, the amount and substantiality of the portion used in 
relation to the copyrighted work as a whole, the Register finds that copying the entire 
work is reasonable in light of the purpose of the copying: creating preservation and 
replacement copies.  An incomplete preservation or replacement copy would not serve 
that purpose effectively.510  Courts have recognized that reproducing a work in its 
entirety does not necessarily not weigh against a finding of fair use when such copying 
is necessary to achieve a legitimate purpose.511 
With respect to the fourth fair use factor, the Register finds it significant that the 
proposed exemption requires institutions to conduct a market check to determine if 
 
507 See 2018 Recommendation at 121; 2015 Recommendation at 122–24. 
508 See Harper & Row v. Nation Enterprises, 471 U.S. 539, 563 (1985) (“The law generally recognizes a 
greater need to disseminate factual works than works of fiction or fantasy”); 2018 
Recommendation at 45; 2015 Recommendation at 70; 2012 Recommendation at 128.  
509 2018 Recommendation at 243. 
510 Monsarrat v. Newman, 514 F. Supp 3d 386, 392 (D. Mass. Jan. 21, 2021) (“a full reproduction is 
consistent with historical and preservationist purposes”). 
511 See, e.g., Swatch Grp. Mgmt. Servs. Ltd. v. Bloomberg L.P., 756 F.3d 73, 90 (2d Cir. 2014) (finding 
third factor was neutral when entire work was copied); Núñez v. Caribbean Int’l News Corp., 235 
F.3d 18, 24 (1st Cir. 2000) (holding copying of entire picture was “of little consequence” to court’s 
analysis).   

[PAGE 95]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
92 
unused and undamaged copies of the motion picture are available at a reasonable price.  
The parties disagree, however, as to whether the market check provision should be 
limited to physical copies in the marketplace, or should require institutions to also 
determine that the work is not reasonably available through a streaming service.  
Opponents contend that “[f]or the vast majority of titles, there is little to no risk that 
researchers will be unable to obtain access for purposes of study, comment or criticism,” 
because many motion pictures “remain available through streaming services, download 
services, and on-demand cable and satellite services.”
512  Opponents express concern 
that the proposed use of the works would interfere with existing and potential markets 
for licensing motion pictures, including licenses specifically designed for public and 
academic libraries.513  They argue that if a motion picture is accessible through a 
streaming service, institutions should not be permitted to make preservation or 
replacement copies.   
LCA maintains that a library should be permitted to make a copy of a motion picture in 
its collection “even if that title is available on a streaming service at that particular point 
in time.”514  It explains that a motion picture may be available for streaming at a certain 
time but may be removed by the service at a later date.515  Even if a motion picture is 
available through a streaming service, LCA argues that supplementary materials 
included on the disc may not be available when streaming.516  LCA also contends that 
patrons cannot make clips from the streamed version for use in presentations 
commenting on or criticizing the motion picture.
517   
The Register concludes that proponents have not demonstrated that a motion picture 
that is available for streaming or digital download is not an adequate replacement copy.  
Streaming services are not unique in changing their offerings periodically.  At the point 
at which the institution is unable to stream the motion picture, it will have satisfied the 
market check requirement.  Though bonus content may not be streamed with the main 
motion picture, that bonus content may be available on the market.  Indeed, opponents 
demonstrated that discs containing all of the bonus materials LCA identified are 
 
512 Joint Creators Class 5 Opp’n at 8–9 & Appendix (providing list of services). 
513 Joint Creators Class 5 Opp’n at 8; DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 5 Opp’n at 17–19.  See also Tr. at 
637:19–40:22 (Apr. 19, 2021) (Evjen, Swank) (describing Swank Digital Campus offerings); Tr. at 
641:15–44:7 (Apr. 19, 2021) (Taylor, DVD CCA) (presentation regarding offerings from Hoopla 
and Kanopy).  
514 LCA Class 5 Reply at 4. 
515 Id.   
516 LCA Class 5 Initial at 8–9.   
517 Tr. at 631:03–09 (Apr. 19, 2021) (McCleskey, Hofstra U.); Tr. at 648:12–22 (Apr. 19, 2021) (Band, 
LCA). 

[PAGE 96]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
93 
available for purchase or via a streaming service.518  In any event, bonus materials on a 
disc are distinct motion picture works from the main movie on the disc, and if they are 
not available on the market, they would be covered by the exemption.  And an existing 
exemption permits faculty and students who seek to comment on or criticize a motion 
picture to circumvent TPMs on motion pictures made available via a digital 
transmission.519  The Register concludes that the market check requirement should 
encompass streaming services to minimize disruption to the existing marketplace 
through which motion pictures are made available to students and researchers.   
 
While the reasonableness of a market check is a fact-specific matter, ordinarily an 
institution should search at least one major seller of physical product, such as 
Amazon.com, and at least one major search engine, to determine whether the motion 
picture is being offered for sale in downloadable form or as a new physical product.  The 
institution also should determine whether the motion picture is available for streaming 
to libraries, archives, and museums through a major streaming service, such as Netflix, 
Hulu, Apple TV, HBO Max, or Amazon Prime.  This inquiry may take into account the 
fact that some major streaming services require that content be accessed for personal use 
only or provide other restrictions that would prohibit libraries, archives, and museums 
from using those services to make motion pictures available to their patrons.
520  The 
institution should also search streaming services that focus on educational streaming, 
such as Swank – Digital Campus, Hoopla, Kanopy, Alexander Street, Passion River, 
Roco Films Educational, and Collective Eye Films.   
If the institution circumvents only after conducting this type of market check, the use is 
unlikely to interfere with the current or potential value of or market for the original.  
Moreover, the prohibition on institutions making copies of the motion pictures available 
outside their premises makes it less likely that copies made pursuant to this exemption 
would function as substitutes for licensed versions of the motion pictures that can be 
streamed in other locations.  Subject to these conditions, the Register concludes that the 
fourth factor weighs in favor of fair use. 
Balancing the fair use factors, the Register finds that proponents have met their burden 
in demonstrating that the proposed exemption is likely to be a fair use with respect to 
making copies of DVDs or Blu-ray discs for the purpose of preservation and 
replacement copies of DVDs or Blu-ray discs that are damaged or deteriorated.  The 
 
518 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 5 Opp’n at 27–28; Joint Creators Class 5 Opp’n at 8–9.     
519 See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1)(ii). 
520 LCA Class 5 Reply at 3–4.   

[PAGE 97]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
94 
Register finds that proponents have not met their burden in demonstrating that copying 
DVDs or Blu-ray discs that are not damaged or deteriorated is likely to be fair use.   
3) Off-Premises Access 
As noted, LCA’s proposed exemption language would not permit access to the 
replacement copies outside the premises of an eligible institution.  In its comments, 
however, LCA notes that the Office is separately considering a request under Class 14 to 
expand the current software and videogame preservation exemptions to permit offsite 
access.  LCA requests that the Class 5 exemption be similarly expanded to include offpremises uses if the Register recommends granting the expansion in Class 14.
521   
The Register must decline LCA’s request to consider the arguments and evidence 
submitted as part of Class 14 in the context of this class.  The two proposals involve 
contexts that differ in significant ways.  As discussed above, the market for out-of-date 
computer software differs considerably from the market for old or limited-release 
motion pictures.  Proponents have made no particularized showing regarding a need for 
off-premises use of motion pictures by researchers, or addressed how providing such 
access could affect the market for licensed access to motion pictures.  LCA argues that 
closures of physical buildings during the COVID-19 pandemic demonstrates the need 
for patrons to be able to access works from outside the walls of a qualifying 
institution.
522  It also maintains that “off-premises access could be afforded to authorized 
students and researchers without the motion pictures being available to the general 
public for entertainment purposes,” but does not provide specifics as to how this could 
be accomplished.523  Proponents have, therefore, failed to meet their burden of 
producing evidence from which the Register could evaluate whether off-premises use 
would be a fair use for purposes of an exemption.524 
 
c. Causation 
DVD CCA and AACS LA assert that CSS is not typically used on a DVD unless the 
creator expects to sell at least 5,000 copies of the disc, so that it is “highly unlikely” that 
many of the motion pictures identified by proponents as no longer available in the 
marketplace are protected by CSS.525  However, DVD CCA and AACS LA failed to cite 
any evidence in support of this proposition in their opposition comments or at the 
 
521 LCA Class 5 Initial at 2.  
522 LCA Class 5 Reply at 2.  
523 Id. 
524 See Section 1201 Report at 110 (explaining that proponents have the burden of production).   
525 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 5 Opp’n at 24.  

[PAGE 98]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
95 
hearing.526  The Register, therefore, finds that the proponents have satisfied their burden 
of demonstrating that the prohibition on circumvention is the cause of a number of 
adverse effects.  Without the prohibition on circumvention, libraries and archives would 
be able to create preservation and replacement copies of damaged or deteriorated 
motion pictures contained on discs that are no longer available in the commercial 
marketplace.    
d. Asserted Adverse Effects  
Because this proposed exemption is limited to circumvention for non-commercial 
preservation and replacement purposes, and the parties’ arguments under the first three 
section 1201 statutory factors address substantially overlapping issues, the Register 
considers these factors together.  
Proponents argue that circumvention is necessary because disc rot and manufacturing 
issues have damaged many discs containing motion pictures.  If the discs are not usable, 
they contend, and other usable copies of those motion pictures are not reasonably 
available in the marketplace, the copyrighted works will no longer be available to 
researchers, educators and students.
527  They argue that “[i]f motion pictures are not 
properly preserved by cultural heritage institutions, the loss would be incalculable.”528  
In their view, permitting preservation and replacement copies to be made under certain 
circumstances would increase the availability of the copyrighted works for noncommercial archival, preservation and educational purposes, including criticism, 
comment, teaching, scholarship, and research.
529   
Opponents contend that copyright owners rely on TPMs when they make motion 
pictures available on DVD and Blu-ray discs at low price points, which increases the 
general availability of the motion pictures for criticism, comment, reporting, teaching, 
scholarship and research.  If libraries and archives can circumvent the TPMs, they argue, 
over time copyright owners may not offer motion pictures in as many formats or at low 
prices.530     
The Register finds that, on balance, these statutory factors favor the requested 
exemption.  Proponents have provided substantial evidence that granting the exemption 
would benefit preservation, education, and scholarship by making available motion 
pictures that might otherwise be lost to history.  The ability of researchers to view 
 
526 Id.; Tr. at 604:24–05:05 (Apr. 19, 2021) (Rubel, U.S. Copyright Office; Taylor, DVD CCA).  
527 LCA Class 5 Initial at 10.  
528 Id.  
529 Id. 
530 Joint Creators Class 5 Opp’n at 10–11.   

[PAGE 99]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
96 
motion pictures no longer available in the marketplace is likely to promote commentary 
and teaching in a variety of disciplines.  The exemption’s limitation to works that are not 
available in the marketplace makes it unlikely to affect copyright owners’ decisions to 
offer motion pictures on DVD or Blu-ray discs or to change their pricing models.      
With respect to the fourth statutory criterion, the effect of circumvention of on the 
market for or value of copyrighted works, for the reasons discussed above in reference 
to the fourth fair use factor, the Register finds that granting the proposed exemption is 
unlikely to adversely affect the market for or value of the motion pictures in the 
proposed class.  DVD CCA and AACS LA argue that the proposed uses would 
constitute a “profound setback” for businesses that make motion pictures available 
under licensing arrangements.
531  Joint Creators posit that because those licenses would 
become less valuable, fewer services would offer licenses to educational and nonprofit 
institutions, and copyright owners would have less incentive to pursue new business 
models through which to make their works available.532  It seems implausible, however, 
that enabling libraries, archives, and museums that already own physical copies of the 
motion pictures to preserve and replace damaged or deteriorated discs will significantly 
affect the licensing market.  Additionally, the limitation of the class to motion pictures 
that are no longer commercially available would seem to minimize the risk that the 
exemption would interfere with existing or potential licensing arrangements.  In fact, the 
exemption’s requirement that institutions perform a reasonable search to ensure that the 
motion picture is not commercially available before circumvention may incentivize 
copyright owners to make their works more commercially available. 
The Register does not find any additional statutory factors relevant to the asserted 
adverse effects in this proposed class.  Based on the foregoing, the Register finds that 
libraries, museums, and archives are adversely affected by the prohibition on 
circumvention in their ability to engage in noninfringing preservation and replacement 
activities, or are likely to be so affected during the next three years. 
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA agrees with the Register that an exemption is warranted, though it would adopt 
additional aspects of the proposal requested by proponents.  First, NTIA believes that 
“[i]t makes sense for libraries, archives, and museums to want to proactively respond to 
the problem if they can do so” before data is lost to disc rot and cannot be retrieved.533  
Although NITA recognizes that section 108 does not cover copying of works that are not 
 
531 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 5 Opp’n at 30. 
532 Joint Creators Class 5 Opp’n at 10–11.   
533 NTIA Letter at 39 (citing LCA Class 5 Reply at 3).     

[PAGE 100]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
97 
currently damaged or deteriorating, it believes that preventative preservation “would 
seem to be within the scope of fair use, at least for archival preservation.”534  
NTIA also does not believe that the availability of a work on a streaming service should 
preclude copying of a motion picture if an unused and undamaged replacement is not 
available for a reasonable price because it is not persuaded that the availability of motion 
pictures on streaming services “solves the problem at hand.”535  It notes that none of the 
streaming services carries all or a majority of the motion pictures at issue, and many do 
not provide licenses to libraries, museums, or archives.536   
NTIA encourages the Register to evaluate the request for institutions to provide offpremises access to the preserved motion pictures, noting that the COVID-19 pandemic 
has highlighted the need for such access.  Although NTIA “fully recognizes that the 
record presented here could have been more robust,”537 it suggests that the Register 
consider evidence proponents offered in connection with Class 14 and evaluate whether 
the limitations on remote access proposed in that class would be sufficient to mitigate 
market harm here.538   
For the reasons discussed above, the Register concludes that the current record does not 
establish that preventative preservation and off-premises access to the preserved motion 
pictures are warranted, and that copying of motion pictures that are available on a 
streaming service is not likely to be fair use. 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
After thorough consideration, the Office recommends adopting an exemption that 
would allow copying of damaged or deteriorated DVDs and Blu-ray discs for the 
purpose of preservation and creating replacement copies for the reasons discussed 
above.  The Register recommends that the Librarian designate the following class: 
(i) Motion pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in 17 
U.S.C. § 101, where the motion picture is lawfully acquired on a DVD 
protected by the Content Scramble System, or on a Blu-ray disc protected by 
the Advanced Access Content System, solely for the purpose of lawful 
preservation or the creation of a replacement copy of the motion picture, by an 
eligible library, archives, or museum, where:  
 
534 Id. at 41.   
535 Id. at 42.   
536 Id.   
537 Id. at 43. 
538 Id. at 44. 

[PAGE 101]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
98 
(A) Such activity is carried out without any purpose of direct or indirect 
commercial advantage;  
(B) The DVD or Blu-ray disc is damaged or deteriorating;   
(C) The eligible institution, after a reasonable effort, has determined 
that an unused and undamaged replacement copy cannot be obtained at 
a fair price and that no streaming service, download service, or ondemand cable and satellite service makes the motion picture available 
to libraries, archives, and museums at a fair price; and  
(D) The preservation or replacement copies are not distributed or made 
available outside of the physical premises of the eligible library, 
archives, or museum.  
(ii) For purposes of paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this section, a library, archives, or 
museum is considered “eligible” if—  
(A) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are open to the 
public and/or are routinely made available to researchers who are not 
affiliated with the library, archives, or museum;  
(B) The library, archives, or museum has a public service mission;  
(C) The library, archives, or museum’s trained staff or volunteers 
provide professional services normally associated with libraries, 
archives, or museums;  
(D) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are composed of 
lawfully acquired and/or licensed materials; and  
(E) The library, archives, or museum implements reasonable digital 
security measures as appropriate for the activities permitted by 
paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this section. 
 
 
 
 

[PAGE 102]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
99 
F. Proposed Class 6: Audiovisual Works—Space -Shifting 
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption 
Petitioner SolaByte Corp. seeks an exemption available to “[t]he legitimate owner of [a] 
DVD or blu-ray disc and licensee of the content” for the purpose of “making a usable 
personal back up copy” of “movies, TV shows, music video[s], [and] other copyrighted 
works.”539  The proposed class “would apply to any title of audio/video works 5 years 
after its public release date.”540  Following its initial petition, SolaByte did not submit 
legal arguments or evidence or participate in the public hearings.  FSF filed brief 
comments generally supporting this exemption, but did not provide any evidence or 
substantive argument regarding the merits of the specific proposal.541  Joint Creators, 
DVD CCA and AACS LA, and the Software and Information Industry Association 
(“SIIA”) each filed comments opposing the proposed exemption on substantive legal 
grounds as well as procedural objections given the lack of record.542 
b. Overview of Issues 
The Register has repeatedly considered proposed exemptions for purposes of spaceshifting or format-shifting, and each time the Register has declined to recommend, and 
the Librarian has rejected, the proposed classes.  As noted in the Acting Register’s 2018 
Recommendation: 
In 2015, the Register recognized the consumer and policy appeal of the proposed 
exemptions, as consumers who purchase a movie in one format can experience 
frustration when they are unable to watch that film in a different format on 
another device.  She noted, however, that “the section 1201 rulemaking is a 
carefully tailored proceeding that is designed to incorporate, not replace, the 
determinations of Congress and the courts.” After careful review, the Register 
did “not find any fair use precedent that sanctions broad space-shifting or format 
 
539 SolaByte Class 6 Pet. at 2. 
540 Id. 
541 FSF Class 6 Initial at 2. 
542 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 6 Opp’n (stating that SolaByte “has not filed any initial 
comments in support of the petition, nor, more importantly, has it provided any legal or factual 
basis for the Register to consider the request”); Joint Creators Class 6 Opp’n at 2 (stating that 
“[t]he scope of this class is unclear, and SolaByte did not file a long-form comment to support its 
petition or explain its scope”); SIIA Class 6 Opp’n (stating that “[t]he comments filed in support 
of an exemption for space shifting do not provide an adequate factual basis or substantive legal 
arguments to support . . . the exception being proposed”). 

[PAGE 103]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
100 
shifting.”  Since then, the Ninth Circuit, in Disney Enterprises, Inc. v. VidAngel, 
Inc., rejected the contention that space-shifting is a “paradigmatic example of fair 
use,” noting that “[t]he reported decisions unanimously reject the view that 
space-shifting is fair use under § 107.”  In doing so, the court credited the 
Register’s conclusion in the last rulemaking that “the law of fair use, as it stands 
today, does not sanction broad-based space-shifting or format-shifting.”543 
During the 2018 proceeding, SolaByte filed a one-page reply comment in support of a 
petition for an exemption to allow so-called “non-reproductive” space-shifting, 
including for commercial purposes.544  At the public hearing, SolaByte said that it sought 
to use the proposed exemption to allow users to stream master cloud copies of 
audiovisual works to their personal device after SolaByte authenticated that the user had 
the same content on disc media.545 
SolaByte’s petition in this proceeding makes no mention of whether it still seeks to 
provide—or already is providing —a commercial service that provides “replacements” 
for users’ disc copies.546  But it says the exemption is needed because, among related 
concerns, “[i]ncomplete licensing of titles by internet media service providers requires 
the owner of the disc to subscribe to multiple service providers at high personal cost to 
cover a fraction of their library titles,” and “[c]ontent owners are unresponsive to 
licensing requests to enable back up services and/or have instituted a regime of up front 
payments that make providing the service economically infeasible.”547  Relatedly, FSF 
argues that “[a]ny medium can degrade or fail over time.  Devices that can access the 
work can likewise degrade, fail, or become no longer available. . . .  [U]sers should have 
the right to transfer the works they own onto other media or devices in order to ensure 
continued access.”548 
2. Discussion 
In the 2006, 2012, 2015, and 2018 rulemakings, the Librarian found, upon the Register’s 
recommendation, that the proponents had failed to establish that space-shifting is a 
noninfringing use.  In the NPRM in this proceeding, the Office asked SolaByte and any 
 
543 2018 Recommendation at 121 (internal footnotes omitted). 
544 2018 SolaByte Class 3 Reply; see 2018 OmniQ Class 3 Pet. at 1.  
545 Tr. at 8:08–14:08, Hearing Ex. 3-A at 5 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Chatfield, SolaByte); Tr. at 10:18–12:03 
(Apr. 11, 2018) (Chatfield, SolaByte). 
546 Tr. at 8:08–14:08, Hearing Ex. 3-A at 6 (Apr. 11, 2018) (Chatfield, SolaByte) (“We ask Librarian 
to authorize an exemption to allow the creation of replacement content to support this 
service[.]”). 
547 SolaByte Class 6 Petition at 2. 
548 FSF Class 6 Initial at 2. 

[PAGE 104]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
101 
proponents of Class 6 “whether, in the past three years, there has been any change in the 
legal or factual circumstances bearing upon that issue.”549  SolaByte submitted no 
comments and did not request to participate in the public hearings. FSF is the only 
proponent to file subsequent comments, but it did not provide legal arguments.  As 
noted in the NPRM, whether “users should have the right to transfer the works they 
own onto other media or devices” is a question for Congress to answer.550  Moreover, it 
is unclear whether SolaByte still seeks to utilize such an exemption to provide a cloudbased commercial service that would go beyond individual users making a personal 
copy, a proposed use that was rejected in 2018.  Nothing in the current record warrants a 
departure from that conclusion.  
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA agrees with the Register that an exemption for this class is not warranted.  It notes 
that “[t]he Librarian rejected similar proposals in the 2006, 2012, 2015, and 2018 
rulemakings, finding that the proponents had failed to clearly establish under applicable 
law that space-shifting for this purpose is a noninfringing use.”551  NTIA also notes that 
despite the Office requesting in the NPRM that petitioners provide evidence of changed 
legal or factual circumstances, the petitioner neither filed comments nor participated in 
the hearings.  NTIA therefore concludes that “[w]ithout evidence or further details or 
legal or policy discussion to support or clarify this petition, [it] cannot support this 
petition as presented.” 552 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
The factual and legal record supporting an exemption for space-shifting and formatshifting remains insufficiently developed.  As was true in 2018, there is no legal support 
for treating these as noninfringing uses.  Moreover, it remains unclear from the record 
that TPMs are preventing users from such uses.  Accordingly, the Register cannot 
recommend adoption of proposed Class 6. 
  
 
549 NPRM at 65305. 
550 FSF Class 6 Initial at 2. 
551 NTIA Letter at 47. 
552 Id. at 48. 

[PAGE 105]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
102 
G. Proposed Class 7(a) and 7(b): Motion Pictures and Literary Works—
Text and Data Mining  
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemptions 
Proposed Classes 7(a) and 7(b) seek to permit circumvention of technological protection 
measures used on motion pictures stored on DVDs or Blu-ray discs and on literary 
works to enable researchers to perform text and data mining (“TDM”) for the purpose of 
scholarly research and teaching.  Authors Alliance, AAUP, and LCA filed petitions that 
would allow “researchers to circumvent technological protection measures on lawfully 
accessed literary works distributed electronically as well as on lawfully accessed motion 
pictures, in order to deploy text and data mining techniques.”553  The Office grouped the 
proposals into two proposed classes: Class 7(a) pertaining to motion pictures and Class 
7(b) pertaining to literary works.554    
Authors Alliance, AAUP, and LCA explained that their proposed exemptions were 
intended to enable researchers to copy motion pictures and literary works to create 
collections of works on which they can conduct TDM.555  TDM involves digitizing and 
downloading large numbers of works to create datasets on which researchers can 
perform algorithmic extractions to investigate questions and observe trends.556  Because 
many motion pictures and electronically distributed literary works are protected by 
TPMs, proponents argued an exemption is necessary to digitize and download the 
works.
557  
In response to concerns raised by opponents that the initial proposal was overbroad, in 
their reply comments Authors Alliance, AAUP, and LCA proposed narrower regulatory 
language.  These updated proposals specified that the purpose of the circumvention 
would be for scholarly research and teaching; the circumvention would have to be 
undertaken by a researcher affiliated with a nonprofit library, archives, museum, or 
institution of higher education; and that the researcher would have to use reasonable 
security measures to limit access to the corpus of circumvented works only to certain 
categories of people.558   
 
553 Authors Alliance/AAUP/LCA Class 7 Pet. at 2.  
554 NPRM at 65,305.  
555 Authors Alliance/AAUP/LCA Class 7 Initial at 4.  
556 Id. at 4–5. 
557 Id. at 5. 
558 Authors Alliance/AAUP/LCA Class 7 Reply at 6–15. 

[PAGE 106]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
103 
Authors Alliance, AAUP, and LCA’s current proposed language is as follows: 
Proposed Class 7(a): Motion pictures, where the motion picture is lawfully made 
and obtained on a DVD protected by the Content Scramble System, on a Blu-ray 
disc protected by the Advanced Access Content System, or via a digital 
transmission protected by a technological protection measure, where:  
(1) the circumvention is undertaken by a researcher affiliated with a 
nonprofit library, archive, museum, or institution of higher education to 
deploy text and data mining techniques for the purpose of scholarly 
research and teaching; and  
(2) the researcher uses reasonable security measures to limit access to the 
corpus of circumvented works only to other researchers affiliated with 
qualifying institutions for purposes of collaboration or the replication and 
verification of research findings.  
Proposed Class 7(b): Literary works, excluding computer programs, distributed 
electronically and lawfully obtained, that are protected by technological 
measures that interfere with text and data mining, where:  
(1) the circumvention is undertaken by a researcher affiliated with a 
nonprofit library, archive, museum, or institution of higher education to 
deploy text and data mining techniques for the purpose of scholarly 
research and teaching; and  
(2) the researcher uses reasonable security measures to limit access to the 
corpus of circumvented works only to other researchers affiliated with 
qualifying institutions for purposes of collaboration or the replication and 
verification of research findings.559 
Additional comments in support of the petition were filed by Matthew Sag, Kyle 
Courtney, Rachael Samberg and Timothy Vollmer.  Comments in opposition to 
proposed class 7(a) were filed by Joint Creators and DVD CCA and AACS LA.  
Comments in opposition to proposed class 7(b) were filed by the Association of 
American Publishers (“AAP”) and SIIA.  
 
b. Overview of Issues 
TDM methods enable researchers to sift through large collections of information to draw 
insights and observe trends.560  TDM requires creating a dataset of works of interest, 
 
559 Id. at 6. 
560 Authors Alliance/AAUP/LCA Class 7 Initial at 5.  

[PAGE 107]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
104 
which “typically involves digitizing or downloading (i.e., reproducing) potentially 
copyrighted works in order to perform algorithmic extractions” from them.561  
Numerous academics submitted letters describing research projects they would like to 
conduct on collections of literary works and motion pictures.  Proponents argue that 
section 1201 impedes the application of TDM techniques to motion pictures and literary 
works because researchers are unable to access digital copies of the motion pictures and 
literary works they want to study.562  As a result, they contend, little TDM research has 
been done on motion pictures, and TDM research on literary works has typically only 
been done on works that are in the public domain.563  Proponents proposed exemptions 
that would permit circumvention of TPMs on DVDs and Blu-ray discs containing 
motion pictures and literary works distributed digitally for the purpose of conducting 
TDM research.   
The first major category of disagreement among the parties relates to whether the 
proposed use is likely to be fair use.  Proponents argue that the case law establishes 
conclusively that creating a searchable collection of works for the purpose of TDM 
research is a fair use because it allows researchers to derive information about books 
without providing the public with a substitute for them.564  Although proponents 
initially stated that researchers would not be able to view the text of literary works or 
the content of motion pictures in the course of their research,565 it became clear over the 
course of this proceeding that proponents believed that it would in fact be necessary for 
researchers to view the content of the works to verify their methods and findings.566  
This raised the novel issues of whether copying works for the purpose of TDM research 
is transformative if researchers can view the entirety of the copyrighted content while 
they do their research.   
Additionally, the parties dispute whether the proposed use would interfere with the 
market for or value of the original works.  Opponents argue that the ability to view the 
entirety of the works creates a risk of substitutional use.
567  They also argue that TDM 
research interferes with the licensing market for collections of literary works and motion 
pictures for TDM purposes.568  Finally, the parties have differing views on the types of 
 
561 Id. at 4.   
562 Id. at 5-6. 
563 Id. at 4. 
564 Id. at 25–26. 
565 See, e.g., Tr. 375:25–376:17 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Stallman, Authors Alliance) (explaining that the full 
text of the literary works would not be viewable by researchers through the corpus). 
566 Authors Alliance and LCA Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 6 (May 21, 2021). 
567 AAP Class 7 Opp’n at 9. 
568 AAP Class 7 Opp’n at 9; DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 7 Opp’n at 14–15. 

[PAGE 108]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
105 
security measures that should be required to secure a corpus composed of numerous 
copyrighted works to prevent security breaches.  Proponents advocate for a flexible 
requirement to implement “reasonable security measures,” to allow researchers to 
determine the appropriate measures based on the size of the corpus and the research 
project.569  Opponents feel strongly that specific security measures must be identified in 
the exemptions.570 
The second major issue of disagreement relates to the availability of alternatives to 
circumvention.  For researchers interested in studying literary works, opponents point to 
existing collections of literary works that are available to researchers.
571  Proponents 
argue that many features of existing collections make them inappropriate for the 
contemplated research, including expensive membership requirements, burdensome 
security measures, and gaps in the collections. 572  Another potential alternative is for 
researchers to create their own digital corpora.  This would require scanning hard-copy 
literary works and making them searchable using optical character recognition and 
using screen-capture technology for motion pictures.573  Proponents argue that these 
methods would require too much time and money to be practicable and would provide 
imperfect data.574  They further contend that the licensing market for such uses is 
insufficiently developed to provide an adequate alternative.   
The Register agrees that the TDM research described by proponents offers considerable 
public benefits and would likely constitute a noninfringing use if it can be conducted 
while maintaining the security of the copyrighted works in each corpus.  She therefore 
recommends granting the proposed exemptions with several important limitations. 
2. Discussion 
a. Works Protected by Copyright 
With respect to the requirement that the relevant TPMs control access to copyrightable 
works, this class involves the use of motion pictures contained on DVDs or Blu-ray 
discs, or transmitted through streaming services, as well as literary works distributed 
 
569 Authors Alliance/AAUP/LCA Class 7 Reply at 23. 
570 AAP Class 7 Opp’n at 3; Joint Creators Class 7 Opp’n at 4–5. 
571 AAP Class 7 Opp’n at 11. 
572 Authors Alliance/AAUP/LCA Class 7 Initial at 11–13.     
573 AAP Class 7 Opp’n at 11; DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 7 Opp’n at 14; Joint Creators Class 7 
Opp’n at 6. 
574 Authors Alliance/AAUP/LCA Class 7 Initial at 13–15.     

[PAGE 109]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
106 
electronically.  There is no dispute that at least some of these works are protected by 
copyright. 
b. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Proponents contend that the proposed uses are likely to be noninfringing based on case 
law holding that copying of copyrighted works to enable searching of the complete text 
is fair use.
575  They point primarily to the Second Circuit’s decisions in Authors Guild, Inc. 
v. HathiTrust576 (“HathiTrust”) and Authors Guild v. Google577 (“Google Books”).   
In HathiTrust, a group of authors and authors’ associations brought copyright claims 
against HathiTrust, an entity created by libraries that had pooled together digital copies 
of books from their collections and created a database that permitted full-text searches to 
enable users to identify the locations of particular words or phrases.  The court held that 
the creation of the database was fair use because the use was transformative and did not 
serve as a substitute for the original, and because the libraries undertook extensive 
security measures to minimize the risk of a data breach.578   
In Google Books, Google digitally scanned, performed optical character recognition, and 
indexed books from numerous research library collections to create a search engine that 
enabled users to identify books that include specific terms, view snippets of text 
containing those terms, and obtain statistical information about the frequency of word 
and phrase usage over time.
579  The court held that Google’s use of the literary works 
was a fair use because it made “available information about Plaintiffs’ books without 
providing the public with a substantial substitute for matter protected by the Plaintiffs’ 
copyright interests in the original works or derivatives of them.”580   
Opponents counter that “U.S. law on TDM uses of copyrighted works—and whether 
such uses qualify as fair uses—is far from settled. ”581  Because fair use is a fact-specific 
inquiry, opponents argue that HathiTrust and Google Books did not establish that all TDM 
uses are fair use, only that the specific uses in those cases were fair use, in light of the 
amount of access provided to the public, the security measures taken, and the relevant 
 
575 Id. at 25–28. 
576 Authors Guild, Inc. v. HathiTrust, 755 F.3d 87 (2d Cir. 2014). 
577 Authors Guild v. Google, Inc., 804 F.3d 202 (2d Cir. 2015) (“Google Books”).  
578 HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 97–100. 
579 Google Books, 804 F.3d at 206.  
580 Id. at 207. 
581 AAP Class 7 Opp’n at 4.  

[PAGE 110]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
107 
licensing markets.582  They point out that HathiTrust and Google Books involved copying 
literary works that had no TPMs, and that the same court subsequently found a TDM 
usage of motion pictures not to be a fair use.583   
The Register agrees with opponents that the case law has not established that all copying 
of works for the purpose of TDM is necessarily a fair use.  Indeed, although the Google 
Books court ultimately concluded that the specific use in that case was fair, it described 
the case as “test[ing] the boundaries of fair use.”584  It is possible, however, to identify 
certain principles from the case law that can be applied to the proposed exemptions.  
First, copying for the purpose of creating a search function has been considered 
transformative in at least some circumstances.585  Second, an important consideration in 
assessing the third factor and likely market harm under the fourth factor is the extent to 
which the display capability enables the public to view substantial portions of the text.586  
Third, the nature and effectiveness of the security measures used to prevent 
unauthorized access to the corpus are likewise significant under the market harm 
analysis.587  The Register discusses each of these principles in greater detail below and 
uses them as guideposts.    
First factor.  The first fair use factor, the purpose and character of the use, looks at the 
commerciality of the use and whether it is transformative.  Proponents suggested in 
their opening comments that the exemptions would “apply to commercial and non-
 
582 AAP Class 7 Opp’n at 4; DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 7 Opp’n at 13; Joint Creators Class 7 
Opp’n at 2–3.  
583 Joint Creators Opp’n at 3 (citing Fox News Network, LLC v. TVEyes, Inc., 883 F.3d 169 (2d Cir. 
2018)).  
584 Google Books, 804 F.3d at 206. 
585 See HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 97 (creation of a full-text searchable database is transformative); 
Google Books, 804 F.3d at 217 (creation of a full-text searchable database is transformative); VHT, 
Inc. v. Zillow Group, Inc., 918 F.3d 723, 743 (9th Cir. 2019) (search engine for photographs provides 
“limited transformation”); A.V. ex rel. Vanderhye v. iParadigms, LLC, 562 F.3d 630, 640 (4th Cir. 
2009) (creation of database of student papers to search for potential plagiarism was 
transformative).   
586 See Google Books, 804 F.3d at 209–10 (maximum of three snippets of each literary work, 
containing no more than one eighth of a page, were viewable for each search and additional 
precautions were taken to ensure that certain segments of each work were unviewable); 
HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 91 (“the user is not able to view either the page on which the term appears 
or any other portion of the book”); iParadigms, LLC, 562 F.3d at 634–35 (plagiarism detector 
program sends professor an “Originality Report” suggesting what percentage of the work 
appears not to be original, cannot view the comparison works that were searched). 
587 HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 100–01; Google Books, 804 F.3d at 228. 

[PAGE 111]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
108 
commercial uses.”588  After opponents expressed concern that scholarly research can be 
performed by those with profit-seeking motives,589 proponents clarified in their reply 
comment that the exemption “seeks to enable use of TDM for noncommercial 
scholarship and teaching.”590  While the language proposed specifies only that the 
purpose of the use is “scholarly research and teaching,” proponents confirmed during 
the hearing that the proposed use is entirely non-commercial and that they would be 
comfortable requiring it to be “solely” for the purpose of scholarly research and/or 
teaching.591  To addresses opponents’ concerns about for-profit entities benefiting from 
the exemptions,592 proponents also amended the proposal to limit beneficiaries to 
researchers affiliated with nonprofit libraries, archives, museums, or institutions of 
higher education.593 
Determining whether the proposed use is transformative requires a clear understanding 
of its contours.  The proposed exemptions contemplate a researcher or group of 
researchers seeking to investigate a particular set of questions that require examination 
of a large number of works.  For example, Dan Sinykin, Assistant Professor of English at 
Emory University, seeks to study how the conglomeration of U.S. publishing between 
the 1950s and 2020 has affected fiction, which would require assembling a large corpus 
of fiction from those seventy years.
594  Eric Hoyt, Professor of Media Production in the 
Department of Communication Arts at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, seeks to 
study the development of filmatic and televisual styles as reflected in camera framing, 
shot length, color, brightness, and contrast.595   
The researcher would assemble a corpus made up of a sufficient number of works from 
the relevant genre and time period to be able to draw conclusions.  In response to 
opponents’ concerns,596 proponents clarified that each researcher can utilize only the 
works in the corpus she has assembled.  She cannot aggregate her corpus with corpora 
 
588 Authors Alliance/AAUP/LCA Class 7 Initial at 26.   
589 AAP Class 7 Opp’n at 7, 9; DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 7 Opp’n at 7.  
590 Authors Alliance/AAUP/LCA Class 7 Reply at 11.  
591 Tr. at 342:23–343:02 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Stallman, Authors Alliance) (“[W]e don’t contemplate the 
work of these scholars being used for commercial purposes, so that limitation is fine.”). 
592 AAP Class 7 Opp’n at 8; DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 7 Opp’n at 11–12.  
593 Authors Alliance/AAUP/LCA Class 7 Reply at 9–10. 
594 Authors Alliance/AAUP/LCA Class 7 Initial at App. L (letter from Dan Sinykin).  
595 Id. at App. E (letter from Eric Hoyt). 
596 Joint Creators Class 7 Opp’n at 4. 

[PAGE 112]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
109 
assembled by other researchers.597  The researcher would enter the algorithms she has 
designed and, using TDM techniques, the full content of each of the works within the 
corpus would be searched and the relevant information extracted in the form of a 
numerical score.598  The text of the proposed exemptions specifies that decrypted copies 
can only be circulated to other institutions or researchers for the purpose of 
collaboration or replication and verification of research findings.      
Having considered the parties’ arguments, the Register concludes that the proposed use 
is non-commercial and likely transformative.  Although the copyrighted works would 
not be altered when they are added to a corpus, a use can be transformative if the 
function or purpose of the use differs from that of the original.599  For example, both the 
HathiTrust and Google Books courts held that the creation of a full-text searchable 
database is transformative because the resulting database is different in purpose and 
character from that of the original literary works. 600   
Here, the intended purpose of the proposed activity is to provide information about 
works by identifying trends or calculating statistics, which differs from the expressive or 
informative purposes of the original works.  In that regard, the proposed use is similar 
to Google’s ngrams tool, which allowed readers “to learn the frequency of usage of 
 
597 Tr. 343:04–07 (Apr. 7, 2010) (Stallman, Authors Alliance) (“[T]he idea is the researchers 
themselves are assembling their own corpora to answer their own questions, not that they’re 
reaching out to use somebody else’s”).  
598 Tr. 350:11–353:02 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Bamman, University of California, Berkeley) (describing 
process of performing TDM research). 
599 See, e.g., iParadigms, 562 F.3d at 640 (archiving and using student papers to detect plagiarism 
was transformative even though the works were unaltered and used in their entirety because the 
use for the purpose of detecting plagiarism was “completely unrelated” to the expressive content 
in the works).   
600 HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 97 (holding that creation of a full-text searchable database that did not 
show the user any of the text of the copyrighted works was transformative); Google Books, 804 
F.3d at 217 (holding that the “snippet view,” which showed portions of unaltered, copyrighted 
text, was transformative because it “add[ed] important value to the basic transformative search 
function” by allowing users to verify that the list of books returned by the database was 
responsive to the user’s search); see also TVEyes, 883 F.3d at 177 (holding that function that 
allowed customers to view clips up to ten minutes long from television broadcasts was “at least 
somewhat transformative” because it “enables users to isolate, from an ocean of programming, 
material that is responsive to their interests and needs,” and to access that material precisely and 
efficiently); Kelly v. Arriba Soft Corp., 336 F.3d 811, 818 (9th Cir. 2003) (holding that displaying 
low-resolution, thumbnail versions of photographs in response to a search query was fair use 
because the Barman function of function of the photographs was aesthetic, while the function of 
the thumbnail versions within the search engine was “to help index and improve access to 
images on the internet and their related web sites”).  

[PAGE 113]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
110 
selected words in the aggregate corpus of published books in different historical 
periods,” and to the report provided by HathiTrust, which provided only the page 
numbers on which a search term was found and the number of times the term appears 
on each page.601   
To address opponents’ concerns that researchers could be using the works in the corpora 
to perform traditional textual or filmatic analysis,602 proponents initially stated that 
researchers would not be able to view the text of literary works or the content of motion 
pictures once they are added to the corpus.603  In response to the Office’s post-hearing 
questions, however, proponents took a different position, contending that an “outright 
ban on viewing any content in a research corpus would comprehensively undermine 
TDM research projects based on the exemption.”604  Proponents asserted that researchers 
must be able to verify their methods and findings by reviewing the content of the works 
in context.  They argued that researchers’ ability to view content from the underlying 
works would be consistent with the HathiTrust’s Non-Consumptive Use Research 
Policy, which permits researchers to refer “to specific passages in order to verify or 
evaluate results, to develop and revise algorithms for processing the text, and to select 
appropriately short quotes as necessary examples in reporting the research, as may be 
supported by fair use.”
605 
Because this issue was introduced after the hearing, opponents did not have a real 
opportunity to provide their views on this issue.  In their prior comments, opponents 
argued that the ability to view the entirety of the copyrighted works raised issues 
regarding whether the use was effectively space-shifting, which the Office has 
consistently found not to be fair use.606  They also expressed concern that if researchers 
 
601 Google Books, 804 F.3d at 217; HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 91.  The HathiTrust Digital Library’s NonConsumptive Use Research Policy was not timely introduced into the record in this proceeding 
and was not discussed in the HathiTrust case.     
602 AAP Class 7 Opp’n at 7–8.  
603 Authors Alliance/AAUP/LCA Class 7 Reply at 16 (stating that circumvention is not necessary 
to engage directly with literature or film); id. at 22 (“Of course digital humanities scholars will 
also want to read or watch works they study via computational methods. And they might even 
want to quote those works in an article discussing the findings of their TDM. But they do not 
need this exemption to read or watch works they already have lawfully obtained, and they do not 
need this exemption to quote from those works.”); see also Tr. 375:25–376:17 (Apr. 7, 2021) 
(Stallman, Authors Alliance) (explaining that the full text of the literary works would not be 
viewable by researchers through the corpus). 
604 Authors Alliance and LCA Post-Hearing Resp. at 6 (May 21, 2021). 
605 Id. at 7 (quoting HathiTrust Digital Library, Non-Consumptive Use Research Policy (approved 
Feb. 20, 2017), https://perma.cc/8WRP-7532 (last visited Sept. 26, 2021)).  
606 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 7 Opp’n at 10–12. 

[PAGE 114]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
111 
used the copies of the copyrighted works made after circumvention for their expressive 
purposes, that would not be transformative.607      
The Register concludes that the proposed use is likely to be transformative, 
notwithstanding researchers’ ability to view the content of the copyrighted works.  The 
Register recommends adding a limitation that researchers would be permitted to view 
or listen to the copyrighted works solely to verify research results, which will ensure 
that the purpose of the use differs from the original expressive purposes for which the 
works were created.   
Thus, the first factor weighs in favor of fair use because the proposed use is noncommercial and, with this limitation, likely to be found transformative.
 
Second factor.  The Register concludes that the second fair use factor, the nature of the 
copyrighted work, weighs against a finding of fair use.  It is well established that literary 
works and motion pictures are creative and thus at the “core” of copyright’s protective 
purposes.
608  This factor, however, is of limited significance in the analysis of this class.609    
Third factor.  With respect to the third fair use factor, the amount and substantiality of 
the portion used in relation to the copyrighted work as a whole, copying the entire work 
is likely reasonable in light of the purpose of the copying: obtaining data about the 
copyrighted works.  Reproducing a work in its entirety does not necessarily weigh 
against a finding of fair use when such copying is necessary to achieve a legitimate 
purpose.610 
Fourth factor.  The Register concludes that proponents have not demonstrated that the 
fourth fair use factor, the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the 
copyrighted work, favors fair use.  This factor focuses on “the effect of the use upon the 
potential market for or value of the copyrighted work,”611 and, in particular, whether the 
 
607 AAP Class 7 Opp’n at 7–8. 
608 See Stewart v. Abend, 495 U. S. 207, 237–238 (1990) (contrasting fictional short story with factual 
works); Harper & Row v. Nation Enters., 471 U.S. 539, 563 (1985) (“The law generally recognizes a 
greater need to disseminate factual works than works of fiction or fantasy”); 2018 
Recommendation at 45; 2015 Recommendation at 70; 2012 Recommendation at 128. 
609 2018 Recommendation at 243. 
610 See, e.g., Swatch Grp. Mgm’t Servs. Ltd. v. Bloomberg L.P., 756 F.3d 73, 90 (2d Cir. 2014) (finding 
third factor was neutral when entire work was copied); Núñez v. Caribbean Int’l News Corp., 235 
F.3d 18, 24 (1st Cir. 2000) (holding copying of entire picture was “of little consequence” to court’s 
analysis).   
611 17 U.S.C. § 107(4). 

[PAGE 115]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
112 
secondary work serves as a substitute for the original work.612  Other relevant 
considerations in this context are the effect on actual or potential licensing markets613 
and the adequacy of the security measures employed to protect against unauthorized 
dissemination of copies.614 
With respect to market substitution, proponents argue that the creation of a digital 
corpus of works that enables researchers to study and draw conclusions about those 
works would not have a substitutional effect.  They note that no one seeking to watch a 
motion picture would instead read a computational analysis of that motion picture.615  In 
post-hearing comments and ex parte discussions, the Authors Alliance emphasized that 
the formats in which the raw files used for machine processing are stored are difficult 
for humans to read, making them “simply inferior” to formats in which the works are 
made available for consumptive use.616  In addition, they noted that institutions already 
own copies of the literary works and motion pictures, and that researchers would use 
those copies if they were seeking to use the works for their expressive purposes.
617  
Because the issue of the viewing the complete content of works by researchers was not 
raised until after the hearing, opponents did not have an opportunity to respond to these 
assertions.   
The Register concludes that, with the limitation that researchers may not use the copies 
of the copyrighted works in the corpus for their expressive purposes, the copies would 
not serve as substitutes for the original works.  
As to licensing revenues, opponents argue that there is an actual and/or potential market 
for copyright owners to license their works for TDM uses.
618  Opponents describe a 
recent recognition of the value of large datasets and the increasing interest in licensing 
such datasets.619  AAP characterizes the current market for large-scale collections of 
 
612 See Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 591 (1994) (noting that “cognizable market 
harm” is limited to “market substitution”). 
613 See Bill Graham Archives v. Dorling Kindersley Ltd., 448 F.3d 605, 613–14 (2d Cir. 2006) (“The 
court looks to not only the market harm caused by the particular infringement, but also to 
whether, if the challenged use becomes widespread, it will adversely affect the potential market 
for the copyrighted work.”). 
614 HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 100–01; Google Books, 804 F.3d at 228. 
615 Authors Alliance/AAUP/LCA Class 7 Initial at 27.   
616 Authors Alliance and LCA Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 8 (May 21, 2021).   
617 Authors Alliance/AAUP/LCA Class 7 Reply at 22 (stating that researchers “do not need this 
exemption to read or watch works they already have lawfully obtained”).  
618 AAP Class 7 Opp’n at 9–10; Joint Creators Class 7 Opp’n at 6; SIIA Class 7 Opp’n at 1.   
619 AAP Class 7 Opp’n at 5; SIIA Class 7 Opp’n at 1.   

[PAGE 116]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
113 
copyrighted literary works to conduct TDM research as “nascent, but growing,” and 
specifically points to the example of the Copyright Clearance Center’s RightFind 
program, which licenses full-text versions of journal articles to TDM researchers.620  
Opponents contend that the proposed use would compete with this burgeoning market.  
Proponents respond that opponents have not presented evidence that licenses are 
available for the specific content researchers desire to use, which includes popular 
fiction and motion pictures.621  They contend that if the existence of a potential licensing 
market were a sufficient showing of market harm to prevent to researchers from copying 
the works, copyright owners who did not find it in their interest to “make that potential 
a reality” would force researchers to “content themselves with what research questions 
the public domain or, if they are fortunate, HathiTrust, allow them to answer.”622   
The Register finds HathiTrust is instructive on this issue.  There, the court held that lost 
licensing revenue can be considered in the analysis of the fourth factor “only when the 
use serves as a substitute for the original.”623  It concluded that HathiTrust’s use of 
copies of the literary works to generate full-text searches was not a lost opportunity to 
license the book for search because the full-text search was not a substitute for the books 
being searched.624  The Register concludes that, as in HathiTrust, the end goal of the 
contemplated TDM research does not serve as a substitute for the original work.   
Finally, with respect to security, proponents suggest that it would be sufficient for the 
exemptions to require qualifying institutions to put in place “reasonable security 
measures,” rather than specifying precise measures that should be implemented.625  
They point to other exemptions the Register has recommended that require “reasonable 
security measures.”626  They reason that institutions of higher education are accustomed 
to using security measures and will exercise their discretion to implement appropriate 
measures for each corpus depending on the “institution size, degree of public access, 
and type of research.”627  In their view, a flexible security standard would permit 
 
620 AAP Class 7 Opp’n at 9–10 (citing RightFind XML for Mining Solution, CCC, 
https://www.copyright.com/publishers/rightfind-xml-for-mining-solution/ (last visited Oct. 18, 
2021)). 
621 Authors Alliance/AAUP/LCA Class 7 Reply at 24.   
622 Id. at 25.   
623 HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 100. 
624 Id. at 100. 
625 Authors Alliance/AAUP/LCA Class 7 Reply at 23. 
626 Id. at 11 (citing Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems 
for Access Control Technologies, 83 Fed. Reg. 54,010, 54,030, 54,017, 54,019, 54,023 (Oct. 26, 2018)).  
627 Id. at 9–10, 13. 

[PAGE 117]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
114 
researchers to implement different measures for a smaller corpus than a massive 
repository like the HathiTrust.628   
Opponents counter that specific security measures are warranted because large 
collections of copyrighted works are at great risk of unauthorized downloading and 
redistribution.629  In their view, the HathiTrust and Google Books courts’ holdings that 
those uses were fair rested in large part on the institutions’ implementation of specific 
security measures to protect the copyrighted works from access and further 
distribution.
630  They argue that the affiliated institution would need to take 
responsibility for the security measures because individual researchers and staff 
members do not have the capacity to determine what safety requirements are necessary 
and comply with those requirements.631   
The Register concludes that the proposed exemptions demand close attention to security 
measures.  The corpora envisioned by proponents could potentially contain hundreds, 
thousands, or even more copyrighted works.  The courts that have found copying for the 
purpose of TDM to be fair use relied heavily in their analyses on the specific security 
measures that were in place.  In HathiTrust, libraries implemented extensive security 
measures to reduce the risk of a data breach, including protecting the servers on which 
complete copies of the text of the copyrighted works were stored, and restricting and 
monitoring network access to the corpus.632  In Google Books, Google had walled off the 
copyrighted works from internet access and applied the same “impressive” security 
measures Google used to keep its own confidential information safe.
633  Likewise, the 
European Directive on the Digital Single Market,634 emphasizes the importance of 
security measures to protect copyrighted works being used for TDM.635  Here, the 
potential for damage if there were to be a security breach is too great to allow 
 
628 Id. at 13; Matthew Sag Class 7 Reply at 2.   
629 AAP Class 7 Opp’n at 3; Joint Creators Class 7 Opp’n at 4–5. 
630 AAP Class 7 Opp’n at 6; Joint Creators Class 7 Opp’n at 3.   
631 AAP Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 10 (May 21, 2021). 
632 HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 100–01. 
633 Google Books, 804 F.3d at 228. 
634 Directive 2019/790, of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 April 2019 on 
Copyright and Related Rights in the Digital Single Market and Amending Directives 96/9/EC and 
2001/29/EC, 2019 O.J. (L 130) (“EU Directive”). 
635 See, e.g., id. at recital 15 (“[T]he copies should be stored in a secure environment.”); id. at recital 
16 (“[R]ightholders should be allowed to apply measures when there is a risk that the security 
and integrity of their systems or databases could be jeopardised.”); id. at art. 3(2) (“Copies of 
works . . . shall be stored with an appropriate level of security . . . .”). 

[PAGE 118]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
115 
researchers to implement security measures that they subjectively find to be reasonable 
without providing guidance as to at least minimum standards.  
The record does not contain significant information regarding the appropriate security 
measures to include in the exemptions.  Because the original proposal included no 
security requirements at all, the issue of whether “reasonable security measures” would 
be sufficient was not raised until the hearing.  Little evidence was included in the record 
regarding specific security measures that would be sufficient to protect corpora from a 
security breach. 
In a post-hearing letter, the Office asked participants to provide their views on 
“minimum, yet sufficient, security measures with which eligible institutions should be 
required to comply when creating a corpus of literary works or motion pictures on 
which text and data mining techniques can be performed,” including providing 
examples of standards for information security management currently used by academic 
institutions or others.
636  Joint Creators replied that copyright owners should be 
permitted time to “articulate a set of guidelines specific to the scope of the TDM projects 
sanctioned by the exemption,“ and that institutions should be required to comply with 
those guidelines.
637  DVD CCA and AACS LA cited the EU Directive’s requirement that 
rightsholders “shall be allowed to apply measures to ensure the security and integrity of 
the networks and databases where the works or other subject matter are hosted.”638 They 
argued that security measures should include strong encryption on the server that stores 
the corpus; separation of the corpus server from other servers; limited network access; 
stringent access mechanisms and policies limiting access to the corpus to those doing 
specific research projects; and deletion of the corpus after the research project is 
complete.639  AAP and SIIA opined that an institution hosting any corpus should adhere 
to a security protocol that complies with the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology’s (“NIST”) standards applicable to highly sensitive material.640  AAP also 
requested additional safeguards as appropriate to particular projects and corpora, 
 
636 Copyright Office Class 7 Post-Hearing Letter at 2 (Apr. 16, 2021). 
637 Joint Creators Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 6 (May 21, 2021) (citing EU Directive, at art. 3(3)). 
638 EU Directive, at art. 3(3).   
639 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1 (May 21, 2021). 
640 AAP Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2 (May 21, 2021) (citing RON ROSS ET AL., NAT’L INST. OF 
STANDARDS & TECH., U.S. DEP’T OF COM., NIST SPECIAL PUBLICATION 800-171, PROTECTING 
CONTROLLED UNCLASSIFIED INFORMATION IN NONFEDERAL SYSTEMS AND ORGANIZATIONS (rev. Jan. 
28, 2021) https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-171/rev-2/final); SIIA Class 7 PostHearing Resp. at 6 (May 21, 2021).   

[PAGE 119]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
116 
including mechanisms to detect and prevent downloading of stored materials and 
deletion of the corpus when the work is complete.641 
Proponents continued to insist that institutions must be able to create customized 
security plans based on each institution’s systems and the nature of the corpus.642  In 
their view, the optimal set of controls for any corpus varies depending on factors such as 
the “future utility of the data, the specifics of the network and storage, and the risks 
associated with disclosure.”
643  In ex parte discussions with the Office, the Authors 
Alliance expressed concern that some of the specific security measures proposed by 
opponents were impracticable, including requiring a physical separation between the 
server hosting the corpus from other institutional servers.644  It agreed, however, to 
include a requirement that researchers consult with their institution’s IT office as they 
assembled the corpus and to specify that the security measures implemented would be 
designed “to prevent dissemination, downloading, and unauthorized access, and to 
limit access to the corpus of circumvented works only to other researchers affiliated with 
qualifying institutions for purposes of collaboration or the replication and verification of 
research findings.”
645 
Given the state of the record on this issue, rather than crafting specific security 
measures, the Register recommends requiring the institution of higher education to 
implement security measures that have been agreed to by interested copyright owners 
and higher education institutions.  Where such measures have not been agreed upon, 
the institution must protect the corpus of works using the same security measures that it 
uses to keep its own highly confidential information (e.g., government-issued 
identification numbers; personal medical or health insurance information; official 
financial, accounting, and payroll systems) secure.  The Register encourages the parties 
to collaborate to develop security measures that strike an appropriate balance between 
protecting the copyrighted materials from unlawful distribution and taking into account 
reasonable limitations on the institutions’ resources.  The post-hearing letters and the 
Office’s ex parte discussions with participants provide some cause for optimism that the 
parties can reach agreement with respect to security issues. 
The option for institutions to use the security measures they use to protect their own 
highly confidential information provides a fallback in the absence of consensus security 
measures.  This option is consistent with the security measures the Google Books court 
 
641 AAP Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 3 (May 21, 2021).   
642 Authors Alliance and LCA Class 7 Post-Hearing Resp. at 4 (May 21, 2021).   
643 Id.   
644 See Authors Alliance Class 7 Ex Parte Letter at 6 (Aug. 9, 2021).    
645 See id. at 5. 

[PAGE 120]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
117 
found sufficient to protect a vast collection of digitized works,646 as well as hearing 
testimony that the University of California at Berkeley would treat the type of corpus 
proposed in the exemptions as “highly sensitive” information, and would implement 
significant security measures in connection with hosting and storing such a corpus.647  
To promote transparency, the Register recommends a requirement that, upon the 
reasonable request of a copyright owner whose works are contained in the corpus, the 
institution must provide information to that copyright owner regarding the nature of the 
security measures it has implemented.  A copyright owner who believes the security 
measures being used are insufficient may provide information regarding those concerns 
in future 1201 rulemaking proceedings. 
Balancing the four fair use factors, with the limitations discussed, the Register concludes 
that the proposed use is likely to be a fair use.    
c. Causation 
The Register finds that proponents have met their burden of showing that the 
prohibition on circumvention is the cause of a number of adverse effects.  But for the 
prohibition on circumvention, researchers would be able to perform TDM techniques on 
contemporary literary works and motion pictures and teach those techniques in their 
courses. 
d. Asserted Adverse Effects  
As an initial matter, there is a dispute regarding the availability of alternatives to 
circumvention that would allow researchers to conduct their research and teach text and 
data mining methods.  For researchers interested in studying literary works, while some 
digital libraries composed of literary works exist, the record demonstrates that those 
libraries are insufficient to allow researchers to conduct the type of research 
contemplated here.   
Opponents pointed to the HathiTrust digital library as an adequate alternative to 
circumvention,
648 but proponents explained that several features of that collection make 
it difficult to use.  First, they noted that the HathiTrust collection is only available to 
 
646 Google Books, 804 F.3d at 228. 
647 Tr. 385:05-387:17 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Hoffman, University of California, Berkeley) (discussing a 
process that includes having the researcher sign an agreement with respect to the TDM project; 
registration of the project with the school’s information security office; deployment of human 
resources to assist with security; staff trainings on cybersecurity; physical security measures; and 
monitoring for system intrusions).   
648 AAP Class 7 Opp’n at 11.  

[PAGE 121]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
118 
researchers who are affiliated with HathiTrust member institutions.649  Second, all 
research must be carried out on HathiTrust servers, which have limited processing 
capabilities.650  Third, security measures put in place to prevent unauthorized 
distribution of digitized works within the collection limit researchers’ ability to test or 
refine their algorithms.
651  Finally, researchers find that the HathiTrust has “substantial 
gaps in its collection.”652  Because the materials in the collection originated in university 
libraries, the collection contains a greater proportion of academic monographs than 
mass-market fiction.653 
Given these limitations, researchers seeking to avoid circumventing TPMs may be 
required to create their own collections by scanning hard-copy versions of literary works 
and digitizing them using optical character recognition (OCR) technology.  The record 
demonstrates, however, that this is not a workable solution for many researchers.654  
Debinding and scanning each book, performing the OCR, reviewing the resulting text 
for errors, and removing any extraneous information may require considerable 
investment of time and money.
655  The OCR process also may introduce errors into the 
digitized works.656  The Register disagrees with opponents’ suggestion that these 
 
649 Authors Alliance/AAUP/LCA Class 7 Initial at App. C (letter from James Clawson explaining 
that some institutions, including many historically Black colleges and universities, lack access to 
the HathiTrust collection due to the expense).  The average annual fee for access to HathiTrust for 
libraries with the smallest budgets is $7,146, and libraries with larger budgets pay more than 
$14,000 per year.  Overview of HathiTrust Cost Model and Annual Fees, HATHITRUST, 
https://www.hathitrust.org/Cost (last visited Oct. 18, 2021).   
650 Authors Alliance/AAUP/LCA Class 7 Initial Apps. I, L, N (letters from Andrew Piper, Dan 
Sinykin, and Ted Underwood). 
651 Id. at Apps. I, N (letters from Andrew Piper and Ted Underwood).  
652 Id. at 11.  
653 Id. at App. B (HathiTrust collection is biased away from mass-market romances and science 
fiction); accord id. at App. P (vast majority of materials in Temple Libraries’ science fiction 
collection are not contained in the HathiTrust collection); id. at App. H (HathiTrust does not have 
extensive collection of young adult books); id. at App. N (HathiTrust does not have extensive 
collection of romance fiction). 
654 Id. at 13–15, App. B (describing process of scanning and digitizing 500 books); id. at App. C 
(describing challenges of OCR); id. at App. G (describing digitization of novels). 
655 Id. at 14; id. at App. H (describing how lengthy and expensive process of digitizing literary text 
is impossible for graduate student); id. at App. O (early career researcher does not have research 
funds or student researchers to digitize works).  
656 Id. at 14, Apps. D, G. 

[PAGE 122]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
119 
difficulties amount to “mere inconveniences.”657  In many cases, they may effectively 
prevent researchers from being able to conduct research involving the works at issue.         
For researchers interested in studying motion pictures, there are no existing large-scale 
libraries of digital motion pictures available for text and data mining.658  Opponents 
suggest that researchers could create their own collections using screen-capture tools.659  
The Office has previously recognized, however, that screen-capture reduces the quality 
of the images available to researchers.660  Such images are unlikely to satisfy the needs of 
researchers, who frequently need access to high-resolution versions of motion pictures 
for their research.661  Thus, the Register finds that there are no existing alternatives to 
circumvention.   
With respect to the first section 1201 statutory factor, proponents argue that granting the 
exemptions would increase the availability of copyrighted works because TDM research 
will give rise to new works, including articles, books, and presentations, that incorporate 
researchers’ findings.662  DVD CCA and AACS LA respond that copyright owners 
distributed audiovisual works in digital format at reasonable prices with the 
understanding that they could only be played back by certain types of players and 
would be protected from further reproduction or distribution by TPMs.  In their view, 
had copyright owners known that a DVD copy would be used for TDM, they would 
have charged higher prices.
663  Likewise, AAP argues that the proposed exemptions 
would decrease the availability of copyrighted works in electronic formats because 
copyright owners may withhold electronic versions of their work to prevent them from 
being exposed to further distribution and piracy.664  
The Register concludes that this factor does not weigh against the proposed exemptions.  
The proposed use is narrowly tailored to scholarly research, and it is unlikely that 
 
657 See AAP Class 7 Opp’n at 10–11; Joint Creators Class 7 Opp’n at 6. 
658 Authors Alliance/AAUP/LCA Class 7 Initial at App. B. 
659 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 7 Opp’n at 14; Joint Creators Class 7 Opp’n at 6. 
660 2012 Recommendation at 133 (“[T]here is no serious question that screen capture technology 
produces lower-quality images than those that are available by circumvention.”).   
661 Tr. 350:14–353:02 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Dr. Bamman, University of California, Berkeley) (explaining 
process of studying the representation of violence in movies by studying features such as the 
RBG values and the subtitles showing dialogue from each movie, which requires “high precision 
fidelity”). 
662 Authors Alliance/AAUP/LCA Class 7 Initial at 29–30. 
663 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 7 Opp’n at 15–16.   
664 AAP Class 7 Opp’n at 12.  

[PAGE 123]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
120 
copyright owners would entirely withhold electronic versions of their works from the 
market out of a concern that they may be used for the type of research described here.        
Proponents have established that the second and third statutory factors weigh in favor 
of granting the exemptions.  The purpose of the exemptions is to increase the use of 
TDM techniques in scholarship, research, and teaching, which are favored purposes 
under the statutory factors.665  Academic researchers provided specific examples of 
research projects they hope to pursue involving the use of TDM techniques to study 
literary works and motion pictures.
666  The exemptions will also enable professors to 
teach TDM techniques to students using contemporary, diverse, and inclusive works.667      
With respect to the fourth statutory factor, as detailed in the discussion of the fourth fair 
use factor, assuming that the copyrighted works in the corpus would not be used for 
their expressive purposes, the Register does not believe that the copies created pursuant 
to the exemptions would serve as substitutes for the original or interfere with licensing 
markets.  The requirement to employ robust security measures will further reduce the 
risk of public access and distribution of the copyrighted works.   
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA recommends adoption of the exemptions to allow circumvention by researchers 
seeking to perform TDM on electronic copies of literary works and motion pictures.  It 
concludes that petitioners persuasively demonstrated that the proposed use is likely to 
be noninfringing.  In its view, like HathiTrust and Google Books, the purpose of the 
proposed use is to provide information about the copyrighted works, not to replicate the 
works’ contents.
668  It further concludes that the products of TDM research, such as 
scholarly books and articles, “make virtually none of the original work accessible to the 
public, and are not in any way a substitute for the original works.”669  NTIA believes that 
proponents demonstrated a need for researchers to have access to the underlying 
copyrighted materials.670  NTIA distinguishes the proposed exemptions—which would 
allow only researchers and those checking or reviewing their work to access to the 
 
665 2015 Recommendation at 94, 311. 
666 Authors Alliance/AAUP/LCA Class 7 Initial at Apps. B–P. 
667 Id. at 31.  While proponents raised the promotion of diversity and equity as a separate factor 
that the Register should consider, the Register finds that these important interests relate to the 
educational, research, and scholarship interests discussed in the second and third statutory 
criteria.    
668 NTIA Letter at 51–52.   
669 Id. at 52–53.   
670 Id. at 57.   

[PAGE 124]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
121 
underlying works—from the facts in TVEyes , in which customers could access virtually 
all of Fox’s audiovisual content.671   
Rather than requiring specific security measures, NTIA recommends that the Librarian 
adopt “a flexible framework that can be tailored to the type of work at issue, the 
resources of the institution, and evolving security threats.”672  NTIA believes that 
expressly prohibiting commercial uses of the accessed works would further minimize 
the risk of market harm.673 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
Proponents have proposed exemptions that would enable researchers to conduct TDM 
research on collections of motion pictures and literary works.  They assembled 
numerous letters from academics that effectively demonstrated the types of research 
questions they desire to answer and explained why existing options do not meet 
researchers’ needs.  The Register recognizes the academic and societal benefits that 
could result from TDM research and concludes that properly tailored exemptions meet 
the statutory requirements for adoption.   
The Register recommends limiting the exemptions to researchers at institutions of higher 
education, and staff members and students working at the direction of such researchers.  
To define the class of eligible institutions, the Register has incorporated language offered 
by proponents that is drawn from Higher Education Act.
674  All of the evidence 
proponents submitted regarding potential TDM research projects involved researchers 
and students from institutions of higher learning.  The record contains no evidence that 
libraries, archives, or museums that are not affiliated with institutions of higher learning 
will conduct TDM research under the exemptions or are able to implement appropriate 
security measures to secure large corpora of copyrighted works.  The recommended 
exemptions therefore do not extend to those types of institutions.  
The Register recommends that circumvention be permitted only on copies of the 
copyrighted works that were lawfully acquired and that the institution owns or for 
which it has a non-time-limited license.  Circumvention is not permitted to access copies 
that the institution has rented or borrowed.   
As discussed above, the Register also finds it appropriate to add a limitation that the 
person undertaking the circumvention view or listen to the contents of the copyrighted 
works in the corpus solely for the purpose of verification of the research findings, not for 
 
671 Id. at 54.   
672 Id. at 57.   
673 Id. at 57–58.  
674 Authors Alliance/AAUP/LCA Class 7 Reply at 9 (quoting 20 U.S.C. § 1001(a)).  

[PAGE 125]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
122 
their expressive purposes.  Further, for the reasons discussed above, the Register 
recommends that the institution storing or hosting a corpus of copyrighted works be 
required to use “effective security measures” to secure the corpus from unauthorized 
access, distribution, or download.  The recommended exemptions define “effective 
security measures” to mean security measures that have been agreed upon by copyright 
owners and institutions of higher education, or, in the absence of such measures, the 
security measures that the institution uses to keep its own highly confidential 
information secure.  If the institution uses the security measures it uses to protect its 
own highly confidential information, it must, upon a reasonable request from a 
copyright owner whose work is contained in the corpus, provide information regarding 
the nature of such measures to that party.   
The Register recommends that the Librarian designate the following classes:    
(1) (i) Motion pictures, as defined in 17 U.S.C. § 101, where the motion picture 
is on a DVD protected by the Content Scramble System, on a Blu-ray disc 
protected by the Advanced Access Content System, or made available for 
digital download where:  
(A) The circumvention is undertaken by a researcher affiliated with a 
nonprofit institution of higher education, or by a student or 
information technology staff member of the institution at the direction 
of such researcher, solely to deploy text and data mining techniques on 
a corpus of motion pictures for the purpose of scholarly research and 
teaching;   
(B) The copy of each motion picture is lawfully acquired and owned by 
the institution, or licensed to the institution without a time limitation 
on access; 
(C) The person undertaking the circumvention views or listens to the 
contents of the motion pictures in the corpus solely for the purpose of 
verification of the research findings; and  
(D) The institution uses effective security measures to prevent further 
dissemination or downloading of motion pictures in the corpus, and to 
limit access to only the persons identified in paragraph (b)(4)(i)(A) of 
this section or to researchers affiliated with other institutions of higher 
education solely for purposes of collaboration or replication of the 
research.  
(ii) For purposes of paragraph (b)(4)(i) of this section:  
(A) An institution of higher education is defined as one that:  

[PAGE 126]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
123 
(1) Admits regular students who have a certificate of graduation 
from a secondary school or the equivalent of such a certificate;  
(2) Is legally authorized to provide a postsecondary education 
program;  
(3) Awards a bachelor’s degree or provides not less than a twoyear program acceptable towards such a degree;  
(4) Is a public or other nonprofit institution; and  
(5) Is accredited by a nationally recognized accrediting agency or 
association.   
(B) The term “effective security measures” means security measures 
that have been agreed to by interested copyright owners of motion 
pictures and institutions of higher education; or, in the absence of such 
measures, those measures that the institution uses to keep its own 
highly confidential information secure.  If the institution uses the 
security measures it uses to protect its own highly confidential 
information, it must, upon a reasonable request from a copyright owner 
whose work is contained in the corpus, provide information to that 
copyright owner regarding the nature of such measures.  
(2) (i) Literary works, excluding computer programs and compilations that 
were compiled specifically for text and data mining purposes, distributed 
electronically where: 
(A) The circumvention is undertaken by a researcher affiliated with a 
nonprofit institution of higher education, or by a student or 
information technology staff member of the institution at the direction 
of such researcher, solely to deploy text and data mining techniques on 
a corpus of literary works for the purpose of scholarly research and 
teaching;   
(B) The copy of each literary work is lawfully acquired and owned by 
the institution, or licensed to the institution without a time limitation 
on access; 
(C) The person undertaking the circumvention views the contents of 
the literary works in the corpus solely for the purpose of verification of 
the research findings; and  
(D) The institution uses effective security measures to prevent further 
dissemination or downloading of literary works in the corpus, and to 

[PAGE 127]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
124 
limit access to only the persons identified in paragraph (b)(5)(i)(A) of 
this section or to researchers or to researchers affiliated with other 
institutions of higher education solely for purposes of collaboration or 
replication of the research.  
(ii) For purposes of paragraph (b)(5)(i) of this section:  
(A) An institution of higher education is defined as one that:  
(1) Admits regular students who have a certificate of graduation 
from a secondary school or the equivalent of such a certificate;  
(2) Is legally authorized to provide a postsecondary education 
program;  
(3) Awards a bachelor’s degree or provides not less than a twoyear program acceptable towards such a degree;  
(4) Is a public or other nonprofit institution; and  
(5) Is accredited by a nationally recognized accrediting agency or 
association.   
(B) The term “effective security measures” means security measures 
that have been agreed to by interested copyright owners of literary 
works and institutions of higher education; or, in the absence of such 
measures, those measures that the institution uses to keep its own 
highly confidential information secure.  If the institution uses the 
security measures it uses to protect its own highly confidential 
information, it must, upon a reasonable request from a copyright owner 
whose work is contained in the corpus, provide information to that 
copyright owner regarding the nature of such measures. 
 
 

[PAGE 128]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
125 
H. Proposed Class 8: Literary Works—Accessibility  
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption 
Petitioners American Council of the Blind, American Foundation for the Blind, National 
Federation of the Blind, Association for Education and Rehabilitation of the Blind and 
Visually Impaired, Library Copyright Alliance, Benetech/Bookshare, HathiTrust, and the 
Perkins Braille & Talking Book Library (collectively “Accessibility Petitioners”),675 
request modification of the current exemption permitting circumvention of access 
controls on e-books for accessibility purposes.  Proponents seek to update the current 
exemption language to track recent changes to the Copyright Act as a result of the 
Marrakesh Treaty Implementation Act (“MTIA”). 
Specifically, Accessibility Petitioners request the following modifications: (1) expanding 
the description of intended beneficiaries from “blind or other person with a disability” 
to any “eligible person, as such a person is defined in 17 U.S.C. 121;”676 (2) expanding the 
copyrighted works covered by the exemption to include “literary work[s] and 
previously published musical work[s] that have been fixed in the form of text or 
notation;”
677 (3) adjusting the reference to the market price of a “mainstream” copy to 
instead refer to the price of an “inaccessible” copy;678 and (4) requesting that if the Office 
determines that the import and export of accessible literary works pursuant to section 
121A of the Copyright Act implicate section 1201(a), the regulatory language explicitly 
include section 121A activity within the scope of the new exemption.679   
Proponents’ requested language is as follows, with proposed deletions indicated with 
strikethroughs and proposed additions indicated in italics: 
 
675 Some of these organizations also filed comments in support of Classes 3 and 17.  For 
simplicity, in this section, “ Accessibility Petitioners” refers to the coalition of accessibility groups 
who filed comments in support of Class 8. 
676 Accessibility Petitioners Class 8 Initial at 7–8. 
677 Id. at 8; see also 17 U.S.C. § 121(a) (permitting reproduction and distribution of “copies or 
phonorecords of a previously published literary work or of a previously published musical work 
that has been fixed in the form of text or notation”). 
678 Accessibility Petitioners Class 8 Initial at 9. 
679 See id. at 8 (arguing that “the import and export of accessible copies of works consistent with 
Section 121A is sufficiently distinct and attenuated from any circumvention activity . . . because 
“Section 121A covers works that have already been remediated into accessible formats, and so 
any necessary circumvention entailed in the remediation would already be covered by the 
existing exemption and its proposed changes”). 

[PAGE 129]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
126 
Literary works or previously published musical works that have been fixed in the 
form of text or notation, distributed electronically, that are protected by 
technological measures that either prevent the enabling of read-aloud 
functionality or interfere with screen readers or other applications or assistive 
technologies: 
(i) When a copy or phonorecord of such a work is lawfully obtained by a 
blind or other an eligible person with a disability, as such a person is 
defined in 17 U.S.C. 121; provided, however, that the rights owner is 
remunerated, as appropriate, for the market price of the mainstream an 
inaccessible copy of the work as made available to the general public 
through customary channels; or 
(ii) When such a work is a nondramatic literary work, lawfully obtained 
and used by an authorized entity pursuant to 17 U.S.C. 121. 
AAP filed comments supporting the proposed exemption,680 and FSF filed comments 
that were generally supportive but did not provide evidence or substantive argument 
regarding the specific proposal.681  Joint Creators filed a comment stating that they do 
not oppose this exemption to the extent it is consistent sections 121 and 121A, and 
seeking clarification that inclusion of a new reference to “phonorecords” would not 
permit unauthorized access to phonorecords in which performances of musical works 
are fixed.682 
For the reasons discussed below, the Register recommends that the proposed changes be 
adopted. 
b. Overview of Issues 
In previous rulemakings, the Register has noted the significant role of e-books in 
improving accessibility for persons who are blind, visually impaired, or print 
disabled.
683  The Register has also recognized that many e-books are protected by TPMs 
that interfere with the proper operation of assistive technologies,684 and thus has 
recommended adoption of exemptions to allow circumvention of such technological 
 
680 AAP Class 8 Reply at 2 (agreeing that “it is appropriate to update the language of the existing 
exemption in the manner proposed in Proposed Class 8 in recognition of changes to U.S. law to 
implement the Marrakesh Treaty”). 
681 FSF Class 8 Initial at 2. 
682 Joint Creators Class 8 Opp’n at 2. 
683 2015 Recommendation at 128; 2012 Recommendation at 16.  
684 2018 Recommendation at 22; 2015 Recommendation at 128; 2012 Recommendation at 23.   

[PAGE 130]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
127 
measures.685  The current exemption allows for circumvention by individuals and 
entities that qualify for the exceptions set forth in section 121 of the Copyright Act, also 
known as the “Chafee Amendment,” as it existed during the 2018 rulemaking.  Under 
section 121, nonprofit organizations and government agencies that provide services to 
visually impaired persons may reproduce and distribute accessible versions of certain 
copyrighted works exclusively for use by such persons.686 
After the 2018 rulemaking, Congress passed, and the President signed, the MTIA,687 
which updated section 121 and created a new section, 121A, to implement the United 
States’ obligations under the Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works 
for Persons Who Are Blind, Visually Impaired or Otherwise Print Disabled (“Marrakesh 
Treaty”).  Among other changes, the MTIA modified section 121 by expanding the 
works eligible for reproduction or distribution from nondramatic literary works to 
“published literary work[s]” and “previously published musical work[s] that ha[ve] 
been fixed in the form of text or notation.”
688  The MTIA also modified the scope of 
beneficiaries from individuals certified as having a disability to any “eligible person.”689  
As amended, an “eligible person” is someone who is (A) blind, (B) “has a visual 
impairment or perceptual or reading disability” that limits their ability to read printed 
works on similar terms as someone without an impairment or disability, or (C) is 
“otherwise unable, through physical disability, to hold or manipulate a book or to focus 
or move the eyes to the extent that would be normally acceptable for reading.”690  
Accessibility Petitioners request that the current e-books exemption for accessibility be 
updated to incorporate these statutory changes. 
The proposed modifications encompass both “literary works” and “musical works that 
have been fixed in the form of text or notation,” and thus would place two categories of 
 
685 2018 Recommendation at 22–23; 2015 Recommendation at 136–37; 2012 Recommendation at 
23–24. 
686 See 17 U.S.C. § 121(a), (d)(2). 
687 Pub. L. No. 115-261, 132 Stat. 3667 (2018). 
688 Compare 17 U.S.C. § 121(a), with 17 U.S.C. § 121(a) (2012) (covering only “previously published, 
nondramatic literary work[s]”). 
689 Compare 17 U.S.C. § 121(d)(3) (defining “eligible person”), with 17 U.S.C. § 121(d)(2) (2012) 
(defining “blind or other persons with disabilities” as individuals eligible to receive accessible 
materials under 2 U.S.C. § 135a); 2 U.S.C. § 135a (2018) (authorizing receipt of accessible materials 
by “blind and to other physically handicapped readers certified by competent authority”). 
690 17 U.S.C. § 121(d)(3). 

[PAGE 131]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
128 
copyrightable works under a single exemption.691  The Register will evaluate both 
categories together because the relevant analysis is the same for each. 
2. Discussion 
In the 2015 rulemaking, the Register concluded that “making e-books accessible to 
persons who are blind, visually impaired or print disabled is a noninfringing [fair] 
use.”692  The Register has reviewed subsequent case law and has determined that the fair 
use analysis from 2015 remains reliable and is appropriate to consider in evaluating this 
class.  
Proponents request several modifications to the current exemption.  First, they seek to 
modify the beneficiary language to track section 121, changing language permitting 
access to works “lawfully obtained by a blind or other person with a disability” to those 
obtained by an “eligible person, as such a person is defined in 17 U.S.C. 121.”693  After 
considering the record, the Register agrees that proponents have shown that they will 
face adverse effects if this language is not modified.  Historically, this exemption has 
defined beneficiaries based on the text of section 121.  For example, in 2012, proponents 
proposed a class that would be “limited to individuals with print disabilities as defined 
by 17 U.S.C. § 121,” and the Register recommended (and the Librarian adopted) the 
proposed language.694  In 2015, the Register crafted an exemption that “reference[d] 
section 121 so that the intended beneficiaries of section 121 are able to benefit from the 
waiver on circumvention.”695  With the class of beneficiaries under section 121 now 
modified by the MTIA, the Register finds it appropriate to amend the regulatory text to 
reflect the statute.696 
 
691 See e.g., 2018 Recommendation at 13 (the “starting point” for defining a class of work “is the 
list of categories appearing in section 102 of title 17, such as literary works, musical works, and 
sound recordings,” but “the particular class of copyrighted works is intended to be a narrow and 
focused subset of the broad categories of works . . . identified in section 102”) (internal citations 
and alterations omitted). 
692 2015 Recommendation at 135. 
693 Accessibility Petitioners Class 3 Initial at 7–8, 9. 
694 2012 Recommendation at 17, 24–25; see also id. at 24 (modifying proposed regulatory language 
“to ensure that it is consistent with, but not an enlargement of, Section 121”). 
695 2015 Recommendation at 137. 
696 As proponents note, the current exemption refers to section 121’s definition for the term “blind 
or other persons with disabilities.”  See Accessibility Petitioners Class 8 Initial at 15; 37 C.F.R. 
§ 201.40(b)(3)(i).  That term is no longer defined in section 121.  The prior version of section 121 
defined the term by reference to the Pratt-Smoot Act’s provisions requiring recipients of 
accessible materials to be “certified by a competent authority,” but the Pratt-Smoot Act was 
 

[PAGE 132]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
129 
The Register also concludes that this adjustment does not alter the fair use analysis from 
prior rulemakings.  In 2015, the Register concluded that making e-books accessible “to 
persons who are blind, visually impaired or print disabled” likely constituted fair use.697  
Congress’s modification of section 121 covers this same class of persons: an “eligible 
person” under the statute is someone who is “blind”; has “a visual impairment . . . and 
so is unable to read printed works to substantially the same degree as a person without 
an impairment or disability”; or “is otherwise unable, through physical disability, to 
hold or manipulate a book or to focus or move the eyes to the extent that would be 
normally acceptable for reading.”698  The Office’s prior fair use analysis applies equally 
to this community.  The 2015 analysis drew heavily from the Second Circuit’s decision in 
Authors Guild v. HathiTrust, in which HathiTrust provided full text access to anyone with 
a “print disability,” defined as “any disability that prevents a person from effectively 
reading printed material,” including “[b]lindness” and physical disabilities “that 
prevent a person from physically holding a book or turning pages.”699  Because the 
HathiTrust holding addressed readers similarly situated to the “eligible persons” 
contemplated by section 121, making e-books accessible to that expanded class likely 
constitutes a fair use. 
Second, proponents request that the exemption be expanded to encompass “previously 
published musical works that have been fixed in the form of text or notation.”  As 
proponents point out, the MTIA expanded the scope of eligible works in section 121 
from “nondramatic literary works” to include all “literary works and previously 
published musical works that have been fixed in the form of text or notation.”700  The 
Marrakesh Treaty defines the relevant works as those “in the form of text, notation 
and/or related illustrations, whether published or otherwise made publicly available in 
 
amended to remove the certification requirement in December 2019.  See 17 U.S.C. § 121(d)(2) 
(2012) (defining “blind or other persons with disabilities” as individuals eligible to receive 
accessible materials under 2 U.S.C. § 135a); 2 U.S.C. § 135a (2018) (authorizing lending of 
accessible materials to “blind and to other physically handicapped readers certified by competent 
authority”); Pub. L. 116-94 § 1403(a), 133 Stat. 2534, 3206 (2019) (amending 2 U.S.C. § 135a to 
remove certification language and permit materials to be loaned to “eligible persons” as defined 
in the current version of section 121). 
697 2015 Recommendation at 135. 
698 17 U.S.C. § 121(d)(3)(A)–(C). 
699 Authors Guild, Inc. v. HathiTrust, 755 F.3d 87, 91 (2d Cir. 2014). See 2015 Recommendation at 
134–35 (discussing HathiTrust opinion and concluding that “making e-books accessible to persons 
who are blind, visually impaired or print disabled is a noninfringing use”). 
700 Accessibility Petitioners Class 8 Initial at 17 (quoting 17 U.S.C. § 121(a)). 

[PAGE 133]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
130 
any media.”701  The Treaty specifically states that this definition includes “works in 
audio form, such as audiobooks,”702 and the MTIA’s legislative history reads the 
reference to “illustrations” to require that section 121 be construed to permit the creation 
of accessible versions of a “textbook [that] includes graphs, maps, or tables of 
information.”703    
The Register concludes that the creation of accessible versions of this expanded set of 
eligible works is similarly likely to be a noninfringing use.  In 2015, the Register credited 
“the 1996 passage of the Chafee Amendment” as a basis for her conclusion that the 
requested use in the e-books exemption was likely noninfringing.
704  The Office reaches 
the same conclusion with respect to the recent modifications to section 121.  
Additionally, as noted, the Second Circuit in HathiTrust found that “providing printdisabled patrons with accessible versions of works in a library’s digital archive” is a fair 
use.
705  Though the copyrighted works in HathiTrust were books, the Register concludes 
that the fair use analysis is not different when applied to a musical work fixed in the 
form of text or notation.  In each of these cases, a print disability results in the inability to 
access the work.  Providing accessibly for this larger set of works is fair use because it “is 
not merely a matter of convenience, but is instead intended to enable individuals who 
are blind or visually impaired to have meaningful access to the same content that 
individuals without such impairments are able to perceive.”706 
Third, proponents seek to replace the phrase “mainstream copy” in the regulatory 
language with “inaccessible copy” on the ground that the current language “is an ableist 
framing that implies accessible format copies are not ‘mainstream.’”707  Proponents 
describe this change as non-substantive, and the Register agrees.  The Register 
recommends replacing this language.708   
 
701 Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works for Persons Who Are Blind, Visually 
Impaired, or Otherwise Print Disabled, art. 2(a), June 27, 2013, S. Treaty Doc. No. 114-6, 52 I.L.M. 
1312 (“Marrakesh Treaty”). 
702 Id., art. 2(a) n.1. 
703 S. REP. No. 115-261 at 3 (2018). 
704 2015 Recommendation at 133–34. 
705 Id. at 134. 
706 Id. at 136 (quoting 2012 Recommendation at 122). 
707 Accessibility Petitioners Class 8 Initial at 9. 
708 The phrase “mainstream copy” originates from the 2012 rulemaking, in which the American 
Foundation for the Blind asserted that “the publisher or rights owner should be compensated for 
[] the price of the mainstream book available to the general public because that’s the standard 
against which we would measure fairness.”  2012 Hearing Tr. at 34:06–09 (June 5, 2012) (Richert, 
 

[PAGE 134]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
131 
Fourth and finally, the Register declines to modify the exemption to include section 
121A activity because the record does not indicate that such activity implicates section 
1201(a)(1)(A)’s prohibition on circumvention of accfess controls.  Section 121A permits 
the import and export of accessible works to and from other Marrakesh signatory 
countries, subject to certain requirements.709  Proponents have argued without 
opposition710 that any works imported or exported under section 121A would be works 
that “have already been remediated into accessible formats, and so any necessary 
circumvention entailed in the remediation would already be covered by the existing 
exemption and its proposed changes.”
711  There is no evidence in the record that the 
import or export of works covered by section 121A involves circumventing technological 
protection measures, and it seems unlikely that activity such as the shipment of 
accessible physical copies or the transmission of accessible digital copies would 
implicate the bar on circumvention of access controls.   
Turning to the section 1201 statutory factors, the Register finds that each factor weighs in 
favor of the modifications requested in this class.  For the first three statutory factors, 
conforming the current exemption to the changes in section 121 as a result of the 
Marrakesh Treaty will increase the availability of copyright works for print-disabled 
persons.  The expanded exemption will make accessible versions of works more 
available to print-disabled readers, and will allow those readers to engage in activities 
contemplated by the second and third statutory factors, such as educational use, 
comment, criticism, teaching, and research.  For the fourth factor, there is no evidence 
that modifying the exemption to match the revisions to section 121 will undermine the 
market for literary works or musical works fixed in text or notation.  By requiring that 
copies of works under this exemption be lawfully obtained, it instead seems likely that 
this exemption will support the market for these works.  
Finally, the statute permits the Librarian to consider “such other factors” as appropriate.  
The Marrakesh Treaty explicitly requires signatories to ensure that legal protection for 
technological protection measures “does not prevent beneficiary persons from enjoying 
the limitations and exceptions provided for in this Treaty.”
712  The Register finds that 
 
American Foundation for the Blind); see also 2012 Recommendation at 23–24 (citing hearing and 
describing remuneration language drawn from the hearing as ensuring exemption “comports 
both with copyright law and proponents’ intent”). 
709 17 U.S.C. § 121A. 
710 At the hearing, Joint Creators stated that they do not have a position and are not opposing 
proponents on this issue.  See Tr. at 131:05–12 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Castillo, Joint Creators). 
711 Accessibility Petitioners Class 8 Initial at 8. 
712 Marrakesh Treaty, art. 7. 

[PAGE 135]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
132 
adapting the current exemption to reflect the recent statutory changes is consistent with 
this obligation.   
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA supports the requested changes in this class.  It explains that “[m]any of these 
proposed changes are necessary to be consistent” with the MTIA, and it supports the 
parties’ proposed language to clarify treatment of sound recordings of musical works.713  
In addition, NTIA supports removal of the reference to “mainstream” copies in the 
remuneration requirement, agreeing that this amendment is nonsubstantive and “does 
not change the overall 1201 analysis.”714 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
Proponents have demonstrated that, absent modifications to the current e-book 
exemption for accessibility, print-disabled individuals will face adverse effects in their 
ability to make noninfringing use of copyrighted literary works and musical works fixed 
in the form of text or notation.  Because proponents have met their burden of proof, and 
there is no opposition to the modifications requested by proponents, the Register 
recommends granting the requested exemption with slight modification as discussed 
below.  
The only concern raised in this class was whether the term “phonorecords,” which was 
added to section 121 by the MTIA, includes sound recordings of performances of 
musical works.  Joint Creators sought clarification from the Office that the term would 
not include such sound recordings, pointing out that such recordings were not the 
subject of the Marrakesh Treaty.715  Proponents do not contest this point, stating that 
they understood the term “phonorecords” to be included in the Marrakesh Treaty and 
subsequent implementation primarily “to clarify that audiobooks and similar aural 
renderings of covered literary works and musical notation can be remediated into 
accessible formats.”716  Accessibility Petitioners and Joint Creators jointly proposed 
regulatory language providing that the term “phonorecords” does not include sound 
recordings of performance of musical works, “unless and only to the extent the 
recording is included as part of an audiobook or e-book.”717  The Register agrees that this 
language addresses the concerns raised, and she recommends its inclusion. 
 
713 NTIA Letter at 59–60. 
714 Id. at 60.  
715 Joint Creators Class 8 Opp’n at 2. 
716 Accessibility Petitioners Class 8 Reply at 8. 
717 Joint Class 8 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2 (May 14, 2021).   

[PAGE 136]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
133 
Finally, though no parties have raised this issue, the Register considers whether the 
proposed language appropriately comprises a single “class of works.”  While this 
exemption previously has been limited to literary works, adapting the new language 
from section 121 results in a class comprising both literary works and musical works, 
provided the latter have been previously published and are fixed in the form of text or 
notation.  Based on section 1201’s legislative history, the Register historically has defined 
classes of works as a “narrow and focused subset” of the broader categories of works in 
section 102, which serve as a “starting point” in defining a class.718  For that reason, the 
Register has generally declined to recommend exemptions that span more than one 
section 102 category.719  Here, however, Congress adopted a statutory provision 
grouping these two categories of works together for purposes of the relevant copyright 
exceptions.  Moreover, for the reasons discussed above, the adverse effects analysis for 
literary works and certain musical works is the same in this context.  The Register 
therefore finds it appropriate to include both categories in a single exemption. 
The Register accordingly recommends that the Librarian designate the following class: 
(i) Literary works or previously published musical works that have been fixed 
in the form of text or notation, distributed electronically, that are protected by 
technological measures that either prevent the enabling of read-aloud 
functionality or interfere with screen readers or other applications or assistive 
technologies:  
(A) When a copy or phonorecord of such a work is lawfully obtained by 
an eligible person, as such a person is defined in 17 U.S.C. § 121; 
provided, however, that the rights owner is remunerated, as 
appropriate, for the market price of an inaccessible copy of the work as 
made available to the general public through customary channels; or 
(B) When such a work is lawfully obtained and used by an authorized 
entity pursuant to 17 U.S.C. § 121. 
(ii) For the purposes of paragraph (b)(6)(i) of this section, a “phonorecord of 
such a work” does not include a sound recording of a performance of a musical 
 
718 See 2018 Recommendation at 13 (emphasis omitted) (quoting House Manager’s Report at 7; 
Commerce Comm. Report at 38). 
719 See 2006 Recommendation at 80–83 (rejecting classes of “[a]ll works and fair use works” and 
“[a]ll works protected by access controls that prevent the creation of backup copies” for failure to 
articulate a specific class of works); 2003 Recommendation at 82–84 (rejecting class of “all works 
. . .  for noninfringing uses” because a class of works must be “some subset of the section 102 
categories of works”). 

[PAGE 137]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
134 
work unless and only to the extent the recording is included as part of an 
audiobook or e-book. 
  

[PAGE 138]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
135 
I. Proposed Class 9: Literary Works—Medical Device Data    
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption 
Several members of the Coalition of Medical Device Patients and Researchers 
(“Coalition”),720 seek to expand the current exemption for medical device data by 
removing several limitations imposed when the rule was adopted in 2015.  First, they 
seek to eliminate the language limiting the exemption to ”wholly or partially implanted” 
medical devices.721  Second, they seek to expand the current exemption to “permit third 
parties to perform the circumvention, with permission, on behalf of the patient.”722  
Third, they request that the Librarian remove the limitation that circumvention be 
accomplished via the “passive monitoring of wireless transmissions.”723  Finally, they 
seek to remove the requirement that circumvention not violate other applicable laws.724   
Taken together, proponents’ requested language is as follows: 
Literary works consisting of compilations of data generated by medical 
devices or by their corresponding personal monitoring systems, where 
such circumvention is undertaken by or on behalf of a patient for the sole 
purpose of lawfully accessing the data generated by their own device or 
monitoring system.725  
 
720 Coalition member Hugo Campos filed the petition for this class, see Hugo Campos Class 9 Pet., 
and subsequent comments were filed by the Coalition.  See Coal. of Med. Device Patients & 
Researchers (“Coalition”) Class 9 Initial; Coalition Class 9 Reply.  For simplicity, the Register will 
refer to the proponents as the “Coalition” in discussing this class. 
721 Hugo Campos Class 9 Pet. at 2. 
722 Id. 
723 Coalition Class 9 Initial at 3. 
724 Compare id., with 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(4). 
725 Coalition Class 9 Initial at 3.  Compare 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(4), with Coalition Class 9 Initial at 3, 
and Hugo Campos Class 9 Pet. at 2. 

[PAGE 139]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
136 
FSF and an anonymous commenter filed brief comments in support of the petition.726  
ACT | The App Association (“ ACT”) filed a comment opposing the petition.727 
For the reasons discussed below, the Register recommends that the proposed 
amendments be adopted. 
b. Overview of Issues 
As described in greater detail in the 2015 Recommendation, many medical devices 
“measure and record data about physiological developments taking place within the 
body, and communicate that data wirelessly to equipment maintained at hospitals or 
doctors’ offices, or to corresponding personal monitoring systems.”728  Some personal 
monitoring systems also “transmit data to a monitoring company and ultimately to the 
patient’s physician.”729  In both circumstances, the transmission of data between the 
medical device or personal monitoring system is “[i]ncreasingly . . . protected by TPMs, 
including encryption schemes.”730  Without circumventing these TPMs, patients cannot 
access the data outputs generated by their medical devices or personal monitoring 
systems without visiting a hospital or doctor’s office.731 
In 2015, the Register found that proponents had demonstrated that patient access to 
medical data generated by implanted medical devices or their corresponding personal 
monitoring systems was, or was likely to be, “hindered by TPMs that protect data 
outputs of those devices and systems.”732  The Register also concluded that the “use of 
TPMs will likely increase in the next three years.”733  The Register’s adverse effects 
 
726 FSF Class 9 Initial at 2 (stating “[u]sers of medical devices should not fear legal consequences 
for accessing information on their own devices”); Anonymous Class 9 Initial (agreeing that 
“[p]atients who have medical devices should absolutely have an accessible way to review their 
body’s data”). 
727 ACT Class 9 Opp’n.  Morgan Reed, ACT’s president, filed the opposition comment and 
testified at the hearing for this class “in [his] role as the Executive Director of The Connected 
Health Initiative,” which is an initiative of ACT.  Tr. at 525:20–23 (Apr. 8, 2021) (Reed, ACT); see 
Morgan Reed, Connected Health Initiative Sees Positive Movement in FDA Guidance, CONNECTED 
HEALTH (Dec. 7, 2017), https://www.connectedhi.com/blog/2017/12/7/connected-health-initiativesees-positive-movement-in-fda-guidance (describing the Initiative as “ ACT | The App 
Association’s Connected Health Initiative”).   
728 2015 Recommendation at 378. 
729 Id.   
730 Id. 
731 Id. at 386. 
732 Id. at 401.   
733 2015 Recommendation at 392. 

[PAGE 140]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
137 
finding was based on proponents’ explanations that patient access to medical device 
data was limited or was only shared with patients for a fee and that the data could be 
used to improve patient care and health.734  The Register also found that the 
circumvention prohibition prevented patients from “real-time monitoring of their own 
health status, including medical incidents reflected in data outputs.”735   
The Register further determined that, based on the record before her, limitations were 
required to ensure that the exemption was properly tailored.  First, the Register 
recommended limiting the exemption to “wholly or partially implanted” devices 
because proponents had provided a record only for such devices.736  Second, the Register 
declined to recommend circumvention “at the direction of a patient” because she 
concluded that phrase could “implicate the anti-trafficking provisions set forth in section 
1201(a)(2) and (b).”737  Third, the Register limited the recommended exemption to 
circumvention undertaken “solely for the purpose of passively accessing data that is 
already being generated or transmitted by the device,” as the record indicated that 
broader uses would increase the power demands on devices and therefore could impact 
the device’s battery life.738  Lastly, the Register recommended that “any actions taken 
under the exemption . . . be compliant with all applicable laws and regulations,” as 
“[t]hese laws and others, as well as FDA regulatory oversight, provide critical legal 
protections in relation to medical devices and their related computer systems and 
should be carefully studied by those seeking to take advantage of the exemption.”
739     
During the seventh triennial rulemaking, the Office recommended, and the Librarian 
approved, the granting of Mr. Campos’s petition to renew the exemption.
740  No 
comments were filed in opposition. 
 
734 Id. at 382, 386–87. 
735 Id. at 397. 
736 See id. at 379–380 (“While in its petition MDRC also referred to ‘devices [that] are designed for 
attachment’ as well as implantation in patients, MDRC’s subsequent filings and the remainder of 
the record demonstrate that the proposed exemption is not intended to encompass attached 
devices that are neither wholly nor partially implanted.”). 
737 2015 Recommendation at 401–02. 
738 Id. at 401.  The record also reflected that the request was limited to circumventing TPMs on 
wireless transmissions.  See id. at 380, 382 & n.2556. 
739 Id. at 401–02. 
740 2018 Recommendation at 23 (“Mr. Campos’s petition demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption, stating that patients continue to need access to data output from 
their medical devices to manage their health.”); see also Exemption to Prohibition on 
Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 83 Fed. Reg. 
54,010, 54,028 (Oct. 26, 2018) (determination of Librarian issuing renewed exemption). 

[PAGE 141]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
138 
Currently, proponents set forth several arguments as to why the Register should expand 
the current exemption and remove these limitations.  First, proponents assert that 
removing the “wholly or partially implanted” language would allow the exemption to 
encompass non-implanted medical devices, and patients need access to medical data 
from such devices “in much the same way they need access to their data from implanted 
devices.”
741  Second, proponents argue that “passive monitoring” “is not a sufficient 
means for patients” who use certain types of medical devices that “do not transmit data 
wirelessly.”742  Third, proponents state that, absent the ability for third parties to conduct 
the circumvention, the “practical application” of the current exemption is “incredibly 
slim” because “[t]he vast majority of patients likely do not have the technical knowledge 
required to circumvent a TPM on their own.”743  Lastly, proponents argue that references 
to other applicable laws “should not underly any decision about the scope or 
appropriateness of an exemption,”744 as “the DMCA is concerned with copyright 
considerations, not other regulatory policy.”745 
2. Discussion 
a. Works Protected by Copyright 
As the Register explained in 2015, in many cases, data generated by medical devices 
“simply reflect[s] an unoriginal stream of data consisting of facts about the patient’s 
physiological condition” and thus is not protected by copyright.
746  Where that is the 
case, proponents do not need an exemption to engage in their desired uses because any 
TPMs on those medical devices would not “effectively control[] access to a [copyrighted] 
work.”747 
It is undisputed, however, that some medical device data outputs “might qualify for 
protection as literary works if they reflect a sufficiently original selection and 
presentation of data.”748  In those cases, section 1201 would apply to circumvention of 
 
741 Hugo Campos Class 9 Petition at 2. 
742 Coalition Class 9 Reply at 3. 
743 Coalition Class 9 Initial at 11. 
744 Id. at 13. 
745 Coalition Class 9 Reply at 4. 
746 See 2015 Recommendation at 393. 
747 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(A). 
748 2015 Recommendation at 393; see Feist Publ’ns, Inc. v. Rural Tel. Serv. Co., 499 U.S. 340, 348 
(1991) (holding that factual compilations may be copyrightable where the “choices as to selection 
and arrangement, so long as they are made independently by the compiler and entail a minimal 
degree of creativity, are sufficiently original”).  In the current rulemaking, ACT did not dispute 
that the relevant data outputs may be copyrightable. 

[PAGE 142]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
139 
TPMs that control access to the data outputs generated by medical devices or personal 
monitoring systems.  The Register therefore finds that at least some of the works in the 
proposed class are protected by copyright. 
b. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
In 2015, the Register found that “accessing personal medical data is likely to be 
noninfringing as a fair use.”749  She reached this conclusion because the use was for the 
noncommercial purpose of “access[ing] potentially life-saving data,” the copyrighted 
material at issue was “highly factual,” and the amount of the copyrighted material used 
was no more than necessary for the use.750  She also found that market harm was 
unlikely because there was “no indication that the desired uses will usurp the market for 
medical devices, their corresponding monitoring systems, the copyrighted computer 
programs within those devices and systems, or the data outputs generated by those 
devices and systems.”
751  Opponents have not questioned the 2015 fair use analysis in 
this proceeding,752 and the Register finds that the analysis remains sound.   
The Register will next consider whether proponents’ requested expansions to nonimplanted devices and non-passive monitoring describe fair uses.  Proponents’ requests 
to permit third parties to perform circumvention and to remove the other applicable 
laws limitation are discussed in the context of adverse effects.753 
i. Non-implanted Devices 
Proponents argue that the use of data outputs from non-implanted medical devices is 
fair use for essentially the same reasons as described in the Office’s 2015 analysis for 
implanted devices.754  For example, proponents argue that, regardless of whether data is 
 
749 See 2015 Recommendation at 394. 
750 Id. at 394–96. 
751 Id. at 396. 
752 See ACT Class 9 Opp’n at 4 (questioning whether the exemption complies with “the complex 
legal, regulatory, and voluntary standards regimes involved in the development of medical 
devices” but not whether as a matter of copyright law the exemption addresses activity that 
constitutes fair use). 
753 Proponents advance a fair use argument addressing researcher use of patients’ data outputs.  
See Coalition Class 9 Initial at 8–9.  But proponents have not requested new exemption language 
for that purpose, instead retaining the requirement that circumvention be done “for the sole 
purpose of lawfully accessing the data generated” by a patient’s device.  Id. at 3.  Because 
proponents have not argued that researchers are adversely affected by the current exemption, the 
Register does not need to consider whether such researchers are engaging in a noninfringing use. 
754 Coalition Class 9 Initial at 7 (arguing proposed exemption “is no different than the original one 
with respect to fair use”).  

[PAGE 143]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
140 
gathered from an implanted or non-implanted medical device, their proposed use is 
transformative under the first fair use factor because patients with access to the raw 
medical data can use new visualizations or analysis to gain “new insights and 
understandings,”755 and “draw conclusions about their health that they would be unable 
to appreciate otherwise.”756  Proponents also draw attention to the second fair use factor, 
noting the factual nature of any copyrightable compilations of medical data makes such 
data “far from the ‘core of intended copyright protection’ because it is informational 
rather than creative.”757   
Based on her prior fair use analysis, the record provided by proponents, and the lack of 
fair use arguments advanced by opponents, the Register concludes that the expansion 
from implanted to non-implanted devices is encompassed within the prior 
determination that accessing medical data from a device is fair use.758  The Register’s 
prior conclusion did not turn on the particular devices generating that data but rather on 
the nature of the data and how proponents intended to use it.759  The Register also notes 
that, as in 2015, opponents have not offered evidence that there is a market for the data 
outputs themselves, separate from the market for medical devices.760  Thus, the Register 
concludes that proponents have shown that patient access to medical data from nonimplanted devices is likely to be a noninfringing use. 
 
755 Id. at 8 (quoting Castle Rock Ent., Inc. v. Carol Publ’g Grp., Inc., 150 F.3d 132, 141 (2d. Cir. 1998)). 
756 Id. at 8; see also 2015 Recommendation at 395 (concluding that “to the extent [medical] data is 
being reinterpreted and/or recompiled to allow more insights into a patient’s health status, the 
use may well be a transformative one”). 
757 Coalition Class 9 Initial at 8 (quoting Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 586 
(1994)); see also 2015 Recommendation at 395 (finding that “even if data outputs are 
copyrightable, they are nonetheless highly factual in nature” and that the use is focused on the 
data itself rather than its compilation). 
758 See 2015 Recommendation 394–97.  During the hearing, ACT’s representative seemed to 
concede that the location of the device (i.e., whether the device is implanted or non-implanted) 
should not affect the noninfringing use analysis, stating that the issue “ends up being a 
distinction without a difference” and “not the primary area of concern.”  Tr. at 536:13–23 (Apr. 8, 
2021) (Reed, ACT).  
759 See 2015 Recommendation at 394–97 (giving weight to, among other factors, the “highly 
factual” nature of medical data and the “highly personal, noncommercial and research-oriented 
nature of the uses at issue”). 
760 Id. at 396. 

[PAGE 144]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
141 
ii. Non-passive Monitoring 
Based on proponents’ comments and hearing testimony, the Office understands nonpassive monitoring to mean assessing data outputs through non-wireless means.761  For 
example, proponents provide the example of “manually reading data outputs stored on 
SD cards in CPAP machines,” as those machines “store data exclusively on removeable 
SD cards and do not transmit data wirelessly.”762  At the hearing, proponents described 
other types of non-passive monitoring that may occur in the future, including “reading 
the memory off your phone” when a medical device connects to and stores health data 
on a patient’s phone.763  At a technical level, this could include “actively connect[ing] to a 
medical device or a receiver on that device to request the data from a program on that 
device,” and “actively intercept[ing] the data while the data is in route to a server from 
the device.”764  Proponents do not specifically address non-passive monitoring in their 
fair use analysis, arguing instead that “[a]ll four factors remain the same, regardless of 
the manner of acquiring the data.”765   
The Register agrees that this activity as so defined also likely constitutes fair use.  As 
proponents note, the purpose and character of the proposed use do not change when 
circumvention occurs through non-passive means.766  The second fair use factor also 
weighs in favor of fair use, as the data outputs are still “highly factual,” regardless of 
whether they are accessed through passive or non-passive means.767  Regarding the third 
fair use factor, the Register previously found that use of the entire work “may be 
necessary,” and there is no evidence in the record that different methods of accessing 
medical device data use different amounts of the work.768  Finally, the Register finds that 
the fourth factor weighs in favor of fair use, as nothing in the record suggests that the 
 
761 See Coalition Class 9 Initial at 11; Coalition Class 9 Reply at 3, 5; see also 2015 Recommendation 
at 381. 
762 Coalition Class 9 Reply at 3, 5. 
763 Tr. at 546:20–547:04 (Apr. 8, 2021) (Zemoudeh, Coalition); see also Tr. at 552:08–13 (Apr. 8, 2021) 
(Zemoudeh, Coalition) (“[I]f you were to read data off the memory of your phone . . . [t]hat 
would just be data on the memory of your phone that you read.”). 
764 Tr. at 547:05–547:16 (Apr. 8, 2021) (Zemoudeh, Coalition). 
765 Coalition Class 9 Initial at 7.  
766 See id. at 11 (noting that expanding the exemption “would open new avenues for data access 
even for devices covered by the existing exemption, allowing the search for and use of better, 
more efficient, or more easily accessible methods of circumvention, thereby expanding lawful 
access to personal medical data”); see also id. (“For the purposes of copyright law, there is no 
meaningful difference between passive monitoring and other forms of circumvention.”). 
767 2015 Recommendation at 395. 
768 See 2015 Recommendation at 396 & n.2658. 

[PAGE 145]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
142 
expansion would negatively affect the potential market for or value of data outputs.  
ACT makes the general argument that the exemption would “negatively impact the 
ability of app developers to successfully compete in the mobile health marketplace and 
protect users from risk of malfunctioning devices and data breaches,”769 but, as noted 
above, has not provided any evidence of market harm or substitution.  Instead, ACT’s 
assertions relate to proponents accessing medical device software for purposes other 
than accessing data outputs, which would be outside the scope of the proposed 
exemption.770 
Based on the foregoing, the Register concludes that accessing data outputs from medical 
devices is likely a fair use, regardless of whether the data is accomplished through 
passive or non-passive monitoring. 
c. Causation 
The Register finds that proponents have met their burden of showing that the statutory 
prohibition on circumvention of access controls limits their ability to engage in the 
proposed uses.  But for the prohibition, users likely could gain lawful access to the data 
outputs on medical devices or personal monitoring systems for these purposes.
771   
d. Asserted Adverse Effects  
Proponents argue that their ability to access data outputs is adversely affected by the 
limitations in the current exemption.  The Register considers these challenged provisions 
individually, then addresses the section 1201 statutory factors in relation to the proposed 
exemption as a whole.   
 
769 ACT Class 9 Opp’n at 5.  ACT makes this specific assertion with regard to the fourth section 
1201 statutory factor.  As the fourth statutory factor closely mirrors the fourth fair use factor, the 
Register mentions ACT’s statement here as well. 
770 See id. at 5–6.  But see Tr. at 553:02–05 (Apr. 8, 2021) (Pearlman, Coalition) (“[I]f someone were 
. . . to access the firmware for purposes other than accessing their medical data, that that would 
still be outside our proposed exemption.”); Tr. at 552:05–16 (Apr. 8, 2021) (Zemoudeh, Coalition) 
(“[I]t is unlikely that any of these non-passive monitoring techniques would alter the software or 
firmware of the device.”); Coalition Class 9 Reply at 5 (“[C]ircumventing TPMs to access 
proprietary code for copyright infringement purposes or to access other patients’ medical data 
would fall outside the scope of the proposed exemption.”).  
771 ACT argues that the cause of proponents’ concern “is not an inability to get the data but rather 
‘a substantial shortage of sleep apnea specialists across the United States’ who can provide 
patients with appropriate treatment.”  ACT Class 9 Opp’n at 3 (quoting Coalition Class 9 Initial at 
7).  The record, however, supports the conclusion that the prohibition on circumvention is the 
cause of users’ inability to access the data for the noninfringing uses they describe. 

[PAGE 146]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
143 
i. Individual Limitations 
Wholly or Partially Implanted Devices.  Proponents contend that this provision puts 
patients with non-implanted devices “at an unnecessary disadvantage” because 
“[w]ithout direct access to their data, access may be significantly delayed or patients 
may find it difficult or impossible to combine it with data from other sources, either of 
which can adversely affect the patient’s ability to manage their own personal health.”772  
Proponents also contend that “[p]atients need real-time access to their data from nonimplanted medical and wellness devices and corresponding personal monitoring 
systems in much the same way they need access to their data from implanted devices.  
Many current and upcoming devices obtain medical data about a patient without the 
need to be fully or partially implanted in the body.”
773 
Specifically, proponents provide the example of CPAP machines, which are nonimplantable devices, and describe how patients could use CPAP machine data to adjust 
their machines and enhance their treatment and health.774  Proponents contend that they 
cannot rely on the data directly provided on the machines’ displays because the 
algorithms in CPAP machines could provide inaccurate readings, such as 
“overestimat[ing] and underestimate[ing] patients’ [apnea-hypopnea indices (‘ APIs’)],” 
which presents a risk that “patients may not make proper air pressure or mask 
adjustments to treat their sleep apnea.”775  By conducting manual analysis of the data 
outputs, however, patients “can reveal false positives and false negatives that algorithms 
either use or fail to use in calculating patients’ APIs.”776  Proponents also discuss 
wearable cardioverter-defibrillators and hearing aids as examples of non-implanted 
devices whose data patients can access to make health assessments but for the 
prohibition on circumvention.777  ACT does not challenge these examples. 
After considering the record of these non-implantable devices, the Register agrees that 
the exclusion of non-implanted devices from the exemption is likely to disadvantage 
 
772 Hugo Campos Class 9 Pet. at 2; see also Tr. at 526:15–527:06 (Apr. 8, 2021) (McClellan, Coalition) 
(noting patients’ need for access to data outputs regardless of the location of the device and 
listing examples of non-implanted devices). 
773 Hugo Campos Class 9 Pet. at 2. 
774 See Coalition Class 9 Initial at 5–7. 
775 See id. at 6. 
776 Id.  “ API” stands for apnea-hypopnea index, which calculates the number of pauses in 
breathing, and is “determined by tracking the number of collapses and near-collapses of the 
airway per hour.”  Id. 
777 Coalition Class 9 Initial at 9–10 (discussing that patients’ data is only available to physicians); 
Coalition Class 9 Reply at 3; see also Tr. at 526:15–21 (Apr. 8, 2021) (McClellan, Coalition) (listing 
wearable cardioverter-defibrillators and hearing aids as examples of non-implanted devices).  

[PAGE 147]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
144 
patients who use such devices.  If the exemption is not expanded to these devices, 
owners of these devices will be unable to access data outputs for the same noninfringing 
purposes as owners of wholly or partially implanted devices. 
Passive Monitoring.  In 2015, the passive monitoring limitation was included to address 
concerns that increased requests for data outputs could impact a device’s battery life and 
effectiveness.778  Proponents argue that this limitation prevents patients from accessing 
data outputs on certain devices, such as those that store data locally rather than transmit 
it wirelessly.
779  As an example, proponents point out that “older [CPAP] models store 
data only on an SD card” and contend that retrieving medical data from the SD card 
“does not have any negative effects on the machine” because manufacturers “already 
contemplated” that patients may need to upload data from an SD card.780  Proponents 
also assert that the limitation leaves patients “unable to experiment with alternative and 
perhaps more efficient or effective ways to access their medical data” from devices.
781  
Additionally, proponents contend that the limitation “forces patients to enable wireless 
capabilities to access [the] data, which makes their data and devices more vulnerable to 
intrusion from third parties.”782   
Opponents assert that the removal of the passive monitoring limitation would provide 
unauthorized access to the underlying software in medical devices, creating a risk that 
the software could be modified in harmful ways.783  At the hearing, ACT’s representative 
asserted that non-passive monitoring is akin to “hacking the device,” which “puts 
patient safety at risk and really puts us at odds with what our regulators are asking us to 
do in these other environments.”784  Opponents also argue that patients are not 
adversely affected by this limitation because patients “have other legal options to obtain 
their health data and to file complaints,” such as taking advantage of regulations under 
the Cures Act or filing complaints with the FDA.
785 
 
778 2015 Recommendation at 401 
779 Coalition Class 9 Initial at 11; see also Coalition Class 9 Reply at 3. 
780 Coalition Class 9 Initial at 11; see also Coalition Class 9 Reply at 3 (“[M]any older models of 
CPAP machines store data exclusively on removeable SD cards and do not transmit data 
wirelessly, thereby making it impossible for the data from these machines to be accessed through 
passive monitoring of wireless transmissions.”). 
781 Coalition Class 9 Initial at 11. 
782 Id. 
783 See ACT Class 9 Opp’n at 5–6; Tr. at 534:21–535:09 (Apr. 8, 2021) (Reed, ACT). 
784 Tr. at 536:07–10 (Apr. 8, 2021) (Reed, ACT). 
785 ACT Class 9 Opp’n at 3.  Proponents respond that because FDA guidelines “heavily encourage 
the use of TPMs to protect patient data in medical devices,” they remain likely to experience 
 

[PAGE 148]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
145 
Proponents disagree that non-passive monitoring techniques would affect the software 
in medical devices.786  For example, they explain that requesting data outputs from a 
program on the device, reading data outputs off a telephone that collects patient data, 
and manually reading data off SD cards in CPAP machines, do not alter or implicate the 
device’s software, as these activities only involve requesting and reading data outputs, 
respectively.787  Additionally, proponents assert that the proposed expansion is crafted 
in such a way that accessing the firmware “for purposes other than accessing [patient] 
medical data” would constitute a violation of section 1201.788 
The Register concludes that proponents have shown likely adverse effects on 
noninfringing uses from the current passive monitoring limitation.  The record reflects 
that patients seek to access their medical data through non-passive means for the same 
purposes contemplated by the current exemption.  The Register acknowledges 
opponents’ concern that some methods of non-passive monitoring may involve access to 
medical device software code but believes that the proposed regulatory language 
addresses their concerns.   
Circumvention by Patients.  During the 2015 rulemaking, the Register recommended that 
the exemption be limited to circumvention undertaken by patients themselves, 
explaining that an expansion to allow circumvention by third parties could implicate the 
anti-trafficking provisions of sections 1201(a)(2) and (b).
789  Proponents urge the Register 
to expressly include language permitting third parties to circumvent TPMs on medical 
devices on behalf of patients wishing to access their data outputs.790  According to 
proponents, the current exemption is limited to patients with a “degree in computer 
science,” as a “vast majority” of patients do not have the knowledge needed to 
 
adverse effects within the next three years regardless of any alternatives to circumvention.  See 
Coalition Class 9 Initial at 14–15; see also Coalition Class 9 Reply at 3–4 (noting that ACT failed to 
“provide any information detailing any examples, let alone statistics, regarding whether the 
Cures Act helps patients obtain TPM-protected data”). 
786 Tr. at 552:05–16 (Apr. 8, 2021) (Zemoudeh, Coalition); see also Tr. at 544:07–17 (Apr. 8, 2021) 
(Zemoudeh, Coalition). 
787 Tr. at 544:07–17, 552:05–16 (Apr. 8, 2021) (Zemoudeh, Coalition); Coalition Class 9 Initial at 11; 
Coalition Class 9 Reply at 5; see also Coalition Class 9 Initial at 6–7 (listing examples of ways that 
SD cards in CPAP machines can be used to access data outputs without implicating the device’s 
software).  But see Tr. at 553:12–17 (Apr. 8, 2021) (Pearlman, Coalition) (“[T]here might be some 
circumstances in which there is overlap, that in order to get to the data, something else is 
inadvertently accessed even though it’s not used for any purpose.”). 
788 Tr. at 553:02–05 (Apr. 8, 2021) (Pearlman, Coalition); see also Coalition Class 9 Reply at 2. 
789 2015 Recommendation at 401. 
790 See Hugo Campos Class 9 Pet. at 2; Coalition Class 9 Initial at 3. 

[PAGE 149]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
146 
circumvent their medical devices.791  Additionally, proponents contend that expanding 
the limitation will “allow patients to share their data in a more direct way with family 
members or friends.”792   
Opponents argue that third-party assistance “will cause developers of connected health 
devices to be in violation of their legal obligations to protect consumer safety and 
privacy.”793  ACT explains that “[t]he FDA does not have a process to review third-party 
modifications of devices to ensure they operate safely.”794  At the hearing, ACT’s 
representative asserted that third parties are not regulated by the FDA or the Office of 
the National Coordinator within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.795  
ACT further contends that this expansion would open the door for others “to access the 
proprietary codes of all medical and health monitoring devices.”
796 
The Register recommends removing the language requiring that circumvention be 
“undertaken by a patient” and replacing it with a requirement that circumvention be 
done “by or on behalf of a patient.”  Although the anti-trafficking provisions in sections 
1201(a)(2) and (b) prohibit the provision of circumvention “service[s],”797 the Office has 
previously concluded that “there is at least a plausible argument that some forms of 
third-party assistance involving circumvention will not rise to the level of a prohibited 
‘service’ in all instances.”798  The Register is not, however, expressing any view as to 
whether particular examples of assistance do or do not constitute unlawful 
 
791 Coalition Class 9 Initial at 11–12; see also id. at 11 (noting that the current exemption’s 
application is “incredibly slim”). 
792 Id. at 12; see also id. at 12–13 (describing the Nightscout project that provides a way for parents 
of children with diabetes to monitor glucose readings). 
793 ACT Class 9 Opp’n at 4–5.  But see Coalition Class 9 Reply at 4 (“[E]xempting patient access to 
data from the prohibitions on circumvention will have no effect on manufacturer compliance 
with any of the types of regulations identified by [ACT].  If forms of data access run afoul of FDA 
regulations . . . granting the exemption will not change that.”). 
794 ACT Class 9 Opp’n at 5. 
795 See Tr. at 571:03–23 (Apr. 8, 2021) (Reed, ACT). 
796 ACT Class 9 Opp’n at 6.  But see Coalition Class 9 Reply at 2, 4 (“The language of the proposed 
exemption does not refer to third parties circumventing TPMs outside of the narrow purpose of 
assisting medical device users to access their own data.  Circumvention for those other purposes 
would still be prohibited by [section] 1201.”). 
797 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(2), (b)(1). 
798 2018 Recommendation at 224 (noting proponents’ argument that “third-party repair services 
are not primarily designed or marketed for the purpose of circumvention; rather circumvention 
of TPMs is merely ancillary to those services”); see also Section 1201 Report at 59 (concluding that 
there is “substantial uncertainty” on this issue). 

[PAGE 150]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
147 
circumvention services, and she cautions that these exemptions do not affect liability 
under the anti-trafficking provisions. 
Compliance with Other Laws.  This limitation was imposed in 2015 to address “serious 
concerns” raised by opponents that an overbroad exemption could result in significant 
health and safety concerns such as “device malfunction, degradation, or even 
damage.”799  The Register also gave weight to comments by the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (“FDA”) that permitting circumvention “as a general matter could 
interfere with its regulatory authority over medical devices.”
800  In this proceeding, 
proponents assert that the “applicable law” language reflects policy considerations 
“unrelated to the protection of copyright law” that should be outside the scope of this 
rulemaking.801  They further note that, because this proceeding can only create 
exemptions to section 1201(a)(1) of title 17, beneficiaries who circumvent in order to 
violate other laws will remain liable under those laws.802   
ACT, by contrast, contends that other applicable laws “are not irrelevant to the process, 
but are critical safety measures resulting from extensive work with stakeholders and 
policymakers.”
803  It further argues that this limitation encourages parties to consider 
their compliance with other applicable laws or regulations and makes violations less 
likely.804   
In light of the FDA’s past comments, the Office issued a letter inviting it to provide its 
views, if any, on the current request.805  The FDA provided a letter in response stating 
that it takes no position on the “applicable law” limitation.806  It requested, however, that 
 
799 2015 Recommendation at 398–99, 402. 
800 Id. at 399. 
801 Coalition Class 9 Initial at 13. 
802 Id. (“[I]f a patient accessing their medical data violates FDA regulations, that will continue to 
be true even if it is no longer a violation of copyright law.”); see also Tr. at 544:23–545:09, 572:18–
24 (Apr. 8, 2021) (Zemoudeh, Coalition) (arguing that “there are penalties under other laws and 
regulations that are deterrent enough” and, because they are more tailored to medical issues, 
“that would be able to address the violations in a better way”). 
803 ACT Class 9 Opp’n at 4. 
804 See Tr. at 576:16–577:07 (Apr. 8, 2021) (Reed, ACT) (testifying “it would be a mistake to take 
[this limitation] out” because it reminds circumventing parties that they “still need to comply 
with these other things, so [they] have a duty to do a better job”). 
805 Letter from Regan A. Smith, Gen. Counsel and Assoc. Register of Copyrights, U.S. Copyright 
Office, to Mark Raza, Acting Chief Counsel, FDA (May 4, 2021). 
806 Letter from Suzanne B. Schwartz, Dir., Office of Strategic P’ships & Tech. Innovation, FDA, to 
Kevin R. Amer, Acting Gen. Counsel & Assoc. Register of Copyrights, U.S. Copyright Office at 2 
(Aug. 13, 2021). 

[PAGE 151]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
148 
if that language is removed, the Office “clarify that nothing in the rule affects the 
application of other federal laws and regulations” and remind parties that the existing 
regulation applies only for the “sole purpose of lawfully accessing” specific medical 
device data.807 
After considering this issue, the Register concludes that it is appropriate to remove this 
limitation.  Opponents are correct in that the “open-ended nature” of the fifth statutory 
factor “permits broad consideration of a wide variety of factors.”
808  But, as proponents 
note, the Office has said that it “will generally decline to consider health, safety, and 
environmental concerns” in this proceeding,809 absent unusual circumstances.  Other 
government agencies are tasked with “enforc[ing] or cover[ing] gaps in their own health, 
safety, environmental, or other regulations,” and exemptions granted in this proceeding 
“provide[] no defense” against other laws and regulations.
810  And in this class, the 
agency with primary regulatory authority in this area, the FDA, does not oppose the 
removal of this limitation so long as the continued applicability of other laws is made 
clear.
811  The Register accordingly recommends removal of this limitation, and has 
recommended language noting that eligibility for this exemption is not a safe harbor 
from, or defense to, liability under other applicable laws.  This language is similar to the 
Register’s recommended language for Class 13.  
ii. Statutory Factors 
The Register finds that the first statutory factor under section 1201(a)(1)(C), the 
availability for use of copyrighted works, favors the requested modification of the 
implanted devices, passive monitoring, and beneficiary provisions of the current 
exemption.  Proponents persuasively establish that the proposed expansions would not 
adversely affect the availability of compilations of data outputs within medical devices 
or personal monitoring systems.  While proponents seek to access compilations of data 
outputs, the Office notes that acquiring data from medical devices implicates section 
1201 only where devices contain compilations of data outputs that are sufficiently 
 
807 Id. (emphasis and internal quotations omitted). 
808 Section 1201 Report at 124. 
809 See id. at 125–26. 
810 Id. 
811 Letter from Suzanne B. Schwartz, Dir., Office of Strategic P’ships & Tech. Innovation, FDA, to 
Kevin R. Amer, Acting Gen. Counsel & Assoc. Register of Copyrights, U.S. Copyright Office at 2 
(Aug. 13, 2021). 

[PAGE 152]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
149 
creative to be protected.812  And proponents are interested in the individual outputs, 
rather than any creative aspects of their compilation.813   
Similar to the 2015 rulemaking, the Register finds that the second statutory factor, the 
availability for use of works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational 
purposes, does not appear especially relevant based on the current record.814  
Proponents only briefly address this factor by stating that “any educational use of data 
from a medical device will likely require circumventing TPMs.”815   
The third statutory factor, which addresses scholarship and research, weighs slightly in 
favor of the exemption.  Proponents contend that “[a]llowing patients to circumvent 
TPMs to access medical data from their devices will increase the availability of reliable 
self-reported patient data, which will in turn encourage additional observational studies 
on chronic illnesses.”816  Proponents offer unrebutted testimony that nonprofit 
organizations currently aggregate self-reported patient data collected from implanted 
devices, which is shared with research groups to “refine or expand upon existing 
treatments.”817  The requested modifications will expand the types of self-reported data 
available for such research projects. 
Regarding the fourth statutory factor, the effect of circumvention of technological 
measures on the market for or value of copyrighted works, the Register determines that 
the expanded exemption is unlikely to have an adverse effect in this area, for 
substantially the same reasons discussed in 2015.
818  Proponents note that the exemption 
will have “no negative effect” on either the software operating the medical devices or the 
compilations of data outputs, as “patients will still purchase medical devices irrespective 
of their access to data and may even be more likely to do so if the data is readily 
accessible.”
819  ACT argues that the proposed exemption “negatively impact[s] the ability 
of app developers to successfully compete in the mobile health marketplace,”820 but it 
does not detail how patients’ access to compilations of data outputs would affect 
competition among app developers or device makers.  Additionally, the personal, 
 
812 2015 Recommendation at 392–394. 
813 Cf. id. at 395 (“[A]ny copyright protection extends only to the selection and arrangement of the 
data and not to the data itself, which is the focus of [proponents’] use.”). 
814 See id. at 398. 
815 Coalition Class 9 Initial at 15. 
816 Id. 
817 Id.   
818 See 2015 Recommendation at 398. 
819 Coalition Class 9 Initial at 16.   
820 ACT Class 9 Opp’n at 5–6. 

[PAGE 153]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
150 
noncommercial use of facts within the compilations of data outputs makes harm to the 
market unlikely.821 
Regarding the fifth statutory factor, which allows for consideration of such other factors 
as the Librarian deems appropriate, the Register again credits the FDA’s view that the 
proposed exemption is not “likely to significantly impact the safety or effectiveness of 
medical devices” and is not “likely to undermine or impede efforts to ensure an 
appropriate degree of cybersecurity for medical devices.”822  The FDA also believes that 
the proposed exemption does not “impair the ability of medical device manufacturers to 
comply with applicable regulatory requirements enforced by FDA,” as originally 
suggested by opponents.823  This factor accordingly does not weigh against granting the 
exemption.  On the whole, therefore, the statutory factors favor granting the requested 
modifications. 
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA agrees with the Register that an expansion of the current exemption is warranted, 
but disagrees with one aspect of the proponent’s proposal.  NITA does not recommend 
that the term “wellness device” be included within the exemption, noting that 
proponents only mentioned that term in the initial petition and did not explain how it 
differs from “medical device.”824  NTIA believes, however, that excluding the term 
“should not be seen as limiting the scope” of devices or corresponding monitoring 
systems that are covered under the exemption.825 
In support of the other proposed expansions, NTIA notes that patient access to medical 
device data “would provide relief from the harm patients experience due to delayed 
access to their health data” and that several adverse effects would continue if the 
exemption were not granted.
826  NTIA agrees with the Register that expanding the 
exemption to include non-implanted medical devices would not alter the fair use 
 
821 See Tr. at 544:06–07 (Apr. 8, 2021) (Zemoudeh, Coalition) (describing proposal as “just for 
access to data”). 
822 Letter from Suzanne B. Schwartz, Dir., Office of Strategic P’ships & Tech. Innovation, FDA, to 
Kevin R. Amer, Acting Gen. Counsel & Assoc. Register of Copyrights, U.S. Copyright Office at 2 
(Aug. 13, 2021).  The FDA further asserted that the proposed exemption is “unlikely to 
undermine the cybersecurity of affected devices, other than as intentionally undertaken by the 
patient and as may impact only such patient’s own device.”  Id. 
823 Id. 
824 NTIA Letter at 66. 
825 Id. 
826 Id. at 62–63. 

[PAGE 154]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
151 
analysis.827  It also agrees that the “other applicable laws” language should be replaced 
with a statement that the “exemption does not obviate the need to follow other laws and 
regulations.”828  Regarding non-passive monitoring, NTIA agrees with proponents that it 
is “often non-intrusive” and “appears unlikely” to compromise the safety and efficacy of 
medical devices.829  Finally, NTIA agrees with the removal of the phrase “undertaken by 
a patient” to expand the reach of the exemption to patients “who do not have the 
technical expertise or tools to circumvent technological protection measures to 
nonetheless access their own data.”830  NTIA, however, suggests that the exemption 
expressly provide that circumvention be “undertaken by or [on] behalf of a patient.”831  
As noted, the Register has not recommended such language in light of potential 
implications regarding the anti-trafficking provisions. 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
After thoroughly considering the record, the Register recommends expanding the 
current exemption as requested by proponents.  The new recommended language 
permits circumvention of non-implanted devices, does not require that circumvention be 
done solely via passive monitoring, removes the reference to other applicable laws, and 
clarifies that eligibility for this exemption does not preclude liability under other 
applicable laws.  The proposed language also adopts proponents’ language that 
circumvention be undertaken “by or on behalf of” a patient.  As explained above, third 
parties seeking to use this exemption are cautioned to consider whether their activities 
could give rise to liability section 1201(a)(2) or 1201(b), which are outside the scope of 
this rulemaking.  
Accordingly, the Register recommends that the Librarian designate the following class: 
Literary works consisting of compilations of data generated by medical 
devices or by their personal corresponding monitoring systems, where 
such circumvention is undertaken by or on behalf of a patient for the 
sole purpose of lawfully accessing data generated by a patient’s own 
medical device or monitoring system.  Eligibility for this exemption is 
not a safe harbor from, or defense to, liability under other applicable 
laws, including without limitation the Health Insurance Portability and 
 
827 Id. at 63 
828 Id. at 65. 
829 Id. at 64. 
830 Id. at 65. 
831 Id. 

[PAGE 155]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
152 
Accountability Act of 1996, the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986, 
or regulations of the Food and Drug Administration. 
 
  

[PAGE 156]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
153 
J. Proposed Class 10: Computer Programs – Unlocking 
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption 
ISRI petitions to expand the existing exemption for unlocking, i.e., circumvention of 
access controls on computer programs for the purpose of enabling a wireless device to 
connect to a different mobile network provider.  Specifically, ISRI seeks to modify the 
existing exemption to (1) add a new device category for “Laptop computers (including 
Chromebooks),”832 or (2) in the alternative, remove the enumerated device categories 
from the current exemption and permit unlocking of all wireless devices.  For the latter 
request, ISRI proposes replacing the current exemption with the following language: 
Computer programs that enable lawfully acquired wireless devices to connect to 
a wireless telecommunications network, when circumvention is undertaken 
solely in order to connect to a wireless telecommunications network and such 
connection is authorized by the operator of such network.
833 
The Office received comments supporting the proposed modifications from Consumer 
Reports, FSF, and several individuals.834  The only opposition comment was filed by 
MEMA, which opposed expanding the exemption to permit unlocking cellular-enabled 
vehicles.835 
 
832 ISRI Class 10 Initial at 5. 
833 ISRI Class 10 Initial at 9. 
834 Consumer Reports argued that the current exemption provides significant benefits for 
consumers and that “[t]he same considerations apply to other devices and appliances that 
depend for their functioning on a connection to a wireless network.”  Consumer Reports Class 10 
Reply at 2.  FSF opined that requiring new exemption requests to permit unlocking of new device 
categories is “an unnecessary burden” that should be eased by permitting unlocking for “all 
works and all users.”  FSF Class 10 Initial at 2.  Most individual commenters expressed concerns 
about unlocking phones, which are already covered by the current exemption, but some also 
expressed the desire to unlock all wireless devices.  See, e.g., Frank Ward Class 10 Initial (asking 
the Office to “rule in favor of consumers’ rights over devices they have purchased”); Justin 
Morrow Class 10 Initial (“Can we please stop this practice of having locked down phones or any 
consumer electronics.”); Luis Sepulveda Class 10 Reply (asking “[i]f we don’t let traditional 
internet companies lock our computers to their service, why are we doing it for the wireless 
companies?”). 
835 MEMA Class 10 Opp’n (arguing that the record did not support an exemption covering motor 
vehicles and that the Office should ensure the final exemption “is limited and expressly excludes 
motor vehicles and motor vehicle equipment”).   

[PAGE 157]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
154 
For the reasons discussed below, the Register recommends granting proponents’ request 
to expand the exemption to all wireless devices.  
b. Overview of Issues 
As explained in prior rulemakings, devices that connect to a wireless telecommunication 
network may contain TPMs to prevent use on a different network, even if the 
telecommunications radios and other hardware in the device have the technical 
capability to operate on another network.836  Wireless carriers may prevent devices from 
accepting a subscriber identity module (“SIM”) card from a competing carrier, by 
requiring input of a special code from the original carrier to enable use of competing 
networks, or by locking a device to operate on a subset of the wireless frequencies over 
which it has the hardware to communicate.
837  Circumvention to “unlock” a wireless 
device for use on other networks can occur by inputting special codes or running 
software to exploit security vulnerabilities and remove the software lock.
838 
The Office has received petitions to permit cell phone unlocking since 2005.  The 
Register recommended such exemptions in 2006, 2010, and 2012.
839  In 2015, the 
 
836 2018 Recommendation at 146; see also 2015 Recommendation at 138. 
837 2015 Recommendation at 144–45.  In the 2018 rulemaking, one proponent described the 
relevant TPM as a lock in the software on a device’s baseband chip, which allows the device to 
communicate with a cellular network.  2018 Hearing Tr. at 139:1–11 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Wiens, iFixit).  
In this proceeding, proponents have referred to the baseband processor as the “modem,” but the 
Office will use “modem” to refer to discrete modules containing a baseband processor that device 
manufacturers can incorporate to add cellular connectivity to their products.  See Tr. at 918:17–21 
(Apr. 21, 2021) (Kaufman, ISRI) (“Last cycle, it was referred to as the baseband processor.  That is 
synonymous with the modem”); but see also ISRI Class 10 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1 n.4 (May 7, 
2021) (citing The Difference Between Chipsets, Modules, and Modems (End-Devices), NimbeLink (Aug. 
16, 2019), https://nimbelink.com/blog/difference-between-chipsets-modules-and-modems/ 
(drawing distinction between baseband processors/chips as smallest unit and “modems” as 
larger unit containing a module that in turn contains a chip)). 
838 2015 Recommendation at 144–45; see also 2018 Hearing Tr. at 140:11–17 (Apr. 23, 2018) (Wiens, 
iFixit) (stating that circumvention involves “modifying a bit on [the] baseband”); Tr. at 918:17–24 
(Apr. 21, 2021) (Kaufman, ISRI) (testifying that “the thing that prevents any device from being 
used on a carrier is a setting in the cellular modem itself,” and users are “able to modify that 
setting by circumventing a TPM that basically modifies whatever bits of code to allow [the 
modem] to communicate with other carriers”). 
839 2006 Recommendation at 53; 2010 Recommendation at 163–64; 2012 Recommendation at 99–
100. The class recommended in 2012 applied to only phones acquired by consumers within 90 
days of the regulatory language going into effect, but Congress replaced the 2012 regulatory 
language with the 2010 language when it passed the Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless 
Competition Act.  See Pub. L. No. 113-144, § 2(c), 128 Stat. 1751, 1751–52 (2014).   

[PAGE 158]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
155 
exemption was expanded to include tablets, mobile hotspots, and wearable devices.840  
In 2018, the exemption was further modified to remove the requirement that devices be 
“used,” i.e., previously lawfully acquired and activated on a cellular carrier’s network.841 
In the last two rulemakings, proponents have requested that the Librarian expand the 
current exemption to all wireless devices.  In 2015, the Register determined that for some 
subset of wireless customers, unlocking such devices is likely noninfringing under 
section 117, and that “unlocking as a general matter is also likely to be a fair use.”842  The 
Register declined, however, to recommend a proposal to include all “consumer 
machines” or “smart devices” in the class because she found that proponents had failed 
to provide sufficient information about the kinds of devices that would be included to 
permit consideration of any adverse effects on noninfringing use.843  In 2018, the Acting 
Register again declined to expand the unlocking class to “all wireless devices” because 
proponents had “fail[ed] to make even a minimal showing that users of many types of 
wireless devices are similarly harmed by the inability to unlock them.”844 
Proponents in this proceeding seek to add a new device category for laptop computers, 
or, in the alternative, to expand the exemption to cover all wireless devices.  With respect 
to the former, proponents argue that laptops are increasingly being sold with cellular 
connectivity, such as 4G LTE and 5G, and that recyclers are beginning to obtain laptops 
that “are locked to a particular wireless carrier in the same manner as are wireless 
handsets, tablets, and other devices covered by the current exemption.”845  Proponents 
suggest that while it is “not completely clear” how frequently laptops will be locked to 
particular carriers in the future, “it is likely that many of the same business and 
economic considerations that led cell phones and tablets to be locked to one carrier will 
impact cellular-connected laptops as well.”
846  To support the inference that locking is 
likely to be an issue for some cellular enabled laptops, ISRI points to the Department of 
Justice’s recent findings that the GSM Association, an association representing major cell 
carriers, took steps to “entrench[] network locking practices” when designing the 
standards for embedded SIMs in mobile-capable devices.847 
 
840 2015 Recommendation at 170–71. 
841 2018 Recommendation at 162–63. 
842 2015 Recommendation at 162. 
843 Id. at 167, 170. 
844 2018 Recommendation at 156. 
845 ISRI Class 10 Initial at 6. 
846 Id. at 9. 
847 Id. (citing Ltr. from Makan Delrahim, Assistant Attorney General, U.S. Department of Justice 
Antitrust Division, to Timothy Cornell, Clifford Chance, GSM Association, re: GSMA Business 
 

[PAGE 159]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
156 
With respect to unlocking all wireless devices, proponents similarly argue that the range 
of wireless devices “continues to grow beyond laptops and the categories of devices 
covered by the current exemption,” and thus adverse effects are likely to occur if 
consumers are unable to unlock those devices.848  ISRI’s written comments list drones, 
televisions, and Internet of Things (IoT) devices as potentially facing adverse effects;849 
ISRI describes these as “illustrative” examples.850  ISRI also makes the broader argument 
that these and other wireless devices share the same cellular modem hardware and 
firmware, so the legal analysis (as well as need for an exemption) with respect to these 
devices is the same.
851 
2. Discussion 
a. Works Protected by Copyright 
This class involves computer software running on wireless devices, which can include 
TPMs as part of the code itself.  Proponents label the relevant copyrighted works for the 
entire class as “computer programs, in the form of firmware or software, that enable 
wireless mobile devices to connect to a wireless telecommunications network.”852  The 
Register agrees that the relevant software constitutes a computer program as defined in 
section 101 and therefore finds that at least some works included in the proposed 
expanded class are protected by copyright. 
b. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
The 2015 and 2018 rulemakings considered three main arguments that unlocking 
wireless devices is a noninfringing use: (1) some methods of unlocking, such as 
inputting unlock codes, do not implicate a section 106 exclusive right; (2) section 117 
privileges some forms of unlocking; and (3) “unlocking as a general matter” is likely to 
 
Review Letter Request at 11–12 (Nov. 27, 2019), available at 
https://www.justice.gov/atr/page/file/1221321/download (“DOJ GSMA Letter”)).  
848 ISRI Class 10 Initial at 10.  While ISRI concedes that it “does not yet have additional examples 
of carrier locking,” it argues that requiring analysis of individual device categories is “unrealistic 
and unworkable” given the rapid increase in wireless devices in the consumer marketplace.  ISRI 
Class 10 Reply at 6. 
849 ISRI Class 10 Initial at 10–11.  
850 Tr. at 925:12–18 (Apr. 21, 2021) (Kaufman, ISRI). 
851 Tr. at 925:12–27:14 (Apr. 21, 2021) (Kaufman, ISRI) (describing the relatively small number of 
5G cellular modems and arguing that “just like for phones and tablets, when you reuse the [5G] 
chip, the analysis for the TPM [i]s pretty likely going to be the same because there’s really no 
reason that the firmware associated with a given piece of hardware is going to be different”). 
852 ISRI Class 10 Initial at 5. 

[PAGE 160]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
157 
be a fair use.853  Proponents argue that the legal basis for their unlocking requests is 
“identical or virtually identical” to their past arguments, and proponents incorporate by 
reference their previous contentions and the Office’s legal conclusions from the 2015 
rulemaking.854  Because the Register must ensure that the new proposed uses in 
connection with the proposed expanded exemption are likely to be noninfringing,855 she 
considers anew whether these three grounds support the requested unlocking activity. 
i. No Prima Facie Infringement 
In the past four rulemakings, the Register has concluded that when unlocking requires 
“changing variables in the cellphone’s software in a manner that is intended by the 
software’s creator,” such activity is noninfringing.856  Proponents have incorporated by 
reference their prior arguments discussing unlock codes,857 but that evidence did not 
address the use of unlock codes in laptops or other wireless devices.  Because the record 
does not make clear whether unlocking these additional devices would involve similar 
uses of unlock codes, the Register focuses her attention on whether other legal bases 
support finding the proposed activities likely noninfringing. 
ii. Section 117 
The Office has previously concluded that in some cases, unlocking may be noninfringing 
under section 117(a), which authorizes the owner of a copy of a computer program to 
make or authorize the making of another copy where doing so is “an essential step in 
the utilization of the computer program in conjunction with a machine.”858  In 2015, the 
Register found “some evidence” that the owner of a wireless device qualifies as the 
owner of the copy of the device software for purposes of section 117(a), citing the Ninth 
Circuit’s decision in Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc.
859 and the Second Circuit’s decision in Krause 
 
853 2015 Recommendation at 159–64; 2018 Recommendation at 148–53. 
854 ISRI Class 10 Initial at 5. 
855 2018 Recommendation at 148. 
856 Id. at 149 (concluding that use of unlock codes “does not involve reproducing the device 
software or creating a derivative work” and thus does not violate any section 106 rights); see also 
2015 Recommendation at 160 (citing 2012 Recommendation at 90; 2010 Recommendation at 134).   
857 ISRI Class 10 Initial at 5 (ISRI “incorporates by reference the detailed arguments in its 2015 
comments regarding tablet computers”); 2015 ISRI Class 12 Initial at 4–5 (discussing “commonly 
used devices locks,” including “model-specific code[s]” and “device-specific code[s]” that permit 
the devices to be used on other networks once inputted) (emphasis removed). 
858 17 U.S.C. § 117(a); see 2012 Recommendation at 93, 2015 Recommendation at 160–62; 2018 
Recommendation at 149–50. 
859 621 F.3d 1102 (9th Cir. 2010). 

[PAGE 161]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
158 
v. Titleserv, Inc.860  These cases provide different tests for determining when a software 
user is the owner, rather than the licensee of a copy of the software under section 117; 
collectively they “remain the two dominant approaches to the question of whether 
software is owned or licensed.”861  The Register concluded in 2015 that users of the 
wireless devices in the class qualified as owners of software copies under either test, 
noting that the software is stored on the device itself, device owners have the right to use 
the device software indefinitely, and they have the right to discard or destroy the device 
(including its software).862  She further found that reproduction or adaptation of device 
software to allow it to operate with a carrier of the user’s choice likely constitutes an 
“essential step” in the utilization of the program within the meaning of section 117(a).
863  
The Acting Register reached the same conclusion again in 2018, observing that the 
relevant legal tests remained unchanged and that the section 117(a) analysis “did not 
depend on the relevant devices being used.”864 
After review of the current record, the Register finds that owners of laptop computers 
are likely to be considered owners of the copies of the software running on those 
computers, including the software governing communication over cellular networks.  As 
in 2018, there have been no significant changes in the case law altering or supplanting 
the tests from Vernor and Krause.
865  And the operative facts—that the software be stored 
on property owned by the user, that users have the right to use the software indefinitely, 
and that the owner has the legal right to destroy the device (and accompanying 
software)—are the same for lawfully owned laptop s as they were for wireless devices 
previously considered under this test.  Thus, the Register finds that owners of laptop 
computers are likely covered by section 117, which the Register has determined permits 
unlocking as a noninfringing act.
866 
The Register cannot, however, make the same finding with respect to all wireless devices 
on this record.  While the Office’s prior section 117 analysis did not depend on the 
 
860 402 F.3d 119 (2d Cir. 2005). 
861 See 2015 Recommendation at 160–62. 
862 Id. at 161 (citing Krause v. Titleserv, Inc., 402 F.3d 119 (2d Cir. 2005), and Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc., 
621 F.3d 1102 (9th Cir. 2010)). 
863 2015 Recommendation at 162. 
864 2018 Recommendation at 150. 
865 The only appellate case since 2018 to substantively address either test appears to be the Second 
Circuit’s decision in Universal Instruments Corp. v. Micro Sys. Eng’g, Inc., where the court applied 
the test from Titleserv and concluded as a matter of law that the defendant owned the software 
copies at issue for purposes of section 117(a).  924 F.3d 32, 44 (2d Cir. 2019). 
866 2015 Recommendation at 162 (“[I]f modifications to device software are necessary to make that 
device operate with a wireless carrier of the user’s choice, those modifications can be considered 
an essential step in the use of the device.”).  

[PAGE 162]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
159 
relevant devices, it did assume facts about what legal rights owners of the device had to 
use the devices and software.867  Proponents have not provided sufficient evidence about 
ownership with respect to all wireless devices for the Register to determine whether the 
same facts, and thus the same conclusion, apply here.  Proponents suggest that the 
shared quality of “inability to choose the mobile wireless communications provider for 
the device that they own and use or seek to recycle/resell” is sufficient to allow for a 
combined legal analysis,868 but that ignores possible factual distinctions among devices.  
Some devices may employ software licensed for only a limited time, and some devices 
may come with additional restrictions on use from the software developer or device 
manufacturer.  These distinctions affect the section 117 analysis, but proponents have 
not provided evidence allowing the Office to find that owners of all wireless devices are 
similarly situated for purposes of section 117.  In the absence of such a showing, the 
Register cannot find that unlocking all additional wireless devices is likely noninfringing 
under section 117(a). 
iii. Fair Use 
1) Laptops 
In prior rulemakings, the Register concluded that unlocking wireless devices such as 
phones, tablets, and mobile hotspots is likely to be a fair use.869  After considering 
proponents’ request to expand the exemption to laptops, the Register concludes that the 
fair use analysis from the 2015 and 2018 rulemakings applies equally to laptops.  As is 
true for unlocking cell phones and other devices covered by the existing exemption, 
unlocking laptops enables interoperability, involves circumvention of “highly 
functional” software code, only copies or alters as much of the copyrighted software 
work as necessary, and is unlikely to harm the market for the laptop’s software.
870  For 
substantially the same reasons as explained in the past two rulemakings, the Register 
thus concludes that unlocking laptops is likely a fair use.  
2) All Wireless Devices 
In the last two rulemakings, supporters of an exemption for unlocking all wireless 
devices provided insufficient supporting evidence to permit a fair use analysis.  In 2015, 
the Office concluded that “unlocking as a general matter is also likely to be a fair use,” 
 
867 See id. at 161 (giving weight to factors such as lack of time limits on use of installed software); 
2010 Recommendation at 132–33 (finding that owners of phones whose carrier contracts limited 
certain uses or modifications of phone software may have different section 117 privileges). 
868 ISRI Class 10 Initial at 10. 
869 2015 Recommendation at 162; 2018 Recommendation at 150–52. 
870 See 2015 Recommendation at 162–64. 

[PAGE 163]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
160 
but found it “impossible to evaluate” whether unlocking all “consumer machines” 
would facilitate noninfringing uses because of a threadbare record.871  In 2018, the Office 
again was unable to conduct a fair use analysis because proponents provided “similarly 
scant” factual evidence and did “not discuss the application of the fair use factors in this 
context.”872  In this proceeding, however, proponents have provided sufficient evidence 
to facilitate a fair use analysis.  After considering proponents’ arguments and evidence, 
the Register concludes that proponents have met their burden to show that unlocking all 
wireless devices is likely a fair use. 
At the outset, the Office determined in 2015 that “unlocking as a general matter is also 
likely to be a fair use,” and the 2015 analysis was not dependent on the specific devices 
being unlocked.873  The purpose of unlocking, regardless of the specific device, is “to 
make functional adjustments to the device software to enable the operation of a device 
on the wireless network of the user’s choice.”
874  The nature of the copyrighted work 
being modified—firmware on cellular modems 875—is “highly functional” and thus 
weighs strongly in favor of fair use.876  The amount of the software used, whether 
viewed as “limited parts of the device’s operating system” or significant copying and 
modification of the firmware, “is necessary to engage an otherwise benign activity”—i.e., 
allowing devices capable of operating on different cellular networks to do so.
877  And 
other than the unique instance of prepaid cell phones in 2015, the Register has never 
 
871 2015 Recommendation at 162, 164 (noting proponents had failed to show “whether unlocking 
would require creation of copies or derivative works . . . [or] whether permitting unlocking is 
likely to adversely impact the market for copyrighted works”). 
872 2018 Recommendation at 152. 
873 2015 Recommendation at 162. 
874 Id. 
875 Proponents argue, and the Register agrees, that the relevant copyrighted work to consider in 
the fair use analysis is the firmware running on a cellular modem.  See ISRI Class 10 Initial at 5 
(describing relevant copyrighted work as “computer programs, in the form of firmware or 
software, that enable wireless mobile devices to connect to a wireless telecommunications 
network”); 2018 Recommendation at 148 (Acting Register agreeing with proponents that “the 
relevant copyrighted works for the entire class are the computer programs running on the 
baseband processors in these devices”); see also 2018 Recommendation at 146 (crediting 
proponent testimony that “the relevant TPM as a lock in the software on a device’s baseband 
chip, which allows the device to communicate with a cellular network”). 
876 2015 Recommendation at 163. 
877 Id. 

[PAGE 164]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
161 
been presented with evidence that unlocking results in harm to the market for a category 
of wireless device or its firmware.878 
In this proceeding, proponents have provided sufficient evidence for the Register to 
conclude that the 2015 fair use analysis applies with equal force to unlocking all types of 
wireless devices.  Proponents offer unrebutted evidence that 5G-enabled devices 
generally use one of a small number of modems, meaning that the firmware subject to 
the fair use analysis and the TPM being circumvented are identical across device 
categories that share a particular modem.879  For example, proponents show that 
worldwide, there are 11 discrete 5G modems that device manufacturers can buy to 
integrate into their devices.880  Most 4G and 5G chipsets in the United States are 
developed by Qualcomm, so unlocking all wireless devices implicates a limited number 
of modems from a single chipset vendor.
881  Proponents argue that manufacturers of 
 
878 See 2015 Recommendation at 163–64 (raising concerns about prepaid cell phones and noting 
that otherwise “no opponent has suggested that the market for software used to operate 
cellphones or other wireless devices would be harmed by allowing those devices to be unlocked”) 
(emphasis added); 2018 Recommendation at 151–52 (considering fourth factor and finding no 
market harm from unlocking because concerns of subsidy theft are “not the result of an 
infringing product substituting for the manufacturer’s software in the marketplace” which is “the 
type of harm with which the fourth fair use factor ordinarily is concerned”). 
879 See ISRI Class 10 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1–2, Ex. A (May 7, 2021); Tr. at 925:12–27:14 (Apr. 21, 
2021) (Kaufman, ISRI) (X55 modem “is being deployed in a wide range of use cases, including 
IoT, including drones, including virtual reality headsets” because modem is “packaged into some 
module that is sold by various IoT providers, and that module that has that modem then can be 
deployed for all of the different use cases that we mentioned”). 
880 See ISRI Post-Hearing Resp. Ex. H, LTE, 5G & 3GPP IoT Chipset Report: Status Update January 
2021 at 2, Global mobile Suppliers Association (Jan. 25, 2021), available at 
https://gsacom.com/paper/chipset-report-january-2021-status-update/ (showing “29 
commercially available 5G mobile processors/platforms and 11 commercially available discrete 
5G modems from [] five semi-conductor companies”).  In short, and as supported by proponent’s 
submissions, a chip is a processor capable of wireless communication, and a module is a slightly 
larger unit containing a chip and adding a few additional features such as memory and voltage 
regulation.  See ISRI Class 10 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1 n.4 (May 7, 2021) (citing The Difference 
Between Chipsets, Modules, and Modems (End-Devices), NimbeLink (Aug. 16, 2019), 
https://nimbelink.com/blog/difference-between-chipsets-modules-and-modems/).  
881 See ISRI Post-Hearing Resp. Ex. C, 5G Device Ecosystem Report March 2019, Global mobile 
Suppliers Association (Mar. 2019), available at https://gsacom.com/paper/5g-device-ecosystemreport-march-2019/ (showing most devices using Qualcomm’s Snapdragon chipset, with Balong 
supplying only chipsets for Huawei devices, and the Samsung Exynos chipset only used in 
Samsung’s devices sold in Europe and Asia).  Huawei’s handsets are generally unavailable in the 
United States.  See Addition of Entities to the Entity List, 84 Fed. Reg. 22,961 (May 21, 2019) 
(Department of Commerce final rule adding Huawei entities to Export Administration 
 

[PAGE 165]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
162 
cellular chipsets generally design a single modem to work with all cellular networks, 
allowing the chipsets to “be used in the greatest number of devices and on as many 
carriers across the globe as possible.”882  And proponents argue it is unlikely that the 
market for the relevant copyrighted works—baseband firmware —will be harmed 
because “a unique feature of firmware is that there is not a separate market for firmware 
outside of the device that it is attached to, so there is no market substitute.”883   
In light of unrebutted evidence that the same set of cellular modems, and thus the same 
firmware, are employed in a variety of wireless devices without distinction based on the 
type of device, the Register concludes that the 2015 fair use analysis applies to unlocking 
activities with respect to wireless devices generally.  Regarding the first factor, making a 
locked cellular modem interoperate with other cellular networks, regardless of the 
specific device into which the modem is incorporated, amounts to “enabling 
interoperability with other software,” an activity that courts have found “is favored 
under the first factor.”884  For the second factor, the “highly functional” nature of modem 
firmware does not differ based on whether the firmware is installed on a modem 
embedded in a phone or in a laptop.885  For the third factor, unlocking would not use a 
 
Regulations’ Entity List).  See also ISRI Class 10 Post-Hearing Resp. Ex. B (chart showing 4G and 
5G laptops sourcing modems from Qualcomm and Intel); ISRI Post-Hearing Resp. Ex. F, LTE, 5G 
and 3GPP IoT Chipsets: Status Update at 5, Global mobile Suppliers Association (Nov. 2019), 
available at https://gsacom.com/paper/5g-modems-chipsets-status-update-2/ (excluding 5G 
modems, globally in 2019 there were 24 commercial 4G LTE modems available from 6 vendors).  
Intel has announced it will not compete in the 5G modem business, making it likely that in the 
next three years most 5G cellular chipsets will be those from Qualcomm.  See Intel to Exit 5G 
Smartphone Modem Business, Focus 5G Efforts on Network Infrastructure and Other Data-Centric 
Opportunities, Intel Newsroom (Apr. 16, 2019), https://newsroom.intel.com/news-releases/intelmodem-statement/.  
882 ISRI Class 10 Post-Hearing Resp. at 3–4 (May 7, 2021) (citing Tom Brant, Lenovo Flex 5G Review, 
PC Mag (Aug. 4, 2020), https://www.pcmag.com/reviews/lenovo-flex-5g (“the Flex 5G has a 
Qualcomm X55 modem, which can access nearly every cellular network available in the U.S. and 
many other countries, from 2G to 5G”)). 
883 ISRI Class 10 Post-Hearing Resp. at 4 (May 7, 2021).  
884 2015 Recommendation at 162.  See also Google LLC v. Oracle Am., Inc., 141 S. Ct. 1183, 1203 (2021) 
(first factor favored fair use where defendant’s use of copyrighted software was “necessary for 
different programs to speak to each other” and “expand[ed] the use and usefulness” of 
smartphones).  
885 See 2015 Recommendation at 163.  As proponents have shown, a particular cellular chipset, 
such as Qualcomm’s X55, can be incorporated into a wide array of disparate devices.  See ISRI 
Class 10 Post-Hearing Resp. Ex. A (May 7, 2021) (showing X55 integration into modules, 
including Quectel RG500Q, marketed for uses in laptops, video surveillance, digital signage, 
routers, medical equipment, and augmented reality) (citing New Products: RG500Q/RM500Q, 
 

[PAGE 166]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
163 
different amount of the copyrighted firmware depending on the type of device; in all 
cases the amount of copyrighted firmware used is no more than “necessary to engage an 
otherwise benign activity”—allowing devices to interoperate with different cellular 
networks.886  Regarding the fourth factor, while there is no evidence in the record that 
unlocking wireless devices is likely to decrease the value of copyrighted software within 
them, there is evidence that “unlocked [devices] (and the software they contain) are 
more valuable in the market than those that are locked—at least to the device owners.”
887   
The Register therefore finds that proponents have met their burden to demonstrate that 
unlocking wireless devices is likely to be a fair use. 
c. Causation 
The Register finds that proponents have met their burden of showing that the current 
qualifying language limits their ability to make some noninfringing uses of wireless 
devices beyond the enumerated categories in the current exemption.  Because the 
specifics of causation are intertwined with the adverse effects on proposed uses, in the 
next section the Register will address whether proponents have successfully established 
that the prohibition on circumvention is the cause of their asserted adverse effects. 
d. Asserted Adverse Effects  
i. Laptops 
ISRI argues that the current exemption has an adverse effect on users’ legitimate interest 
in unlocking laptops.  ISRI acknowledges that it did not request to include laptops in the 
scope of the previous rulemaking but says that in the intervening three years recyclers 
“have now begun to obtain and need to recycle and/or resell laptops with such wireless 
connectivity, but have found that some of those devices are locked to a particular 
wireless carrier in the same manner as are wireless handsets, tablets, and other devices 
covered by the current exemption.”888  At the hearing, ISRI testified that laptop 
consumers tend to recycle old models when they trade for a new version, and the recent 
 
RG510Q/RM510Q, Avnet, https://www.avnet.com/wps/portal/apac/products/newproducts/npi/aac-202002-quectel/ (product page for Quectel 5G module marketed as fit for uses 
such as “vehicle tracking,” “electricity meters,” “cash register[s],””street lighting,” and 
“personal/pet tracker[s]”)). 
886 See 2015 Recommendation at 163. 
887 Id. at 163–64; see also ISRI Class 10 Initial at 6 (“ISRI members report that an unlocked 
Chromebook device is often worth at least 6% to 8% more than a locked Chromebook”); ISRI 
Class 10 Reply at 5 (some donated laptops to schools that were carrier-locked could not be used 
and “as result, either went unused or were recycled”). 
888 ISRI Class 10 Initial at 6. 

[PAGE 167]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
164 
entry of 5G laptops in the market are the impetus for what ISRI expects will be a 
growing number of locked 4G-enabled laptops making their way into the hands of 
recyclers (who in turn seek to unlock them).889 
Looking to the section 1201 statutory factors, the first factor—the availability for use of 
copyrighted works—favors extending the exemption to laptops.  Because unl ocked 
laptops are more valuable for resale,890 an exemption for unlocking laptops will expand 
the availability of the copyrighted software within them by enabling them to continue 
their intended, functional use.  There is no evidence in the record suggesting that 
unlocking laptops will decrease the availability of copyrighted works.   
The second statutory factor, the availability for use of works for nonprofit archival, 
preservation, and educational purposes, and the third factor, the effect on criticism, 
comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship and research, are neutral.  Though 
unlocked laptops could serve as tools for these uses, that possibility does not materially 
affect this factor.891 
For the fourth statutory factor, the effect of circumvention on the market for copyrighted 
works, there is no evidence in the record that permitting laptop unlocking will harm the 
market for copyrighted works.     
Accordingly, the Register finds that proponents have demonstrated that absent an 
exemption, they are likely to be adversely affected in their ability to unlock laptop 
computers. 
ii. All Wireless Devices 
ISRI argues that the current prohibition harms owners of non-exempted wireless devices 
because of their “inability to choose the mobile wireless communications provider for 
the device that they own and use or seek to recycle/resell.”892  It contends that, regardless 
of what particular wireless device a consumer owns, consumers and recyclers are 
adversely affected when they are not allowed to unlock their devices to “switch to a 
better or cheaper wireless carrier.”
893  ISRI further argues that owners of wireless devices 
 
889 Tr. at 911:14–12:12 (Apr. 21, 2021) (Kaufman, ISRI); see also Tr. at 9:12:23–13:22 (Apr. 21, 2021) 
(Kaufman, ISRI) (testifying that laptops have not been the subject of this rulemaking because 
cellular-enabled laptops have surged in the market during the last three years). 
890 ISRI Class 10 Initial at 6. 
891 See 2015 Recommendation at 167–68; 2018 Recommendation at 154. 
892 ISRI Class 10 Initial at 10. 
893 ISRI Class 10 Post-Hearing Resp. at 5 (May 7, 2021).  

[PAGE 168]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
165 
of any kind “stand[] in the same position from a copyright law standpoint” as owners of 
devices covered by the current exemption.894   
ISRI suggests that, over the next three years, the adverse effects caused by the inability to 
unlock all wireless devices will increase.  ISRI has provided evidence that 5G cellular 
modules are now being marketed and sold for incorporation into a wide array of 
devices, ranging from pet trackers to point-of-sale machines in retail stores.
895  ISRI has 
also shown that 5G-capable devices are rapidly entering the market, with 33 devices 
announced in 2019 and 703 devices announced by 2021.896  Because “the same modem is 
used across device categories,” ISRI argues that the same firmware and TPMs are 
implicated in devices sharing the modem, and that consumers suffer the same adverse 
effects if they cannot unlock devices sharing the modem.
897 
The Register concludes that proponents have provided sufficient evidence that, absent 
an exemption, owners of wireless devices of all types will face adverse effects on 
noninfringing use if they cannot unlock them.  Device manufacturers are rapidly 
incorporating 5G modems into devices that have not previously been capable of using 
wireless networks.898  And proponents have shown that the main 5G modem currently 
incorporated into 5G devices, Qualcomm’s X55 modem, is in some instances sold in a 
device locked to a particular wireless provider.899  The Register finds this evidence 
 
894 Id. 
895 Id. at 1–2 (providing evidence of 5G module developed for incorporation into “vehicle 
tracking,” “electricity meters,” “cash register[s],” ”street lighting,” and “personal/pet tracker[s]”); 
ISRI Class 10 Post-Hearing Resp. Ex. A (May 7, 2021) (showing range of use cases discussing in 
marketing for modules incorporating Qualcomm’s 5G modem, including “business routers,” 
“4K/8K live streaming,” “consumer laptops,” and “smart factories”).  
896 ISRI Class 10 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1 (May 7, 2021) (citing 5G Device Ecosystem Report March 
2019 at 1, Global mobile Suppliers Association (Mar. 2019), available at 
https://gsacom.com/paper/5g-device-ecosystem-report-march-2019/ (identifying “seven 
announced form factors” including 5G phones, hotspots, and modules), 5G Ecosystem Report 
Executive Summary at 2, Global mobile Suppliers Association (Apr. 2021), available at 
https://gsacom.com/paper/5g-devices-april-2021-executive-summary/ (graph showing steady 
increase of announced and commercially available 5G products, with 703 5G devices announced 
by the end of March 2021, including phones, laptops, tablets, drones, head-mounted displays, 
and TVs)). 
897 ISRI Class 10 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2–3 (May 7, 2021). 
898 See id. at 1–2 (providing evidence of 5G module developed for incorporation into “vehicle 
tracking,” “electricity meters,” “cash register[s],” ”street lighting,” and “personal/pet tracker[s]”). 
899 See ISRI Class 10 Initial at 8 (citing Andrew E. Freedman, Lenovo Flex 5G Review: Solid Arm 
Laptop, but 5G Isn’t Ready, TOM’S HARDWARE (July 28, 2020), 
https://www.tomshardware.com/reviews/lenovo-flex-5g (describing laptop using Qualcomm X55 
 

[PAGE 169]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
166 
sufficient to show that some wireless devices across a variety of categories are likely to 
be locked to a particular carrier over the next three years, and that owners of those 
devices will be adversely affected absent an unlocking exemption. 
The analysis of the section 1201 statutory factors is similar to the analysis for laptops.  If 
consumers can unlock any locked wireless device, unlocking “will expand the 
availability of the copyrighted software within them by enabling them to continue their 
functional use” instead of being discard or sold for scrap.900  The second and third 
factors–the availability for use on nonprofit purposes and impact on activities such as 
criticism and comment—are ne utral for the reasons noted above.  For the fourth factor, 
the Register determines that unlocking will not harm and may increase the value of the 
copyrighted works—firmware on wireless modules—because devices were initial ly sold 
locked will be more appealing to consumers as a result of their ability to interoperate 
with a consumer’s wireless network of choice.901  
The fifth statutory factor allows the Register to consider other factors that may be 
appropriate, which may include issues such as “consumer choice and competition.”902  
Carrier locks have been debated in this rulemaking since 2006.903  Though carriers have 
relaxed their policies in the last 15 years, proponents note that the Department of Justice 
has recently investigated potential anti-competitive behavior by the GSM Association 
(GSMA), which sets standards for cellular operations.904  For example, the Department of 
 
modem, and how “[i]n the United States, Verizon’s 5G network is used exclusively for the 
laptop”); ISRI Class 10 Post-Hearing Resp. Ex. A (May 7, 2021) (showing numerous device 
categories that incorporate X55 modem)). 
900 2018 Recommendation at 154 (analysis for 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(i)). 
901 See 2015 Recommendation at 168 (unlocking appears to have not harmed market for wireless 
devices, and “during the time that the exemption for cellphone unlocking has been in place, the 
market for cellphones (including their embedded software) has continued to expand rapidly”); 
2018 Recommendation at 155 (no evidence of market harm from expanding unlocking to used 
devices); cf. ISRI Class 10 Initial at 6 (ISRI testimony that “an unlocked Chromebook device is 
often worth at least 6% to 8% more than a locked Chromebook”). 
902 See 2015 Recommendation at 168; 2012 Recommendation at 96 (giving weight to the 
“significant consumer interest and demand in using legacy phones on carriers other than the one 
that originally sold the phone to the consumer”); see also Section 1201 Report at 92 (noting 
“section 1201 was not intended to facilitate manufacturers’ use of TPMs to facilitate product tying 
or to achieve a lock-in effect”). 
903 See generally 2006 Recommendation at 48–53 (noting “undisputed” evidence “that mobile 
handset consumers who desire to use their handsets on a different telecommunications network 
. . . are often precluded from doing so” by carrier locks). 
904 ISRI Class 10 Initial at 9 (citing DOJ GSMA Letter); DOJ GSMA Letter at 1, 4 (citing receipt of 
business review request letter in July 2019 and noting that the Antitrust Division “had [already] 
 

[PAGE 170]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
167 
Justice found that in 2017, North American cellular carriers sought to require “more 
durable network lock[s]” in standards under development and used the GSMA group to 
create “a separate process, which was completely devoid of non-operator participation, 
to make the rule mandatory in North America.”905  The Register finds that these concerns 
provide further support for the requested expansion. 
The Register has considered the arguments raised by MEMA in opposition to this 
request, and concludes that they do not affect the statutory analysis.  MEMA argues, 
essentially, that unlocking the cellular modem on cars could negatively affect other 
vehicle systems governing safety and emissions.906  In doing so, MEMA echoes 
arguments from prior rulemakings opposing exemptions for the repair and modification 
of vehicles.
907  The Register has previously addressed these concerns by limiting the 
scope of the repair class to permit only “lawful” modification, which excludes situations 
where someone attempts to engage in “circumvention to achieve an illicit purpose.”908   
The Register finds that the existing limitations in the unlocking exemption sufficiently 
address these concerns.  The exemption is narrow, permitting circumvention “solely” to 
connect to a wireless network and requiring that connection to be authorized by the 
network operator.
909  Circumvention of cellular modem software in vehicles must be 
done “solely” for the purpose of network interoperability, and thus someone who 
intends to violate vehicle emissions or safety laws would not be covered.  Because 
 
been investigating GSMA’s RSPv2 standard and the processes used to promulgate that standard 
as well as its proposed successor, RSPv3” due to “significant concerns that GSMA and its 
operator members used an unbalanced standard-setting process” with “self-dealing provisions 
designed to enhance or maintain the incumbent operators’ competitive position by entrenching 
network locking practices”). 
905 DOJ GSMA Letter at 6. 
906 MEMA Class 10 Opp’n. 
907 See 2015 Recommendation at 241–44 (summarizing opposition by automakers and 
transportation regulatory agencies to vehicle repair class on grounds such as “vehicle safety, 
energy policy (including fuel efficiency), the environment (including air pollution and emission 
of greenhouse gas pollutants)”); 2018 Recommendation at 214–15 (opposition to repair class 
covering vehicles include “concerns regarding vehicle safety, environmental impact, 
unauthorized access to private data, and compliance with regulations promulgated by other 
federal agencies”). 
908 2015 Recommendation at 248; see also 2018 Recommendation at 215–16 (concerns raised 
regarding vehicle safety and pollution “d[id] not significantly affect the Acting Register’s 
calculus” to modify repair exemption that retained lawful modification requirement). 
909 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(5). 

[PAGE 171]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
168 
MEMA’s concerns are addressed by the existing regulatory limitation, the Register 
concludes that the foregoing analysis is unaffected.910 
3. NTIA Comments 
As it has since 2012, NTIA supports modifying the unlocking exemption to cover all 
lawfully owned wireless devices.911  It credits proponents’ evidence that an increasing 
number of wireless devices are in the market and believes that an exemption for 
particular categories of devices is “both unnecessary and too inflexible.”
912  NTIA also 
views this exemption as an opportunity for the Office to “make clear” that this 
proceeding is not a forum for arguments predicated on non-copyright concerns.913 
As explained above, the Register agrees that the record for this class supports an 
exemption covering all wireless devices. 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
Based on the augmented record provided to the Office in this rulemaking, the Register 
concludes that proponents have met their burden to show that the statutory prohibition 
is likely to cause adverse effects on the ability to unlock wireless devices of any category.  
The statutory factors weigh in favor of expanding the exemption to all wireless devices, 
and no factors weigh against expansion.  The Register finds it appropriate to modify the 
current unlocking exemption to cover all wireless devices. 
The Register accordingly recommends that the Librarian designate the following class: 
Computer programs that enable wireless devices to connect to a 
wireless telecommunications network, when circumvention is 
undertaken solely in order to connect to a wireless telecommunications 
network and such connection is authorized by the operator of such 
network. 
 
  
 
910 In the unanticipated event that MEMA identifies increased instances of unauthorized 
circumvention stemming from this expanded exemption, the Office would welcome report in the 
next rulemaking cycle in the event it is asked whether renewal of the exemption is appropriate. 
911 NTIA Letter at 68. 
912 Id. at 69. 
913 Id.; see also Section 1201 Report at 125 (noting that the Office will not “categorically” exclude 
non-copyright concerns from statutory analysis but will be “principally focused on the copyright 
concerns” implicated by proposed exemptions). 

[PAGE 172]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
169 
K. Proposed Class 11: Computer Programs—Jailbreaking    
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemptions 
Class 11 comprises two requests to expand the current exemptions for “jailbreaking,” 
which refers to “the process of gaining access to the operating system of a computing 
device . . . to install and execute software that could not otherwise be installed or run on 
that device, or to remove pre-installed software that could not otherwise be 
uninstalled.”914  First, EFF seeks to clarify and expand the current exemption pertaining 
to jailbreaking smart TVs to include video streaming devices.915  Second, SFC seeks to 
enable the installation of alternative firmware in routers and other networking 
devices.916   
Because the petitions are separate but related, each is discussed separately within this 
class.  For the reasons discussed below, the Register recommends that the proposed 
exemptions be granted. 
i. Video Streaming Devices 
In the 2018 rulemaking, the Office recommended, and the Librarian adopted, an 
exemption permitting the jailbreaking of voice assistant devices and renewed 
exemptions for smartphones, tablets and other portable all-purpose mobile computing 
devices, and smart TVs.
917  In the current proceeding, EFF seeks to clarify the scope and 
definition of smart TVs.918  EFF proposes revising the exemption to clarify that it applies 
to: 
[C]omputer programs on devices that are primarily designed to display 
software applications on a screen, including applications that stream 
video delivered via the Internet, where such devices connect to but are 
not physically integrated into a display.
919   
 
914 2015 Recommendation at 172. 
915 See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(7); EFF Class 11 Pet. at 2. 
916 See Software Freedom Conservancy (“SFC”) Class 11 Pet. at 2. 
917 The jailbreaking exemptions are codified in separate regulatory subparagraphs.  See 37 C.F.R. 
§ 201.40(b)(6)–(8). 
918 See EFF Class 11 Pet. at 2. 
919 EFF Class 11 Initial at 2 (emphasis omitted); see also EFF Class 11 Reply at 1 (same).  This 
language differs from the language that EFF proposed in its petition for a new exemption.  See 
 

[PAGE 173]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
170 
EFF contends that it is “unclear whether th[e] [current] exemption includes hardware 
devices that enable the viewing of video streams, along with other software applications, 
when such devices are not physically integrated into a television.”920  According to EFF, 
“[t]oday, devices designed to run video streaming apps can either be integrated into a 
television or available as a separate physical device, often a box or ‘stick’ that connects to 
a television.”921  FSF filed a brief comment in support of the petition.922  The petition was 
opposed by ACT,923 DVD CCA and AACS LA,924 and Joint Creators.925 
ii. Routers and Other Networking Devices 
SFC requests a new exemption to permit the circumvention of access controls on 
computer programs within “routers and other networking devices to enable the 
installation of alternative firmware.”
926  SFC contends that the exemption is needed “to 
enable owners of wireless routers and other networking devices to improve the 
reliability, functionality, and security of their devices by installing alternative operating 
 
EFF Class 11 Pet. at 2 (“[C]omputer programs on devices that are primarily designed to display 
software applications on a television, including applications that stream video delivered via the 
Internet, where such devices are not physically integrated into a television.”) (emphasis added).  
During the hearing, EFF explained that this change in wording was intended to encompass “a 
computer monitor” or devices that “could take an HDMI input.”  Tr. at 863:18–864:08 (Apr. 21, 
2021) (Stoltz, EFF); see also EFF Class 11 Ex Parte Letter at 3 (July 28, 2021) (describing the reason 
for replacing the word “television” in its subsequent comments). 
920 EFF Class 11 Pet. at 2. 
921 Id. 
922 FSF Class 11 Initial.  The Office received two comments that discussed jailbreaking in general.  
See Arvind Puri Class 11 Initial; Anonymous Class 11 Reply.  While the anonymous comment 
briefly discussed opposition to the “modification of ‘streaming devices’ as these have one 
intended purpose which connects a user to a subscription service,” no further details were 
provided.  Anonymous Class 11 Reply. 
923 ACT Class 11 Opp’n. 
924 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 11 Opp’n.  DVD CCA & AACS LA opposed the proposed 
exemption “to the extent that it could be read to permit circumvention of DVD and Blu-ray 
players.”  DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 11 Opp’n at ii. 
925 Joint Creators Class 11 Opp’n. 
926 SFC Class 11 Pet. at 2. 

[PAGE 174]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
171 
system software.”927  FSF filed a brief comment in support of the petition.928  The petition 
was opposed by ACT and Joint Creators.929 
b. Overview of Issues 
i. Video Streaming Devices 
As the Office has noted in prior rulemakings, smart TVs often contain TPMs, such as 
encryption and administrative access controls, that “restrict access to the TV’s 
firmware.”930  In the 2015 rulemaking, the Office recommended an exemption to allow 
jailbreaking of “computer-embedded televisions (‘smart TVs’),” concluding that the 
“prohibition on circumvention [was] preventing installation of legitimate third-party 
software applications that can enhance the smart TV’s functionality.”931  For example, 
third-party applications can improve accessibility features, expand compatibility with 
peripheral hardware, and allow adjustments of visual elements such as aspect ratio.932  
The exemption was renewed in 2018.933   
EFF now urges the Office to expand the exemption to specifically cover “video 
streaming devices” such as “the Roku line of products, the Amazon Fire TV Stick, and 
the Apple TV.”934  EFF asserts that changes in the marketplace warrant the expansion, 
including that smart TV software is increasingly integrated into separate video 
streaming devices that connect to a television.935  EFF contends that, except for their 
 
927 SFC Class 11 Initial at 2.  SFC refers to the software on wireless routers collectively as 
“‘firmware’ because it is installed in the router’s semi-permanent memory.”  Id. 
928 FSF Class 11 Initial. 
929 ACT Class 11 Opp’n; Joint Creators Class 11 Opp’n.  The Office received one comment that 
discussed jailbreaking in general.  See Arvind Puri Class 11 Initial.  While DVD CCA & AACS LA 
filed opposition comments for Class 11 overall, their comment appears to focus mainly on the 
proposed exemption pertaining to video streaming devices.  See generally DVD CCA & AACS LA 
Class 11 Opp’n.  During the hearings, however, DVD CCA & AACS LA expressed concern with 
the proposed exemption pertaining to routers and other networking devices.  See Tr. at 894:07–
895:04 (Apr. 21, 2021) (Ayers, DVD CCA & AACS LA). 
930 2015 Recommendation at 203. 
931 Id. at 215. 
932 Id. at 215 (citing SFC 2015 Class 20 Supp. at 5–6). 
933 See 2018 Recommendation at 24–25. 
934 EFF Class 11 Pet. at 2. 
935 Id. 

[PAGE 175]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
172 
location, these devices “are functionally and architecturally identical to smart TVs,”936 
sometimes even running the same underlying software as the smart TV itself.937  EFF 
notes that, similar to smart TVs, video streaming devices “are computing devices that 
run a variety of programs, including but not limited to programs that play video streams 
received over the Internet.”938 
Opponents raise concerns that EFF’s proposed regulatory language could be read 
broadly to cover devices not discussed by EFF’s comments.  Joint Creators argue that the 
language would encompass “all video transmission devices” rather than the “handful of 
specific uses, including uses of devices like Amazon Fire, Apple TV, and Roku,” cited in 
EFF’s comments.939  Joint Creators contend that the “proposed class would arguably 
sweep in all ‘over-the-top set top boxes’ such as cable boxes and satellite service boxes, 
video game consoles, . . . disc players that transmit content to TVs,” and video game 
controllers.940  DVD CCA and AACS LA similarly assert that the proposed class “will 
swallow any device that connects to a TV for viewing content,” including a “DVD or 
Blu-ray player with streaming functionalities[,] . . . DVD and Blu-ray players, . . . DVRs, 
video game consoles, Kodi boxes, other casting devices, and even mobile phones.”
941  In 
response, EFF states that its language “covers only a narrow category of devices that is 
well understood in the marketplace: devices that run a variety of applications, with a 
primary purpose of streaming video from the Internet for display on a television screen, 
and which are not integrated into other types of devices such a Blu-ray players or game 
consoles.”
942  
 
936 EFF Class 11 Initial at 3; see also EFF Class 11 Reply at 1–2 (“These devices are functionally 
equivalent to the class granted in 2018 for smart TVs . . . except that they do not integrate a screen 
into the same device as the processor and network adaptor.”). 
937 See EFF Class 11 Initial at 3 n.4 (“‘Roku TVs’ are smart TVs made by numerous manufacturers 
that incorporate Roku hardware and software, providing apps, a voice assistant, and integration 
with some Apple devices. . . . Roku ‘streaming players,’ such as the Roku Premiere, run the same 
software and incorporate the same functionality but in a physically separate enclosure that 
connects to a display through an HDMI cable.”) (internal citations omitted). 
938 Id. at 3. 
939 Joint Creators Class 11 Opp’n at 2–3. 
940 Id. at 3 & n.6. 
941 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 11 Opp’n at 1, 6; see also id. at 6 n.10 (“Over-the-Top (‘OTT’) is 
also an elusive term, as it too refers to a broad and varied array of devices.”). 
942 EFF Class 11 Reply at 2; see also Tr. at 858:16–25 (Apr. 21, 2021) (Stoltz, EFF).  In a subsequent ex 
parte meeting with the Office, EFF described the test as the “primary function” test.  See EFF Class 
11 Ex Parte Letter at 3 (July 28, 2021).  Additionally, EFF states that “[s]et-top boxes that receive 
video from FCC-regulated multichannel video programming distributors such as cable or 
 

[PAGE 176]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
173 
Opponents also question the proposed language regarding a device’s “primary 
purpose.”  DVD CCA and AACS LA express concern about how that standard would 
apply to multifunctional devices and noted that a device’s primary purpose could 
evolve over time.943  Joint Creators view the test as overly subjective, explaining that, for 
some individuals, the primary purpose of using a device, such as a Blu-ray player, is to 
access video streaming applications when they do not have a smart TV.944  
EFF has stated throughout this proceeding that it intends the exemption to include only 
devices that physically connect to a television and whose primary purpose is streaming 
video from the internet.  To the extent such devices are adversely affected by the 
prohibition on circumvention, the Register will recommend regulatory language that 
responds to opponents’ concerns about the operation and scope of the exemption. 
ii. Routers and Other Networking Devices 
SFC seeks to jailbreak an entirely new category of devices: routers and other networking 
devices.945  SFC offers a number of reasons for seeking such access.  First, it contends that 
“encryption schemes” and “administrative access controls (such as developer 
passwords)” are preventing users from installing alternative firmware, fixing security 
flaws, and enabling new functionality, among other noninfringing uses.
946  SFC notes 
that “manufacturer-supplied firmware is a ‘take it or leave it’ proposition, leaving 
consumers with limited options for deciding what tools to install or how the router is 
configured.”947  Second, SFC argues that jailbreaking will enable users to continue using 
routers and other networking devices “[w]hen manufacturers stop providing updates,” 
thereby preventing the routers from becoming “increasingly vulnerable to attack by 
malicious parties, and . . . becom[ing] functionally obsolete prematurely as networking 
protocols advance and the devices become incompatible with current standards.”948 
As with EFF’s proposal for smart TVs, opponents raise concerns that the proposed 
inclusion of the term “other networking devices” is “very broad” and could be 
 
satellite (devices that are generally leased from MVPDs rather than sold) are likewise not 
included because they primarily receive video from sources other than the Internet.”  EFF Class 
11 Reply at 4; see also EFF Class 11 Ex Parte Letter at 3 (July 28, 2021). 
943 Tr. at 860:07–21 (Apr. 21, 2021) (Ayers, DVD CCA & AACS LA). 
944 Tr. at 861:13–862:12 (Apr. 21, 2021) (Williams, Joint Creators). 
945 SFC Class 11 Pet. at 2. 
946 Id.; see also SFC Class 11 Initial at 3–4 (discussing common examples of TPMs and TPMs used 
in specific routers); Tr. at 899:07–23 (Apr. 21, 2021) (Williamson, SFC) (discussing examples of 
TPMs relevant to the proposed exemption). 
947 SFC Class 11 Initial at 2. 
948 Id. 

[PAGE 177]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
174 
construed to “arguably sweep in anything with Wi-Fi.”949  Specifically, DVD CCA and 
AACS LA note that “many devices now generate their own local [wireless] networks . . .  
in order to make it easy for a consumer to make a network connection with that device 
and to use a remote device to adjust other settings,” including, for example, “a game 
console that generates its own [network] in order to allow easy set up.”950  While Joint 
Creators “do not object to repairing wireless routers to enable connections to internet 
networks,” they similarly argue that SFC’s proposed exemption is “vague and 
unbounded by practical limitations,”951 and could sweep in “things like [virtual reality] 
headsets [and] other devices that can connect directly” to the internet due to the 
presence of a wi-fi chip.952   
SFC responds that the proposed exemption is “absolutely not” intended to “sweep in 
just any device that has networking capabilities.”953  SFC states that it would support an 
exemption that covers only “dedicated networking devices, including routers, switches, 
hubs, bridges, gateways, modems, repeaters, and access points.”954  Opponents did not 
dispute the limiting explanation provided by SFC.  Therefore, the Register will evaluate 
the proposed exemption as defined in this manner. 
2. Discussion 
a. Works Protected by Copyright 
With respect to the requirement that the relevant TPMs control access to copyrightable 
works, both proposed exemptions involve firmware that constitutes computer programs 
within the meaning of the Copyright Act.
955  Similar to the 2018 and 2015 rulemaking, 
the Register finds that at least some works included in the proposed exemptions are 
protected by copyright. 
 
949 Tr. at 894:11–19 (Apr. 21, 2021) (Ayers, DVD CCA & AACS LA). 
950 Tr. at 894:21–895:04 (Apr. 21, 2021) (Ayers, DVD CCA & AACS LA).   
951 Joint Creators Class 11 Opp’n at 7. 
952 Tr. at 895:18–24 (Apr. 21, 2021) (Williams, Joint Creators). 
953 Tr. at 895:06–09 (Apr. 21, 2021) (Williamson, SFC). 
954 Tr. at 895:09–15 (Apr. 21, 2021) (Williamson, SFC). 
955 See 2018 Recommendation at 167; 2015 Recommendation at 172 n.1077; see also EFF Class 11 
Initial at 6 (“The works at issue in this request are firmware and operating system programs 
installed on video streaming devices, which are subject to copyright.”); SFC Class 11 Initial at 4 
(“ All of the works in question are software applications protected by copyright . . . .”). 

[PAGE 178]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
175 
b. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
i. Video Streaming Devices 
EFF concedes that jailbreaking involves modifying the device software and thus 
implicates the derivative work right, but it argues that the activity is protected by fair 
use.956  In EFF’s view, the Register and Librarian “correctly concluded [in past 
rulemakings] that modifying the firmware in one’s device in order to run lawfully 
acquired software is a fair use, falling squarely within Congress’s intent to promote 
software interoperability.”957  Furthermore, EFF contends that “[t]he relevant law has not 
changed materially since the last rulemaking cycle,”958 and that video streaming devices 
are “functionally identical to smart TVs for which jailbreaking exemptions have been 
granted in two previous rulemakings.”959 
In 2015, the Register concluded, based on the case law and submitted evidence, that 
“modifications to [smart TV] firmware to enable interoperability with third-party 
software are likely to constitute a fair use.”960  The Register reached this conclusion 
because the use was for the noncommercial and personal purpose of “enabling 
interoperability with other computer programs,” the copyrighted material at issue was 
“functional,” and the amount of the copyrighted material was of limited relevance, due 
in part to the small number of modifications made to enable jailbreaking.961  The Register 
also found that market harm was unlikely because there was no evidence provided to 
support the claim that “jailbreaking . . . smart TVs w[ould] make it easier to gain 
unauthorized access to copyrighted content, or that it would otherwise undermine smart 
TVs as a platform for the consumption of expressive works.”962  After reviewing 
subsequent fair use case law, the Register finds that the 2015 analysis remains sound and 
is relevant for analyzing the parties’ fair use arguments. 
Regarding the first fair use factor, EFF asserts several arguments for why the purpose 
and character of jailbreaking favors its proposal, including that the “purpose of 
jailbreaking non-integrated smart TVs is identical to the purpose of jailbreaking 
 
956 EFF Class 11 Initial at 6. 
957 Id.; see also 2018 Recommendation at 167–72; 2015 Recommendation at 188–189, 213–15; 2012 
Recommendation at 72–74; 2010 Recommendation at 92–100. 
958 EFF Class 11 Initial at 6. 
959 Id. at 9. 
960 2015 Recommendation at 213. 
961 Id. at 213–14. 
962 Id. at 214–15. 

[PAGE 179]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
176 
physically integrated smart TVs.”963  Similar to its reasoning in 2018, EFF argues that the 
“analysis and modification of the functional aspects of software” for purposes of 
interoperability is a favored purpose under applicable precedent.964  In response, 
opponent ACT contends that the “primary reason people want to jailbreak these devices 
has nothing to do with the reasons provided by the petitioner,” and has everything to do 
with “consumers unlock[ing] free content.”965  Joint Creators also note that “[o]nce 
circumvented, even for the ostensible purpose of first installing a lawful application, 
nothing prevents a user from later installing infringing applications or applications that 
enable infringement on these devices.”966   
As to the second fair use factor, EFF argues that the nature of the copyrighted work 
favors fair use where the copying of software is necessary to understand its functional 
aspects.  It notes that the “firmware and operating system code on video streaming 
devices lie[] on the functional end of the spectrum.”967  Regarding the third factor, EFF 
contends that it “favors fair use, or is neutral,” because when “jailbreaking video 
streaming devices, . . . the portion of the firmware that must be permanently modified to 
accomplish a jailbreak is a very small proportion of the overall code.”968   
Discussing the fourth fair use factor, EFF argues that jailbreaking video streaming 
devices “does not foreclose sales of the device firmware,” as the firmware “is sold along 
with the devices themselves, and not separately.”969  It contends that “[f]irmware 
 
963 EFF Class 11 Reply at 4; see e.g., EFF Class 11 Initial at 8 (quoting 2018 Recommendation at 170) 
(noting that users seek to jailbreak video streaming devices for privacy purposes, which “is a 
purpose for which circumvention may be warranted”). 
964 EFF Class 11 Initial at 7; see also id. at 7–8 (discussing the decisions in Sega Enters. Ltd. v. 
Accolade, Inc., 977 F.2d 1510 (9th Cir. 1992), and Sony Comput. Ent., Inc. v. Connectix Corp., 203 F.3d 
596 (9th Cir. 2000) and noting that the legislative history of section 1201 “encourage[s] 
interoperability”). 
965 ACT Class 11 Opp’n at 3; see also id. at 4 (“The ‘why jailbreak?’ search resulted in post after 
post focused exclusively on how to get free content.”). 
966 Joint Creators Class 11 Opp’n at 4. 
967 See EFF Class 11 Initial at 10 (citing Sega, 977 F.2d at 1526; Connectix, 203 F.3d at 605); see also id. 
(noting that the Register has previously concluded that “second factor favors fair use for 
jailbreaking,” as “bootloaders and operating systems are largely functional works” (citing 2018 
Recommendation at 176; 2015 Recommendation at 188; 2012 Recommendation at 73; 2010 
Recommendation at 96)). 
968 EFF Class 11 Initial at 11–12; see also id. at 11 (discussing how the CheckRa1n jailbreak and 
obtaining root access to an Amazon Fire TV Stick involve a small amount of code). 
969 Id. at 12; see also EFF Class 11 Reply at 6 (“Smart TV devices are not sold as bare metal waiting 
for a separate purchase of operating firmware; they are sold with a copy of the firmware, and the 
copyright holder receives compensation.”). 

[PAGE 180]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
177 
upgrades are not sold, but are made available to device owners as a free download,” and 
therefore “do[] not cause any proliferation of infringing copies, nor replace any sales.”970  
Furthermore, EFF asserts that “[j]ailbreaking has not harmed sales of similar devices,” 
noting that “revenues from sales of smart TVs (and their accompanying firmware) have 
risen steadily since 2014, before the Librarian first granted an exemption for jailbreaking 
them, . . . and are predicted to continue rising.”971 
After considering the parties’ arguments and evidence, as well as the Office’s prior fair 
use analysis, the Register concludes that EFF’s requested exemption covers activities that 
constitute noninfringing fair use.  While the 2015 analysis focused on software 
embedded within a smart TV,972 the record does not suggest that the location of the 
software affects or alters its functions, and thus the relevant use.  Regardless of where 
the software is located, EFF’s proposed use remains the same, and the nature of the 
software remains functional.  Similarly, the software’s location does not appear to affect 
the portion used in jailbreaking, nor does it alter the Register’s prior finding that there is 
not a market for the software separate from the device itself.
973  While opponents argue 
that the proposed exemption could lead to unauthorized access to copyrighted works 
and to unapproved apps, as in 2015, “[n]o actual evidence was submitted to illustrate the 
claim that jailbreaking . . . will make it easier to gain unauthorized access to copyrighted 
content.”974  The Register also reaches this conclusion based on the narrow construction 
of this class and its application to video streaming devices that physically connect to a 
television and whose primary purpose is streaming video from the internet.  Because the 
Register concludes that the location of the software does not alter the Office’s previous 
fair use analysis, she finds that Class 11 describes a noninfringing fair use. 
 
970 EFF Class 11 Initial at 12. 
971 Id. (citing H. Tankovska, Smart TV market revenue in the United States from 2014 to 2025, STATISTA 
(Aug. 27, 2020), https://www.statista.com/statistics/781427/smart-tv-market-revenue-in-the-us/); 
see also id. (explaining how “the ability to jailbreak may increase the market value of a video 
streaming device”). 
972 2015 Recommendation at 213–15. 
973 See id. at 214–15. 
974 Id.  Instead, opponents argue as a general matter that jailbreaking creates the opportunity for 
piracy.  See ACT Class 11 Opp’n at 4–6 (making arguments about app piracy that are not 
necessarily tied to streaming devices and noting the security risks from jailbreaking); Joint 
Creators at 3–5 (raising concerns about “television service set-top boxes and Blu-ray disc 
players,” as well as discussing the sale of infringing devices rather than lawful streaming 
devices).  ACT alludes to “countless online posts and tutorials about how to jailbreak streaming 
devices in order to get free access to unlimited video content,” but it does not provide examples 
of them.  ACT Class 11 Opp’n at 4.   

[PAGE 181]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
178 
ii. Routers and Other Networking Devices 
The Register concludes that SFC has carried its burden of demonstrating that 
circumventing access controls on routers and other networking devices is likely to 
enable noninfringing uses of that firmware.975  It appears undisputed that the proposed 
exemption seeks to permit the installation of software, such as OpenWrt, that “is 
composed of software components licensed under” Free and Open Source Software 
(“FOSS”) terms.
976  These licensing terms permit anyone to “copy, modify, and 
redistribute their code.”977  In such cases, the Register concludes that the uses SFC seeks 
to enable would be licensed and thus noninfringing.  To the extent that jailbreaking of 
these devices involves modification of the firmware to enable interoperability with 
lawfully obtained applications, the activity is likely fair use under the same analysis 
provided above.  The Register therefore finds that SFC has met its burden of 
demonstrating that jailbreaking routers and other networking devices is likely to be 
noninfringing. 
c. Causation 
The Register finds that EFF and SFC have met their burden of showing that the statutory 
prohibition on circumvention of access controls limits their ability to engage in the 
proposed uses.  But for the prohibition, users likely could gain lawful access to the 
firmware for these purposes.
978 
d. Asserted Adverse Effects 
i. Video Streaming Devices 
EFF argues that the prohibition on circumvention adversely affects noninfringing 
jailbreaking of video streaming devices because “[w]ithout a clarification or expansion 
to non-integrated devices, the availability of privacy enhancements, user control, and 
enhanced functionality on those devices would be limited by operation of the DMCA to 
 
975 The term “other networking devices” is limited to the narrowed scope of devices proposed by 
SFC, as discussed above. 
976 SFC Class 11 Initial at 3; see also id. at 4 (stating that the firmware on most routers and other 
networking devices is “built primarily” from FOSS components). 
977 Id. at 3–4. 
978 See EFF Class 11 Initial at 3–4 (stating that AppleTV devices contain cryptographic verifications 
preventing the running of non-approved applications and cryptographic checks that prevent 
modification or replacement of the operating system and that accessing the firmware on Roku 
and Amazon Fire OS requires modifying the access controls or firmware on the device); SFC 
Class 11 Initial at 3 (explaining that obtaining access to firmware requires circumvention of 
“encryption and cryptographic signing of firmware files, and access control measures”). 

[PAGE 182]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
179 
what the manufacturer chooses to provide.”979  It asserts that without jailbreaking, users 
cannot add many significant and popular additions to video streaming devices, such as 
“replac[ing] the home screens generated by their streaming devices,” connecting video 
streaming devices to other hardware and input devices,980 installing “an alternative 
operating system on their devices,” or “writing software that can run on multiple 
hardware platforms.”981  It further argues that TPMs limit users’ control over their 
privacy, as users are prevented from installing virtual private networks (“VPN”s) and 
“encrypt[ing] their network communications.”982   
Opponents argue that there are viable alternatives available to circumvention, and thus 
section 1201 does not adversely affect users seeking, for example, to change the device’s 
home screen or screen saver, connect a video streaming device to other hardware and 
input devices, or to control their privacy.983  Joint Creators contend that “the identified 
uses can be accomplished through devices without access controls to prevent app 
installations that are readily available in the marketplace,”
984 while ACT states that there 
is “plenty of open source streaming capability that you can do without hacking a 
device.”985 
According to EFF, these options are not adequate alternatives to circumvention for a 
number of specific non-infringing uses.  Opponents do not specifically dispute EFF’s 
assertion that these proposed uses cannot be accomplished using manufacturerprovided functionality or firmware.  For example, ACT and Joint Creators do not 
dispute that Apple TV does not allow the installation of third-party applications without 
jailbreaking or that Android-based devices and other devices still do not allow users to 
 
979 EFF Class 11 Initial at 13. 
980 Id. at 13.  EFF notes that users can utilize the nControl app, which “allows a user to connect a 
variety of game controllers and joysticks to an AppleTV,” can add a web browser to AppleTVs, 
which do not “come equipped with a browser,” add other programs to AppleTVs, including 
“support for an external broadcast TV turner,” and installing AirMagic that “allows for remote 
control of an AppleTV from any device on a local network.”  Id. at 13–14. 
981 Id. at 13–14; see also Tr. at 890:02–16 (Apr. 21, 2021) (Stoltz, EFF) (confirming that certain actions 
on video streaming devices require jailbreaking and circumventing access controls). 
982 EFF Class 11 Initial at 14; see also id. at 14 (“[A]lthough VPN apps are available in the Apple 
App Store, and even though the Apple TV uses the same basic networking code as other Apple 
devices, the access controls on the Apple TV do not allow the installation of a VPN.”); Tr. at 
890:02–16 (Apr. 21, 2021) (Stoltz, EFF) (confirming that increasing privacy on video streaming 
devices requires jailbreaking and circumvention of access controls). 
983 See, e.g., Joint Creators Class 11 Opp’n at 6. 
984 Id.; see also Tr. at 878:20–879:05 (Apr. 21, 2021) (Williams, Joint Creators); Tr. at 887:18–888:13 
(Apr. 21, 2021) (Williams, Joint Creators). 
985 Tr. at 867:01–10 (Apr. 21, 2021) (Reed, ACT). 

[PAGE 183]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
180 
take certain actions on these devices.986  EFF more specifically describes applications and 
programs, such as AirMagic and nControl, that cannot be installed without first 
jailbreaking a video streaming device.987  And enabling certain accessibility features, 
such as “inverting the video to make the text more readable or altering the colors that 
are displayed on the screen to make them more readable to people with certain visual 
disabilities” cannot be done “at all on an Apple device without jailbreaking.”988  The 
Register credits these arguments and finds that, at least for some third-party 
applications, there are not viable alternatives to circumvention. 
Turning to the section 1201 statutory factors, the Register finds that the first factor, the 
availability for use of copyrighted works, favors the proposed exemption for 
substantially the same reasons as in the 2018 rulemaking.  There, the Office concluded 
that “access controls prevent consumers from using third-party applications, so denying 
a jailbreaking exemption would significantly diminish the availability of those works,” 
and that “granting the exemption is unlikely to discourage use or development of 
devices or the copyrighted firmware needed to run them.”
989  Proponents have also 
persuasively established that the exemption will have neither positive nor negative 
effects “on the availability of copyrighted firmware and application software,” similar to 
mobile computing devices and applications, whose growth has continued “despite (or 
because of) the existence of a jailbreaking exemption.”
990  
Regarding the second statutory factor, the availability for use of works for nonprofit 
archival, preservation, and educational purposes, the Register finds that this factor is 
neutral.  Similar to previous rulemakings, the Register concludes that based on the 
current record, “this factor is not directly implicated by the jailbreaking exemptions.”991      
As to the third statutory factor, which addresses criticism, comment, news reporting, 
teaching, scholarship, and research, the Register finds that this factor slightly favors the 
proposed exemption.  As in 2018, the Register concludes that “the current record 
suggests that jailbreaking may help further research of security flaws by allowing users 
 
986 See Tr. at 879:12–880:19 (Apr. 21, 2021) (Stoltz, EFF). 
987 See Tr. at 890:04–891:01 (Apr. 21, 2021) (Stoltz, EFF); EFF Class 11 Initial at 13–14 (stating that 
the nControl app “allows a user to connect a variety of game controllers and joysticks to an 
AppleTV,” and the AirMagic program “allows for remote control of an AppleTV from any device 
on a local network”). 
988 Tr. at 891:22–892:05 (Apr. 21, 2021) (Stoltz, EFF). 
989 2018 Recommendation at 174 (internal quotations omitted). See also 2012 Recommendation at 
76 (similar); 2010 Recommendation at 101 (similar). 
990 EFF Class 11 Initial at 14; see also 2015 Recommendation at 216. 
991 2018 Recommendation at 176 (citing 2015 Recommendation at 190; 2012 Recommendation at 
77; 2010 Recommendation at 101). 

[PAGE 184]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
181 
to access a device’s ‘lower-level functionality’ to detect vulnerabilities.”992  EFF provides 
evidence that the proposed exemption may allow users to research device security or 
vulnerability and, in turn, enhance security.993  Additionally, the Register agrees with 
EFF’s argument that the exemption “will not have a significant impact” on criticism, 
comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research.994  According to EFF, “all of 
the software that can be installed on a jailbroken device can also be installed on a smart 
TV for which an exemption is already available (and for which no objections were filed 
in this rulemaking cycle).”995 
Based on the record as a whole, the Register concludes that the fourth statutory factor, 
the effect of circumvention of technological measures on the market for or value of 
copyrighted works, favors an exemption.  With respect to the effect on the value of the 
device firmware, the same conclusions noted above regarding the fourth fair use factor, 
as well as the Office’s findings in the 2018 and 2015 rulemakings, are applicable here.  In 
those rulemakings, there was “no evidence that the prior jailbreaking exemptions have 
harmed the market for firmware” in smartphones, voice assistant devices, smart TVs, or 
all-purpose mobile devices, and nothing in the record suggests that a different 
conclusion is warranted for video streaming devices.
996  Additionally, the Register 
concludes that based on the current record, expanding the current exemption to video 
streaming devices is unlikely to harm the market for copyrighted works that can be 
accessed through video streaming devices.  The Register recognizes that piracy of 
streaming content is a highly significant concern, and acknowledges the prevalence of 
video streaming devices.  Similar to the Register’s finding in the 2018 rulemaking, 
however, the evidence does not indicate that past jailbreaking exemptions have 
increased levels of piracy on devices within the current exemption, and neither ACT nor 
Joint Creators opposed the renewal petition for the existing exemption.  It is also 
significant that, as noted in the 2018 rulemaking, streaming content providers typically 
control access to content “with TPMs separate from those protecting the firmware.”
997  
 
992 2018 Recommendation at 177 (quoting 2015 Recommendation at 191). 
993 EFF Class 11 Initial Ex. A, at 1. 
994 Id. at 15. 
995 Id. at 15. 
996 2018 Recommendation at 180; 2015 Recommendation at 191, 216; see also EFF Class 11 Initial at 
15 (arguing that the proposed exemption is “likely to stimulate the market for such works by 
permitting developers to create new applications for the devices[,] . . . thus making these 
devices—together with their copyrighted firmwa re—more attractive to consumers ”). 
997 2018 Recommendation at 181; see EFF Class 11 Reply at 7 (citing 2018 Recommendation at 181 
n.1121) (“[A]udiovisual content streamed from the Internet can be and often is subjected to 
separate technological protection measures that are outside the scope of this proposed class.  In 
 

[PAGE 185]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
182 
ACT and Joint Creators suggest that jailbreaking would facilitate the installation of 
counterfeit apps and apps that enable unauthorized access to copyrighted content.  Joint 
Creators argue that once a video streaming device is circumvented, “even for the 
ostensible purpose of first installing a lawful application, nothing prevents a user from 
later installing infringing applications or applications that enable infringement on these 
devices.”998  They provide examples of lawsuits filed against distributors of “infringing 
devices and applications designed for Kodi and other platforms.”999  Ultimately, Joint 
Creators contend that “[a]llowing the circumvention of a new category of devices that is 
specifically designed to stream copyrighted content to televisions would undermine the 
legitimate marketplace, confuse consumers as to which applications provide authorized 
access . . . and harm copyright owners.”1000  Accordingly, Joint Creators urge that any 
expanded jailbreaking exemption “should at least include limitations similar to the 
existing exemption for voice assistants.”1001 
ACT asserts that “[j]ailbreaking these devices to gain free access to content from 
unapproved apps threatens the market for App Association members innovating new 
means of developing and delivering content,” as “[t]rusted app stores serve as a vital 
foundation for the growing uses of apps across industries and enterprises.”
1002  
Additionally, ACT contends that the installation of counterfeit apps or apps that enable 
unauthorized access to copyrighted content “threaten end-user confidence and can lead 
to customer data loss, interruption of service, revenue loss, and reputational damage.  
These threats have caused significant damage, and continue to pose substantial hazards, 
to app developers.”
1003   
The Register believes that two limitations address opponents’ market harm concerns.1004  
First, the current exemption, and the recommended regulatory language, are limited to 
where circumvention is accomplished for the “sole purpose of enabling interoperability” 
with lawful applications.  Any activities that fall outside those permitted by the 
exemption, such as jailbreaking a video streaming device to install unlawful 
 
2018, the Register found the presence of separate TPMs on streaming media to be significant in 
determining that an exemption has no meaningful impact on infringement.”). 
998 Joint Creators Class 11 Opp’n at 4. 
999 Id.; see also id. at 4–5 (discussing past Notorious Markets for Counterfeiting and Piracy reports 
authored by the United States Trade Representative that highlight illicit streaming devices and 
Internet Protocol television (“IPTV”) apps). 
1000 Id. at 5–6. 
1001 Id. at 8; see 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(8). 
1002 ACT Class 11 Opp’n at 5.   
1003 Id. at 6. 
1004 See Joint Creators Class 11 Opp’n at 4–6, 8; ACT Class 11 Opp’n at 5–6. 

[PAGE 186]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
183 
applications, are not covered by the exemption and will violate section 1201.  Second, the 
Register will recommend regulatory language that jailbreaking must not be for the 
purpose of gaining unauthorized access to other copyrighted works.  Because 
circumvention must be for the “sole purpose” of enabling interoperability, including this 
language does not substantively change the scope of the exemption.  
Regarding the fifth statutory factor, the Register does not find any additional factors 
relevant to the asserted adverse effects in this proposed class.   
Based on the record, the Register concludes that, to the extent the current smart TV 
exemption could be construed as excluding video streaming devices, users are adversely 
affected in their ability to jailbreak video streaming devices, or are likely to be so 
adversely affected during the next three years.  The Register accordingly finds that 
proponents have carried their burden to demonstrate such effects. 
ii. Routers and Other Networking Devices 
SFC argues that the prohibition on circumvention adversely affects users’ abilities to 
legally install FOSS on routers and other networking devices.  SFC asserts that without 
the proposed exemption for jailbreaking, users have “limited options for deciding what 
tools to install or how the router is configured.”1005  Specifically, SFC contends that users 
cannot “improve the router’s performance, reliability, and security, expand its 
capabilities, and extend its useful life” by installing alternative firmware without 
circumventing TPMs.1006  Additionally, it states that the TPMs within routers and other 
network devices “restrict access to FOSS  components pre-installed on the devices by 
their manufacturers” and “prevent device owners from installing other licensed 
software on their devices.”1007  Lastly, SFC alleges that without the proposed exemption, 
users cannot provide software updates once they are no longer provided by the device 
manufacturer.1008   
Joint Creators “do not object to repairing wireless routers to enable connections to 
internet networks,” but argue that proponents have alternatives to circumvention.
1009  
For example, Joint Creators argue that “if SFC is correct that installing an Open Wrt 
operating system completely replaces a router’s stock firmware such that none of the 
 
1005 SFC Class 11 Initial at 2. 
1006 Id. at 2–3; see also SFC Class 11 Reply at 2 (same). 
1007 SFC Class 11 Initial at 4. 
1008 Id. at 5; see also id. at 5–6 (explaining how 418 network devices are still supported due to 
OpenWrt despite discontinuation by manufacturers). 
1009 Joint Creators Class 11 Opp’n at 7. 

[PAGE 187]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
184 
manufacturer’s code continues to be used,”1010 proponents could simply use a different 
device to avoid the need for circumvention.1011  Joint Creators also contend that the 
proposed exemption is “sufficient[ly] cover[ed]” by sections 1201(g), 1201(i), and 1201(j) 
“to the extent security or privacy concerns are at issue.”1012   
In response, SFC disputes that there are adequate alternatives to circumvention.  It notes 
that ACT “does not cite a single example” of extensive open-source options and that, in 
any event, “the availability of FOSS-friendly routers on the market is irrelevant” to the 
uses in which SFC seeks to engage.1013  SFC further asserts that “even ‘proprietary’ router 
firmwares are built from FOSS components like the Linux kernel and BusyBox” and that 
“the authors of these components encourage modification and reuse via FOSS 
licenses.”1014  Lastly, SFC states that its privacy and security-related uses “are not 
adequately addressed” by sections 1201(g), 1201(i), and 1201(j).1015   
The Register agrees with proponents and concludes that the alternatives set forth by 
ACT and Joint Creators are insufficient to accomplish the noninfringing purposes cited 
by SFC.  Neither ACT nor Joint Creators contest the fact that SFC’s proposed uses, which 
are noninfringing, cannot be accomplished using the manufacturer-provided firmware.  
Similarly, the Register reiterates her previous finding that “section 1201(f) does not 
unambiguously authorize jailbreaking by end users” and that there is a “general dearth 
 
1010 Id. 
1011 Id. (citing 2010 Recommendation at 220 (rejecting a class to circumvent TPMs on subscription 
video streaming services that require specific operating system versions of hardware to watch 
material “because although a user might have been prevented from engaging in a noninfringing 
use of a work using a particular device, the user could engage in the same noninfringing use of 
the work using a different device”)).  The 2010 class cited by Joint Creators was an attempt “to be 
able to gain access to protected digital works on platforms of their choosing, rather than on the 
platforms or platform options offered by content providers.”  2010 Recommendation at 214.  
Because SFC here seeks to install licensed software on lawfully owned hardware, the analysis is 
not analogous.  The same is true for ACT’s argument that some router manufacturers offer 
“extensive open-source options” and thus “[h]obbyists and tinkerers” should use those devices 
instead.  See ACT Class 11 Opp’n at 3. 
1012 Joint Creators Class 11 Opp’n at 8. 
1013 SFC Class 11 Reply at 3. 
1014 Id. (citing SFC Class 11 Initial at 2 & n.1). 
1015 Id. at 4–5 (asserting that section 1201(g) does not “relate to” any of its proposed noninfringing 
uses, section 1201(i) has “narrow limits” that protect only the individual participating in 
circumvention, and section 1201(j) contains “limited exemptions” that only allow for correction of 
vulnerable components, when upgrading a single vulnerable component “typically requires 
upgrading related components, and most routers require updating the entire firmware as a 
package”). 

[PAGE 188]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
185 
of case law on that question.”1016  Nor are sections 1201(g), (i), and (j)—which address 
encryption research, protection of personally identifying information, and security 
testing respectively— likely to cover the full range of jailbreaking activities proposed 
here. 
Turning to the section 1201 statutory factors, the Register finds that the first factor favors 
the proposed exemption.  As in prior rulemakings, the Register finds that because 
“access controls prevent consumers from using third-party applications,” the inability to 
jailbreak devices with those controls “would significantly diminish the availability of 
those works.”
1017  Additionally, while SFC’s argument under the first factor is brief, they 
have provided evidence that the “proposed exemption is primarily focused on 
increasing device owners’ access to copyrighted works for use on their devices,” which 
opponents have not disputed.1018   
The Register finds that the second statutory factor, looking to nonprofit archival, 
preservation, and educational purposes, is neutral.  In previous rulemakings, the 
Register found that this factor was “not directly implicated by the jailbreaking 
exemptions,”1019 and the Register reaches the same conclusion here.   
The Register finds that the third statutory factor weighs slightly in favor of the 
exemption.  Based on the current record, the proposed exemption may allow users to 
research, comment upon, and create new programs or firmware that can be used within 
routers and other network devices, as well as address any potential security 
vulnerabilities that may occur.  Additionally, similar to past rulemakings, the Register 
finds that “the current record suggests that jailbreaking may help further research of 
security flaws by allowing users to access a device’s ‘lower-level functionality’ to detect 
vulnerabilities.”
1020  The Register’s conclusions are supported by SFC’s assertions that 
the proposed exemption will “promote research into the improvement of networking 
technology.”1021  Specifically, SFC notes that “OpenWrt has been fundamental to a 
number of such research efforts” and that “[e]ach of these efforts depends upon 
 
1016 2018 Recommendation at 176; see also 2015 Recommendation at 181 n.1159; 2012 
Recommendation at 71; 2010 Recommendation at 84–85. 
1017 2018 Recommendation at 174 (quoting 2015 Recommendation at 190) (noting that “granting 
the exemption is unlikely to discourage use or development of devices or the copyrighted 
firmware needed to run” third-party applications). 
1018 SFC Class 11 Initial at 6 (citing 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C)(i)) (discussing the number of FOSS 
packages available to users). 
1019 2018 Recommendation at 176; 2015 Recommendation at 190; 2012 Recommendation at 77; 2010 
Recommendation at 101. 
1020 2018 Recommendation at 177 (quoting 2015 Recommendation at 191). 
1021 SFC Class 11 Initial at 6 (citing 17 U.S.C. § 1201(i)(1)(C)(iii)). 

[PAGE 189]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
186 
researchers’ ability to install an OpenWrt-based operating system onto consumer 
networking devices for the purpose of research and testing.”1022  Further, SFC argues 
that by installing alternative firmware like OpenWrt, “users gain timely security updates 
for not only late-model devices, but also for devices long-unsupported by their 
manufacturers, enhancing the security of their networks and extending the life of their 
hardware, potentially by many years.”1023 
The Register concludes that the fourth statutory factor supports granting the exemption.  
The record reflects that the proposed exemption “will not cause fewer devices to be 
sold,” but could increase demands for routers and other networking devices.1024  
Additionally, “[t]here is no evidence that the prior jailbreaking exemptions have harmed 
the market for firmware in smartphones or all-purpose mobile devices,” and nothing in 
the current record suggests that a different conclusion is warranted for routers or other 
networking devices.
1025  Instead, the record reveals that the proposed exemption would 
“promote the use of [alternative software] on a broader range of devices” and that this, 
in turn, would increase the value of manufacturer-supplied firmware, “as the research 
supported by FOSS firmware projects produces improvements to wireless technology 
generally.”
1026  Furthermore, the record contains no evidence that there is a market solely 
for the firmware within routers or other networking devices.    
Based on the foregoing analysis, the Register finds that users are adversely affected in 
their ability to jailbreak routers or other networking devices, or are likely to be so 
adversely affected during the next three years.  Thus, the Register finds that the 
statutory factors favor the proposed exemption. 
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA agrees with the Register that both exemptions are warranted.  Regarding video 
streaming devices, NTIA notes that users of these devices are “undertaking nearly 
identical activities” and are “likely to have identical needs for circumventi[on]” as users 
 
1022 Id. at 6–7. 
1023 Id. at 8. 
1024 Id. at 7; see also id. at 7 (citing Sebastian Anthony, 11 years on: Linksys cashes in on WRT54G 
popularity with overpriced WRT1900AC router, EXTREMETECH (Jan. 16, 2014), 
https://www.extremetech.com/computing/174875-11-years-later-linksys-cashes-in-on-wrt54gspopularity-with-overpriced-wrt-1900ac-router) (discussing that a router supported by OpenWrt 
was kept “on the market longer than nearly any other consumer router”). 
1025 2018 Recommendation at 180 (citing 2015 Recommendation at 191). 
1026 SFC Class 11 Initial at 7. 

[PAGE 190]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
187 
covered by the exemption for smart TVs.1027  It also believes that the exclusion of DVD 
players and game consoles, as well as the recommended renewal of the current 
exemption, further support proponents’ request.1028   
NTIA diverges from the Register however, regarding how to implement the new 
proposed exemption.  While NTIA suggests including video streaming devices as a 
separate device from “smart televisions,” the Register believes that the substance of the 
request may be accomplished simply by defining the term “smart television” to include 
video streaming devices.  The Register’s recommended language is further discussed 
below. 
Regarding routers and other networking devices, NTIA finds that the exemption is 
warranted in light of its limitation to firmware on lawfully acquired devices.  It notes 
that, while the exemption is for a “somewhat different set of use cases,” the 
noninfringing uses are “familiar” and focus on enhancing and improving device 
functionality.
1029  It also concludes that the proposed uses are “clearly noninfringing” 
given that users seek to load alternative FOSS software on the devices.1030 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
For the reasons described above, proponents have satisfied their burden of showing that 
technological measures applied to video streaming devices and routers or other 
networking devices are having, or are likely to have, an adverse effect on noninfringing 
uses.  The Register accordingly recommends adoption of exemptions authorizing the 
jailbreaking of both types of devices, with appropriate limitations. 
First, the Register recommends adding language to the existing smart TV exemption to 
clarify that the exemption encompasses video streaming devices.  To address copyright 
owners’ concerns about scope, the Register adopts EFF’s suggestion of a “primary 
purpose” limitation.  The Register intends the new language to cover dedicated 
streaming devices such as a Roku TV or an Apple TV and to exclude other devices such 
as DVD players, Blu-ray players, and video game consoles that may be incidentally 
capable of streaming internet video, but are not primarily designed for such a use.  
Additionally, the Register intends to exclude cable and satellite set-top boxes that are 
leased from multichannel video programming distributors.
1031   
 
1027 NTIA Letter at 73.  NTIA notes that video streaming devices and smart TVs “essentially 
perform the same functions [] and often run the same operating systems.”  Id. 
1028 Id. 
1029 Id. 
1030 Id. 
1031 See EFF Class 11 Reply at 4. 

[PAGE 191]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
188 
Second, the Register recommends creating a new exemption for routers and other 
networking devices.  To address copyright owners’ concerns, the Register has 
recommended language limiting the exemption to devices primarily used to enable 
network connectivity, such as routers, switches, hubs, bridges, gateways, modems, 
repeaters, and access points.  The language is intended to exclude devices that are able 
to connect to a network, but are not primarily used by consumers as networking 
equipment.  The exemption further excludes devices that are not lawfully owned by 
those seeking to jailbreak.  
Finally, Joint Creators requested that both exemptions include limiting language that 
circumvention “not [be] accomplished for the purpose of gaining unauthorized access to 
other copyrighted works,”
1032 as was adopted during the 2018 rulemaking for certain 
other exemptions, including the exemption for jailbreaking voice assistant devices.  The 
Register does not view this language as a substantive change.  Because the current 
exemption requires that jailbreaking be for the “sole purpose” of enabling the use of 
“lawfully obtained” software, the existing smart TV exemption does not permit 
individuals to jailbreak streaming devices for piracy purposes.  Nevertheless, the 
Register concludes that the addition of this language is appropriate to ensure clarity as 
well as consistency across exemption classes.  The recommended language accordingly 
includes this language in both exemptions.  
Accordingly, the Register recommends that the Librarian designate the following 
classes: 
(1) Computer programs that enable smart televisions to execute lawfully 
obtained software applications, where circumvention is accomplished for the 
sole purpose of enabling interoperability of such applications with computer 
programs on the smart television, and is not accomplished for the purpose of 
gaining unauthorized access to other copyrighted works.  For purposes of this 
paragraph (b)(10), “smart televisions” includes both internet-enabled 
televisions, as well as devices that are physically separate from a television 
and whose primary purpose is to run software applications that stream 
authorized video from the internet for display on a screen. 
(2) Computer programs that enable routers and dedicated network devices to 
execute lawfully obtained software applications, where circumvention is 
accomplished for the sole purpose of enabling interoperability of such 
applications with computer programs on the router or dedicated network 
device, and is not accomplished for the purpose of gaining unauthorized 
access to other copyrighted works.  For the purposes of this paragraph (b)(12), 
 
1032 Joint Creators Class 11 Opp’n at 7–8 (emphasis omitted); see also Tr. at 896:08–12 (Apr. 21, 
2021) (Williams, Joint Creators). 

[PAGE 192]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
189 
“dedicated network device” includes switches, hubs, bridges, gateways, 
modems, repeaters, and access points, and excludes devices that are not 
lawfully owned.  
 
  

[PAGE 193]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
190 
L. Proposed Class 12: Computer Programs—Repair    
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption 
Six organizations submitted five petitions for new or expanded exemptions relating to 
the diagnosis, maintenance, repair, and modification of software-enabled devices.1033  
Two petitions—one from EFF,  the other from iFixit and Repair Association—seek to 
merge and expand the two existing exemptions to cover all types of devices and 
vehicles.1034  These proponents also seek to permit “modification” of all devices.  Three 
other petitions propose expanding the existing device exemption to cover other specific 
types of devices.  Summit Imaging, Inc. (“Summit Imaging”) and Transtate Equipment 
Co., Inc. (“Transtate”) each petition to exempt circumvention of TPMs on softwareenabled medical devices and systems for purposes of diagnosis, maintenance, and 
repair.1035  Public Knowledge and iFixit jointly petition for “a new exemption to allow for 
circumvention of TPMs to repair video game consoles and replace damaged 
hardware.”1036 
Comments in support of various proposals were submitted by the petitioners, as well as 
by ACA, FSF, and Kevin Kilkuskie.1037  Opposition comments were submitted by ACT; 
the Advanced Medical Technology Association (“ AdvaMed”); the Alliance for 
Automotive Innovation (“ Auto Innovators”); DVD CCA and AACS LA; the Equipment 
Dealers Association, its regional affiliates (collectively, “EDA”), and Associated 
Equipment Distributors (“ AED”); Joint Creators; the Medical Imaging & Technology 
Alliance (“MITA”); and Philips North America, LLC (“Philips”).
1038  Reply comments 
were submitted by the American Farm Bureau Federation (“ AFBF”), ACA, Consumer 
Reports, MEMA, the Specialty Equipment Market Association (“SEMA”), and an 
 
1033 See NPRM at 65,306–07. 
1034 EFF Class 12 Pet. at 2–3; iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Pet. at 2. 
1035 Summit Imaging Class 12 Pet. at 2; Transtate Class 12 Pet. at 2. 
1036 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 Pet. at 2; Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 Reply at 4 
(described as “a limited exemption to repair video game consoles with optical drives”). 
1037 ACA Class 12 Initial at 2; EFF Class 12 Initial; iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial; FSF Class 
12 Initial at 2; Kevin Kilkuskie Class 12 Initial at 2; Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 Initial; 
Summit Imaging Class 12 Initial; Transtate Class 12 Initial & Exs. 1–29. 
1038 ACT Class 12 Opp’n; AdvaMed Class 12 Opp’n; Auto Innovators Class 12 Opp’n; DVD CCA & 
AACS LA Class 12 Opp’n; EDA & AED Class 12 Opp’n; Joint Creators Class 12 Opp’n; MITA 
Class 12 Opp’n; Philips Class 12 Opp’n.  Auto Innovators is a combination of the Association of 
Global Automakers and the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers.  See Auto Innovators Class 12 
Opp’n at 1. 

[PAGE 194]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
191 
anonymous participant.1039  Finally, several individuals provided comments in support 
of the proposed exemption in an audience participation session during the public 
hearings.1040 
b. Overview of Issues 
Although petitioners’ various proposals overlap to some extent—for example, the 
proposed expansion to cover all software-enabled devices would also cover the more 
targeted expansions specific to video game consoles and medical devices and systems—
the issues raised by participants can generally be organized into four categories: (1) all 
software-enabled devices; (2) vehicles and marine vessels; (3) video game consoles; and 
(4) medical devices and systems. 
All software-enabled devices.  Petitioners who seek an expansion to cover all softwareenabled devices assert that such an expansion is warranted because the current device 
categories are “unnecessarily narrow and ambiguous in scope.”1041  EFF states that a 
“scattershot approach” to defining a class limited to certain types of software-enabled 
devices “will fail to adequately alleviate the adverse effects on users” of the variety of 
devices that need repair.1042  Both petitions propose that—in addition to diagnosis, 
maintenance, and repair—“modification” of devi ces should be permitted under the 
exemption.1043  In response, opponents assert the proposed expansion to all devices is 
overbroad and that proponents have failed to develop a record that demonstrates 
sufficient commonalities among the various types of software-enabled devices.1044  
Opponents also object to the class including specific types of devices— namely, ereaders, video game consoles, disc players, and medical devices—asserting that the 
 
1039 AFBF Class 12 Reply; Consumer Reports Class 12 Reply; MEMA Class 12 Reply; SEMA Class 
12 Reply; Anonymous Class 12 Reply.  Petitioners also submitted four reply comments.  See EFF 
Class 12 Reply; iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Reply; Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 Reply; 
Transtate Class 12 Reply & Exs. 30–32. 
1040 See Tr. at 937:02–938:14 (Apr. 21, 2021) (Cade, Neb. Farm Bureau); Tr. at 946:24–948:21 (Apr. 
21, 2021) (Reynolds, Colo. Ass’n of Biomed. Equip. Techs.); Tr. at 949:07–952:16 (Apr. 21, 2021) 
(O’Reilly, U.S. PIRG); Tr. at 953:04–955:03 (Apr. 21, 2021) (Gordon-Byrne, Repair Ass’n); Tr. at 
955:17–960:09 (Apr. 21, 2021) (Roberts, SecuRepairs); Tr. at 960:18–962:15 (Apr. 21, 2021) 
(Schaffer); Tr. at 962:21–964:17 (Apr. 21, 2021) (Khanifar, Waveform). 
1041 iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 2. 
1042 EFF Class 12 Initial at 2. 
1043 EFF Class 12 Pet. at 2; iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Pet. at 2; see also FSF Class 12 Initial at 2 
(noting that diagnosis and repairing hardware “increasingly requires modifying or replacing the 
software found on those devices”). 
1044 See DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 12 Opp’n at 4–8; Joint Creators Class 12 Opp’n at 2, 7–8; 
Philips Class 12 Opp’n at 2–4. 

[PAGE 195]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
192 
record is inadequate and that circumvention of TPMs on such devices carry unique risks 
for copyright owners.1045  As for “modification,” opponents contend that this proposed 
use is so broad that it would encompass both noninfringing and infringing activities, in 
some cases implicating copyright owners’ exclusive right to prepare derivative works.1046 
Vehicles and marine vessels.  Although no petition specifically focuses on expanding the 
current vehicle repair exemption, two proposals suggest that the two existing repair 
exemptions be merged, which would effectively broaden the vehicle exemption by: (1) 
no longer limiting the class to “motorized land vehicles”; and (2) removing other 
limitations in the current vehicle exemption, including the requirement that users 
comply with other laws.1047  In their initial comments, proponents elaborate that the 
current exemption for vehicles is too narrow because it only covers land vehicles and 
assert that operators of marine vessels face similar adverse effects.1048  Opponents do not 
raise concerns specifically about marine vessels, but do object to removing language 
requiring compliance with other laws, also referred to as the “Illegality Limitation.”1049  
In addition, opponents propose circumscribing the existing vehicle exemption by 
redefining what constitutes “repair” as well as explicitly excluding third-party assistance 
and provision of tools.
1050  In reply, commenters supportive of the vehicle exemption 
stressed the importance of third-party assistance and access to tools.1051 
Video game consoles.  Video game consoles, like marine vessels, fall under the two 
umbrella proposals covering all software-enabled devices.1052  In addition, Public 
Knowledge and iFixit submitted a standalone proposal to permit circumvention to 
repair video game consoles, specifically, console optical drives.1053  Proponents contend 
that authorized repair services are inadequate, particularly for certain legacy consoles 
 
1045 See Joint Creators Class 12 Opp’n at 2, 7–8; DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 12 Opp’n at 2–4; 
Philips Class 12 Opp’n at 3–4. 
1046 See ACT Class 12 Opp’n at 2, 5–6; DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 12 Opp’n at 1, 2–9; Joint 
Creators Class 12 Opp’n at 7–8. 
1047 See EFF Class 12 Pet. at 3; iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Pet. at 3; see also ACA Class 12 Initial 
at 1; ACA Class 12 Reply at 2–3. 
1048 See iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 8–10, 20; SEMA Class 12 Reply at 1.  
1049 Auto Innovators Class 12 Opp’n at 6–9; EDA & AED Class 12 Opp’n at 6–9. 
1050 See Auto Innovators Class 12 Opp’n at 2–6 (citing Auto Innovators Renewal Comment at 3–4); 
EDA & AED Class 12 Opp’n at 6–9, 12, Ex. B. 
1051 See AFBF Class 12 Reply at 4–6; ACA Class 12 Reply at 1–2; MEMA Class 12 Reply at 2–7. 
1052 See EFF Class 12 Pet. at 2; iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Pet. at 2. 
1053 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 Pet. at 2; iFixit & Public Knowledge Class 12 Reply at 3. 

[PAGE 196]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
193 
that manufacturers no longer support.1054  Opponents contend that circumvention of 
TPMs to repair consoles creates a risk of market harm for these devices that decisively 
tips the fair use and adverse effects analyses against granting an exemption.1055  Further, 
they assert that adequate alternatives to circumvention exist such that an exemption is 
not warranted.1056 
Medical devices and systems.  The two proposals covering all software-enabled devices 
include some examples of medical devices.1057  Separately, Summit Imaging and 
Transtate each submitted petitions to permit circumvention of TPMs on medical devices 
and systems for purposes of diagnosis, maintenance, and repair.  Besides device 
software, these petitioners seek access to data files stored on medical devices and 
systems, including manuals and servicing materials.1058  Although some manufacturers 
provide access to device software and servicing materials, proponents assert that the 
materials provided vary and in many cases are inadequate to execute repairs.1059  
Opponents object that the proposed uses, particularly when conducted by an 
unauthorized third-party servicer, are commercial in nature and would harm the market 
for medical devices and systems.1060  Further, opponents argue that an exemption is 
unnecessary because adequate authorized repair services exist.1061  Finally, they raise 
concerns that circumvention would undermine patient safety, create cybersecurity risks, 
and interfere with manufacturers’ regulatory compliance obligations.1062 
For the reasons discussed below, the Register recommends granting most of the 
proposed modifications, with certain limitations to address opponents’ concerns. 
 
1054 See Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 Initial at 2, 4–5; Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 
Reply at 6. 
1055 See Joint Creators Class 12 Opp’n at 2–7; see also DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 12 Opp’n at 11–
20. 
1056 See Joint Creators Class 12 Opp’n at 3–5. 
1057 See, e.g., iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 18 (including examples of medical devices 
such as motorized wheelchairs, CPAP machines; hearing aids, and blood glucose monitors). 
1058 See Summit Imaging Class 12 Pet. at 2; Transtate Class 12 Pet. at 2–3. 
1059 See Transtate Class 12 Reply at 2–5. 
1060 See ACT Class 12 Opp’n at 4–5; AdvaMed Class 12 Opp’n at 2, 7–8; MITA Class 12 Opp’n at 3–
4, 9, 17–18; Philips Class 12 Opp’n at 4, 7–10, 17. 
1061 See AdvaMed Class 12 Opp’n at 11; Philips Class 12 Opp’n at 2, 5–6, 14–15. 
1062 See ACT Class 12 Opp’n at 3–4; AdvaMed Class 12 Opp’n at 6, 9, 11–16; MITA Class 12 Opp’n 
at 5–7, 9–11, 17–18; Philips Class 12 Opp’n at 16–19. 

[PAGE 197]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
194 
2. Discussion 
a. Scope of the Proposed Class 
The proposals to expand the repair exemption to cover all software-enabled devices, if 
adopted, would effectively subsume the device-specific proposals relating to video game 
consoles and medical devices and moot the need to separately evaluate these narrower 
proposals.  Accordingly, as a threshold matter, the Register considers whether 
proponents have established a record that supports defining the class of works broadly 
by demonstrating that sufficient commonalities exist for the proposed uses across the 
full spectrum of software-enabled devices. 
Petitioners argue that while there is a wide range of software-enabled devices, the 
proposed uses of these devices—diagnosis, maintenance, repair, and modification — are 
being adversely affected in the same way.1063  They assert there are sufficient 
commonalities among the proposed uses and users of these devices that “no principled 
distinction” can be made to include some devices but not others.  In support, proponents 
outline how the same types of TPMs restrict access to firmware and data in a variety of 
software-enabled consumer devices.1064  In addition, they cite a few examples where 
TPMs inhibit repair of commercial and industrial systems, including facility 
management systems controlling commercial building access, supervisory control and 
data acquisition (SCADA) systems that facilitate operation of machinery, and PBX 
telephone systems.1065 
Further, proponents point to drawbacks of the current exemption’s device-by-device 
approach.  For one, they assert that limiting the exemption to devices that fall within 
particular categories neither adequately addresses the current variety of existing 
software-enabled devices nor keeps pace with the ever-expanding types of devices.1066  
 
1063 See EFF Class 12 Initial at 13–14; iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 10; Tr. at 847:03–12 
(Apr. 20, 2021) (Sheehan, iFixit). 
1064 See EFF Class 12 Initial at 13–14, 17–60; iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 17–18; see also 
iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 14–17 (cataloging software-enabled devices including 
various home appliances and home systems as well as power drills, battery gauges, and 
toolboxes); iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Reply at 6 (noting harm from inability to repair smart 
devices such as alarm clocks, lightbulbs, thermostats, washing machines, garage door openers, 
refrigerators, as well as vehicles and tractors); Tr. at 800:20–802:14 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Wiens, Repair 
Ass’n) (commenting on need to repair smart devices containing lithium batteries, computers, and 
computing peripherals). 
1065 See iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 19–20. 
1066 See iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Pet. at 2 (“Over the next three years, there will no doubt be 
new devices that don’t also fit cleanly into existing categories and wouldn’t fall neatly into new 
 

[PAGE 198]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
195 
As a result, proponents say that exemption advocates and the Copyright Office are 
triennially burdened with considering whether the repair exemption should be 
expanded to include a new or different type of device even where the uses remain the 
same.1067  To illustrate, proponents observe that the current exemption covers 
smartphones, but not tablets, despite the fact that the firmware for both devices is 
“nearly identical” and the adverse effects on repair are the same.1068 
A second drawback proponents suggest is that limiting the exemption to particular 
categories of devices can introduce ambiguity.1069  For example, under the current 
exemption, proponents query whether a CPAP machine qualifies as a “home appliance” 
and whether eligibility to circumvent TPMs to repair an appliance hinges merely on 
whether it resides in a home kitchen or an office pantry.1070   
Opponents object that a class covering all software-enabled devices is overbroad and 
that the record does not demonstrate that sufficient commonalities exist among the uses 
and users of various devices.  DVD CCA and AACS LA comment that the legislative 
history’s requirement that “the rulemaking proceeding should focus on distinct, 
verifiable, and measurable impacts . . . render[s] proponents’ current request impossible, 
as this rulemaking could never handle the quantum of evidence that would be necessary 
to support an unbound exemption for all software-enabled devices.”1071  Opponents note 
that, in 2018, the Acting Register declined to recommend a class covering “devices, 
generally” based on a “sparse” record; and they observe similar deficiencies in 
proponents’ current petitions.1072  Joint Creators warn that “[d]ivorcing an exemption 
from the actual devices at issue would invite unforeseen harm,” noting that permitting 
 
categories that might be invented during this proceeding.”); see also EFF Class 12 Pet. at 2 
(“Software-enabled devices are ubiquitous in modern life.”); FSF Class 12 Initial at 2 (noting 
“there are very few items on the market these days that do not come with some sort of software 
included”); iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 3–4; Tr. at 737:06–12, 737:25–738:06 (Apr. 20, 
2021) (Sheehan, iFixit). 
1067 ACA Class 12 Initial at 2 (“Users should not have to apply for repair exemptions on a productby-product basis where the principle of lawful repair is the same.”); iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 
Initial at 3–4; Tr. at 737:13–19 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Sheehan, iFixit). 
1068 iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 3. 
1069 Id. at 2–4; Tr. at 737:20–24 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Sheehan, iFixit). 
1070 iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 3–4; see also iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Pet. at 2. 
1071 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 12 Opp’n at 5–6 (citing Commerce Comm. Report at 37); see also 
Philips Class 12 Opp’n at 3–4 (asserting the proposed class is “facially impermissible, as it is 
overly broad and fails to account for any of the unique characteristics of medical devices”). 
1072 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 12 Opp’n at 6–7 (citing 2018 Recommendation at 191–92); Joint 
Creators Class 12 Opp’n at 7 (commenting that EFF provides the same examples as in 2018 and 
iFixit & Repair Ass’n do not discuss individual examples). 

[PAGE 199]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
196 
modification of all devices could be stretched to allow circumvention to engage in 
activities for which that the Library has denied exemptions, such as jailbreaking video 
game consoles.1073  In the event that the Office recommends a broad class, opponents 
assert that certain devices—specifically, disc players and video game consoles —should 
be carved out.1074 
In the 2018 rulemaking, the Acting Register noted that a class of works may be 
appropriate in scope “where the record establishes that users of such works are similarly 
affected by the prohibition on circumvention, and where . . . the class is further 
narrowed by reference to particular types of uses.”1075  When the Office first considered a 
repair exemption for a broad class of software-enabled devices in 2018, the limited 
record during that proceeding could only support evaluation of a few device 
categories.
1076  As some devices were not discussed until the post-hearing stage of the 
proceeding, there was insufficient information to properly evaluate whether sufficient 
commonalities existed among different device types.
1077  In comparison, here, 
proponents have established a record of illustrative examples and analysis showing 
users being hindered by similar TPMs across a variety of consumer devices.1078  
Moreover, the type of copyrighted work, i.e., the computer program to which 
proponents are seeking access, is generally similar across different devices—the Linux 
operating system.1079 
 
1073 Joint Creators Class 12 Opp’n at 8; see Tr. at 747:15–750:05 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Williams, Joint 
Creators; Smith, U.S. Copyright Office) (discussing distinctions between categories of devices, in 
particular, video game consoles); Tr. at 759:06–760:06 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Reed, ACT) (noting that 
expanding the exemption could exacerbate an existing problem where even free software “is 
being pirated and an additional ad network is being installed underneath it”). 
1074 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 12 Opp’n at 7–8 (noting that proponents’ examples of e-readers 
and Wi-Fi-connected speakers do not provide the evidentiary basis to cover players that enable 
motion picture playback); Joint Creators Class 12 Opp’n at 9; Tr. at 752:12–24 (Apr. 20, 2021) 
(Ayers, DVD CCA & AACS LA). 
1075 2018 Recommendation at 289 (citing House Manager’s Report at 7 (suggesting that Register 
should look to whether the prohibition on circumvention affects the availability of works in 
different categories in the same way)). 
1076 See 2018 Recommendation at 189–94. 
1077 See id. at 194 n.1199. 
1078 See EFF Class 12 Initial at 3–60; iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 2–23; EFF Class 12 
Reply at 2–3, 8–9; iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Reply at 3–8, 10–12. 
1079 See Tr. at 742:11–744:08 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Wiens, Repair Ass’n) (noting that TPMs on softwareenabled devices are largely enabled not to protect the firmware, but the device itself from security 
vulnerabilities); see also Tr. at 739:05–741:07 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Gagliano, EFF; Smith, U.S. Copyright 
 

[PAGE 200]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
197 
Software-enabled consumer devices, besides predominating the rulemaking record, also 
share some common characteristics such that users of the proposed exemption are likely 
to be similarly situated.  In the 2016 Software Study, the Office observed that “everyday 
products” containing embedded software share several traits including that (1) “they are 
consumer-grade”; (2) the “software within the product is often specifically created for a 
particular product to control that product’s basic operations”; (3) the software may be 
“ancillary to the non-software (e.g., mechanical or electrical) components of the 
product”; (4) the software “may be distributed along with the product itself without 
payment of a separate charge or fee”; and (5) the software may not be “readily copied, 
thus presenting somewhat diminished concerns about widespread infringement.”
1080  
Further, the Office observed the “ubiquity of copyrighted software in everyday 
products” and “evolving nature of the universe of these items.”1081  This evolution has 
continued over the past five years, during which time the “use of embedded software in 
consumer products has grown rapidly, and with it the deployment of TPMs.”1082  Given 
these commonalities, it seems likely that users of software-enabled consumer devices 
will be similarly affected by TPMs, so that it is appropriate to define the proposed class 
to encompass that category of products. 
It is unclear, however, that commercial and industrial devices and systems share these 
commonalities.  Proponents offer a few examples of TPMs preventing access to SCADA 
and commercial building systems, but it is not apparent from the record that users of 
commercial and industrial systems are similarly situated to users of consumer products.  
From the examples provided, it appears that some of these users had adequate 
alternatives to circumvention.1083  It was also unclear whether the proposed uses would 
 
Office) (discussing the scope of the exemption being limited to “firmware or embedded 
software,” not other applications that may control the operation of a product); see generally Class 
10 Computer Programs — Unlocking (finding that wireless devices integrate a limited number of 
modems that mostly employ chipsets from a single vendor). 
1080 U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, SOFTWARE-ENABLED CONSUMER PRODUCTS 9 (2016), 
https://www.copyright.gov/policy/software/software-full-report.pdf (“Software Study”). 
1081 Id. at 5, 10, 12. 
1082 ACA Class 12 Initial at 2; see also iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 14–16 (noting that 
“shipments of smart home devices are increasing annually at a rate of up to 31%”). 
1083 For example, iFixit and the Repair Association cite a building owner being locked out of its 
facility management system after the only employee who had a password died; yet, the owner 
could still gain access albeit after resetting and reconfiguring the system instead of bypassing the 
TPM.  See iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 19; Tr. at 744:15–747:04 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Wiens, 
Repair Ass’n; Smith, U.S. Copyright Office) (also discussing building automation system that 
caps the maximum number of key cards).  The other example, involving Siemens’s practice of 
hard-coding passwords into their SCADA systems, proposes a workaround where users could 
 

[PAGE 201]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
198 
contravene negotiated licensing terms between commercial actors, which might affect 
the analysis of potential market harm.1084  Indeed, the Software Study identified a 
distinction between “consumer-grade” and “industrial devices, the latter of which may 
be subject to contractual and licensing agreements between parties with similar 
bargaining power.”1085  Without a more developed record concerning devices designed 
primarily for commercial and industrial use, the Register cannot properly evaluate the 
purported similarities to consumer devices or analyze the claimed adverse effects.1086 
Opponents also object to including certain consumer devices that provide access to other 
expressive works, namely, disc players and video game consoles.  Neither petition 
covering all software-enabled devices nor the comments submitted in support of those 
petitions address video game consoles in any detail.  Public Knowledge and iFixit’s joint 
submissions, however, focus exclusively on repair of video game console optical 
drives.
1087  Because of the distinct record and unique issues pertaining to gaming 
consoles, the Register concludes that the proposal to repair console optical drives should 
be considered separately, as a subset of consumer devices. 
In addition, the Register declines to collapse the separate exemptions for vehicles and 
other devices into a single exemption.  The two existing exemptions each contain their 
own unique language and limitations, which commenters have separately petitioned to 
renew on the basis that there has been no material change in the facts, law, or other 
 
develop their own “patch” rather than wait for Siemens to address the hacking vulnerability.  See 
iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 19. 
1084 See Tr. at 756:13–757:15 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Reed, ACT) (commenting that circumvention of TPMs 
could be disruptive to “licensing and right-sizing of the products” because users could avoid 
paying for additional licenses); see also Andy Greenberg, The Hacked McDonald’s Ice Cream 
Machines—and Started a Cold War , WIRED (Apr. 20, 2021), https://www.wired.com/story/theyhacked-mcdonalds-ice-cream-makers-started-cold-war/ (describing a dispute involving 
developers of a device designed to facilitate maintenance and repair of commercial ice cream 
machines, the manufacturer, authorized distributors, and McDonald’s that implicates licensing 
and franchise agreements). 
1085 Software Study at 9. 
1086 See FTC, NIXING THE FIX: AN FTC REPORT TO CONGRESS ON REPAIR RESTRICTIONS 51 (May 2021), 
https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/reports/nixing-fix-ftc-report-congress-repairrestrictions/nixing_the_fix_report_final_5521_630pm-508_002.pdf (“FTC Report”) (“When 
deciding the scope of expanded repair rights, policymakers should think about whether the 
rights should be limited to consumer goods or include capital items.  Given the complexity and 
variation among products, it seems unlikely that there is a one-size fits all approach that will 
adequately address this issue.”). 
1087 See Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 Pet. at 2; Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 Reply at 4. 

[PAGE 202]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
199 
circumstances.1088  The Register will, however, consider whether the existing exemption 
for motorized land vehicles should be expanded to include marine vessels, for which 
proponents provide some support.1089  The Register will also consider the proposal to 
remove the Illegality Limitation for vehicles, specifically whether this limitation is 
adversely affecting users’ ability to make use of the current exemption.1090  
For medical devices and systems, the Register concludes that the specific proposals for 
diagnosis, maintenance, and repair of these devices and systems should be evaluated 
separately for several reasons.  First, most medical devices cited in the record are not 
“consumer devices” and vary in terms of their function, TPMs, and software licenses.1091  
Second, beyond firmware access, petitioners seek access to data files and servicing 
materials associated with medical devices and systems.  Finally, participants have raised 
issues and submitted record materials, such as FDA reports and studies, that bear on 
whether medical equipment repair is being adversely affected by the prohibition against 
circumvention. 
In sum, the Register will evaluate the following proposed classes for which sufficient 
commonalities exist: (1) computer programs in devices designed primarily for use by 
consumers, including video game consoles for the sole purpose of repairing optical 
drives; (2) computer programs in marine vessels; and (3) computer programs and data 
files in medical devices and systems. 
b. Works Protected by Copyright 
Computer programs, including those contained in consumer devices, marine vessels, 
and medical devices and systems, are protected under the Copyright Act.1092  In 
addition, some related data files stored on medical devices and systems, such as 
 
1088 See ACA Vehicle Repair Renewal Pet.; AFBF Vehicle Repair Renewal Pet.; CTA Vehicle Repair 
Renewal Pet.; MEMA Vehicle Repair Renewal Pet.; SEMA Vehicle Repair Renewal Pet. 
1089 See iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 8–10; SEMA Class 12 Reply at 1; AFBF Class 12 Ex 
Parte Letter at 2 (Aug. 3, 2021). 
1090 See ACA Class 12 Initial at 1; iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 20–21; ACA Class 12 
Reply at 2–3; iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Reply at 11–12. 
1091 See Summit Imaging Class 12 Pet. at 3 (imaging equipment and ventilators with TPMs 
including “user-specific login credentials or security keys, among other measures”); Transtate 
Class 12 Pet. at 3 (imaging, endoscopy, and life-support devices with TPMs including 
“encryption, embedded software, and challenge-response mechanisms, access codes, passwords, 
keys, or digital signatures”). 
1092 17 U.S.C. § 101 (definitions of “computer program” and “literary works”); see also 2018 
Recommendation at 194; 2015 Recommendation at 218; Software Study at 2–3. 

[PAGE 203]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
200 
manuals and documentation, are copyrightable as literary works.1093  The Register 
therefore finds that at least some works included in the proposed class are protected by 
copyright. 
c. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Proponents’ asserted noninfringing uses—diagnosis, maintenance, repair, and 
modification—overlap somewhat among the three refined classes.  The terms 
“maintenance” and “repair” are defined in the current exemption for devices.1094  In its 
comments, EFF defines “modification” as “to add new features, load the software of 
one’s choice, disable undesired functionality, or customize the operation of the device to 
one’s preferences.”1095  Based on these definitions, the Register evaluates whether the 
proposed uses are likely noninfringing as to each class. 
i. Consumer Devices 
Proponents suggest that diagnosis, maintenance, repair, and modification of softwareenabled devices are noninfringing activities permitted under the fair use doctrine and 
section 117. 
1) Fair Use 
The Register first considers whether diagnosis, maintenance, and repair of softwareenabled consumer devices is likely to be fair use, and separately whether modification of 
 
1093 See U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, COMPENDIUM OF U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE PRACTICES § 721.11 (3d ed. 
2021) (“COMPENDIUM (THIRD)”); see also iFixit, Medical Device Repair, 
https://www.ifixit.com/Device/Medical_Device (last visited Oct. 15, 2021) (database of repair 
manuals and support documentation for medical devices).  Proponents assert that some data 
files, including error logs, and configuration files stored behind TPMs on medical devices may 
not be protected by copyright.  See Summit Imaging Class 12 Initial at 2; Transtate Class 12 Initial 
at 5.  Nonetheless, because some medical device and system data files may be protectable 
compilations provided they “feature[] an original selection and arrangement,” the Register will 
consider whether accessing these files is necessary to engage in the proposed noninfringing uses.  
Feist Publ’ns, Inc. v. Rural Tel. Serv. Co., 499 U.S. 340, 348 (1991); see 2015 Recommendation at 393–
94 (concluding that some medical device data outputs, such as batch reports, might be 
copyrightable compilations); cf. 2018 Recommendation at 316–17 (concluding that aircraft data 
collected and organized as required by industry standards did not qualify as a copyrightable 
compilation). 
1094 See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(10); see also 17 U.S.C. § 117(d).  These definitions are not part of the 
current exemption for vehicle repair. 
1095 EFF Class 12 Pet. at 3; EFF Class 12 Initial at 1. 

[PAGE 204]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
201 
those devices is likely to be fair use.  Whether repair of video game consoles is likely to 
be fair use is also analyzed separately. 
Diagnosis, maintenance, and repair—consumer devices.  Citing the Office’s previous 
conclusions, proponents assert that the same fair use analysis applies consistently across 
a broader class of software-enabled devices.1096  Under the first fair use factor, 
proponents assert that, irrespective of the type of device, “the purpose of repair is to 
restore a device’s functionality to its previous working state.”1097  On the second factor, 
they observe that the “underlying copyrighted software is essentially functional rather 
than expressive where the software is not meant to be consumed as a creative work.”1098  
For the third factor, proponents argue that “use of the entire software work is reasonable 
when the purpose is repair” because it “often require[s] analysis of the full software 
program,” and “the ultimate product does not contain infringing copies.”
1099  Finally, 
proponents argue the fourth factor favors fair use because “there is no separable market 
for embedded software.”
1100  Rather, “[p]recluding consumers, and their repairpersons 
of choice, from fixing an ever-expanding category of smart devices in fact may 
negatively impact the value of these works when, as this Copyright Office noted, ‘repair 
supports—rather than displaces—the purpose of the embedded pr ograms that control 
the device.’”1101 
ACT objects that, given the scope of the proposed class, the uses do not permit a 
“blanket determination” on fair use.1102  DVD CCA and AACS LA comment that “the 
‘repair’ exemption does not extend to devices that provide access to other, expressive 
copyrighted works.”
1103  They assert that the Office’s previous decision to exclude video 
game consoles should apply equally to DVD and Blu-ray players because permitting 
 
1096 See iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 12 (“The key point is that, from a noninfringement 
perspective, newly presented devices are no different than those covered by existing exemptions; the only 
change is the increasing prevalence of TPM-encumbered devices.”); iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 
Reply at 3–5 (citing Software Study at 33; 2018 Recommendation at 203–05); see also EFF Class 12 
Initial at 14; Tr. at 736:25–737:05, 738:07–15 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Sheehan, iFixit). 
1097 iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Reply at 4 (citing Storage Tech. Corp. v. Custom Hardware Eng’g & 
Consulting, Inc., 421 F.3d 1307 (Fed. Cir. 2005); Sony Computer Entm’t v. Connectix Corp., 203 F.3d 
596 (9th Cir. 2000); Sega Enters. v. Accolade, Inc., 977 F.2d 1510 (9th Cir. 1992)). 
1098 iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Reply at 5 (citing 2015 Recommendation at 234–35). 
1099 Id. at 5. 
1100 Id. (citing 2018 Recommendation at 204–05). 
1101 iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 12 (quoting Software Study at 40); see also iFixit & 
Repair Ass’n Class 12 Reply at 5 (suggesting that where a use is transformative, “copyright 
owners cannot claim market harm”). 
1102 ACT Class 12 Opp’n at 2. 
1103 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 12 Opp’n at 1. 

[PAGE 205]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
202 
circumvention for any purpose will compromise the digital ecosystem and lead to piracy 
of expressive content, which will consequently harm the market for these players.1104  
Responding to these concerns, iFixit and the Repair Association argue that “even for 
software-enabled devices that contain, display, or perform expressive content,” the 
proposed uses do not harm the market for expressive works because the subject of the 
exemption is the firmware, and “in ensuring that devices remain operational, repair 
supports the market for [expressive] works.”1105 
The Register agrees with proponents that diagnosis, maintenance, and repair of 
software-enabled consumer devices are likely to be fair uses where the purpose is to 
restore device functionality.  Indeed, the Office previously recognized this in its 
Software Study, observing that device repair is generally noninfringing.  While 
cautioning that “fair use analysis is ultimately a fact-specific inquiry” that can vary 
based on the type of device, the Office concluded that “properly applied, the fair use 
factors—together with the existing case law—should ensure that consumers, repair 
technicians, and other interested parties will be able to engage in most traditional repair 
. . . activities without fear of copyright infringement liability.”
1106  In 2018, the Acting 
Register found diagnosis, maintenance, and repair likely to be fair use for particular 
categories of devices, but declined to consider an exemption covering all softwareenabled devices due, in part, to a sparse record and limited analysis of these devices.1107  
Here, proponents offer illustrative examples of a wide variety of devices.1108  For the 
most part, opponents do not challenge this conclusion except to comment that 
circumvention of TPMs on devices that provide access to other expressive works may 
lead to piracy.1109  The Register will consider that concern, and whether additional 
limitations on the proposed exemptions are appropriate, in the adverse effects analysis 
below. 
Repair of video game console optical drives.  Public Knowledge and iFixit assert that 
repairing video game consoles—specifically, accessing console software that controls 
device hardware to remove and replace an optical drive— is a fair use.  Petitioners argue 
the first factor favors fair use because “[r]epair of a software-enabled good ‘may be a 
 
1104 See id. at 11–16; Tr. at 753:23–754:10 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Ayers, DVD CCA & AACS LA). 
1105 iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Reply at 5. 
1106 Software Study at 39–41. 
1107 2018 Recommendation at 191–94, 202–05. 
1108 See, e.g., iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 12, 17–18; Tr. at 800:20–802:14 (Apr. 20, 2021) 
(Wiens, Repair Ass’n). 
1109 See DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 12 Opp’n at 11–16. 

[PAGE 206]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
203 
favored purpose when directed at preserving the functionality of a device.’”1110  In 
addition, they note that the use is noncommercial because it is intended “to allow for 
continued personal use of a device.”1111  On the second fair use factor, proponents stress 
that the “software controlling access between a motherboard and optical drive is 
functional, rather than creative.”1112  Proponents assert the third factor likewise favors 
fair use because “[t]he amount of code accessed in the course of repairs is proportionally 
small,” and that, in any event, copying the entire program may be permitted “when 
used to facilitate repair.”1113  Finally, proponents contend that there is “no known 
market” for the software that pairs console motherboards with optical drives, which has 
“no independent value.”1114 
In opposition, Joint Creators contend that the analysis for video game consoles in 
previous rulemaking cycles should continue to apply—that is, console repair is not a fair 
use because it would “enable[] unauthorized access to and use of works distributed 
through consoles, including television programs, movies, and sound recordings,” and 
“the market for the firmware would deteriorate if it was compromised.”
1115  Although 
opponents concede that “hardware repair . . . might be non-infringing in some 
circumstances,” they express concern that “circumventing access controls on console 
firmware enables consoles to load and run infringing games and other content, 
regardless of the circumventor’s stated purpose.”1116  Petitioners respond that 
opponents’ reliance on previous rulemakings is misplaced because the proposed use 
here is narrower than that addressed in past proposals and must be considered “on its 
own merits.”
1117 
For essentially the same reasons that the Register concludes that repair of softwareenabled consumer devices is likely to be fair use, the Register finds that certain video 
game console repair is also likely fair use.  Accessing console firmware for the limited 
purpose of repairing an optical drive to restore the console’s functionality is unlikely to 
affect the value of such software, for which there appears to be no independent market 
 
1110 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 Initial at 3 (quoting 2018 Recommendation at 196); Public 
Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 Reply at 6–7. 
1111 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 Initial at 3. 
1112 Id. at 3. 
1113 Id. at 4 (citing 2015 Recommendation at 214); see also 2018 Recommendation at 198. 
1114 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 Initial at 4. 
1115 Joint Creators Class 12 Opp’n at 5–6 (citing 2018 Recommendation at 205–06; 2012 
Recommendation at 48).   
1116 Id. at 6. 
1117 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 Reply at 6–7. 

[PAGE 207]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
204 
separate from the console itself.1118  Opponents acknowledge that repair activity is in 
some cases noninfringing;1119 and to the extent that users go beyond the “stated 
purpose” of repairing the optical drive, that activity is outside the scope of the proposed 
exemption.1120  Because the record is devoid of evidence involving other types of console 
repair, the Register declines to consider whether repair of any other element of the 
console firmware or hardware is noninfringing.  The Register will also consider, in 
addressing adverse effects below, whether imposing additional limitations on the 
proposed exemption to safeguard expressive works is appropriate. 
Modification, generally.  Proponents assert that “modification” of software-enabled 
devices is also fair use.  In support, EFF conducts an individualized fair use analysis of 
modifications for eight separate devices, concluding that “the analysis for each example 
is identical in all key respects, demonstrating the uniformity of the issues across 
modifications and device types.”
1121  EFF argues the first factor favors fair use because 
the modifications are for personal, noncommercial uses that are transformative in 
nature, such as installing new features and increasing the utility of the device.
1122  On the 
second fair use factor, EFF observes that functional software is primarily factual, not 
expressive; and code that controls device functionality is minimally creative.1123  For the 
third factor, EFF notes that the entirety of the work generally must be copied to allow for 
modifications because the firmware needs to be decrypted and analyzed to understand 
it and to identify the portions of the code to modify.1124  Finally, addressing the fourth 
 
1118 See Sony Comput. Entm’t v. Connectix Corp., 203 F.3d 596, 603–08 (9th Cir. 2000); Sega Enters. v. 
Accolade, Inc., 977 F.2d 1510, 1522–28 (9th Cir. 1992); Software Study at 41. 
1119 See Joint Creators Class 12 Opp’n at 6. 
1120 See Tr. at 788:22–795:07 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Sheehan, iFixit; Amer, U.S. Copyright Office; Burke, 
Public Knowledge; Williams, Joint Creators; Ayers, DVD CCA & AACS LA) (discussing whether 
limitations on the scope of the proposal are sufficient to prevent piracy). 
1121 EFF Class 12 Initial at 15. 
1122 See id. at 14; id. at 17–19 (citing Connectix, 203 F.3d at 599, 609; Sega, 977 F.2d at 1522–23) 
(customizing digital camera functionality); id. at 22–24 (customizing cat litter box cleaning cycles); 
EFF Class 12 Initial at 27–29 (customizing printer firmware); id. at 32–34 (customizing 
programmer/debugger, including to install new features); id. at 38–39 (modifying camera gimbal 
and creating related educational materials); id. at 43–45 (customizing e-reader to enable use of 
additional screensavers, fonts, apps, and file types); id. at 49–50 (customizing robotic companion 
firmware to install new features); id. at 54–56 (modifying digital mobile radio to allow 
multichannel monitoring); see also Tr. at 760:16–762:21 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Gagliano, EFF). 
1123 See EFF Class 12 Initial at 14, 19 (citing Connectix, 203 F.3d at 603–05; Sega, 977 F.2d at 1524), 
24, 29–30, 34–35, 40, 45–46, 51, 56–57. 
1124 See EFF Class 12 Initial at 14, 19–20 (citing Authors Guild v. Google, Inc., 804 F.3d 202, 221–22 (2d 
Cir. 2015); Perfect 10, Inc. v. Amazon.com, Inc., 508 F.3d 1146, 1167–68 (9th Cir. 2007); Kelly v. Arriba 
 

[PAGE 208]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
205 
fair use factor, EFF asserts there is no market harm because there is no market for the 
firmware separate from the device, and modification may actually result in increased 
sales of a device because of the availability of alternative firmware options.1125  
Separately, iFixit and the Repair Association also assert that device modification is 
noninfringing fair use, relying on their analysis for repair as applicable to 
modification.1126 
Opponents object that “unqualified modification” as applied to a broad class of devices 
is so expansive that it defies a singular fair use determination.1127  Because 
“modification” can have a different meaning depending on the device, opponents 
caution that some modifications could implicate a software owner’s derivative work 
right.1128  And as with device repair, opponents argue that modification of software on 
devices that provide access to expressive content, even for facially benign reasons, could 
compromise digital ecosystem protections, leading to unauthorized access to and piracy 
of expressive works.
1129  Opponents also warn that “modification” could be interpreted 
to include jailbreaking video game consoles, a use that the Register has “repeatedly 
denied.”1130 
 
Soft Corp., 336 F.3d 811, 820–21 (9th Cir. 2003); Connectix, 203 F.3d at 605–06; Sega, 977 F.2d at 
1526; Field v. Google, 412 F. Supp. 2d 1106, 1120–21 (D. Nev. 2006)); id. at 25, 30–31, 35–36, 41–42, 
46–47, 51–52, 57–58.  For example, to modify some device firmware, a user must “view the 
original code in its entirety to identify the checksum value in the code so they can match it when 
installing the modified firmware.”  Id. at 25. 
1125 Id. at 14–15, 20, 25–26, 31, 36, 41, 47, 52–53, 58; EFF Class 12 Reply at 5 (“Software-enabled 
devices are not sold as bare metal waiting for a separate purchase of operating firmware; they are 
sold with a copy of the firmware, and the copyright owner receives their compensation.”). 
1126 See iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Reply at 4–5 (citing Sony Corp. of Am. v. Universal City 
Studios, 464 U.S. 417, 450 (1984); Connectix, 203 F.3d at 602, 603; Sega, 977 F.2d at 1527); Tr. at 
767:25–768:08 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Sheehan, iFixit); see also Tr. at 754:24–756:03 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Burke, 
Public Knowledge) (noting that limited “modification for a functional purpose” may be necessary 
to perform a video game console repair); EFF Class 12 Ex Parte Letter at 1 (July 28, 2021) (noting 
its proposal “includes . . . modification in furtherance of repair”). 
1127 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 12 Opp’n at 8–9 (faulting the “dearth of information” provided 
about modification as fatal to evaluating whether the proposed use is noninfringing); see also ACT 
Class 12 Opp’n at 2. 
1128 See DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 12 Opp’n at 8 (citing 2018 Recommendation at 210); Joint 
Creators Class 12 Opp’n at 8 (“[T]he modification language proposed allows for the creation of 
derivative works of software/firmware resident in every device or machine.”). 
1129 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 12 Opp’n at 4, 9–11; Joint Creators Class 12 Opp’n at 8–9; Tr. at 
753:03–13 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Ayers, DVD CCA & AACS LA) (noting that modification that 
“chang[es] the functionality of a device” could allow playback of pirated content). 
1130 Joint Creators Class 12 Opp’n at 8. 

[PAGE 209]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
206 
As in 2018, the Register cannot conclude that modification of software-enabled devices 
generally is likely to be fair use.  Although she credits EFF for providing several 
examples of device modification and analyzing the fair use factors as applied to those 
proposed modifications, the term “modification” is insufficiently precise and 
encompasses activities so broad that the proposal resists a unified analysis across all 
devices.  Unlike diagnosis, maintenance, and repair, which have been defined for 
software-enabled devices in this rulemaking partly by drawing on definitions in section 
117,1131 “modification” is undefined by statute.1132  As opponents observe, it is not 
difficult to imagine modifications that would arguably infringe the derivative work 
right.1133  And while it is true that the current exemption for repair of motor vehicles 
encompasses certain modifications, that language is expressly limited to “lawful 
modification of a vehicle function.”1134  Proponents have offered no analogous language to 
cabin the scope of the modifications contemplated here.1135  Accordingly, on the present 
record, the Register cannot conclude that modification generally constitutes a 
noninfringing use. 
2) Section 117 
Proponents offer section 117 as an alternative basis to conclude that diagnosis, 
maintenance, repair, and modification are noninfringing uses of software-enabled 
devices.1136  EFF asserts that section 117(a)(1) “specifically protects adaptation when the 
‘adaptation is created as an essential step in the utilization of the computer program in 
conjunction with a machine and that it is used in no other manner.’”1137  Proponents also 
rely on section 117(c), arguing that many repair-related activities—for example, entering 
a password, reading device values, or changing software settings—do not require 
 
1131 See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(10); see also 17 U.S.C. § 117(d). 
1132 The term “modification” does, however, appear in the definition for “derivative work” as the 
type of change that, if original, constitutes a “derivative work.” See 17 U.S.C. § 101. 
1133 See 2015 Recommendation at 193–94 (denying jailbreaking proposal for e-readers); id. at 199–
201 (denying jailbreaking proposal for video game consoles); 2012 Recommendation at 42–44, 47–
50 (same). 
1134 See 2018 Recommendation at 197, 199 (emphasis added) (lawful modification of a vehicle 
function “does not extend to gaining unauthorized access to entertainment content”). 
1135 See 2015 Recommendation at 220–21, 224, 234–37, 239–44. 
1136 See EFF Class 12 Initial at 15 (citing Software Study at 35–38); iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 
Initial at 12–13.  As noted above, Public Knowledge and iFixit make no argument that repair of 
optical drives in video game consoles is noninfringing under section 117. 
1137 EFF Class 12 Reply at 4 (quoting 17 U.S.C. § 117(a)(1)); see also iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 
Initial at 12–13. 

[PAGE 210]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
207 
making software copies “other than those that normally occur when turning on the 
device.”1138 
In response, Joint Creators comment that “[t]o the extent firmware must be reproduced 
or modified for repair, Section 117 of the Copyright Act does not make the use at issue 
lawful.”1139  They note that only the owner of a copy of a program is eligible for the 
section 117(a) exemption, and observe that software in devices such as video game 
consoles is licensed.1140  As to section 117(c), opponents argue that there is insufficient 
evidence that devices can be restored to “normal functionality” after TPMs have been 
circumvented.1141    
The Register affirms that, “[p]roperly construed, section 117 should adequately protect 
most repair and maintenance activities” for software-enabled devices.1142  The 
rulemaking record, however, is insufficient to conclude that repair or modification of 
software-enabled consumer devices is likely covered under this section.  With respect to 
section 117(a), “the inquiry into whether an individual qualifies as an ‘owner’ is factintensive.”1143  Proponents focus on ownership of a device, but do not establish that the 
embedded copy of the copyrighted software is also owned.  With respect to section 
117(c), the Register observes that some “maintenance” and “repair” activities anticipated 
by the proposal likely fall under this statutory exemption.  At the same time, section 
117(c) covers a narrower range of activities than those proposed here; any uses that 
involve loading or accessing software that are not  necessary to activate the machine 
likely would not be protected under the statute.
1144  Accordingly, the Register concludes 
that although some of the proposed uses may be noninfringing under section 117, the 
record lacks sufficient evidence to assess whether that section might serve as an 
alternative basis to conclude that diagnosis, maintenance, repair, and modification of 
software-enabled consumer devices, in general, is noninfringing. 
 
1138 iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 13. 
1139 Joint Creators Class 12 Opp’n at 5. 
1140 See id. at 5–6 (citing license agreements for Nintendo Switch, Sony PlayStation, and Microsoft 
Xbox console firmware). 
1141 Id. at 6. 
1142 Software Study at 35–38 (internal quotations omitted). 
1143 2018 Recommendation at 200–01 (citing Krause v. Titleserv, Inc., 402 F.3d 119 (2d Cir. 2005); 
Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc., 621 F.3d 1102 (9th Cir. 2010)); see also Universal Instruments v. Micro Sys. 
Eng’g, 924 F.3d 32, 44–45 (2d Cir. 2019). 
1144 See Software Study at 37–38. 

[PAGE 211]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
208 
ii. Marine Vessels 
Proponents assert that diagnosis, maintenance, repair, and modification of software in 
marine vessels are noninfringing.  Proponents do not offer a separate fair use analysis 
specifically for marine vessels because their position is that the same analysis applies 
across all device types, including land vehicles and marine vessels.1145  In support, they 
note that three manufacturers make engines and diagnostic tools for both land vehicles 
and marine vessels.1146  Opponents raise no specific objections that the proposed 
activities are not fair use as to marine vessels.   
For essentially the same reasons outlined above for software-enabled consumer devices, 
and consistent with the 2015 and 2018 Recommendations concerning repair of land 
vehicles,1147 the Register concludes that diagnosis, repair, and lawful modification of a 
vessel function are likely to be noninfringing fair uses of marine vessel software. 
iii. Medical Devices and Systems 
Proponents of an exemption covering medical devices and systems assert that accessing 
equipment software and data files for purposes of diagnosis, maintenance, and repair is 
fair use and noninfringing under section 117.  Because proponents do not seek an 
exemption to modify medical devices or systems, or their software, the Register does not 
consider whether modification is noninfringing.   
Regarding the first fair use factor, proponents argue that the proposed uses are intended 
“to make the devices useful for the purpose for which they are intended.”
1148  In 
addition, Transtate asserts that where original equipment manufacturers (“OEMs”) fail 
to provide servicing materials as required by the FDA for certain devices and systems, 
then accessing those materials via the equipment is a purpose that favors fair use.1149  In 
response, opponents primarily argue that the first factor weighs against the fair use 
because the proposed activities are for a “commercial” purpose.1150  They base this, in 
part, on the fact that petitioners are independent service organizations (“ISOs”) that 
derive a “commercial benefit” from medical equipment repair services.1151  Proponents 
 
1145 iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 8, 12. 
1146 Id. at 3, 9. 
1147 See 2018 Recommendation at 195–200; 2015 Recommendation at 234–37. 
1148 Summit Imaging Class 12 Initial at 5–6; see Transtate Class 12 Initial at 16. 
1149 See Transtate Class 12 Pet. at 3; Transtate Class 12 Initial at 16. 
1150 See AdvaMed Class 12 Opp’n at 7–8; MITA Class 12 Opp’n at 9; Philips Class 12 Opp’n at 7–8 
(citing Leadsinger, Inc. v. BMG Music Publ’g, 512 F.3d 522, 530 (9th Cir. 2008) for the proposition 
that commercial uses are “presumptively . . . unfair”). 
1151 MITA Class 12 Opp’n at 9. 

[PAGE 212]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
209 
concede that the proposed uses “involve a commercial setting” and that equipment 
repair can be done for profit, but argue that this is not determinative on the first 
factor.1152 
The Register agrees that opponents overstate the significance of the commercial purpose 
element to the fair use analysis.  Commerciality is not fatal to a fair use determination; 
rather the Supreme Court has clarified that there is no “hard evidentiary presumption” 
against commercial uses and that such uses must be addressed through a “sensitive 
balancing of interests.”1153  Here, the proposed activities are intended to restore a 
medical device or system’s functionality, not to commercialize the embedded 
copyrighted software and other servicing materials.1154  The Register has previously 
concluded that diagnosis and repair are likely to be transformative uses.1155  The Register 
accordingly concludes that proponents’ proposed use is likely transformative and so the 
first factor favors fair use. 
On the second fair use factor, proponents assert that medical equipment computer 
programs and data files are “functional works” that are “used to support operation, 
mechanical, and electronic processes of the medical systems.”
1156  Opponents argue that 
medical equipment software is “creative” and its design involves substantial effort.1157  
Philips asserts that, in contrast to “functional” software embedded in video game 
consoles and vehicles, medical device software is of “comparatively much higher value 
 
1152 Transtate Class 12 Reply at 11. 
1153 Campbell v. Acuff-Rose, 510 U.S. 569, 584–85 (1994) (quoting Sony Corp. of Am. v. Universal City 
Studios, 464 U.S. 417, 455 n.40 (1984)); see Google LLC v. Oracle Am., Inc., 141 S. Ct. 1183, 1204 (2021) 
(“[M]any common fair uses are indisputably commercial.”). 
1154 See Transtate Class 12 Reply at 11 (“Servicing the medical equipment owned by lawful 
possessors is primarily for public benefit, as access to materials required for servicing is 
imperative in treating patients, and is especially critical during a pandemic such as the current 
COVID-19 crisis.”), Ex. 5 (decl. of Kevin Melvin ¶ 7), Ex. 6 (decl. of John Kahler ¶ 16), Ex. 7 (decl. 
of Abigail Lane-Savage ¶¶ 17–19)). 
1155 2015 Recommendation at 234–35. 
1156 Transtate Class 12 Initial at 17 (adding that “manuals are technical and contain data, namely 
information of the functions of the systems or devices and the operating specifications”) (citing 
Lexmark Int’l, Inc. v. Static Control Components, Inc., 387 F.3d 522, 536 (6th Cir. 2004); Sony Comput. 
Entm’t, Inc. v. Connectix Corp., 203 F.3d 596, 603 (9th Cir. 2000)); see Summit Imaging Class 12 
Initial at 6 (citing same cases); Transtate Class 12 Reply at 11–12 (“The software itself is not 
dictated by any creative expression, but by the specific technical needs of the machine.”). 
1157 MITA Class 12 Opp’n at 9–10. 

[PAGE 213]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
210 
and complexity and invoke[s] patient safety and information security concerns.”1158  
Opponents further note that some medical device software is unpublished.1159 
The Register finds that the second factor favors fair use.  Even if proponents are correct 
that medical device software is highly complex and valuable, the second factor “calls for 
recognition that some works are closer to the core of intended copyright protection than 
others.”1160  Here, the computer programs and data embedded in medical devices and 
systems are not used for their expressive qualities, but rather for their functional and 
informational aspects that enable users to control and understand the operation of the 
equipment.1161  And even assuming some programs may be unpublished, that does not 
outweigh the functional nature of the works.1162   
Proponents contend that the third fair use factor favors fair use because the amount used 
is necessary for the purpose of diagnosing, maintaining, and repairing medical devices 
and systems.1163  Further, proponents assert that “[t]he servicing computer programs and 
data files involved can be but a small portion of the entire software package.”1164  
Opponents challenge the assertion that the proposed uses only implicate a portion of the 
copyrighted works, suggesting that these activities would require use of the entirety of 
works stored on medical devices and systems, weighing against fair use.1165  Even if that 
 
1158 Philips Class 12 Opp’n at 8–9. 
1159 See AdvaMed Class 12 Opp’n at 8. 
1160 Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 586 (1994). 
1161 See Google LLC v. Oracle Am., Inc., 141 S. Ct. 1183, 1202, 1208–09 (2021); Lexmark International, 
Inc. v. Static Control Components, Inc., 387 F.3d 522, 536 (6th Cir. 2004); Sony Comput. Entm’t, Inc. v. 
Connectix Corp., 203 F.3d 596, 603 (9th Cir. 2000); see generally Class 9 Literary Works — Medical 
Device Data. 
1162 See 17 U.S.C. § 107 (“The fact that a work is unpublished shall not itself bar a finding of fair 
use if such finding is made upon consideration of all the [statutory] factors.”); Harper & Row, 
Publishers v. Nation Enters., 471 U.S. 539, 554 (quoting S. REP. NO. 94-473, at 65 (1975)) (“[T]he 
unpublished nature of a work is ‘[a] key, though not necessarily determinative, factor’ tending to 
negate a defense of fair use.”). 
1163 Summit Imaging Class 12 Initial at 6 (“It is necessary to execute the computer programs and 
access the data files during servicing activities to understand system or device performance and 
. . . update the data files such as service logs.”); see also Transtate Class 12 Initial at 17. 
1164 Transtate Class 12 Initial at 17; see also Summit Imaging Class 12 Initial at 6; Transtate Class 12 
Reply at 12. 
1165 See AdvaMed Class 12 Opp’n at 8; MITA Class 12 Opp’n at 10 (noting that circumvention 
“would expose the full range of programs, manuals, computer code, logs, and other intellectual 
property to public view”); Philips Class 12 Opp’n at 9 (“By circumventing Philips’ access 
controls, ISOs gain unauthorized access to Philips’ copyrighted advanced service software.  ISOs 
 

[PAGE 214]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
211 
is true for some equipment, courts have nonetheless concluded that use of the entirety of 
a work is permissible where necessary to achieve a transformative purpose.1166  As in 
previous rulemakings, the Register finds that this factor should be given little weight 
here because the use is necessary to accomplish the transformative purposes of 
diagnosis, maintenance, and repair.1167  Accordingly, the Register finds the amount used 
is reasonable relative to the purpose of the use. 
Considering the fourth fair use factor, proponents argue that the proposed uses would 
have a “minimal” effect on the market for or value of the copyrighted works because 
medical device and system software and data files are sold with the equipment and have 
no independent value separate from the devices.
1168  Specifically addressing device and 
system manuals, Transtate observes that “electronic manuals merely provide technical 
information,” which manufacturers “provided freely” in the past, suggesting that their 
use “ha[s] a demonstrated neutral effect on the market.”1169   
Opponents dispute proponents’ characterization of market harm, commenting that there 
is a “standalone” market for medical device software.1170  AdvaMed notes that “[s]ome 
software on medical devices is activated and maintained through a subscription model,” 
and other device software can “function on independent, unrelated computers.”1171  
Further, it argues that because some medical devices use embedded software that is 
owned by a software developer that licenses it to the device manufacturer, any 
maintenance of the software by an unauthorized user may contravene licensing 
terms.1172  Finally, opponents warn that unauthorized repair, particularly if widespread, 
 
then copy and use those entire copyrighted works to service Philips systems more efficiently or 
modify Philips systems for commercial gain.”). 
1166 See Google LLC v. Oracle Am., Inc., 141 S. Ct. 1183, 1205 (2021) (“The ‘substantiality’ factor will 
generally weigh in favor of fair use where . . . the amount of copying was tethered to a valid, and 
transformative, purpose.”); Sony Computer Entm’t v. Connectix Corp., 203 F.3d 596, 603–06 (9th Cir. 
2000). 
1167 See 2018 Recommendation at 204; 2015 Recommendation at 235–36. 
1168 Summit Imaging Class 12 Initial at 6; Transtate Class 12 Initial at 17–18, Ex. 1 (decl. of Robert 
A. Wheeler ¶ 35); Transtate Class 12 Reply at 13–14. 
1169 Transtate Class 12 Initial at 18. 
1170 AdvaMed Class 12 Opp’n at 8. 
1171 Id. at 8.  But see MITA Class 12 Opp’n at 10 (“ Although there is no separate market for the 
medical imaging device software beyond the medical imaging devices containing that software, 
disabling of TPMs would damage the market for the medical imaging devices and the software 
contained therein.”). 
1172 See AdvaMed Class 12 Opp’n at 8–9. 

[PAGE 215]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
212 
“can result in patient injury, compromise patient privacy, and place valuable intellectual 
property at risk, all of which can harm the value of the copyrighted work.”1173 
Consistent with findings in prior rulemakings and for the other types of softwareenabled devices evaluated above, the Register credits proponents’ assertion that most 
medical device and system software and data files generally have no independent value 
separate from being used with the equipment.
1174  Although the record suggests that 
some system features on certain devices may be separately licensed through a 
subscription service, the purpose of the proposed uses is not to enable ongoing 
unauthorized access to enhanced features, but merely to restore functionality so the 
equipment performs as intended.
1175  Even where the software could be installed on 
another “standalone” computer, there is no indication that the software serves any 
function, or has any value, except for use with the medical device or system for which it 
was designed.  With respect to opponents’ concerns about the proposed exemption 
being abused, if a user were to reproduce and retain additional copies of any 
copyrighted materials for use with other devices, or enable permanent access to 
subscription-only services, those activities would remain prohibited because they fall 
outside the scope of the proposed exemption.  Overall, the Register concludes that 
diagnosis, maintenance, and repair of medical devices and systems is unlikely to harm 
the market for the embedded software and this factor favors fair use. 
Taken together, the factors indicate that the proposed uses are likely to be noninfringing 
fair uses.  In light of that conclusion, it is unnecessary for the Register to address 
proponents’ separate argument that the proposed activities are noninfringing under 
section 117.
1176 
d. Causation 
The record shows that the statutory prohibition on circumvention of access controls 
limits users’ ability to diagnose, maintain, and repair software-enabled consumer 
devices, including repair of video game console optical drives.  In addition, the 
prohibition impedes the ability to engage in the diagnosis, repair, and modification of a 
vessel function for marine vessels.  Finally, the prohibition limits users’ ability to 
 
1173 Id. at 9; MITA Class 12 Opp’n at 10–11; Philips Class 12 Opp’n at 10. 
1174 See 2018 Recommendation at 204–05; 2015 Recommendation at 236; Software Study at 41. 
1175 See 2018 Recommendation at 198–99 (concluding that although certain vehicle telematics and 
entertainment software “can have independent value, and may be accessed through subscription 
services,” where access is necessary to engage in vehicle repair, it is not likely to harm the market 
for the software). 
1176 Moreover, under the analysis above regarding consumer devices, the Register concludes that 
section 117 would not fully the cover the proposed uses here. 

[PAGE 216]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
213 
diagnose, maintain, and repair medical devices and systems.  But for the prohibition, 
users likely could gain lawful access to the copyrighted computer programs and related 
data files, including medical device servicing materials, for noninfringing repair-related 
purposes. 
e. Asserted Adverse Effects  
Having concluded that certain repair-related activities are likely noninfringing as to the 
three classes identified above, the Register evaluates whether these activities are being 
adversely affected by the prohibition against circumvention. 
i. Consumer Devices 
The Register considers the adverse effects on repair activities for software-enabled 
consumer devices, in general, before analyzing the same for video game consoles, 
specifically.  In doing so, the Register considers to what extent the legal and factual 
circumstances have changed since 2018, when similar proposed exemptions for 
software-enabled devices were denied, in part, because there was insufficient evidence 
that the proposed uses were being adversely affected.1177 
Software-enabled consumer devices, generally.  Proponents assert that as “[s]oftware is 
increasingly embedded in every imaginable type of product” and TPMs are more 
commonly deployed, “[t]his often has the undesirable effect—intended or unintended —
of hindering diagnosis, maintenance, and repair, traditional uses of those products.”1178  
They argue that because the number of software-enabled devices protected by TPMs is 
growing at a rate that outpaces the triennial rulemaking, a broad access exemption for 
repair-related purposes is necessary to remove “legal uncertainty and the risk of harsh 
penalties.”1179   
In support, proponents offer a few illustrative examples where the current device-bydevice approach adversely affects users seeking to repair consumer devices.1180  iFixit 
and the Repair Association note that while circumventing TPMs to repair smartphones 
is exempt under current regulations, doing so to repair tablets is not.1181  In opposition, 
ACT asserts that adequate alternatives to circumvention exist, observing that many 
 
1177 See 2018 Recommendation at 220. 
1178 iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 10. 
1179 Id. at 10, 15 (noting that shipments of smart home devices are “increasing annually at a rate of 
up to 31%” and the worldwide number of Internet of Things devices “is projected to increase to 
43 billion by 2023”). 
1180 See EFF Class 12 Initial at 13–14, 17–60; iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 14–18; iFixit & 
Repair Ass’n Class 12 Reply at 6; Tr. at 800:16–802:14 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Wiens, Repair Ass’n). 
1181 iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 17–18. 

[PAGE 217]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
214 
devices are covered by damage warranties and certified repair options are sufficient.1182  
But proponents note that even where device manufacturers offer repair services, these 
services may be insufficiently timely, limited to specific types of repairs, or discontinued 
when a manufacturer goes out of business.1183  Consequently, some users for whom 
repair, not replacement, of a specific device is essential are without options.1184  In 
addition, proponents comment that the alternatives proposed by opponents are 
inadequate for “people with limited mobility and those in rural areas,” particularly with 
in-person services restricted during the COVID-19 pandemic.1185 
In 2018, proponents were able to show that repair of smartphones and home appliances 
and home systems was being inhibited, but the record for other types of devices was 
“insufficient . . . to adequately identify and evaluate any asserted adverse effects on 
noninfringing uses.”1186  Compared to 2018, proponents have developed a record of 
adverse effects on diagnosis, maintenance, and repair for a wider variety of consumer 
devices.1187  Accordingly, the Register finds that the current rulemaking record is 
adequate to consider the statutory factors for the refined class. 
 
1182 See ACT Class 12 Opp’n at 2, 5 (suggesting that users “who want to build their own solutions 
or fix their own devices have plenty of options available to them” and can chose between “closed 
and open-source systems,” including certified repair options like Apple Repair). 
1183 See iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 16 n.98 (citing a consumer complaint about 
unavailability of local authorized repair services); id. at 18 (citing Joe Keegan, Why Can’t I Fix My 
Own Phone, Toaster, or Tractor?, THE MARKUP (Oct. 20, 2020), https://themarkup.org/ask-themarkup/2020/10/20/0-electronics-right-to-repair-ventilators-iphone) (noting Apple’s authorized 
service providers perform only four types of iPhone repair: display, battery, speaker, and 
camera)); EFF Class 12 Reply at 8–9 (inadequacy of disc player repair alternatives); iFixit & Repair 
Ass’n Class 12 Reply at 7–8 (Wi-Fi-connected thermostat manufacturer neglected to timely 
address software bug “leaving many users in the cold without heat in the middle of winter”); Tr. 
at 764:23–767:18 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Sheehan, iFixit; Smith, U.S. Copyright Office) (discussing 
adequacy of authorized repair services). 
1184 See iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 18 (describing specialized repair services, not 
offered by manufacturer, to repair damaged devices to recover images and videos for personal or 
law enforcement purposes); iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Reply at 7. 
1185 iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Reply at 7; Tr. at 799:07–19 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Burke, Public 
Knowledge) (stressing importance of device repair when there are disruptions in supply chain for 
replacement devices). 
1186 2018 Recommendation at 220. 
1187 See iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 14–15 (noting that the “average household 
contained eleven software-enabled devices” and “one in ten households is a smart home,” any of 
which “may be encumbered by a TPM”); Tr. at 800:20–802:14 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Wiens, Repair 
Ass’n); see also Soo Youn, Ovens, Dishwashers and Washing Machines Are Breaking Down Like Never 
 

[PAGE 218]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
215 
The first section 1201 statutory factor favors an exemption for consumer devices because 
the proposed uses “extend the useful life of the devices by facilitating repair and 
restoration of device functionality,” thereby increasing availability of device software for 
use.1188  iFixit and the Repair Association comment that “[s]oftware can only be used 
when the device it enables functions,” so repairing broken devices makes “software 
lying dormant” available for use.
1189  In addition, EFF asserts that an expanded repair 
exemption will promote the creation of additional new works, that is, “videos and 
writings” discussing how to repair software-enabled devices.1190  In opposition, ACT 
contends that allowing circumvention of TPMs will compromise protections on licensed 
software, which will “allow[] software competitors access to product codes, which is a 
disincentive to innovation.”1191  DVD CCA and AACS LA suggest that the Register 
“look[] past the copyright in the code, and more fully consider[] the copyrights that the 
code is intended to protect” and how circumvention will harm investment in making 
new motion pictures.1192  But there is no indication that permitting the proposed repaircentric uses, would disincentivize creation of either device software or other creative 
works.1193 
The second and third statutory factors weigh slightly in favor of an exemption, as it 
would remove impediments to repairing devices for educational purposes.  Proponents 
note that exempting repair activities will “enable hand-on-learning and research into the 
nature and function of devices.”1194  DVD CCA and AACS LA view these factors as 
“inconsequential” to evaluating the proposals, and they assert that preserving disc 
players, unlike video game consoles, is not justified because disc players are inexpensive 
to replace.
1195  The Register agrees that these factors have limited relevance to the 
proposed uses, but nonetheless concludes that repair education and commentary are 
 
Before. But There’s Nobody to Fix Them., WASH. POST (Oct. 22, 2020), 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/road-to-recovery/2020/10/22/appliance-repair-servicespandemic/; Louise Matakis, Best Buy Made These Smart Home Gadgets Dumb Again, WIRED (Nov. 
12, 2019), https://www.wired.com/story/best-buy-smart-home-dumb/.  
1188 2018 Recommendation at 221. 
1189 iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Reply at 10. 
1190 EFF Class 12 Initial at 16. 
1191 ACT Class 12 Opp’n at 5. 
1192 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 12 Opp’n at 16–17 (citing analysis of video game consoles in 
2012 Recommendation at 51). 
1193 See iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Reply at 10–11; EFF Class 12 Reply at 5–6. 
1194 iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 22; see EFF Class 12 Initial at 16. 
1195 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 12 Opp’n at 17–19. 

[PAGE 219]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
216 
diminished by the current prohibition against circumvention, as users may be unwilling 
to risk liability to demonstrate repair-related activities. 
Addressing market harm under the fourth statutory factor, ACT warns that “the 
potential damage to all software markets—mobile apps, enterprise software, and 
firmware—is significant if these exemptions are approved.” 1196  To illustrate how 
circumvention can lead to such harm, ACT notes that pirates are circumventing TPMs 
even on free smartphone apps and redistributing the apps with the pirate’s ad network 
installed on the pirated version.1197  Offering similar piracy-related concerns, DVD CCA 
and AACS LA comment that “any repair exemption of independent code protecting the 
DVD or Blu-ray player threatens to disrupt the content protection ecosystem.”1198  EFF 
observes that there is no opposition to a repair exemption for the “vast majority of 
devices.”1199  Further, EFF notes opponents’ concerns about market harm are 
“speculative” and have not been borne out by “evidence of increased infringement” 
resulting from the existing jailbreaking and repair exemptions.
1200  With respect to disc 
players, proponents comment that circumvention of TPMs of the players alone would 
not permit unauthorized access to expressive works; rather, it may expose an encryption 
key that could be used to make a separate circumvention of TPMs on the discs, an 
activity that would not be covered by the proposed exemption.1201  As to whether the 
exemption would harm the market for device firmware, proponents argue there is no 
market for firmware independent of the device because a user of the firmware “would 
need to own the hardware device for it to work.”
1202 
 
1196 ACT Class 12 Opp’n at 2; see also ACT Class 12 Opp’n at 5–6 (noting that “[l]icensed software 
is part of most products with digital content embedded in them” and permitting circumvention 
of TPMs protecting that software undermines “investment and distribution in existing products 
and future innovations”). 
1197 See Tr. at 759:06–760:06 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Reed, ACT). 
1198 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 12 Opp’n at 19–20; see also Tr. at 771:24–774:08 (Apr. 20, 2021) 
(Amer, U.S. Copyright Office; Ayers, DVD CCA & AACS LA) (discussing how TPMs protecting 
firmware in disc players control access to cryptographic keys that can be used to decrypt content 
stored on discs); Tr. at 776:03–777:14 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Cheney, NTIA; Ayers, DVD CCA & AACS 
LA) (same). 
1199 EFF Class 12 Reply at 5. 
1200 Id. at 5–6; see also iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 22; Tr. at 762:10–21. (Apr. 20, 2021) 
(Gagliano, EFF). 
1201 See EFF Class 12 Reply at 6; Tr. at 763:21–764:22 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Sheehan, iFixit); see also Tr. at 
784:18–785:17 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Gagliano, EFF) (observing that, despite Blu-ray encryption being 
“widely publicly available” since 2007, this has not diminished licensing and release of works on 
DVD and Blu-ray). 
1202 EFF Class 12 Reply at 5. 

[PAGE 220]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
217 
The Register finds that this factor does not disfavor an exemption because consumer 
device firmware generally does not have independent value separate from the device.  
Opponents’ concerns that expanding the exemption to cover devices that permit access 
to other expressive works—including e -readers, disc players, and Wi-Fi connected 
speakers—would lead to infringement have not been substantiated. 1203  Similar concerns 
about exemptions creating a path to piracy were raised by opponents of current 
exemptions for devices and media that access expressive works, but evidence of 
infringement attributable to exemption misuse has not materialized.  Indeed, the 
Register is recommending these exemptions be renewed, in part, because they received 
no meaningful opposition reflecting changed circumstances.1204  Moreover, as noted 
above, opponents’ concerns largely relate to the proposal to modify content-oriented 
devices.1205  Because the Register declines to find that device modification in general is 
likely to be noninfringing, these concerns should be allayed if not moot.  Nonetheless, 
the Register concludes it is appropriate to retain the definitions of “maintenance” and 
“repair,” as well as to require that circumvention not be “accomplished for the purpose 
of gaining unauthorized access to other copyrighted works.”  These restrictions 
appropriately circumscribe the proposed uses and help to ensure that the exemption is 
not misused as a shield for piracy. 
Turning to the fifth statutory factor, participants dispute whether the Office should 
consider the overlap of the proposed exemption with other laws and regulations.  
Opponents assert that device manufacturers use TPMs to comply with obligations 
concerning user privacy and safety as well as to protect trade secrets and other 
intellectual property.
1206  Proponents argue that the Register should decline to consider 
non-copyright related factors and should not condition the exemption on compliance 
with other laws or regulations.1207  The Office has previously stated that “it will 
generally decline to consider health, safety, and environmental concerns” as part of the 
triennial proceeding, but that “granting of an exemption provides no defense to those 
 
1203 See NPRM at 65,300; DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 12 Opp’n at 3–4, 7–8, 11–15. 
1204 See NPRM at 65,295–300 (recommending renewal of jailbreaking smartphones, tablets, and 
smart TVs; educational, accessibility, and other uses of motion pictures on DVD and Blu-ray 
discs; and repair of smartphones). 
1205 See DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 12 Opp’n at 9–11; Joint Creators Class 12 Opp’n at 9 (faulting 
the proposal to allow modification as “abstract”). 
1206 See ACT Class 12 Opp’n at 6; EDA & AED Class 12 Opp’n at 16–17. 
1207 See Consumer Reports Class 12 Reply at 2; EFF Class 12 Reply at 7–8; iFixit & Repair Ass’n 
Class 12 Reply at 11; Tr. at 768:17–24 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Sheehan, iFixit).  Proponents also note 
environmental benefits to repair.  See iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 22–23; Public 
Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 Initial at 6. 

[PAGE 221]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
218 
who use it as an excuse to violate other laws and regulations.”1208  The Register adheres 
to that view here. 
Also relating to the fifth factor, proponents observe that TPMs can have an 
anticompetitive effect on independent repair and self-repair.1209  Related to proponents’ 
concerns, the Office takes notice of recent government initiatives to address 
anticompetitive conduct in the repair sector.  In May 2021, the Federal Trade 
Commission issued a report to Congress on repair restrictions.  The report discussed 
how TPMs are used by manufacturers to “impede repairs by individuals and 
independent repair shops” while noting that the section 117(c) repair exception and the 
current temporary exemptions to section 1201(a) indicate that repair restrictions are “not 
insurmountable.”
1210  Following the FTC Report, on July 9, the President issued an 
Executive Order encouraging the FTC to exercise its rulemaking authority to address 
“unfair anticompetitive restrictions on third-party repair or self-repair of items.”
1211  The 
Register concludes that these initiatives to address anticompetitive conduct provide 
further support for an expanded exemption for consumer device repair. 
Video game consoles.  The Office has scrutinized previous proposals involving 
circumvention of TPMs on video game consoles due to a close association between 
console TPMs and prevention of piracy.
1212  Opponents have raised similar concerns in 
this rulemaking, though the proposed exemption is narrower than past proposals 
because the proposed use is limited to repair of console optical drives.   
 
1208 Section 1201 Report at 126 (citing 2015 Recommendation at 11); see 2018 Recommendation at 5 
(summarizing that the Acting Register “did not accord significant weight to such considerations” 
in the 2018 proceeding and noting that despite “the seriousness of these issues, they generally are 
best addressed through other legal frameworks and by agencies with expertise in those areas”). 
1209 See Transtate Class 12 Pet. at 4; ACA Class 12 Initial at 2; EFF Class 12 Initial at 15; Kevin 
Kilkuskie Class 12 Initial; Summit Imaging Class 12 Initial at 3, 5; EFF Class 12 Reply at 5; iFixit & 
Repair Ass’n Class 12 Reply at 7–8, 11; Consumer Reports Class 12 Reply at 2; Tr. at 765:11–19 
(Apr. 20, 2021) (Sheehan, iFixit). 
1210 FTC Report at 24–26. 
1211 Exec. Order No. 14,036 of July 9, 2021, 86 Fed. Reg. 36,987, 36,992 (July 14, 2021); see also 86 
Fed. Reg. at 36,992 (encouraging FTC to exercise regulatory authority to address “any other 
unfair industry-specific practices that substantially inhibit competition.”); FTC, File No. 212 3126, 
Resolution Directing Use of the Compulsory Process Regarding Repair Restrictions (Sept. 2, 
2021); FTC, File No. 211 0160, Resolution Directing Use of the Compulsory Process Regarding 
Abuse of Intellectual Property (Sept. 2, 2021). 
1212 See 2018 Recommendation at 205–06; 2015 Recommendation at 199–201; 2012 
Recommendation at 42–44, 47; Tr. at 792:22–793:02 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Williams, Joint Creators). 

[PAGE 222]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
219 
Proponents assert that where an optical drive is not functioning, console firmware must 
be accessed to remove and replace the drive.1213  Proponents claim this process requires 
circumvention of TPMs to “divorce” the old drive from and “marry” the new drive to 
the console motherboard.1214  All participants agree that the console will not function 
properly if console TPMs are not restored after the drive repair is executed.1215  While 
opponents question whether this can be accomplished and warn that an exposed console 
would facilitate video game piracy,1216 proponents insist that restoring console TPMs is 
feasible.1217  Opponents also assert that a repair exemption is unnecessary because 
console manufacturers “provide easy, reliable, and affordable repair services”—both 
under warranty and post-warranty—as well as “comprehensive online and offline 
support networks that help consumers to remotely troubleshoot issues.”1218  Proponents 
contend that repair services for consoles have become “substantially less available” since 
the 2018 rulemaking, noting for example that Microsoft has discontinued support for 
certain pre-2016 consoles.1219  Finally, opponents suggest circumvention is unnecessary 
 
1213 See Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 Initial at 2–3. 
1214 Id. at 3. 
1215 See Tr. at 755:12–756:03 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Burke, Public Knowledge); Tr. at 783:17–784:15 (Apr. 
20, 2021) (Amer, U.S. Copyright Office; Williams, Joint Creators); Tr. at 787:11–16 (Apr. 20, 2021) 
(Wiens, Repair Ass’n). 
1216 See Tr. at 777:25–778:23 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Reed, ACT) (asserting that replacing and flashing an 
Xbox drive can facilitate playing pirated content); Tr. at 782:01–783:03 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Williams, 
Joint Creators); Tr. at 794:20–24 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Ayers, DVD CCA & AACS LA); ESA Class 12 Ex 
Parte Letter at 2 (Aug. 12, 2021). 
1217 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 Reply at 8–9 (noting that a console must be “re-locked” to 
function correctly and restore access to stored device data— “effective repair requires that the prerepair and post-repair level of security remain identical”); see also Tr. at 774:11–775:25 (Apr. 20, 
2021) (Burke, Public Knowledge); Tr. at 779:04–780:10 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Wiens, Repair Ass’n) 
(noting “the device isn’t repaired unless the copy protection is restored” which requires running 
“a software tool that pairs [an off-the-shelf] optical drive to the machine”); Chris Green, 
Comment to Replacement Disc Drive won’t play games but will play movies, IFIXIT (May 3, 2011), 
https://www.ifixit.com/Answers/View/51505/Replacement+Disc+Drive+won’t+play+games+but+
will+play+movies (recommending swap of controller board from original drive to new drive). 
1218 Joint Creators Class 12 Opp’n at 3–4; see Tr. at 792:12–18 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Williams, Joint 
Creators); Tr. at 802:25–804:03 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Williams, Joint Creators). 
1219 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 Initial at 2, 4–5; Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 Reply 
at 6; Tr. at 789:04–791:02 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Sheehan, iFixit; Burke, Public Knowledge) (commenting 
that video game repairers “have storage rooms full of hundreds of consoles that they’ve been 
unable to fix for their customers, because without the ability to replace a broken optical drive on 
its own, the repairs are too costly, too risky, and the parts are too hard to find”); Tr. at 798:15–
799:06 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Burke, Public Knowledge); Kyle Wiens, Op-ed, Copyright Law is Bricking 
 

[PAGE 223]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
220 
because users can replace both the malfunctioning optical drive and its paired 
motherboard with a functioning hardware combination.1220  Proponents argue that the 
cost and difficulty in locating parts makes this an inadequate alternative compared to 
replacing only the optical drive.1221 
The record indicates that circumvention is necessary to repair optical drives and that 
restoration of the same TPMs, including copy controls and authentication mechanisms, 
is possible and necessary to restore console functionality in accordance with its original 
or authorized specifications.  Unlike in previous rulemakings, the proposed exemption 
is limited to a specific, recurring hardware issue.  In addition, compared to 2018, 
proponents here have identified some consoles for which manufacturer repair services 
are neither available nor adequate.
1222  For these reasons, the Register concludes that 
there are potential adverse effects to consider under the section 1201 statutory factors. 
Regarding the first statutory factor, proponents assert that the inability to execute 
hardware repairs diminishes the availability for use of the console firmware.1223  Looking 
beyond the firmware to the video games, opponents assert that “[u]nauthorized repair 
will undermine the security of consoles, thereby threatening the ecosystems that 
consumers currently enjoy” and potentially harming the availability of games.
1224  
Proponents respond that the availability of video games is also adversely affected by an 
unrepaired console, and that an exemption for repair “will give users enduring, lawful 
access to content that they have legally purchased and licensed from creators, while also 
enabling them to legally purchase and play new content on their repaired console.”1225  
The Register agrees with proponents that this factor favors an exemption because, 
provided that all TPMs are restored, console repair is more likely to increase availability 
of works for use than it is to deter video game developers from creating new works. 
Considering the second and third statutory factors together, while they are of limited 
relevance to the proposal, the Register finds that they weigh slightly in favor of an 
exemption, as the proposed uses may benefit console preservation and, to a lesser extent, 
education about consoles.  Opponents argue that “repair of consoles is not in 
 
Your Game Console. Time to Fix That, ARS TECHNICA (Dec. 12, 2020), https://arstechnica.com/techpolicy/2020/12/copyright-law-is-bricking-your-game-console-time-to-fix-that/.  
1220 See Joint Creators Class 12 Opp’n at 5 & n.14; ESA Class 12 Ex Parte Letter at 2 (Aug. 12, 2021). 
1221 See Tr. at 789:04–791:02 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Sheehan, iFixit; Burke, Public Knowledge). 
1222 Compare 2018 Recommendation at 219–20, with Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 Initial at 2–
5. 
1223 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 Initial at 5. 
1224 Joint Creators Class 12 Opp’n at 6. 
1225 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 Reply at 9; Tr. at 787:24–788:16 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Wiens, 
Repair Ass’n); Tr. at 953:24–954:04 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Gordon-Byrne, Repair Ass’n). 

[PAGE 224]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
221 
furtherance of archiving, preserving, or educating people about video games,” is 
“frequently a commercial enterprise,” does not provide commentary on video games, 
and that any research only relates to repair, “not any broader topic.”1226  The Register 
agrees that the connection between repair and these other uses is tenuous, but 
nonetheless agrees with proponents that repair may provide some educational value 
about how optical drives function within gaming consoles.1227 
On the fourth statutory factor, opponents assert there is no reason for the Register to 
deviate from previous rulemakings where “console-specific concerns about potential 
market harm” weighed against exemptions.
1228  As one example, opponents point to a 
recent criminal indictment against a hacking group that created circumvention tools for 
certain consoles, which allowed users to access libraries of unauthorized copies of video 
games.
1229  Proponents agree that concerns about video game piracy are valid, but argue 
that opponents have made no showing that permitting repair of console optical drives, 
specifically, would increase piracy.
1230  Moreover, proponents assert that there is no 
independent market for console firmware and that repair of consoles will actually 
increase the market for games played using discontinued or older consoles.1231 
The Register appreciates opponents’ legitimate concerns over video game piracy, but it 
is unclear how the targeted repair activities proposed here would further such activity.  
Indeed, the criminal piracy cited by opponents appears to involve console modification, 
which is outside the scope of the proposal.
1232  Overall, this factor does not disfavor an 
exemption because restoration of TPMs following repair diminishes the piracy risk, 
 
1226 Joint Creators Class 12 Opp’n at 6. 
1227 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 Initial at 5; Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 Reply at 9–
10. 
1228 Joint Creators Class 12 Opp’n at 6–7 (quoting 2018 Recommendation at 206); see Tr. at 747:20–
748:03, 749:18–25 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Williams, Joint Creators); Tr. at 793:03–20 (Apr. 20, 2021) 
(Williams, Joint Creators) (commenting that limiting language does not address “big picture 
concerns that the 1201 statute really set a marketplace expectation for typical consumers” that, 
when altered, results in market harm). 
1229 See Joint Creators Class 12 Opp’n at 3. 
1230 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 Reply at 9–10; Tr. at 755:12–756:03 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Burke, 
Public Knowledge); Tr. at 953:20–953:24 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Gordon-Byrne, Repair Ass’n). 
1231 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 Initial at 6; Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 12 Reply at 10. 
1232 See Indictment, U.S. v. Louarn, No. CR20-127 (Aug. 20, 2020), ECF 1 (outlining criminal piracy 
allegations involving modification of consoles using USB ports and MicroSD ports, not consoles 
with optical drives); Matthew Gault, Nintendo Threatens Repair Shop for Advertising Switch Mod 
Chip Installs, V
ICE MOTHERBOARD (June 18, 2020), 
https://www.vice.com/en/article/7kpxbb/nintendo-threatens-repair-shop-for-advertising-switchmod-chip-installs.  

[PAGE 225]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
222 
console firmware has little if any independent value outside of the device, and restoring 
more consoles to functionality may increase the potential market for video games. 
The Register finds no additional factors raised by participants about repair of video 
game consoles relevant to her determination. 
After weighing the statutory factors, the Register concludes that the prohibition on 
circumvention of TPMs is causing, or is likely to cause, adverse effects on the  
noninfringing diagnosis, maintenance, and repair of software-enabled devices designed 
primarily for use by consumers.  Carrying forward the language of the existing 
exemption, the Register concludes the definitions of “maintenance” and “repair” 
appropriately focus these activities on the restoration of device functionality, including 
restoring TPMs that serve other beneficial purposes such as protecting user privacy, 
security, and safety.  In addition, the Register concludes that the distinct record for 
repair of video game consoles, and the unique concerns raised by circumvention of 
TPMs on those devices, warrant a more limited exemption. 
ii. Vehicles and Marine Vessels 
As noted above, the Register has determined that the exempt activities for land 
vehicles—diagnosis, repair, and lawful modification of a vehicle function —are also 
likely to be noninfringing for marine vessel.  The Register proceeds to evaluate whether 
the prohibition on circumvention is adversely affecting these noninfringing uses for 
marine vessels.  In addition, she considers whether the limitation in the current vehicle 
exemption that requires users to comply with other laws is adversely affecting users’ 
ability to engage in noninfringing uses.
1233  For the following reasons, the Register 
concludes the vehicle exemption should be expanded to include marine vessels and that 
the language requiring compliance with other laws should be removed. 
Proponents assert that users of marine vessels are adversely affected in the same manner 
as users of land vehicles, in particular, tractor owners.  iFixit and the Repair Association 
explain that boat dealers that service these marine vessels “are often located far from 
where the vehicles are used and the manufacturers will not sell their diagnostic software 
to the owners themselves.”1234  Consequently, at least some vessel users do not have 
 
1233 Some opposition comments also propose changes to the existing vehicle exemption that 
would restrict its scope.  See EDA & AED Class 12 Opp’n at 7–9.  The Register declines to 
consider changes that would limit the scope of the proposed exemption, which should have been 
submitted in opposition to the renewal petitions.  To the extent that comments are relevant to 
proponents’ request to remove the Illegality Limitation, the Register considers them here. 
1234 iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 8; see also AFBF Class 12 Ex Parte Letter at 2 (Aug. 3, 
2021) (noting that “’farming’ may include crop cultivation in a marine environment through 
water-based transport and machinery”). 

[PAGE 226]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
223 
adequate access to repair options and diagnostic information.1235  Proponents further 
observe that the same manufacturers of land vehicle engines also manufacture marine 
vessel engines, so that excluding marine vessels from the exemption is “a distinction 
without a difference.”1236  In support, SEMA notes that it is “aware of an engine tuning 
product that is legal under the DMCA exemption for land vehicles but has been 
challenged for its application in boats given the current Class 12 limitation.”1237  No 
opposition comments address or object to extending the exemption for land vehicle 
repair to marine vessels.  Because the Register credits the similarities between marine 
vessels and land vehicles, and finds no reason to deviate from the adverse effects 
analysis in the previous recommendations for land vehicles,
1238 she concludes that the 
current prohibition against circumvention is or is likely to adversely affect diagnosis, 
repair, and lawful modification of a vessel function for marine vessels. 
Turning to the requirement that users comply with other laws and regulations when 
circumventing TPMs to repair vehicles, iFixit and the Repair Association assert that any 
exemption “should not be conditioned on compliance with non-copyright-related laws 
and regulations.”
1239  Opponents respond that proponents’ arguments are the same that 
the Office rejected in previous rulemakings, and that proponents fail to provide 
evidence of changed circumstances that warrant reconsideration.1240   
 
1235 See iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 9, 20 (noting that “[f]requently, the electronic 
engine installed in ships does not have a diagnostic gauge or display mounted in the control 
panel” and “[t]his real-time engine diagnostic information is essential for engine operators”). 
1236 Id. at 9. 
1237 SEMA Class 12 Reply at 1. 
1238 See 2018 Recommendation at 212–16; 2015 Recommendation at 240–44, 248. 
1239 iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Pet. at 3 (“The DMCA is not a catch-all extra punishment for 
violation of EPA regulations or breach of contract, and an exemption . . . does not immunize 
people from punishment for violating other laws and regulations.”); see also ACA Class 12 Initial 
at 1 (“[T]he exemption has never been shown . . . to interfere with a vehicle’s safety and 
environmental controls.”); Tr. at 836:02–15 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Sheehan, iFixit) (suggesting the 
limitation “compounds liability”). 
1240 See Auto Innovators Class 12 Opp’n at 6–8; Tr. at 750:15–751:11, 839:14–840:09 (Apr. 20, 2021) 
(Rosenbaum, Auto Innovators).  Citing the 2018 Recommendation, Auto Innovators offers the 
following reasons to justify retaining the limiting language: (1) the limitation is not impeding 
legitimate vehicle repair as “other laws” still apply regardless of the exemption; (2) proponents 
have not shown “any incremental impact on noninfringing repair activities” from DMCA 
enforcement of this limitation; (3) the limitation is consistent with language found in other 
permanent and temporary exemptions; and (4) there is concern that removing the limitation 
could “will cause confusion and mislead automobile owners regarding whether they must 
comply with other laws.”  See Auto Innovators Class 12 Opp’n at 8–9. 

[PAGE 227]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
224 
The Register has received requests to remove similar references to other laws from the 
exemptions pertaining to medical device data (Class 9) and security research (Class 13).  
In those classes, the Office received comments from the FDA and DOJ, the federal 
agencies tasked with enforcement of the relevant regulatory schemes.  Those offices 
advised the Office that they would not object to removal of the challenged language.
1241  
They concluded that it is unnecessary to condition eligibility for the exemption on 
compliance with other laws, as the latter will continue to apply regardless of whether 
the user is exempted from liability under section 1201.  The Register agrees with those 
views, and accordingly has recommended removing the “other laws” language from 
Classes 9 and 13, and replacing it with a clarifying statement that eligibility for the 
exemption is not a safe harbor or defense to liability under other applicable laws.  The 
Register concludes that the same reasoning is applicable in this class, and therefore is 
recommending a similar change to the regulatory language here. 
iii. Medical Devices and Systems 
Finally, the Register considers whether the prohibition against circumventing TPMs on 
medical devices and systems to access computer programs and data files, including 
equipment manuals, is adversely affecting the repair of those devices and systems.  
Proponents describe the use of various TPMs as an effort by OEMs “to try to prevent or 
hinder access to the software tools and other programs and data files in which they 
claim copyright needed for the diagnosis, repair, and maintenance of medical 
devices.”
1242  To illustrate the adverse effects on repair, proponents point to instances 
where medical facilities have been unable to use equipment due to inadequate repair 
options, particularly during the COVID-19 pandemic.1243  They assert that where users, 
 
1241 Letter from Suzanne B. Schwartz, Dir., Office of Strategic P’ships & Tech. Innovation, FDA, to 
Kevin R. Amer, Acting Gen. Counsel & Assoc. Register of Copyrights, U.S. Copyright Office at 2 
(Aug. 13, 2021); DOJ Class 13 Reply at 5. 
1242 Summit Imaging Class 12 Pet. at 3; see Transtate Class 12 Pet. at 2–3 (noting that OEMs use 
“TPMs such as encryption, embedded software, and challenge-response mechanisms, access 
codes, passwords, keys, or digital signatures” to restrict access to device software and “manuals 
and technical data . . . being provided via electronic media, sometimes as data files installed on 
the medical systems or devices”); Tr. at 949:12–950:10 (Apr. 21, 2021) (O’Reilly, U.S. PIRG). 
1243 See Summit Imaging Class 12 Initial at 3–4; Transtate Class 12 Initial at 11 & Ex. 21 (citing 
Lauren Goode, Right-to-Repair Groups Fire Shots at Medical Device Manufacturers, WIRED (May 19, 
2020), https://www.wired.com/story/right-to-repair-medical-equipment-ifixit/); see also Joe 
Keegan, Why Can’t I Fix My Own Phone, Toaster, or Tractor?, THE MARKUP (Oct. 20, 2020), 
https://themarkup.org/ask-the-markup/2020/10/20/0-electronics-right-to-repair-ventilators-iphone 
(reporting on a biomedical technician unable to repair ventilators in the Strategic National 
Stockpile); Adi Robertson, Right-to-Repair Advocates Say Hospitals Need New Rules to Keep 
Equipment Working, THE VERGE (July 9, 2020), https://www.theverge.com/2020/7/9/21318551/right-
 

[PAGE 228]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
225 
specifically ISOs, have engaged in circumvention to repair medical devices and systems, 
manufacturers have alleged violations of section 1201.1244 
Opponents assert that adequate alternatives to circumvention nullify the basis for an 
exemption.  AdvaMed comments that “[r]obust service and repair offerings already exist 
through OEMs and authorized ISOs” and “[o]wner or lessee users of medical devices 
can also have their staff become authorized . . . through training programs and 
undertaking certain [FDA reporting] obligations.”1245  Similarly, Philips comments that it 
“provides ISOs with access to . . . materials that allow them to setup and service Philips’ 
medical imaging systems, but restricts them from accessing more advanced unlicensed 
features and service functionalities.”1246  Proponents acknowledge that certain OEMs 
provide equipment owners and ISOs with some access to software and servicing 
materials, but contend that this access is often not sufficient to diagnose, maintain, and 
repair the equipment.
1247  For example, Transtate comments that “basic” repair 
“documentation and software is not available on all medical systems,” and even where it 
is provided, “many systems” are not properly configured or “require[] the purchase of 
thousands of dollars in hardware per engineer” to service the equipment.
1248  Moreover, 
proponents assert authorized repair options are inadequate to provide timely, costeffective service, which can be essential to avoid negative patient outcomes.1249  In 
 
to-repair-hospital-equipment-rules-third-party-pirg-survey; U.S. PIRG, HOSPITAL REPAIR 
RESTRICTIONS (July 2020), https://uspirgedfund.org/reports/usp/hospital-repair-restrictions.  
1244 See Summit Class 12 Pet. at 2; Transtate Class 12 Pet. at 4; Summit Imaging Class 12 Initial at 2; 
Tr. at 806:09–808:13 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Kerwin, IAMERS); Tr. at 952:05–16 (Apr. 21, 2021) (Smith, 
U.S. Copyright Office; O’Reilly, U.S. PIRG). 
1245 AdvaMed Class 12 Opp’n at 2, 10–11; see also MITA Class 12 Opp’n at 3; Tr. at 825:06–827:22 
(Apr. 20, 2021) (Reed, ACT) (confirming that TPMs limit access to some device manuals to 
authorized servicers). 
1246 Philips Class 12 Opp’n at 5–6 & Ex. A (decl. of Jacqueline Dickson ¶¶ 2–11) (describing 
Philips’ customer service intellectual property policies, including the access levels for different 
types of authorized users). 
1247 See Summit Class 12 Initial at 3; Transtate Class 12 Initial at 8, 14; Transtate Class 12 Reply at 
4–5. 
1248 Transtate Class 12 Reply at 4–5, 8 n.24; see also Summit Imaging Class 12 Initial at 3; Tr. at 
812:14–813:03 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Inacker, Transtate); Tr. at 948:07–21 (Reynolds, Colo. Ass’n of 
Biomed. Equip. Technicians); Isaac Scher, Hospitals Need Ventilators to Keep Severe COVID-19 
Patients Alive. They Might Not Be Able to Fix Them Without Paying the Manufacturer $7,000 per 
Technician., BUS. INSIDER (June 3, 2020), https://www.businessinsider.com/ventilatormanufacturers-dont-let-hospitals-fix-coronavirus-right-to-repair-2020-5.  
1249 See Summit Imaging Class 12 Initial at 3–4 (commenting that because medical providers 
“cannot troubleshoot and conduct repairs promptly” due to a lack of access to “software and files 
 

[PAGE 229]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
226 
addition, proponents comment that manufacturers in some cases no longer provide 
repair support for older equipment that can still be used by medical facilities to provide 
treatment.1250   
Relevant to the first section 1201 statutory factor, proponents assert that the prohibition 
on circumventing TPMs restricts the availability for use of medical device software and 
manuals in which OEMs are claiming copyright.
1251  Opponents respond that “medical 
device software is broadly licensed and available” to providers, although TPMs may 
limit “what aspects of the device software may be viewed and copied.”
1252  Philips 
comments that it makes available all the copyrighted material “needed to permit basic 
repair and servicing” of its devices, and asserts that the “copyright-protected options 
and features” that proponents seek are “beyond essential repair and servicing.”
1253  
Further, it asserts that copyrighted software on older devices that have received an “End 
of Service” designation should not be accessible for the proposed uses because “the 
equipment is no longer safe and effective to operate.”1254  While the Register 
acknowledges opponents’ safety concerns and will address those below, she concludes 
that this factor favors an exemption because the prohibition on circumvention makes 
medical equipment software and manuals less available for use in noninfringing 
diagnosis, maintenance, and repair. 
Regarding the second and third statutory factors, MITA asserts that the “commercial 
nature” of petitioners’ interest runs contrary to the nonprofit nature of the purposes 
outlined in these factors.1255  Although repair of medical devices and systems that are no 
longer supported by OEMs arguably preserves the availability for use of the 
 
needed to service their equipment,” repair is delayed and medical equipment remains out of 
service, leading to “negative patient outcomes”— an issue exacerbated by the COVID-19 
pandemic); Tr. at 805:18–806:06 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Kerwin, IAMERS) (commenting that rural and 
regional hospital facilities are underserved by OEMs in terms of cost and timeliness of repair); Tr. 
at 807:23–808:04 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Kerwin, IAMERS) (observing a price differential of $150-200 per 
hour for ISO repair compared to $600-800 per hour for OEM repair with a four-hour minimum); 
Tr. at 818:13–819:01 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Sheehan, iFixit) (noting delays in servicing wheelchairs and 
ventilators). 
1250 See Summit Imaging Class 12 Initial at 2; Transtate Class 12 Initial at 6; Transtate Class 12 
Reply at 5. 
1251 Summit Imaging Class 12 Initial at 2–3; Transtate Class 12 Initial at 2, 4–5; Transtate Class 12 
Reply at 4–5. 
1252 MITA Class 12 Opp’n at 3. 
1253 Philips Class 12 Opp’n at 15. 
1254 Id. at 15–16. 
1255 MITA Class 12 Opp’n at 3. 

[PAGE 230]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
227 
equipment’s software and servicing materials, the Register finds these factors not 
especially relevant to the determination. 
On the fourth factor, opponents warn that permitting circumvention “would severely 
harm” the market for and value of medical equipment software because it would give 
“full access” to entities requesting it “for purely commercial purposes.”1256  Specifically, 
they contend that allowing circumvention “would expose intellectual property, 
including valuable know-how in addition to the copyrighted information, to competitors 
and the general public,” who could “view and replicate valuable innovations.”1257  
AdvaMed also expresses “concerns about accessing and activating software modules 
that are purchased or licensed separately following an additional purchase or 
subscription model,” noting that unauthorized access would harm the value of those 
works.1258  Transtate responds that opponents’ focus on ISOs’ commercial motives is 
“misplaced” because the exemption would apply only to “lawful possessors of the 
medical devices and the third party servicers performing services requested by the 
lawful possessors.”
1259   
The Register concludes that the narrow proposed uses and additional limitations on the 
scope of these activities limit any potential market harm.  To the extent a user is 
accessing the software and manuals to diagnose, maintain, or repair the device or 
system, those uses support rather than displace the embedded computer programs.
1260  
As with other software-enabled devices, the functional software and manuals for 
medical devices and systems have no independent value separate from the equipment 
they operate or explain.
1261  Further, to appropriately circumscribe the proposed uses, 
the Register determines that the definitions of “maintenance” and “repair” used in the 
current exemption for devices should likewise apply to the proposal for medical devices 
and systems.  This factor therefore does not disfavor an exemption. 
Under the fifth statutory factor, the Librarian has discretion to consider additional 
factors she deems appropriate.  Proponents argue that the public interest in deterring 
anticompetitive behavior favors the requested exemption.  They assert that medical 
equipment repair “is dominated by OEMs who use . . . TPMs to hinder competition by 
 
1256 Philips Class 12 Opp’n at 17. 
1257 MITA Class 12 Opp’n at 3 
1258 AdvaMed Class 12 Opp’n at 11. 
1259 Transtate Class 12 Reply at 9 
1260 See 2018 Recommendation at 203 (quoting Software Study at 40). 
1261 Indeed, one opponent acknowledges that “there is no independent market for the medical 
imaging device software beyond the devices themselves,” though also comments that the market 
for medical devices and integrated software together will be harmed by “loss of public 
confidence in the safety and efficacy of medical imaging.”  MITA Class 12 Opp’n at 4. 

[PAGE 231]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
228 
ISOs.”1262  Proponents argue that OEMs charge higher prices and that medical service 
providers must spend more to service their equipment than if they were able to engage 
in self-repair or have an ISO perform repairs on their behalf.1263  ISOs have asserted 
antitrust claims in litigation against OEMs, with mixed results.1264  Opponents respond 
that the rulemaking process should not be used as “a means of regulating competitive 
markets or promoting commercial outcomes.”1265  Consistent with the discussion above, 
the Register concludes that an exemption to facilitate repair of medical devices and 
systems could help to address the broader competitive concerns recently highlighted by 
the Executive Branch.1266  This factor provides further support for the proposed 
exemption. 
Opponents assert that the potential consequences of unauthorized circumvention on 
patient safety should factor into if not decisively tilt the analysis against an exemption.  
Opponents comment that “unauthorized ISOs” present an acute risk to patient safety 
because, unlike OEMs, these organizations are not obligated to adhere to FDA Quality 
System Regulation (QSR) requirements.
1267  AdvaMed comments that it is “aware of at 
least 281 adverse events . . . from 2012 to 2017 associated with third party servicing.”1268  
Opponents further warn that some ISOs cross the line from “servicing” into 
“remanufacturing,”
1269 which the FDA has said “can have a significant impact on the 
 
1262 Transtate Class 12 Pet. at 4; see Summit Class 12 Initial at 3; Transtate Class 12 Reply at 6. 
1263 Summit Imaging Class 12 Initial at 3; Transtate Class 12 Pet. at 4; Transtate Class 12 Initial at 
10 & Ex. 18 (Medical Equipment Maintenance Market Report); Tr. at 806:15–807:10 (Apr. 20, 2021) 
(Kerwin, IAMERS); see also FTC Report at 40. 
1264 Compare Philips N. Am., LLC v. Summit Imaging Inc., Case No. C19-1745JLR, 2020 WL 6741966, 
at *6-7 (W.D. Wash. Nov. 16, 2020) (dismissing ISO antitrust counterclaims against OEM for 
monopolization and attempted monopolization, including theories based on refusal to deal and 
essential facilities), with Jury Verdict, Red Lion Medical Safety Inc. v. GE Co. Inc., 2:15-cv-00308 
(E.D. Tex. Apr. 26, 2017), ECF No. 165 (jury verdict finding OEM liable for anticompetitive 
conduct relating to servicing of anesthesia machines).   
1265 See, e.g., Philips Class 12 Opp’n at 7–8. 
1266 See Exec. Order No. 14,036 of July 9, 2021, 86 Fed. Reg. 36987, 36992 (July 14, 2021); FTC 
Report at 40. 
1267 See AdvaMed Class 12 Opp’n at 10–12; MITA Class 12 Opp’n at 5–7; Philips Class 12 Opp’n at 
17–19; Tr. at 813:25–815:04 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Reed, ACT) (noting that cost savings from ISO repair 
can be attributed to ISOs not having to comply with FDA QSR requirements). 
1268 AdvaMed Class 12 Opp’n at 12–15 (providing illustrative examples of unauthorized 
servicing); Tr. at 813:18–24 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Reed, ACT) (commenting that 1% of adverse incidents 
attributable to ISO repair from the FDA’s 2017 Medical Device Review (“MDR”) amounted to “40 
deaths, 294 serious injury, 38,50021 patients and/or operators exposed to potential harm”). 
1269 See AdvaMed Class 12 Opp’n at 13; MITA Class 12 Opp’n at 3–5, 19–36. 

[PAGE 232]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
229 
safety and effectiveness of the device.”1270  Opponents also assert that expanding access 
to medical devices and systems has the potential to introduce security vulnerabilities to 
the device and any facility network to which the device is connected.1271 
As noted above, the Register generally does not consider other regulatory schemes as 
part of the adverse effects analysis because the focus of this proceeding is on copyrightrelated considerations.  The Register notes, however, that the FDA submitted comments 
in this proceeding highlighting a 2018 report in which it “determined that the available 
evidence was insufficient to conclude whether or not there is a widespread public health 
concern relating to medical device servicing” and “did not justify imposing additional 
regulatory requirements on ISOs.”
1272  With respect to opponents’ concern about device 
“remanufacturing,” the Register again notes that “modification” is not part of the 
proposed exemption for medical devices; rather, the exemption requires the device to be 
restored to normal functionality and no changes be made to the firmware.1273  
Accordingly, opponents’ concerns, while significant, do not provide a basis for denying 
the requested exemption. 
After weighing the statutory factors, the Register concludes that the prohibition on 
circumvention of TPMs is causing, or is likely to cause, an adverse impact on the 
noninfringing diagnosis, repair, and maintenance of medical devices and systems.   
 
1270 U.S. FOOD AND DRUG ADMIN., FDA REPORT ON THE QUALITY, SAFETY, AND EFFECTIVENESS OF 
SERVICING OF MEDICAL DEVICES 24 (May 2018), https://www.fda.gov/media/113431/download 
(“2018 FDA Report”). 
1271 See AdvaMed Class 12 Opp’n at 5–6; MITA Class 12 Opp’n at 5; Philips Class 12 Opp’n at 2, 
18–19. 
1272 Letter from Suzanne B. Schwartz, Dir., Office of Strategic P’ships & Tech. Innovation, FDA, to 
Kevin R. Amer, Acting Gen. Counsel & Assoc. Register of Copyrights, U.S. Copyright Office at 3 
(Aug. 13, 2021) (citing 2018 FDA Report at 23); see also id. at 3 (Aug. 13, 2021) (citing U.S. FOOD & 
DRUG ADMIN., STRENGTHENING CYBERSECURITY PRACTICES ASSOCIATED WITH SERVICING OF 
MEDICAL DEVICES: CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES (June 2021), 
https://www.fda.gov/media/150144/download) (noting the FDA’s views that “[ISOs] may be well 
positioned to help identify and address security vulnerabilities” and that circumvention for 
repair-related purposes would not “necessarily and materially jeopardize the safety and 
effectiveness of medical devices in the United States with respect to cybersecurity”). 
1273 See Tr. at 819:10–822:07 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Bartelt, U.S. Copyright Office; Wiens, Repair Ass’n; 
Kerwin, IAMERS) (discussing how medical devices would be restored to compliance with OEM 
specifications); Tr. at 828:04–07 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Inacker, Transtate) (“[F]or a medical device, after 
TPM circumvention, the data remains on the device.  The software remains intact.  The device is 
left in its original state after the repair is complete.”). 

[PAGE 233]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
230 
iv. Third-party assistance and tools 
Finally, a number of participants submitted comments addressing issues with thirdparty assistance and access to tools in furtherance of the proposed uses.1274  These issues 
have been addressed in previous recommendations, the NPRM to this rulemaking, and 
Office policy studies.1275  Because the legal circumstances have not materially changed, 
the Register adheres to the views expressed in the 2018 Recommendation and reiterated 
in the NPRM.1276  Consistent with these views, and cognizant that the Librarian’s 
authority under the statute to grant exemptions to the anti-circumvention provisions 
does not extend to the anti-trafficking provisions, the Register does not recommend 
modifying any language relating to third-party assistance or provision of tools.1277 
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA recommends expanding the current exemptions for vehicles and certain devices 
by merging them into a single exemption that would permit circumvention “for the 
diagnosis, maintenance, and repair of all software-enabled devices, machines, and 
systems.”
1278  In addition, NTIA recommends allowing “lawful modification that is 
necessary for a repair or maintenance” and “modifications of software regarding the 
functionality of a device,” machine, or system.1279  Concerning the scope of the class, 
NTIA observes that “in contrast to the record developed in 2018, . . . the current record 
reflects that all such devices share critical features with regard to repair.”1280  NTIA 
 
1274 See FSF Class 12 Initial at 1–2; iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 12 Initial at 17–18; Summit Imaging 
Class 12 Initial at 4, 7; Transtate Class 12 Initial at 20–21; ACT Class 12 Opp’n at 6; AdvaMed 
Class 12 Opp’n at 12; Auto Innovators Class 12 Opp’n at 2–6; EDA & AED Class 12 Opp’n at 6–7, 
12; Joint Creators Class 12 Opp’n at 4 n.9; Philips Class 12 Opp’n at 10, 15, 19 n.75; ACA Class 12 
Reply at 1–3; AFBF Class 12 Reply at 4–6; EFF Class 12 Reply at 9–11; iFixit & Repair Ass’n Class 
12 Reply at 9–10; MEMA Class 12 Reply at 2–7; Transtate Class 12 Reply at 7–9; Tr. at 769:11–24, 
810:02–22, 831:22–832:16, 845:01–12 (Apr. 20, 2021) (McHargue, AFBF); Tr. at 840:19–842:19 (Apr. 
20, 2021) (Rosenbaum, Auto Innovators); Tr. at 856:23–846:04 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Sheehan, iFixit); Tr. 
at 848:05–13 (Apr. 20, 2021) (Williams, Joint Creators); Tr. at 937:02–938:14 (Apr. 21, 2021) (Cade, 
Neb. Farm Bureau). 
1275 See NPRM at 65,299–300; 2018 Recommendation at 222–26; 2015 Recommendation at 239, 246–
47; Section 1201 Report at 52–62; Software Study at 32–33, 36–38. 
1276 See NPRM at 65,300; 2018 Recommendation at 222–26. 
1277 The Office has expressed support for a statutory change to facilitate the provision of assistance 
to exemption beneficiaries in appropriate circumstances.  See Section 1201 Report at 59–60. 
1278 NTIA Letter at 76, 84. 
1279 Id. at 76, 84. 
1280 Id. at 77; see also id. at 79 (noting examples provided by proponents of TPMs “curtailing repair 
or modification by entities other than the OEM or its authorized agents”). 

[PAGE 234]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
231 
concludes that the proposed uses of these devices are fair uses as well as noninfringing 
under sections 117(a) and 117(c).1281  It finds opponents’ piracy-related arguments 
unpersuasive because the exemption would not permit “unlawfully accessing or 
copying specific content.”1282  For similar reasons, NTIA suggests that the exemption 
should not make compliance with other applicable laws a condition of the exemption 
and “instead recommends adding an appropriate notice in the regulatory text.”1283 
The Register largely agrees with NTIA’s support for expanding the exemptions to cover 
a broader swath of software-enabled devices and systems.  But, as noted above, while 
many devices share commonalities, the Register observes distinctions in the present 
record among the various proposals and the types of devices, which warrant separate 
analyses and determinations.  In addition, for the reasons explained above, the Register 
does not conclude that “modification” as a general matter is noninfringing. 
Addressing third party assistance, NTIA recommends that the exemption expressly 
apply to both the device “owner” as well as “a third party authorized by the owner.”1284  
In support, NTIA observes that this change would address harm arising from 
anticompetitive restrictions, as addressed in the Executive Order and FTC report 
discussed above.1285  As noted, the Register finds that these Executive Branch initiatives 
constitute an additional factor favoring an exemption for repair-related activities.  The 
Register, however, declines to recommend express language regarding third-party 
assistance because the legal circumstances concerning “whether vehicle or other repair 
services may run afoul of the anti-trafficking provisions when engaging in 
circumvention on behalf of customers” have not materially changed since 2018.
1286 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
After thorough consideration, the Office recommends expanding the two current 
exemptions for vehicle and device repair, and adding a third exemption specifically for 
medical device and system repair.  
First, in recognition of the commonalities among uses and users across a diversity of 
software-enabled devices, the Register recommends expanding the exemption for certain 
 
1281 See NTIA Letter at 80–82. 
1282 Id. at 83–84. 
1283 Id. at 82–84 (finding opponents’ safety and privacy concerns unpersuasive). 
1284 Id. at 84. 
1285 Id. at 78 (citing Exec. Order No. 14,036 of July 9, 2021, 86 Fed. Reg. 36987 (July 14, 2021); FTC 
Report at 3, 6, 40); see also id. at 83 (finding opponents’ safety concerns about third-party repair 
unpersuasive). 
1286 2018 Recommendation at 225. 

[PAGE 235]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
232 
categories of devices to cover diagnosis, maintenance, and repair of any lawfully 
acquired device that is primarily designed for use by consumers.  To address opponents’ 
concerns that the exemption not be misused to gain unauthorized access to other 
copyrighted works beyond the device firmware, the Register carries forward the 
requirement that the circumvention is “not accomplished for the purpose of gaining 
access to other copyrighted works,” as well as the existing definitions of “maintenance” 
and “repair.”   
With respect to video game consoles, the recommended exemption is limited to one 
specific type of repair— namely, repair of optical drives.  To be clear, if a console does 
not contain an optical drive, it is not eligible under this exemption; and if circumvention 
is done to repair any part of a console other than the optical drive, that activity too falls 
outside the scope of the exemption.  Narrowing the exemption for consoles in this 
manner appropriately balances the specific adverse effects experienced by users against 
opponents’ legitimate concerns over links between console circumvention and piracy. 
Second, the Register recommends that the existing exemption for land vehicles be 
expanded to cover marine vessels. 
Finally, the Register recommends a new exemption allowing circumvention of TPMs 
restricting access to firmware and servicing materials on medical devices and systems 
for the purposes of diagnosis, maintenance, and repair.  Like the consumer device 
exemption, the Register incorporates the definitions of “maintenance” and “repair” from 
section 117 into the proposal. 
Accordingly, the Register recommends that the Librarian designate the following 
classes: 
(1) Computer programs that are contained in and control the functioning of a 
lawfully acquired motorized land vehicle or marine vessel such as a personal 
automobile or boat, commercial vehicle or vessel, or mechanized agricultural 
vehicle or vessel, except for programs accessed through a separate subscription 
service, when circumvention is a necessary step to allow the diagnosis, repair, 
or lawful modification of a vehicle or vessel function, where such 
circumvention is not accomplished for the purpose of gaining unauthorized 
access to other copyrighted works.  Eligibility for this exemption is not a safe 
harbor from, or defense to, liability under other applicable laws, including 
without limitation regulations promulgated by the Department of 
Transportation or the Environmental Protection Agency. 
(2) Computer programs that are contained in and control the functioning of a 
lawfully acquired device that is primarily designed for use by consumers, 
when circumvention is a necessary step to allow the diagnosis, maintenance, 

[PAGE 236]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
233 
or repair of such a device, and is not accomplished for the purpose of gaining 
access to other copyrighted works. For purposes of this paragraph (b)(14): 
(i) The “maintenance” of a device is the servicing of the device in order 
to make it work in accordance with its original specifications and any 
changes to those specifications authorized for that device; and 
(ii) The “repair” of a device is the restoring of the device to the state of 
working in accordance with its original specifications and any changes 
to those specifications authorized for that device. For video game 
consoles, “repair” is limited to repair or replacement of a console’s 
optical drive and requires restoring any technological protection 
measures that were circumvented or disabled. 
(3) Computer programs that are contained in and control the functioning of a 
lawfully acquired medical device or system, and related data files, when 
circumvention is a necessary step to allow the diagnosis, maintenance, or 
repair of such a device or system.  For purposes of this paragraph (b)(15): 
(i) The “maintenance” of a device or system is the servicing of the 
device or system in order to make it work in accordance with its 
original specifications and any changes to those specifications 
authorized for that device or system; and 
(ii) The “repair” of a device or system is the restoring of the device or 
system to the state of working in accordance with its original 
specifications and any changes to those specifications authorized for 
that device or system. 
 
 
 

[PAGE 237]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
234 
M. Proposed Class 13: Computer Programs—Security Research    
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption 
Proponents seek to expand a current exemption that permits the circumvention of access 
controls on computer programs for good-faith security research.  The current exemption 
language encompasses: 
(i) Computer programs, where the circumvention is undertaken on a 
lawfully acquired device or machine on which the computer program 
operates, or is undertaken on a computer, computer system, or computer 
network on which the computer program operates with the authorization 
of the owner or operator of such computer, computer system, or 
computer network, solely for the purpose of good-faith security research 
and does not violate any applicable law, including without limitation the 
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986. 
(ii) For purposes of this paragraph (b)(11), “good-faith security research” 
means accessing a computer program solely for purposes of good-faith 
testing, investigation, and/or correction of a security flaw or vulnerability, 
where such activity is carried out in an environment designed to avoid 
any harm to individuals or the public, and where the information derived 
from the activity is used primarily to promote the security or safety of the 
class of devices or machines on which the computer program operates, or 
those who use such devices or machines, and is not used or maintained in 
a manner that facilitates copyright infringement.
1287   
Professor J. Alex Halderman, CDT, and U.S. Technology Policy Committee of the 
Association for Computing Machinery (“Halderman et al.”) filed a petition to eliminate 
several limitations in the existing exemption.1288  These include the phrases “solely for 
the purpose of,” “the information derived from the activity is used primarily to promote 
the security or safety of,” and “not used or maintained in a manner that facilitates 
copyright infringement.”  They also seek to eliminate the requirement that 
circumvention be limited to that conducted on a “lawfully acquired device or machine,” 
and that circumvention “not violate any applicable law.”1289  SFC also filed a petition 
seeking to make explicit that the good-faith security research exemption covers “privacy 
issues (including flaws or functionality)” and to “permit[] the owner of the device to 
 
1287 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(11). 
1288 Halderman et al. Class 13 Pet. at 3. 
1289 Id. 

[PAGE 238]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
235 
remove software or disable functionality that may expose personal information.”1290  
Comments supporting some form of the proposed expansions or clarification were filed 
by FSF, HackerOne, Rapid7, Consumer Reports, and GitHub.  Comments opposing the 
proposed expansions or clarification were filed by ACT, BSA, DVD CCA and AACS LA, 
Joint Creators, MEMA, and SIIA. 
For the reasons discussed below, the Register recommends that the proposed exemption 
be granted in part and denied in part. 
b. Overview of Issues 
Class 13 proponents generally observe that “security research plays a vital role in our 
cybersecurity architecture.”1291  They argue that security research benefits the public by 
enabling researchers “to uncover security flaws and vulnerabilities and then alert 
consumers and notify companies of such concerns, and to develop new, secure versions 
of computer programs and software.”1292 They also argue that, in some cases, researchers 
have declined to pursue beneficial security research, or have not reported their findings, 
due to fear of liability.
1293  Opponents of the proposed expansion, though agreeing that 
“[s]ecurity research is a critical and necessary part of innovation in digital products and 
services,” argue that the existing exemption is sufficient.1294 
In the 2018 rulemaking, the Acting Register considered petitions to remove several of the 
limitations in the 2015 exemption, including expanding the exemption to softwareenabled devices generally.1295  The 2015 exemption had limited security research to 
specific categories of devices.1296  In the 2018 proceeding, proponents argued that the 
 
1290 SFC Class 13 Pet. at 2. 
1291 Halderman et al. Class 13 Reply at 5 (citing Halderman et al. Class 13 Initial at 8–11; 
HackerOne Class 13 Initial at 2; ACT Class 13 Opp’n at 3). 
1292 Halderman et al. Class 13 Pet. at 3.  See also HackerOne Class 13 Initial at 2 (discussing “over 
150,000 vulnerabilities” that have been found through security research); Halderman et al. Class 
13 Initial at 33 (“Good-faith security research and testing are matters of national security 
policy.”); GitHub Class 13 Reply at 2 (“Important security work is done by all kinds of 
developers.”). 
1293 See HackerOne Class 13 Initial at 2 (“Nearly two-thirds of hackers say they have found bugs 
and chosen not to report them to the organization. Thirty-eight percent of hackers said this was 
due to ‘threatening legal language’ posted on the organization’s website regarding the discovery 
of potential vulnerabilities.”); Halderman et al. Class 13 Initial at 10. 
1294 ACT Class 13 Opp’n at 2. 
1295 See 2018 Recommendation at 283–84. 
1296 The 2015 exemption had been limited to (1) devices or machines primarily designed for use by 
individual consumers (including voting machines); (2) motorized land vehicles; and (3) medical 
 

[PAGE 239]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
236 
device limitations harmed security research by excluding a variety of software-enabled 
devices and systems in which there is a legitimate research interest.  In the end, the 
Acting Register agreed that the device limitations should be removed, and also revised 
some of the language of the exemption to better track the statutory exemption for 
security testing in section 1201(j), including to allow circumvention to be undertaken on 
a “computer, computer system, or computer network on which the computer program 
operates” and “with the authorization of the owner or operator of such computer, 
computer system, or computer network.”
1297  The Acting Register declined to 
recommend the other proposed changes, concluding that the proponents had failed to 
demonstrate that they were adversely affected by the exemption’s limitations. 
Class 13 proponents again request removal of these provisions.  They generally argue 
that the existing exemption, though beneficial to security researchers, remains unclear as 
to whether certain research activities will in fact be free from liability under section 
1201.1298  Specifically, Halderman et al. point to provisions referred to as the “ Access 
Limitation,”1299 the “Use Limitation,”1300 the “Lawfully Acquired Limitation,”1301 and the 
“Other Laws Limitation.”1302  They argue that the Librarian should remove each of these 
limitations in order “[t]o guarantee that researchers can continue to engage in beneficial, 
 
devices designed for whole or partial implantation in patients, as well as corresponding personal 
monitoring systems.  See 2015 Recommendation at 319–20. 
1297 2018 Recommendation at 313–14. 
1298 Halderman et al. Class 13 Initial at 4. 
1299 Halderman et al. Class 13 Initial at 5 (“The Purpose Limitation cabins the exemption to 
circumvention undertaken ‘solely for the purpose of good-faith security research,’ and that limit 
good-faith security research to accessing a computer program ‘solely for purposes of good faith 
testing, investigation and/or correction of a security flaw or vulnerability.’”). 
1300 Id. (requiring that “the information derived from the activity is used primarily to promote the 
security or safety of the class of devices or machines on which the computer program operates, or 
those who use such devices or machines, and is not used or maintained in a manner that 
facilitates copyright infringement”). 
1301 Id. (requiring that “circumvention be undertaken on a ‘lawfully acquired device or machine 
on which the computer program operates, or is undertaken on a computer, computer system, or 
computer network on which the computer program operates with the authorization of the owner 
or operator of such computer, computer system, or computer network”). 
1302 Id. (requiring that “researchers ‘not violate any applicable law, including without limitation 
the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986, as amended and codified in title 18, United States 
Code’”). 

[PAGE 240]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
237 
noninfringing good-faith security research, and simplify the process for evaluating 
alleged violations.”1303 
SFC expressed support for many of the arguments of Halderman et al.,1304 but SFC’s 
petition and written comments solely address privacy-related research.  SFC expresses 
concern that the existing security research exemption “does not protect the full gamut of 
socially valuable privacy research” and provides several examples that it thought would 
not be covered by the security research exemption.1305  These include “installing 
legitimately obtained software on devices for the purpose of evaluating the device’s 
functionality, de-obfuscating and decompiling code in order to study it, and accessing 
protected memory spaces to evaluate the software within.”1306  Accordingly, SFC 
requests that the Office recommend expanding the exemption to explicitly protect 
privacy research. 
Opponents generally argue that the current limitations have enabled good-faith security 
research, that proponents did not demonstrate a sufficient basis for removing the 
limitations, and that the limitations should be retained as “common-sense ways of 
tailoring the exemption to attempt to cover only legitimate conduct.”1307  Joint Creators, 
for example, argue that the existing temporary exemption, which it did not oppose, and 
section 1201(j) “already provide the shields from liability that legitimate researchers 
need to circumvent access controls to conduct security testing.”1308  Similarly, BSA 
argues that despite supporting renewal of the existing exemption, with the limitation as 
recommended by the Acting Register and adopted by the Librarian in 2018, BSA is 
concerned that the Halderman et al. petition “seeks to eliminate all of these critical 
safeguards.”1309 
2. Discussion 
The Office begins by discussing the SFC petition.  SFC requested that the Register clarify 
that the existing exemption “includes good-faith testing, investigation, and/or correction 
of privacy issues (including flaws or functionality that may expose personal 
 
1303 Halderman et al. Class 13 Initial at 4.  See also FSF Class 13 Initial at 2; HackerOne Class 13 
Initial at 3–5; GitHub Class 13 Reply at 2–3.  Rapid7 supports a portion of Halderman et al.’s 
petition, recommending that the exemption be expanded “to strike the ‘any applicable law’ 
provision, and clarify the ‘used or maintained’ provision.”  Rapid7 Class 13 Initial at 2. 
1304 See, e.g., Tr. at 463:11–464:14, 505:07–20 (Apr. 8, 2021) (Williamson, SFC). 
1305 SFC Class 13 Initial at 2–4. 
1306 Id. at 3. 
1307 Joint Creators Class 13 Opp’n at 3.  See also ACT Class 13 Opp’n at 2. 
1308 Joint Creators Class 13 Opp’n at 2. 
1309 BSA Class 13 Opp’n at 2. 

[PAGE 241]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
238 
information) and permits the owner of the device to remove software or disable 
functionality that may expose personal information.”1310  In its initial comments, SFC 
noted that “17 USC § 1201(i) addresses such end-user mitigations and is the more 
appropriate focus of any proposed expansion to those protections,” and suggested that 
the Office recommend legislation to revise section 1201(i).1311  In reply comments and 
hearing testimony, petitioner SFC dropped its request for the expanded exemption to 
cover “disabling of functionalities.”1312 
What remains of SFC’s petition is the request that the security research exemption be 
expanded to address privacy-related security research.  In public comments, both the 
Computer Crime and Intellectual Property Section (CCIPS) at the Department of Justice 
and the cybersecurity and data analytics company Rapid7 opposed expanding the 
exemption to include privacy-related security research because, they both argued, the 
current exemption already covers such privacy-related security research.1313  As Rapid7 
noted, “[e]xposure of personal or sensitive information is a common security risk, and 
the object of many instances of security research is the discovery of flaws or 
functionality that may result in exposure of personal or sensitive information.”1314  At the 
public hearing, SFC stated that it sees no need for expanding the exemption provided 
that the Register clarifies in her Recommendation that privacy-related security research 
is already covered.1315  Opponents were asked if any disagreed with this understanding 
of the current exemption, and none voiced an objection. 
In a post-hearing letter, the Office noted the apparent agreement among participants 
that SFC’s concerns could be addressed through a clarifying statement in the 
Recommendation rather than through a revision of the regulatory text.  The Office 
requested that participants submit a joint letter confirming this understanding, or, if any 
disagreed, that they separately submit letters setting out any disagreements and 
proposing regulatory language to resolve the issue.  All participants conferred, and all 
except for SIIA and Joint Creators signed a letter stating their shared view that “the 
existing exemption covers testing, investigating, and correcting security flaws or 
 
1310 SFC Class 13 Pet. at 2. 
1311 SFC Class 13 Initial at 2. 
1312 See SFC Class 13 Reply at 4; Tr. at 516–17 (Apr. 8, 2021) (Williamson, SFC). 
1313 Rapid7 Class 13 Initial at 7–8 (“Deliberate but inadequate measures to delete or minimize 
personal or sensitive information is another security vulnerability with privacy implications. 
Security researchers widely recognize that the concept of ‘good faith research’ encompasses 
testing and investigation of such flaws to prevent exposure of personal or sensitive data.”); CCIPS 
Class 13 Reply at 5–6. 
1314 Rapid7 Class 13 Initial at 7. 
1315 Tr. at 517:13–16 (Apr. 8, 2021) (Williamson, SFC). 

[PAGE 242]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
239 
vulnerabilities comprising or related to the unauthorized disclosure or collection of 
personal information.”1316  Neither SIIA nor Joint Creators submitted a separate letter.  
The Office notes that the current exemption defines the limits of what can be researched 
broadly, covering “good-faith testing, investigation, and/or correction of a security flaw 
or vulnerability.”1317  The exemption is not limited to specific subjects or issues within 
security flaws or vulnerabilities.  Moreover, the exemption does not draw a distinction 
between vulnerabilities that the copyright owner authorized and those that were 
unauthorized.  As Rapid7 noted, “deliberate design choices, such as weak default 
passwords or unencrypted communication channels, may result in exposure of personal 
information that creates security and privacy risks for device users.”1318  Thus, the 
Register concludes that the existing exemption includes “testing, investigation, and/or 
correction of privacy issues (including flaws or functionality that may expose personal 
information)” within the scope of good-faith security research.1319  Accordingly, 
expanding the exemption to expressly cover such research is unnecessary.  The Register 
therefore does not recommend altering the current regulatory language to address this 
issue. 
The Office turns now to the Halderman et al. petition.  The proposal would remove 
several limitations from the security research exemption that proponents claim hinder 
good-faith security research by creating uncertainty about covered activities.  
a. Works Protected by Copyright 
The proposed class involves computer programs.  There is no dispute among 
participants that these are copyright-protected works.  Accordingly, the Register again 
finds that at least some works included in the proposed expanded class are protected by 
copyright. 
b. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
The 2018 rulemaking identified fair use as the basis for finding good-faith security 
research to be likely noninfringing.  As support for the proposed expansion, proponents 
argue that most security research involving computer programs does not implicate 
copyright law, but that when it does, the security research is a fair use.1320  Accordingly, 
the proposed expansion is evaluated on this basis.  In considering this issue, the Office 
notes that many of the proponents’ fair use arguments were evaluated, and accepted, by 
 
1316 Joint Class 13 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1 (May 14, 2021). 
1317 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(11). 
1318 Rapid7 Class 13 Initial at 7. 
1319 See SFC Class 13 Initial at 2. 
1320 See Halderman et al. Class 13 Initial at 13–17. 

[PAGE 243]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
240 
the Acting Register in the 2018 rulemaking when recommending removal of the device 
limitation.  In this proceeding, opponents did not respond to proponents’ fair use 
arguments or dispute that the proposed uses are noninfringing; rather, opponents 
primarily argue that petitioners have failed to demonstrate adverse effects arising from 
the exemption language at issue.  Though no opposition comments addressed fair use, 
the Register has an independent obligation to ensure that the proposed uses are likely to 
be noninfringing. 
Overall, given that the security research industry’s needs and practices with regard to 
software-enabled devices are much the same as they were in 2018, and that the case law 
likewise has not significantly altered the fair use analysis, the Register evaluates fair use 
in much the same way.  Accordingly, the Register concludes that the proposed uses are 
likely to be a fair use.  
i. No Prima Facie Infringement 
Noting that the Register concluded in the past two rulemakings that “the computer 
programs at issue . . . are ‘likely to fall on the functional rather than creative end of the 
spectrum,’”1321 proponents assert that much good-faith security research is noninfringing 
because it deals with unprotectable elements of copyrighted computer programs.1322  In 
support, proponents rely on Sega and Connectix, in which the Ninth Circuit noted that 
characteristics of computer programs can cut in favor of fair use.1323  Those cases did not, 
however, announce a general principle that some elements of a computer program, such 
as object code, are not protected by copyright at all.  Indeed, the court explicitly 
concluded that object code is protected by copyright.1324  Moreover, even if proponents’ 
argument were supported by case law, it would not cover all intended uses of the 
proposed exemption.  Accordingly, proponents must provide an additional legal basis to 
support a finding that the proposed covered uses likely are noninfringing. 
 
1321 Id. at 14 (quoting 2018 Recommendation at 296). 
1322 Id. at 13–14. 
1323 See Sony v. Connectix, 203 F.3d 596, 602 (9th Cir. 2000); Sega v. Accolade, 977 F.2d 1510, 519–20 
(9th Cir. 1992), as amended (Jan. 6, 1993). 
1324 See Connectix, 203 F.3d at 602; Sega, 977 F.2d at 519–20.  The recent Supreme Court decision in 
Google LLC v. Oracle Am., Inc. is not to the contrary.  141 S. Ct. 1183, 1197 (2021) (assuming but not 
deciding copyrightability of software at issue).  Moreover, even though, as the Register has 
previously observed, computer programs are functional, it is not a given that even the second fair 
use factor (nature of the work) will weigh in favor of fair use.  See, e.g., Wall Data Inc. v. L.A. 
County Sheriff’s Dep’t, 447 F.3d 769, 780 (9th Cir. 2006); Cable/Home Commc’n Corp. v. Network 
Prods., Inc., 902 F.2d 829, 844 (11th Cir. 1990). 

[PAGE 244]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
241 
ii. Fair Use 
The Register concluded in 2015 that it was likely a fair use to conduct security research 
on computer programs in three categories of devices: devices primarily designed for use 
by individual consumers (including voting machines); motorized land vehicles; and 
medical devices designed for whole or partial implantation in patients and 
corresponding personal monitoring systems.
1325  The Register found that the relevant 
uses “are likely to be transformative, including copying the work to perform testing and 
research;”1326 that the device-controlling software at issue was likely to be largely 
functional in nature;1327 that though reproduction of the computer program was likely to 
be substantial, which typically weighs against fair use, “the weight to be given to it 
under the circumstances is slight;”1328 and “that any market harm resulting from 
independent researchers would be due to potential criticism resulting from the research, 
which is not considered a cognizable harm under” the fair use doctrine.
1329  In 2018, the 
Acting Register concluded that the analysis applied in much the same way to nonconsumer devices in expanding the exemption to cover all software programs.1330 
In support of the current proposed exemption, proponents contend that “the intended 
uses that the modifications would enable do not differ in any way material to the 
question of infringement” from the good-faith security research that the Office has 
previously found to be noninfringing.1331  
Regarding the first fair use factor, the purpose and character of the use, proponents note 
that the Acting Register previously concluded that “many of the activities involved in 
security research are likely to be transformative . . . and do not ‘merely supersede[] the 
objects of the original creation.’”1332  Proponents argue that “[n]one of the proposed 
modifications to the current exemption would materially affect the first factor 
analysis.”1333  They further argue that removing the limitations “would merely eliminate 
the uncertainty” and “ensure that security researchers would not be chilled as they 
 
1325 2015 Recommendation at 300. 
1326 Id. 
1327 Id. at 301. 
1328 Id. 
1329 Id. at 302. 
1330 See 2018 Recommendation at 294–98. 
1331 Halderman et al. Class 13 Initial at 12 (citing 2015 Recommendation at 300). 
1332 Id. at 15 (quoting 2018 Recommendation at 294) (citing NPRM at 65,300–01) (internal 
quotation marks omitted). 
1333 Halderman et al. Class 13 Initial at 15. 

[PAGE 245]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
242 
engage in scientific dialogue, classroom teaching and other scholarship, activities long 
established in Section 107 to be transformative in nature.”1334 
To the extent that the proposed expansions seek to facilitate scientific dialogue, teaching, 
and scholarship, the Register finds that the first fair use factor continues to weigh in 
favor of fair use for the proposed class of security research.  As discussed below with 
respect to adverse effects, these uses are not materially different from those covered by 
the existing exemption.  Consistent with the Office’s determinations in 2018 and 2015, 
the Register concludes that the proposed uses are likely to be transformative and do not 
merely substitute for the value of the copyrighted works. 
For the second fair use factor, the nature of the underlying work, proponents note that in 
2018 the Acting Register found that the covered uses were “focused on programs used to 
operate machines, devices, or systems” that “are likely to fall on the functional rather 
than creative end of the spectrum.”1335  Proponents contend that the proposed uses 
under the expanded exemption “do not expand the realm of underlying programs 
subject to research” or “change the type or character of program subject to research.”1336  
The Register agrees that the second factor continues to favor fair use.  Nothing in the 
record suggests that proponents seek to access copyrighted works of a different nature 
than those covered by the current exemption. 
Regarding the third fair use factor, the amount and substantiality of the portion used in 
relation to the copyrighted work as a whole, proponents note that the Acting Register in 
2018 found that this factor did not weigh against fair use even though researchers may 
reproduce the entire computer program.1337  Specifically, the Acting Register found that 
“[c]ourts have been willing to permit complete copying of the original work . . . where it 
is necessary to accomplish a transformative purpose” and stated that this factor is “not 
accorded significant weight where functional elements of a program cannot be 
investigated without some intermediate reproduction.”1338  Again, proponents contend 
that the proposed expansion would not change this analysis and further claim that 
“[p]ublication of security research rarely contains any substantial portions of the original 
work.”1339 
 
1334 Id. 
1335 Id. at 15–16 (quoting 2018 Recommendation at 295–96) (citing NPRM at 65,300–01). 
1336 Id. at 16. 
1337 Id. (citing 2018 Recommendation at 296). 
1338 2018 Recommendation at 296 (alteration in original) (quoting and citing 2015 
Recommendation at 301). 
1339 Halderman et al. Class 13 Initial at 16 (citing 2018 Felten & Halderman Class 10 Initial at 16). 

[PAGE 246]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
243 
The Register concludes that the third factor remains neutral as to the expanded 
exemption, as the analysis remains substantially the same as in 2018.  Though the 
intended use is likely to reproduce a substantial portion, if not all, of the computer 
program as an intermediate step to security research, it is unlikely to use more than 
what is necessary for the research.  Thus, the intended use is of a kind that courts have 
said does not significantly weigh against a finding of fair use.1340  
For the fourth fair use factor, effect on the relevant market, proponents note that the 
Acting Register in 2018 also found that this factor favored fair use.  They highlight the 
Acting Register’s statements that opponents may not merely raise speculative concerns 
but rather need to identify a cognizable market harm, and that “customers being 
scare[d] . . . away from software providers due to vulnerabilities being exposed is 
precisely the type of reputational harm that the courts have held non-cognizable under 
the fourth factor.”
1341   
Proponents, however, contend that the Acting Register “wrongly concluded” that the 
Lawfully Acquired Limitation plays a role in the fourth factor analysis.1342  The limitation 
requires that good-faith security research be conducted on a lawfully-obtained device or 
machine, or on a computer, computer system, or computer network on which the 
computer program operates with the authorization of the owner or operator.1343  
Halderman et al. argue that “[t]he purpose of the market factor analysis is to protect real 
markets cognizable under copyright,” and “consistency with other non-copyright law is 
not a relevant consideration toward whether security research on the software is 
infringing.”1344  Accordingly, they argue, the fourth factor would still favor fair use even 
if the Lawfully Acquired Limitation were removed from the security research 
exemption. 
The Register rejects Halderman et al.’s argument that the Lawfully Acquired Limitation 
is irrelevant to the fair use analysis.  As the Acting Register said in 2018 in retaining this 
limitation, “acquiring a device in violation of law would weigh heavily against a fair use 
finding, as it plainly is conduct that, were it to become widespread, would adversely 
affect the software copyright owner’s potential market.”1345  Proponents have offered no 
persuasive legal or factual grounds for departing from that conclusion.  The Register 
 
1340 See 2018 Recommendation at 296. 
1341 Halderman et al. Class 13 Initial at 16–17 (alteration in original) (quoting 2018 
Recommendation at 298) (citing NPRM at 65,300–01) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
1342 Id. at 17. 
1343 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(11)(i). 
1344 Halderman et al. Class 13 Initial at 17. 
1345 2018 Recommendation at 298 (citing Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, 510 U.S. 569, 590 (1994)). 

[PAGE 247]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
244 
addresses proponents’ specific concerns about the effect of the Lawfully Acquired 
Limitation in the discussion of potential adverse effects below. 
Subject to this limitation, the Register again concludes that the fourth factor favors a 
finding of fair use.  As in the two previous proceedings, the record contains no evidence 
that good-faith security research involving lawfully acquired devices or systems has, or 
will, supplant the market for computer programs.  To the extent that vulnerabilities 
found through good-faith security research may hurt a copyright owner’s reputation or 
discourage consumer activity, such a harm is not cognizable under copyright law.1346 
After considering the arguments and the record in this class, the Register agrees with 
proponents that the intended uses do not materially alter the fair use analysis.  Insofar as 
the proposed expansions relate to teaching and scholarship involving good-faith 
security research, the Register concludes that the activities are likely to constitute fair 
use. 
c. Causation 
The Register has previously concluded that the prohibition on circumvention of access 
controls limits the ability of computer security researchers to make the noninfringing 
uses described above.  During this proceeding, opponents of the proposed expansion 
have argued that proponents ignore ways in which computer programs may be 
available for good-faith security research despite TPMs.  Opponents give the example of 
the “bug bounty” programs that software companies employ to incentivize individuals 
to identify and report flaws in their software.1347  These programs, however, are limited 
in scope, and generally permit circumvention only in circumstances that the copyright 
owner approves.  Proponent HackerOne reported a recent survey in which about twothirds of hackers said that “they have found bugs and chosen not to report them to the 
organization,” with about half attributing the lack of reporting to “threatening legal 
language” on the organization’s website.
1348  Accordingly, the Register again concludes 
that the prohibition on circumvention is the cause of researchers’ inability to make 
noninfringing uses of the covered works.  
 
1346 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 592. 
1347 See ACT Class 13 Opp’n at 3.  Class 13 proponent HackerOne also stated that it “has partnered 
with more than 1,700 customer programs to help find over 150,000 vulnerabilities and award 
more than $82 million in bug bounties.”  HackerOne Class 13 Initial at 2.  
1348 HackerOne Class 13 Initial at 2. 

[PAGE 248]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
245 
d. Asserted Adverse Effects  
i. Current Limitations 
Proponents generally assert that all the limitations in the current exemption have the 
effect of chilling beneficial security research by creating uncertainty for researchers.1349  
The record for most of the challenged limitations is not materially different than it was 
in the 2018 cycle, and as the Acting Register noted then, “speculation alone is insufficient 
to demonstrate a likely adverse effect.”1350  
Access Limitation. Proponents contend that the Access Limitation—which limits 
circumvention to that undertaken “solely for the purpose of good-faith security 
research” and defines such research as accessing a computer “solely for purposes of 
good faith testing, investigation and/or correction of a security flaw or 
vulnerability”1351— creates uncertainty that “may unnecessarily chill activity undertaken 
for security research purposes.”1352  They argue that “security researchers hack not just 
for testing, investigation, or correcting flaws or vulnerabilities, but for a host of other 
reasons too.”1353  These “other valid purposes” purportedly include “testing their own 
skills or advancing the field.”1354  HackerOne cites a survey it conducted in 2019–2020 of 
3,150 respondents from more 120 countries, that found various reasons hackers choose 
to hack, including “[t]o be challenged,” “[t]o do good in the world,” and “[t]o show 
off.”
1355  GitHub likewise argues that hackers may wear many hats and “[s]o long as 
their activity is consistent with undertaking good-faith security research, it should not 
matter if a specific step be ‘solely’ focused on security— it can and should embrace 
activities that lead to stable computing environments because stable computing systems 
are consistent with ensuring secure computing ecosystems.”
1356  
 
1349 See generally Halderman et al. Class 13 Initial.  See also HackerOne Class 13 Initial at 5; GitHub 
Class 13 Reply at 4–5; SFC Class 13 Initial at 5. 
1350 2018 Recommendation at 303 (citing 1201 Report at 28; 2012 Recommendation at 8). 
1351 37 C.F.R § 201.40(b)(11)(i)–(ii).  Proponents generally refer to this as the “purpose limitation,” 
but to maintain consistency with its treatment in the 2018 Recommendation, the Office refers to it 
as the “access limitation.” 
1352 GitHub Class 13 Reply at 4.  See also SFC Class 13 Initial at 5 (“By putting essential research 
techniques in legal jeopardy, the prohibition chills beneficial privacy research.”). 
1353 HackerOne Class 13 Initial at 4 (citing HACKERONE, THE 2020 HACKER REPORT 35 (2020), 
https://www.hackerone.com/resources/reporting/the-2020-hacker-report).  
1354 Halderman et al. Class 13 Reply at 6 (citing HackerOne Class 13 Initial at 4). 
1355 HACKERONE, THE 2020 HACKER REPORT 35, 51 (2020), 
https://www.hackerone.com/resources/reporting/the-2020-hacker-report.  
1356 GitHub Class 13 Reply at 4. 

[PAGE 249]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
246 
Halderman et al. further contend that the Access Limitation discourages researchers 
from sharing their work or pushing the boundaries of their field because they may be 
conducting security research “for other valid purposes” that exceed the limitation.1357  In 
their view, uncertainty over the definition of “solely” “allows for malicious litigation 
against security researchers who—in addition to disclosing the results of their research 
to software developers—also attempt to inform the public about dangerous 
vulnerabilities in software.”1358  
Proponents rely heavily on Green v. U.S. Department of Justice, in which a security 
researcher challenged section 1201 on First Amendment grounds.1359  They point to a 
2019 ruling in which the district court held that plaintiff had adequately pleaded an “as 
applied” First Amendment challenge and that that portion of the complaint could 
survive a motion to dismiss.1360  
Opponents counter that the proponents’ argument for removal relies on “an 
unreasonable interpretation of the [Access] Limitation.”1361  In particular, opponents 
argue that “[t]here is no evidence indicating this language exposes researchers to 
malicious litigation when they seek to study, develop solutions to, or inform the public 
about dangerous vulnerabilities in software, to engage in scientific dialogue or 
implement protective measures, or engage in academic peer review, classroom teaching, 
or to publish updates to the security community.”
1362  They also contend that proponents 
“have merely presented the same arguments as they did before, and provided an 
implausible reading of preliminary motions in the Green case.  None of this warrants the 
Register revisiting this issue yet again.”1363  Additionally, opponents claim that removing 
the Access Limitation would facilitate copyright infringement.1364 
As in the 2018 proceedings, the Register is not convinced that the Access Limitation 
creates a reasonable risk of chilling good-faith security research.  In the 2018 
Recommendation, the Office explained that “the Access Limitation is not properly read 
 
1357 Halderman et al. Class 13 Reply at 5–9. 
1358 Halderman et al. Class 13 Initial at 18. 
1359 392 F. Supp. 3d 68 (D.D.C. 2019). 
1360 See id.  
1361 BSA Class 13 Opp’n at 4. 
1362 Joint Creators Class 13 Opp’n at 4 (citing Halderman et al. Class 13 Initial at 18, 21–22).  See 
also SIIA Class 13 Opp’n at 5 (“We are aware of no case that would prevent petitioners from being 
able to inform consumers that a system is insecure so they can protect themselves . . . .”). 
1363 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 13 Opp’n at 3. 
1364 See, e.g., ACT Class 13 Opp’n at 3; Joint Creators Class 13 Opp’n at 5; SIIA Class 13 Opp’n at 2; 
DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 13 Opp’n at 3, 5. 

[PAGE 250]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
247 
to prohibit teaching, academic dialogue, or scholarship involving information derived 
from good-faith security research.”1365  It noted that “[s]uch activities ordinarily are 
expected to follow from research, and therefore they easily fit within the meaning of the 
regulatory language when read in its proper context.”1366  CCIPS likewise stated that 
neither “the DMCA [n]or the existing language of the security research exemption 
violate[] the First Amendment,” and thus the Access Limitation need not be removed.1367  
Nothing in the Green case alters that conclusion.  In fact, in July 2021, the court denied 
the plaintiff’s motion for a preliminary injunction, holding that he failed to demonstrate 
a likelihood of success on his First Amendment argument.
1368 
As the Register has said before, speculation alone is insufficient to establish adverse 
effects on noninfringing uses.1369  Absent specific evidence that the Access Limitation is 
likely to chill otherwise protected security research, the Register cannot conclude that 
that language is likely to cause an adverse effect.  Accordingly, the Register will not 
recommend removal of that provision from the exemption. 
Use Limitation. Proponents contend that the Use Limitation1370 discourages security 
research by requiring that research be done “primarily to promote the security or safety 
of the class of devices or machines on which the computer program operates, or those 
who use such devices or machines, and is not used or maintained in a manner that 
facilitates copyright infringement.”1371  They argue that this “add[s] confusion to 
researchers’ ability to engage in valuable public discourse concerning cybersecurity 
policy that isn’t per se tied to improving the security of specific devices”1372 and by 
potentially subjecting researchers to liability for infringement by third parties.1373  For 
example, Halderman et al. argue that “[a] narrow reading might interpret ‘primarily’ to 
mean ‘only’—excluding conduct like engaging in  scholarship which does not directly 
improve the security of devices, but rather contributes to scientific discussion.”1374  
 
1365 2018 Recommendation at 305; see also 2015 Recommendation at 310–11. 
1366 2018 Recommendation at 306. 
1367 CCIPS Class 13 Reply at 5.  
1368 Mem. Op. at 32, Green v. U.S. Dep’t of Justice, No. 16-cv-1492 (D.D.C. July 15, 2021), ECF No. 51.  
1369 See Section 1201 Report at 28; 2018 Recommendation at 303; 2012 Recommendation at 8. 
1370 Proponents refer to this as the “security limitation,” which Halderman et al. treat as a subset 
of “use limitations” that also includes the Access Limitation, which they refer to as the “purpose 
limitation.”  To remain consistent with the 2018 Recommendation, the Office does not adopt 
proponents’ terminology. 
1371 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(11)(ii). 
1372 Halderman et al. Class 13 Initial at 18. 
1373 Rapid7 Class 13 Initial at 6; Halderman et al. Class 13 Reply at 6–7. 
1374 See, e.g., Halderman et al. Class 13 Initial at 21. 

[PAGE 251]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
248 
Additionally, proponents argue, the Use Limitation “discourages security researchers 
from sharing their results by preventing a researcher from claiming the exemption if a 
bad actor takes advantage of that researcher’s vulnerability announcement.”1375  This, 
they claim is “especially concerning in light of efforts by some vendors to intimidate 
researchers who attempt to warn the public against using services with critical 
vulnerabilities.”1376 
Halderman et al. offer the example of Voatz, a voting technology company that uses 
blockchain to store votes, which allegedly threatened litigation against researchers when 
the company “realized that publication of research would negatively impact their 
business because researchers had identified intractable critical vulnerabilities.”1377  The 
researchers purportedly had “sought to comply with the firm’s disclosure policy, [and] 
conducted research within the bounds of the CFAA [Computer Fraud and Abuse Act][] 
and the temporary security research exemption to the DMCA.”1378  The record does not 
indicate that a lawsuit was filed in connection with this matter.  But proponents argue 
that the threat of possible litigation is enough to qualify as an adverse effect.1379 
In response, opponents contend that proponents have merely recycled the arguments 
the Acting Register rejected in 2018 and that their claims of potential adverse effects are 
both speculative and dependent on implausible court interpretations of the Use 
Limitation.1380  As with the Access Limitation, they argue that the Use Limitation is 
critical to balancing the interests of good-faith security researchers and copyright 
owners,1381 and that removing the limitation would facilitate copyright infringement.1382 
CCIPS also opposes removing the Use Limitation and argues that “the [Acting] 
Register’s 2018 clarification—that ‘ this language refers to the researcher’s own use and 
maintenance of the information derived from the research,’ and that any facilitation 
 
1375 HackerOne Class 13 Initial at 5. 
1376 Halderman et al. Class 13 Initial at 21-23 (arguing that “malicious litigation” has a chilling 
effect on researchers, who “may be circumspect in discussing their work or reluctant to inform 
the public about critical vulnerabilities in applications from social media to election 
infrastructure”). 
1377 Id. at 22. 
1378 Id. 
1379 See Tr. at 489:01–490:18 (Apr. 8, 2021) (Reid, Halderman et al.). 
1380 See BSA Class 13 Opp’n at 4–5; Joint Creators Class 13 Opp’n at 4; SIIA Class 13 Opp’n at 5. 
1381 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 13 Opp’n at 3, 5. 
1382 Id. 

[PAGE 252]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
249 
should be assessed using established principles of third party liability for 
infringement—largely addressed this concern .”1383 
The Register agrees with opponents that the Use Limitation continues to serve a 
valuable purpose and that it does not impose adverse effects on noninfringing uses.  As 
with the Access Limitation, the Register finds that proponents’ concerns are based on 
implausible interpretations of the Use Limitation.  The Register reiterates the 
clarifications in the 2018 Recommendation.  Specifically, the noninfringement language 
“refers to the researcher’s own use and maintenance of the information derived from the 
research,” and “evidence of third-party infringement is relevant to a researcher’s 
eligibility for the exemption only insofar as it supports a finding that the researcher’s use 
or maintenance of information constitutes contributory or vicarious infringement, or 
inducement of infringement.”
1384  Researchers need not worry about how third parties 
use the findings or publication of good-faith security research unless the researchers 
would be liable for facilitating copyright infringement under established standards of 
secondary copyright infringement. 
In light of the foregoing, the Register again concludes that the Use Limitation is not 
likely to result in an adverse effect on good-faith security research. 
Lawfully Acquired Limitation. Proponents argue that the Lawfully Acquired Limitation 
creates significant uncertainty over potential liability, even where devices are obtained 
in an entirely legitimate manner.  HackerOne, for example, raises concerns about 
software as a service that is accessed through a website: “Unfortunately, these 
researchers may not be able to find protection under Proposed Class 13 because they are 
not in lawful possession of the devices or machines that house the computer programs 
on which the websites are run.”1385  Halderman et al. provided another example—that of 
devices, such as voting machines, upon which vendors place contractual restrictions 
preventing buyers from selling to third parties, including security researchers.  Because 
contract law is governed by state laws, they argue, “[a] researcher’s potential for liability 
may depend on contract law within a specific state, leading to different outcomes 
depending on what state the security researcher resides in, what state the device was 
initially sold in, or the state in which the vendor operates or is incorporated in.”
1386  This, 
they contend, creates too much uncertainty for security researchers to receive preresearch clearance from their attorney.1387 
 
1383 CCIPS Class 13 Reply at 5 (quoting 2018 Recommendation at 309). 
1384 2018 Recommendation at 309–10. 
1385 HackerOne Class 13 Initial at 3. 
1386 Halderman et al. Class 13 Initial at 24. 
1387 Id. 

[PAGE 253]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
250 
Opponents generally contend that the Lawfully Acquired Limitation strikes the 
appropriate balance and that the record does not support removing it.1388  Multiple 
commenters cited the 2018 rulemaking proceeding, which found insufficient evidence of 
adverse effects, and claimed that proponents have offered no new evidence.1389  For 
example, Joint Creators state that “[i]n 2018, the Copyright Office rejected an identical 
request due to the absence in the record of any indication of this type of dispute and . . . 
there is no indication in Halderman’s 2020 petition that any disputes of the type 
described by proponents have materialized.”1390  In particular, opponents argue that 
proponents rely on an “unreasonable” interpretation of the current exemption.1391 
CCIPS likewise opposes removing the limitation on the same rationale it provided in 
2018.  It states the limitation still “serves the valid purpose of excluding research on 
devices obtained through theft or fraud, or conducted on other hardware or networks 
without permission of an owner or lawful operator.”1392 
As with the Access Limitation and the Use Limitation, the Acting Register considered 
and rejected proponents’ arguments in 2018.  In particular, as BSA notes, the Acting 
Register’s 2018 Recommendation carefully considered the argument that this limitation 
potentially chills security research and rejected the proponents’ assertion that the 
limitation was ambiguous.
1393  Nonetheless, to avoid any uncertainty, the Acting Register 
stated that the Lawfully Acquired Limitation “does not require that the circumventing 
party be the lawful owner of the device—or the software embedded  within the device—
only that the device be lawfully acquired.”1394  The Register adheres to this conclusion 
and is not persuaded that the Lawfully Acquired Limitation has had any chilling effect 
on good-faith security research.  
For software programs that are accessed through a website, the Register offers 
additional guidance.  Proponents express concern that security researchers cannot 
lawfully acquire “the devices or machines that house the computer programs on which 
 
1388 See ACT Class 13 Opp’n at 2; BSA Class 13 Opp’n at 2, 5; MEMA Class 13 Opp’n at 2 (arguing 
that the exemption is rooted in the Lawfully Acquired Limitation and that this is part of “a 
thoughtful and narrowly tailored exemption that permits good-faith security research” while 
being mindful of safety concerns related to circumvention of TPMs in vehicles). 
1389 See ACT Class 13 Opp’n at 2; Joint Creators Class 13 Opp’n at 5; MEMA Class 13 Opp’n at 2. 
1390 Joint Creators Class 13 Opp’n at 5.  See also ACT Class 13 Opp’n at 2 (arguing that “petitioners 
have not proven actual harm to justify their removal”); BSA Class 13 Opp’n at 5. 
1391 BSA Class 13 Opp’n at 5. 
1392 CCIPS Class 13 Reply at 5. 
1393 BSA Class 13 Opp’n at 5 (quoting 2018 Recommendation at 303). 
1394 2018 Recommendation at 303. 

[PAGE 254]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
251 
the websites are run.”1395  The exemption, however, covers research that is “undertaken 
on a computer, computer system, or computer network . . . with the authorization of the 
owner or operator of such computer, computer system, or computer network.”1396  It 
does not require that a researcher be the owner of the device or machine used to operate 
a website.  Rather, a researcher seeking to conduct good-faith security research on such a 
program will satisfy the Lawfully Acquired Limitation if the researcher has authorized 
access to the website housing the program; the researcher need not physically acquire the 
devices or machines on which the website is run. 
The Register accordingly concludes that the Use Limitation is unlikely to result in an 
adverse effect on good-faith security research, and therefore does not recommend its 
removal from the exemption. 
Other Laws Limitation. Proponents argue that the Other Laws Limitation, which 
requires that a covered act of circumvention “not violate any applicable law, including 
without limitation the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986,”1397 chills noninfringing 
security research by “creating uncertainty through the introduction of extraneous legal 
regimes wholly unrelated to copyright.”1398  In particular, they argue first that “laws 
governing ethical hacking are increasingly in flux”1399 and that some laws, “like the 
CFAA[,] are enforced through nuanced prosecutorial discretion in order to distinguish 
between technical violations that are generally allowed and malicious violations that are 
usually prosecuted.”1400  Second, they argue that the Other Laws Limitation forces the 
Copyright Office to weigh in on laws that are outside its expertise.1401  And, third, 
proponents assert that the Other Laws Limitation provides a vehicle for copyright 
owners “to sue security researchers based on claims that have no actual basis in 
copyright law, but merely seek to leverage Section 1201 to intimidate critics or 
opponents.”1402 
Additionally, proponents contend that security researchers often lack the resources to 
sufficiently evaluate all potentially applicable laws, such as the CFAA, state contract 
 
1395 HackerOne Class 13 Initial at 3. 
1396 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(11)(i). 
1397 Id. 
1398 Halderman et al. Class 13 Initial at 12.  See also Rapid7 Class 13 Initial at 3. 
1399 HackerOne Class 13 Initial at 3 (discussing, as an example, the CFAA). 
1400 Halderman et al. Class 13 Initial at 25 (citing U.S. DEP’T. OF JUSTICE, JUSTICE MANUAL, § 9-
48.000 (rev. Jan. 2020), https://www.justice.gov/jm/jm-9-48000-computer-fraud).  
1401 Id. at 26. 
1402 Id. 

[PAGE 255]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
252 
laws, tax laws, and obscure foreign laws.1403  As an example of an adverse effect, 
Professor Halderman stated at the public hearing that a junior colleague had been 
discouraged from pursuing a research project because of colleagues’ concerns over 
potential legal violations that could trigger liability under section 1201.1404  Rapid7 adds 
that the “increased and unnecessary burden falls heaviest on independent researchers 
without access to legal expertise or resources.”1405 
Rapid7 asserts that the Acting Register rejected removing the Other Laws Limitation in 
2018 because the Office, agreeing with CCIPS, did not want to suggest that the 
temporary exemption could provide justification for violating other applicable laws.1406 
Rapid7, however, argues that the regulatory language can be revised to make clear that 
eligibility for the exemption does not provide a safe harbor from other laws.1407  To avoid 
the bootstrapping of liability under section 1201, Rapid7 recommends removing from 
the exemption the requirement that an act of circumvention not violate any applicable 
law and replacing it with explanatory text that a protected use “may nevertheless incur 
liability under other applicable laws, including without limitation the Computer Fraud 
and Abuse Act of 1986, as amended and codified in title 18, United States Code.”
1408  In 
reply comments, Halderman et al. state that “Rapid7’s proposed modification with 
regard to the Other Laws Limitation would solve many of the issues with” that 
provision.1409 
Opponents counter that the Other Laws Limitation “strikes the appropriate balance, and 
petitioners have not proven actual harm to justify [its] removal.”1410  Of particular 
concern, opponents say, is that without the Other Laws Limitation, some individuals 
might exploit the exemption as a defense for violating an applicable law.1411  Opponents 
 
1403 Id. at 25 (“Security researchers usually work for universities or other non-profit institutions, 
and thus cannot afford to hire sophisticated legal counsel that is qualified to opine on the 
applicability of various legal regimes including—but not limited to —the DMCA, the CFAA, the 
Wiretap Act, various federal and state level privacy laws, and every state’s contract law.”); 
Halderman et al. Class 13 Reply at 10 (arguing that not all security researchers are well supported 
and, regardless, the Other Laws Limitation should be removed to guard against discouraging 
good-faith security research). 
1404 Tr. at 441:19–442:19 (Apr. 8, 2021) (Halderman, Univ. of Michigan). 
1405 Rapid7 Class 13 Initial at 3. 
1406 Id. at 3–4. 
1407 Id. at 5. 
1408 Id. 
1409 Halderman et al. Class 13 Reply at 12. 
1410 ACT Class 13 Opp’n at 2.  See also Joint Creators Class 13 Opp’n at 5. 
1411 See, e.g., Tr. at 496:13-19 (Apr. 8, 2021) (Williams, Joint Creators). 

[PAGE 256]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
253 
also note that, in rejecting the proposed removal of the Other Laws Limitation in 2018, 
the Office cited the language in the permanent exemption for security testing in section 
1201(j), which includes a similar condition.1412   
CCIPS has advised the Office that, in contrast to its prior views, it now supports 
removing the Other Laws Limitation.  In 2018, CCIPS said that “it ‘does not view the 
anti-circumvention provisions as the most appropriate or efficient means of imposing 
limits on security research’ beyond the scope of copyright concerns, and therefore 
‘would not object to the removal of [the Other Laws Limitation] from the exemption, 
were it standing alone.’”
1413  It opposed removing the Other Laws Limitation, however, 
because of “the interplay and occasionally overlapping application of the DMCA and 
the CFAA” and concern that removal “might mislead researchers into believing that 
operating within the DMCA exemption would also provide an exemption from CFAA 
liability, which it does not.”1414  But, while stating that good-faith security research still 
should not violate applicable laws,1415 CCIPS states that it is “now persuaded that 
replacing the existing requirement that research not violate ‘any applicable law’ with 
alternative explanatory language would provide equally sufficient notice of the need to 
comply with applicable law.”1416 
In particular, CCIPS shares proponents’ concern that the Other Laws Limitation deters 
beneficial security research in two ways.  One is by imposing potentially substantial 
liability under section 1201 for an “inadvertent or minor violation[] of an unrelated 
law”1417 that carries a much lower penalty, and possibly where prosecutorial discretion 
suggests enforcement is likely.  The second way is by sweeping in foreign laws that may 
be obscure, inconsistent with U.S. law, or “administered or enforced in a manner 
inconsistent with U.S. standards.”1418  CCIPS supports Rapid7’s approach for removing 
 
1412 BSA Class 13 Opp’n at 5–6; Joint Creators Class 13 Opp’n at 6. 
1413 2018 Recommendation at 311 (quoting Letter from John T. Lynch, Jr., Chief, Comput. Crime & 
Intellectual Prop. Section, Criminal Div., U.S. Dep’t of Justice, to Regan A. Smith, Gen. Counsel & 
Assoc. Register of Copyrights, U.S. Copyright Office at 5 (June 28, 2018), available at 
https://cdn.loc.gov/copyright/1201/2018/USCO-letters/USDOJ_Letter_to_USCO.pdf).  
1414 Letter from John T. Lynch, Jr., Chief, Comput. Crime & Intellectual Prop. Section, Criminal 
Div., U.S. Dep’t of Justice, to Regan A. Smith, Gen. Counsel & Assoc. Register of Copyrights, U.S. 
Copyright Office at 6 (June 28, 2018) available at https://cdn.loc.gov/copyright/1201/2018/USCOletters/USDOJ_Letter_to_USCO.pdf.  
1415 CCIPS Class 13 Reply at 3 (“To be clear, as part of the federal government’s chief law 
enforcement body, we remain steadfast in our view that those who undertake computer security 
research in good faith can and should abide by all applicable federal, state, and local laws.”). 
1416 Id. 
1417 Id. 
1418 Id. at 4. 

[PAGE 257]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
254 
the Other Laws Limitation and adding a clarifying statement, but with additional 
language to make clear that qualification for the exemption “is not a safe harbor or 
defense to liability under other applicable laws.”1419 
As in 2018, the Register places considerable weight on the views of CCIPS on this 
question, given its role in enforcement of federal cybercrime laws.1420  The Office finds it 
significant that the agency charged with such responsibility does believe it necessary to 
condition eligibility for the security research exemption on compliance with other legal 
provisions, which of course continue to apply in any event.  The Register concludes that 
CCIPS and Rapid7 offer an effective approach for removing likely adverse effects on 
noninfringing security research while making clear that nothing in the exemption 
condones or excuses the violation of any other law applicable to an act of circumvention.   
In recommending retaining the Other Laws Limitation in 2018, the Office also noted its 
general practice of tailoring exemption language to track the provisions of any 
analogous statutory exemption to the extent possible.
1421  As noted, section 1201(j) 
requires compliance with other laws as a condition of eligibility for the permanent 
security testing exemption.
1422  While the Office continues to believe that it is appropriate 
to look to the permanent exemptions in crafting temporary exemptions involving similar 
subject matter, there is no presumption in favor of adopting the statutory language.   
Indeed, as proponents noted, “Congress explicitly added the triennial rulemaking 
process to Section 1201 to allow the Office to adjust and rework exemptions based on 
changing circumstances and new technologies.”1423  
Here, the record demonstrates that the Other Laws Limitation is likely to impose an 
adverse effect on noninfringing security research.  And, for the reasons just discussed, 
that language can be removed without giving any suggestion that a security researcher 
is free to violate any other applicable laws when undertaking research that is exempt 
from section 1201 liability.  The Register accordingly agrees with the combined approach 
proposed by Rapid7 and CCIPS.  The regulatory language should be revised to make 
clear that this exemption does not provide a safe harbor from liability for violating other 
laws, but is not itself contingent upon adherence to other laws. 
 
1419 Id. at 5. 
1420 2018 Recommendation at 311. 
1421 Id. 
1422 17 U.S.C. § 1201(j)(2). 
1423 Halderman et al. Class 13 Reply at 10 (citing 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)); see also CCIPS Class 13 
Reply at 4 n.8 (noting that Congress designed the triennial review to “permit[] the language of 
exemptions to adapt to evolving technologies, market conditions, and legal landscapes”). 

[PAGE 258]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
255 
ii. Statutory Factors 
The analysis of the proposed expansion under the section 1201 statutory factors differs 
slightly from the previous two cycles.1424  The first statutory factor weighs in favor of the 
proposed expansion because the record demonstrates that granting the exemption 
would increase the availability of copyrighted works aimed at improving security 
vulnerabilities.  Proponents have shown that removing the Other Laws Limitation is 
likely to reduce concerns about security research possibly falling outside the exemption 
solely because of the specter of an unrelated or obscure law.1425  The second and third 
factors also support the proposed expansion, as the record indicates that it would 
increase security research in educational settings and for criticism, comment, teaching, 
scholarship, and research.  Proponents also have demonstrated that the Other Laws 
Limitation has deterred noninfringing security research.1426  
The Register finds that the fourth statutory factor also weighs in favor of granting the 
expansion, given that only the Other Laws Limitation is removed and the remaining 
limitations are retained.  For the reasons noted above in the discussion of the fourth fair 
use factor, removing the Other Laws Limitation is unlikely to adversely affect the 
market for or value of computer programs.1427  For the fifth factor, the Register finds 
significant CCIPS’s concerns about the Other Laws Limitation being applied in a manner 
that could convert section 1201 into a vehicle for penalties that are disproportionate to 
the law that is implicated. 
Based on the foregoing, the Register finds that proponents have met their obligation to 
show that the Other Laws Limitation is causing an adverse effect on users’ ability to 
conduct noninfringing security research, or is likely to cause such an adverse effect in 
the next three years.  The Register does not find any actual or likely adverse effect from 
the Access, Use, or Lawfully Acquired limitations challenged by proponents. 
 
1424 Cf. 2018 Recommendation at 312 (“The application of the first four statutory factors to the 
proposed expansion is substantially the same as the analysis in 2015.”). 
1425 Previously, this factor weighed in favor of the exemption because “removal of the Device 
Limitation would broaden the universe of programs upon which such works may be based.” 
2018 Recommendation at 312. 
1426 This is a similar application of the second and third factors as in 2018, when the Acting 
Register concluded “that the Device and Controlled Environment Limitations have prevented 
researchers from undertaking research projects outside the scope of the current exemption, and 
that they have deterred researchers from involving students in projects that could expose them to 
legal risk.”  2018 Recommendation at 312. 
1427 This is also similar to the application of the fourth factor in 2018.  See 2018 Recommendation at 
312 (“[G]ranting the expansion, while retaining the other limitations discussed, is unlikely to 
adversely affect the market for or value of copyrighted computer programs.”). 

[PAGE 259]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
256 
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA addresses the SFC proposed exemption and the Halderman et al. proposed 
exemption separately.  Regarding SFC’s proposal to cover privacy-related research in the 
exemption, NTIA agrees with the Register that no such expansion is necessary because 
“the current exemption already covers the privacy-related research activities referenced 
in the participants’ post-hearing May 14, 2021 letter.”1428  NTIA recommends that the 
Register’s Recommendation and the final rule make clear that privacy research is 
covered by the exemption.  NTIA also urges that the Recommendation and final rule 
make clear that the privacy-related research “activities referenced in the participants’ 
post-hearing letter do not encompass the totality of privacy-related research activities 
that are permitted with the good-faith security research exemption.”1429  The Register 
agrees that covered activities are not limited to those expressly referenced by 
participants in the post-hearing letter. 
For the Halderman et al. petition, NTIA generally supports the proposal, consistent with 
its views in the 2015 and 2018 proceedings.
1430  Regarding the Other Laws Limitation, 
NTIA supports removing the provision for many of the same reasons discussed above.  
Specifically, “NTIA emphasizes that an exemption granted under this rulemaking does 
not obviate the need to comply with any other laws and regulations”1431 and 
recommends removing the language so as not to “export[] potential liability under the 
DMCA to any other legal regime.”1432  Moreover, NTIA argues that removing this 
limitation would avoid “pull[ing] significant non-copyright law and policy 
considerations into this rulemaking process.”1433  It recommends adding text at the end 
of the exemption that “Good faith security research that qualifies for the exemption 
under paragraph (a) may nevertheless incur liability under other applicable laws, 
including without limitation the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986, as amended 
 
1428 NTIA Letter at 87 (citing Joint Class 13 Post-Hearing Resp. (May 14, 2021)). 
1429 Id. 
1430 Id. at 88–89 (“NTIA continues to believe that supporting an inclusive security research 
exemption that provides certainty to security researchers will ultimately lead to more good-faith 
security research and serve the public interest in significant ways.”). 
1431 Id. at 94. 
1432 Id. (citing CCIPS Class 13 Reply at 4; Letter from David J. Redl, Assistant Sec’y for Commc’ns 
& Info. & Adm’r, Nat’l Telecomms. & Info. Admin., U.S. Dep’t of Commerce, to Karyn A. Temple, 
Acting Register of Copyrights and Dir., U.S. Copyright Office, at 78–79 (Sept. 25, 2018) (“2018 
NTIA Letter”)). 
1433 Id. at 96 (citing Halderman et al. Class 13 Initial at 26). 

[PAGE 260]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
257 
and codified in title 18, United States Code.”1434  This language tracks recommendations 
from CCIPS and Rapid7, and is consistent with the Register’s recommendation. 
NTIA also supports removing the Lawfully Acquired Limitation, arguing that there may 
be “situations where a security researcher might have indeed obtained access to a 
program, device, machine, or system in a legitimate manner (and done their best to do 
so), but nonetheless the threat of section 1201 liability looms large due to potential 
ambiguities in the law.”1435  In past proceedings, NTIA notes, it “has conditioned its 
recommended regulatory language in this class on circumvention being ‘initiated by the 
owner of the copy of the computer program or with the permission of the owner of the 
copy of the computer program.’”1436  Here, however, NTIA is persuaded by proponents’ 
argument that the Lawfully Acquired Limitation is likely to adversely affect users of the 
proposed exemption in a similar manner to the Other Laws Limitation.1437  For the 
reasons discussed above, however, the Register recommends retaining the Lawfully 
Acquired Limitation, and CCIPS agrees with that approach.  
NTIA further supports, as it did in 2018, the removal of the Access Limitation and the 
Use Limitation.
1438  In its view, removing the term “solely” in the Access Limitation “will 
‘provide clarity to good-faith security researchers and result in increased good-faith 
security research efforts, further coordination within the security research community, 
and ultimately promote public safety and security.’”1439  On the Use Limitation, NTIA 
again concludes that “removal of this provision ‘would provide clarity to good-faith 
security researchers and eliminate the potential liability of these researchers for the 
actions of third parties.’”
1440  The Register appreciates the importance of providing 
clarity, and for that reason has previously offered interpretive guidance, as discussed 
above.  Further, the Register concludes that proponents’ concerns over these two 
limitations are speculative and do not demonstrate an adverse effect.  The Register 
therefore recommends retaining these provisions. 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
After thorough consideration, the Register recommends expanding the exemption by 
removing the Other Laws Limitation for the reasons discussed above.  The Office again 
 
1434 Id. at 97 (citing Rapid7 Class 13 Initial at 5; Rapid7 and J. Alex Halderman Class 13 Ex Parte 
Letter at 1 (July 16, 2021); CCIPS Class 13 Reply at 4–5). 
1435 Id. at 99. 
1436 Id. at 98 (quoting 2018 NTIA Letter at 84). 
1437 Id. 
1438 Id. at 101–05. 
1439 Id. at 103 (quoting 2018 NTIA Letter at 80) (citing GitHub Class 13 Reply at 4). 
1440 Id. at 104–05 (quoting 2018 NTIA Letter at 81). 

[PAGE 261]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
258 
notes that this exemption does not serve as waiver of liability for violating other laws 
while performing good-faith security research—indeed, an intended beneficiary may be 
subject to legal liability outside section 1201 even if operating within the exemption.  
Rather, this expansion merely removes liability under section 1201 of title 17 for 
circumvention based solely on a violation of another applicable law.  The Office also 
clarifies that the exemption is inclusive of privacy research that otherwise meets the 
regulatory requirements.  The Register recommends that the Librarian designate the 
following class: 
(i) Computer programs, where the circumvention is undertaken on a 
lawfully acquired device or machine on which the computer program 
operates, or is undertaken on a computer, computer system, or 
computer network on which the computer program operates with the 
authorization of the owner or operator of such computer, computer 
system, or computer network, solely for the purpose of good-faith 
security research. 
(ii) For purposes of paragraph (b)(16)(i) of this section, “good-faith 
security research” means accessing a computer program solely for 
purposes of good-faith testing, investigation, and/or correction of a 
security flaw or vulnerability, where such activity is carried out in an 
environment designed to avoid any harm to individuals or the public, 
and where the information derived from the activity is used primarily 
to promote the security or safety of the class of devices or machines on 
which the computer program operates, or those who use such devices or 
machines, and is not used or maintained in a manner that facilitates 
copyright infringement. 
(iii) Good-faith security research that qualifies for the exemption under 
paragraph (b)(16)(i) of this section may nevertheless incur liability 
under other applicable laws, including without limitation the 
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986, as amended and codified in 
title 18, United States Code, and eligibility for that exemption is not a 
safe harbor from, or defense to, liability under other applicable laws. 
 
 
 

[PAGE 262]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
259 
N. Proposed Classes 14(a) and 14(b): Computer Programs and Video 
Games—P reservation 
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemptions 
Proposed Classes 14(a) and 14(b) seek to address concerns that TPMs applied to 
computer programs and video games can interfere with legitimate preservation 
activities, including post-preservation research and teaching.  The Register previously 
recommended, and the Librarian granted, separate exemptions permitting libraries, 
archives, and museums to circumvent TPMs on computer programs and video games 
for the purpose of preservation activities under certain circumstances.  SPN and LCA 
filed petitions to remove the requirement in these existing exemptions that the preserved 
computer program or video game must not be “distributed or made available outside of 
the physical premises of the eligible library, archives, or museum” (the “premises 
limitation”).
1441  They explain that their proposed amendments would “meet growing 
user demand for remote access to virtual libraries,” as the premises limitation “inhibit[s] 
preservation, research, and teaching, slowing the race to protect vital digital history.”
1442  
Because the issues in the computer program and video game subclasses have common 
characteristics, the Register will address both together, but will identify any factual or 
legal differences. 
Through the course of these proceedings, proponents recommended various 
exemptions.  In response to Joint Creators’ and the Entertainment Software Association’s 
(“ESA’s”) concerns that proponents’ initial proposal was overbroad,
1443 proponents 
offered to narrow the exemption to allow offsite video game access only “where the 
library, archives, or museum has no reason to believe the user has any purpose other 
than private study, scholarship, or research.”1444  Proponents also stated their willingness 
“to accept a usage restriction for video game copies produced under the exemption,” by 
“adding a requirement that distribution must be for teaching, scholarship, or 
research.”1445  Proponents proposed new regulatory language adding this requirement to 
Class 14(b),1446 and proposed language for both Class 14(a) and 14(b) that would 
“harmoniz[e] the eligibility requirements across the software preservation exemptions,” 
 
1441 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(12)(ii), (13)(iii) (2019). 
1442 SPN & LCA Class 14 Initial at 3. 
1443 See Joint Creators Class 14 Opp’n at 2; ESA Class 14 Opp’n at 5–6. 
1444 SPN & LCA Class 14 Reply at 3. 
1445 SPN & LCA Class 14 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1 (May 13, 2021). 
1446 Id. 

[PAGE 263]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
260 
and “include a reasonable security requirement.”1447  Proponents subsequently reiterated 
that they did not support an exemption that contained additional use case-based access 
restrictions.1448  Opponents maintain that the proposed exemption is overbroad and that 
proponents “did not provide information about realistic and noninfringing use cases 
that would support an exemption.”1449 
Proponents’ ultimate exemption proposals follow, with proposed amendments 
indicated in bold and proposed deletions in strikethrough. 
SPN and LCA’s Class 14(a) exemption language: 
(13)(i) Computer programs, except video games, that have been lawfully 
acquired and that are no longer reasonably available in the commercial 
marketplace, solely for the purpose of lawful preservation of a computer 
program, or of digital materials dependent upon a computer program as 
a condition of access, by an eligible library, archives, or museum, where 
such activities are carried out without any purpose of direct or indirect 
commercial advantage and the program is not distributed or made 
available outside of the physical premises of the eligible library, 
archives, or museum. 
(ii) For purposes of the exemption in paragraph (b)(13)(i) of this section, 
a library, archives, or museum is considered “eligible” if— 
(A) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are open 
to the public and/or are routinely made available to researchers 
who are not affiliated with the library, archives, or museum;  
(B) The library, archives, or museum has a public service 
mission;  
(C) The library, archives, or museum’s trained staff or 
volunteers provide professional services normally associated 
with libraries, archives, or museums;  
(D) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are 
composed of lawfully acquired and/or licensed materials; and  
 
1447 Id. 
1448 SPN & LCA Class 14 Ex Parte Letter at 1 (June 25, 2021). 
1449 Joint Creators & ESA Class 14 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1 (May 24, 2021). 

[PAGE 264]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
261 
(E) The library, archives, or museum implements reasonable 
digital security measures as appropriate for the activities 
permitted by this paragraph (b)(13).1450 
SPN and LCA’s Class 14(b) exemption language: 
(12)(i) Video games in the form of computer programs embodied in 
physical or downloaded formats that have been lawfully acquired as 
complete games, when the copyright owner or its authorized 
representative has ceased to provide access to an external computer 
server necessary to facilitate an authentication process to enable 
gameplay, solely for the purpose of: 
. . . . 
(B) Permitting access to the video game to allow copying and 
modification of the computer program to restore access to the game on a 
personal computer or video game console when necessary to allow 
preservation of the game in a playable form by an eligible library, 
archives, or museum, where such activities are carried out without any 
purpose of direct or indirect commercial advantage and the video game is 
not distributed or made available outside of the physical premises of the 
eligible library, archives, or museum for teaching, research, or 
scholarship. 
(ii) Video games in the form of computer programs embodied in physical 
or downloaded formats that have been lawfully acquired as complete 
games, that do not require access to an external computer server for 
gameplay, and that are no longer reasonably available in the commercial 
marketplace, solely for the purpose of preservation of the game in a 
playable form by an eligible library, archives, or museum, where such 
activities are carried out without any purpose of direct or indirect 
commercial advantage and the video game is not distributed or made 
available outside of the physical premises of the eligible library, 
archives, or museum for teaching, research, or scholarship. 
. . . . 
(iv) For purposes of this paragraph (b)(12), the following definitions shall 
apply: . . . 
 
1450 SPN & LCA Class 14 Post-Hearing Resp. at 4–5 (May 13, 2021). 

[PAGE 265]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
262 
(E) A library, archives, or museum is considered “eligible” when 
the collections of the library, archives, or museum are open to 
the public and/or are routinely made available to researchers 
who are not affiliated with the library, archives, or museum. For 
purposes of the exemption in paragraph (b)(12)(i) and (b)(12)(ii) 
of this section, a library, archives, or museum is considered 
“eligible” if— 
[1] The collections of the library, archives, or museum are 
open to the public and/or are routinely made available to 
researchers who are not affiliated with the library, 
archives, or museum;  
[2] The library, archives, or museum has a public service 
mission;  
[3] The library, archives, or museum’s trained staff or 
volunteers provide professional services normally 
associated with libraries, archives, or museums;  
[4] The collections of the library, archives, or museum are 
composed of lawfully acquired and/or licensed materials; 
and  
[5] The library, archives, or museum implements 
reasonable digital security measures as appropriate for 
the activities permitted by this paragraph (b)(12).
1451 
Additional comments in support were filed by FSF and Tony Li, and supporting 
testimony was provided by Henry Lowood of Stanford University and Bo Ruberg of the 
University of California, Irvine.  Comments in opposition were filed by Joint Creators 
and ESA. 
For the reasons discussed below, the Register recommends that the proposed 
exemptions be granted in part and denied in part. 
b. Overview of Issues 
In recommending prior preservation-related recommendations, the Register has stated 
that section 108 of the Copyright Act, which exempts libraries and archives from liability 
for certain preservation activities, “highlight[s] Congress’s recognition of preservation as 
 
1451 Id. at 3–4. 

[PAGE 266]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
263 
an important social activity.”1452  The Register has also noted that “this recognition is 
balanced with specific limitations on the making of such reproductions, reflecting 
Congress’s acknowledgment of copyright owners’ concern over unrestricted copying 
under the guise of preservation.”1453  In 2015 and 2018, using section 108 as a guide, the 
Register recommended a video game preservation exemption that included a 
requirement that the preserved video game must not be “distributed or made available 
outside of the physical premises of the eligible library, archives, or museum.”1454  In 
2018, SPN and LCA proposed a software preservation exemption that contained an 
equivalent premises limitation, which the Register recommended after observing that it 
was “consistent with section 108(c).”1455 
Proponents now argue that the premises limitation inhibits remote user access to 
preserved works and that removal of this language would benefit users, including by 
lowering research and teaching costs, such as those associated with travel; meeting 
users’ expectations, which in turn could help the institutions obtain funding; and 
complying with health and safety guidelines during the COVID-19 pandemic.1456   
Opponents contend that the proposed expansion is unnecessary and overbroad, 
including because the works at issue can already be preserved under the current 
exemption.1457  They also argue that the proposed classes do not limit the beneficiaries of 
the exemption to “authenticated researchers pursuing scholarly purposes,”1458 and 
consequently would allow “unauthorized, remote access to complete works for the 
general public, including for entertainment purposes, and even if the copyright owner 
 
1452 2018 Recommendation at 242; 2015 Recommendation at 341 (citing 17 U.S.C. 108; H.R. REP. 
NO. 94-1476, at 74–75 (1976), reprinted in 1976 U.S.C.C.A.N. 5659, 5688-89). 
1453 2015 Recommendation at 341. 
1454 2018 Recommendation at 282; 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(12)(i)(B), (12)(ii), (13)(i) (2019); 2015 
Recommendation at 352; 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(8)(i)(B) (2016). 
1455 2018 Recommendation at 237, 255; 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(13)(i) (2019). 
1456 SPN & LCA Class 14 Initial at 4–9.  Proponents’ submitted comments referred to surveys of 
different preservation institutions’ staff, but do not include any specific survey questions and 
responses or any other documentation relevant to the survey.  In response to the Office’s request, 
proponents declined to submit such documentation.  SPN & LCA Class 14 Ex Parte Letter at 1 
(June 25, 2021).  The Register did not consider the survey evidence because neither she nor the 
opponents were able to review the context or accuracy of these survey references. 
1457 ESA Class 14 Opp’n at 10, 14–15; Joint Creators Class 14 Opp’n at 3. 
1458 ESA Class 14 Opp’n at 13. 

[PAGE 267]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
264 
has since reissued the work (or issued a derivative version of the work) or may do so in 
the future.”1459 
2. Discussion 
a. Works Protected by Copyright 
The proposed exemption would apply to TPMs controlling access to computer programs 
and video games, which are protected by copyright as computer programs, audiovisual 
works, or both.  There is no dispute that at least some of these works are protected by 
copyright.1460  Therefore, the Register finds that the proposed class includes at least some 
works protected by copyright. 
b. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Proponents argue that various statutory provisions reflect a general federal policy of 
enabling remote access for preservation.  These include the section 108 exceptions (as 
well as proposed amendments suggested in the Copyright Office’s Section 108 Discussion 
Document1461); the TEACH Act provisions found in sections 110(2) and 112(f); section 
1401(f)(1); and the section 117 exceptions for computer programs.1462  Proponents argue 
that their proposed activities are likely to be noninfringing based on a combination of 
those provisions and the fair use doctrine. 
i. Section 108 
Proponents recognize that not all of their proposed activities are likely to be 
noninfringing based on the text of section 108.1463  Instead, they argue that several 
provisions of section 108 “demonstrate[s] a general federal policy of enabling remote 
 
1459 Joint Creators Class 14 Opp’n at 2; see also ESA Class 14 Opp’n at 6 (removal of the premises 
limitation “is not preservation; that is offering an online arcade in violation of the exclusive rights 
of video game copyright owners, and to the detriment of an important market that such 
copyright owners can and do exploit and defend.”). 
1460 See ESA Class 14 Opp’n at 10. 
1461 U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, SECTION 108 OF TITLE 17: A DISCUSSION DOCUMENT OF THE REGISTER OF 
COPYRIGHTS (2017), https://www.copyright.gov/policy/section108/discussion-document.pdf 
(“SECTION 108 DISCUSSION DOCUMENT”). 
1462 SPN & LCA Class 14 Initial at 22. 
1463 See id. at 14, 23 (suggesting that proposed activities in this class “in some cases may” be 
protected by section 108); Tr. at 661:06–15 (Apr. 19, 2021) (Teitler, SPN) (“While there might be 
some cases where archivists could conduct work offsite remotely that would be fair, I don’t think 
that 108(d) and 108(e) specifically would encompass those uses.”). 

[PAGE 268]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
265 
access” to copyrighted works, “especially out-of-commerce works used for research and 
teaching.”1464   
Proponents first argue that section 108(c) supports their proposed exemption, despite 
that provision’s inclusion of a premises limitation.  Broadly, section 108(c) authorizes an 
eligible institution to make three copies of a published work solely for purposes of 
replacing a copy that is damaged, deteriorating, lost, or stolen, “or if the existing format 
in which the work is stored has become obsolete.”1465  Replacement copies may not be 
made available to the public in digital format outside the institution’s premises.1466  
Proponents explain that inclusion of the premises limitation was “motivated by concern 
that ‘unlimited access to digital copies from any location’ could harm the copyright 
owner’s market interests.”
1467  In their view, this concern is not present in “a context 
where no market demand exists . . . and where there is no indication that the user has 
any intention other than personal research and study,” because in such a circumstance 
the “risk is attenuated at best, and outweighed by the research and teaching value of 
access.”
1468  Proponents argue that the Office “recognized the desirability of off-premises 
access” to works in a preservation institution’s collection in the Section 108 Discussion 
Document.1469  Proponents further suggest that the term “premises” does not necessarily 
refer to physical premises and could include a digital network or an institutional 
intranet.1470   
Proponents also argue that sections 108(d) and (e) support their proposed exemption. 
Section 108(d) authorizes an eligible institution to reproduce and distribute a copy made 
from its collections upon request for “no more than one article or other contribution to a 
copyrighted collection or periodical issue” or “a small part of any other copyrighted 
work,” if certain requirements are met,1471 including that “the library or archives has had 
no notice that the copy or phonorecord would be used for any purpose other than 
private study, scholarship, or research.”
1472  Section 108(e) authorizes an eligible library 
or archives to reproduce and distribute an entire work or substantial part of a work 
 
1464 Id. at 22. 
1465 17 U.S.C. § 108(c).   
1466 Id. § 108(c)(2). 
1467 SPN & LCA Class 14 Initial at 24 (citing S. REP. NO. 105-190 at 27 (1998)). 
1468 Id. 
1469 Id. at 25; see also SPN & LCA Class 14 Reply at 21. 
1470 SPN & LCA Class 14 Initial at 24; Tr. at 678:01–03 (Apr. 19, 2021) (Albert, SPN) (noting that 
“although [section 108] says ‘premises,’ it doesn’t specify physical premises in the way that the 
. . . current [regulatory language does]”). 
1471 17 U.S.C. § 108(d). 
1472 Id. § 108(d)(1). 

[PAGE 269]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
266 
upon a user’s or other library or archives’ request, “if the library or archives has first 
determined, on the basis of a reasonable investigation, that a copy or phonorecord of the 
copyrighted work cannot be obtained at a fair price” and the library or archives can 
satisfy the same notice and copyright requirements found in section 108(d).1473   
Proponents contend that these sections “are meant to preserve the traditional scholarly 
right to conduct research at home with one’s scholarly materials”1474 and that “providing 
off-site access to out-of-commerce software to users through emulation software serves 
the customary purposes advanced by sections 108(d) and (e), namely to facilitate 
personal research uses that require consulting library resources at a distance.”1475  An 
earlier version of proponents’ Class 14(b) video game preservation proposal included 
the restriction found in section 108(d) and (e) that preservation institutions “only serve 
users where [they] have no notice that access is for reasons other than private study, 
scholarship, or research.”1476  Proponents state that adding this language “should prove 
effective and workable” in limiting uses to scholarly purposes because it “has been 
effective at protecting the rights of copyright holders in the context of other works for 
nearly half a century.”
1477  
Opponents disagree that section 108 applies to the proposed uses in this class.  ESA 
makes a general objection that proponents “never identify the cases they think might be 
covered by Section 108 . . . and do not argue that those provisions are materially 
relevant.”1478  Joint Creators argue that proponents are not targeting preservation, as 
contemplated by section 108, as they believe proponents intend to “create new copies 
that they never paid for, and . . . propose to use the copies obtained through 
circumvention in ways in which lawful copies never could have been used.”1479  Joint 
Creators additionally note that section 108(c) is not applicable because of its premises 
requirement.1480   
Opponents further argue that using section 108(d) and (e) as either a basis for 
noninfringing use or as model exemption language is problematic.  They correctly note 
 
1473 Id. § 108(e)(1)–(2). 
1474 Tr. at 661:07–11 (Apr. 19, 2021) (Teitler, SPN); see SPN & LCA Class 14 Initial at 24. 
1475 SPN & LCA Class 14 Initial at 24. 
1476 SPN & LCA Class 14 Reply at 7 (referencing 17 U.S.C. § 108(d)(1), (e)(1)).  
1477 Id. at 7. 
1478 ESA Class 14 Opp’n at 10 n.59. 
1479 Joint Creators Class 14 Opp’n at 5; see also Tr. at 675:24–676:19 (Apr. 19, 2021) (Williams, Joint 
Creators) (discussing applicability of section 108). 
1480 Tr. at 676:11–14 (Apr. 19, 2021) (Williams, Joint Creators). 

[PAGE 270]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
267 
that these provisions do not apply to audiovisual works, including video games.1481  
Joint Creators further observe that section 108(d) “only applies to portions of specific 
types of works,” not whole works.1482  Opponents also argue that the proposed 
exemptions do not include any “requesting language,” even though sections 108(d) and 
(e) require that any reproduction or distribution made by a library or archive must have 
been pursuant to a user’s request.1483  ESA further argues that the notice provisions of 
section 108(d) and (e), “[are]n’t very meaningful if a public library chooses to put 
emulated games up online for a public audience.”1484 
Having considered the parties’ arguments, the Register concludes that proponents’ uses 
are unlikely to be noninfringing under section 108.  The Office considered section 108(c) 
in the last rulemaking, and concluded that some, but not all, proposed software 
preservation activities would be noninfringing under that section.1485  Proponents have 
not offered any arguments that change this analysis.  While the Section 108 Discussion 
Document proposed removal of section 108(c)’s premises requirement, it cannot act as the 
legal basis that a particular activity is noninfringing, as it does not have the force of 
law.1486   
Likewise, neither section 108(d) nor (e) can serve as a basis to find that proponents’ 
proposed activities are likely to be noninfringing.  Section 108(d) is inapplicable to 
proponents’ activities as it only applies to small portions of a work.  While section 108(e) 
may apply to some works involved in proponents’ activities, section 108(i) exempts most 
audiovisual works from section 108(d) and (e),1487 making each section inapplicable to 
video games. 
 
1481 See Joint Creators Class 14 Opp’n at 4 n.9; Tr. at 681:10–11 (Apr. 19, 2021) (Williams, Joint 
Creators).  
1482 Tr. at 675:24–76:03 (Apr. 19, 2021) (Williams, Joint Creators). 
1483 Tr. at 683:21–684:01 (Apr. 19, 2021) (Englund, ESA); Tr. at 676:04–08 (Apr. 19, 2021) (Williams, 
Joint Creators); see also Tr. at 696:04–05 (Apr. 19, 2021) (Williams, Joint Creators) (“current 108(e) 
is about user requests, not about proactive projects by universities”). 
1484 Tr. at 683:13–15 (Apr. 19, 2021) (Englund, ESA). 
1485 2018 Recommendation at 237–38. 
1486 Further, contrary to proponents’ claim that “premises,” in the context of current section 108 
does not necessarily mean “physical premises,” the legislative history for the DMCA’s section 108 
amendments contemplate that “’libraries’ and ‘archives’ refer to institutions that are established 
as, and conduct their operations through, physical premises.” S. REP. NO. 105-190, at 62 (1998). 
1487 17 U.S.C. § 108(i). 

[PAGE 271]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
268 
Because not all of the proposed uses are protected by section 108, proponents must 
demonstrate that their proposed activities are likely noninfringing on other legal 
grounds. 
ii. Sections 110(2), 112(f), 1401(f) and 117 
Proponents contend that sections 110(2), 112(f), and 1401(f) “demonstrat[e]  a general 
federal policy of enabling remote access for these purposes.”1488  Proponents also state 
that “the creation of temporary copies on the user’s computer and the display and 
performance of preserved works in a user’s browser as part of EAAS1489 for preservation, 
teaching, and research, as well as the copying and distribution of preserved software to 
facilitate teaching and research by remote users using their own hardware, are protected 
by . . . [section] 117.”1490  Proponents do not otherwise explain how the proposed uses 
would be noninfringing based on these provisions.  Without further analysis, 
proponents have failed to meet their burden of showing that their activities are likely 
noninfringing under these provisions.1491 
iii. Fair Use 
1) Applicability of Fair Use 
As in past exemption recommendations, the Register again recognizes that “some 
preservation activity beyond the scope of [section] 108 may well constitute a fair use.”1492  
The Office has noted that section 108 “provides useful and important guidance as to 
Congress’s intent regarding the nature and scope of legitimate preservation 
activities,”1493 but “fair use remains an important safety valve [that] is available to 
libraries and archives in situations not addressed by the text of section 108.”1494  This 
approach is consistent with the statute, which expressly provides that nothing in section 
108 “in any way affects the right of fair use as provided by section 107.”1495  The Register 
 
1488 SPN & LCA Class 14 Initial at 22. 
1489 “EAAS” is an abbreviation for “Emulation as a Service.”  See SPN & LCA Class 14 Initial at 7. 
1490 Id. at 14.   
1491 Notably, in 2018 and 2003, the Register found the record insufficient to determine that section 
117 applies to similar preservation activities.  See 2018 Recommendation at 245–47; 2003 
Recommendation at 56–58 & nn.101–03.   
1492 2018 Recommendation at 239; 2003 Recommendation at 54–55.   
1493 2018 Recommendation at 239 (citing 2015 Recommendation at 342). 
1494 2018 Recommendation at 239–40 (citing SECTION 108 DISCUSSION DOCUMENT at 16). 
1495 17 U.S.C. § 108(f)(4); see also Authors Guild v. HathiTrust, 755 F.3d 87, 94 n.4 (2d Cir. 2014) 
(relying on this clause to reject argument that section 108 foreclosed analysis under fair use); H.R. 
 

[PAGE 272]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
269 
therefore will consider proponents’ argument that their activities are noninfringing as 
fair uses. 
2) Discussion 
With respect to the first fair use factor, the purpose and character of the use, proponents 
cite the 2018 Recommendation to support their claim that their non-commercial 
“preservation, research, and teaching are activities favored under the fair use 
analysis.”1496  Proponents cite Authors Guild v. HathiTrust for the premise that it is 
appropriate to consider the Copyright Act or other federal policies as evidence 
regarding whether a particular use advances the goals of copyright.1497  Referencing 
Google v. Oracle1498 and other cases, proponents also claim that uses that benefit the 
public are more likely to be fair.1499 
Proponents further contend that their contemplated uses are transformative and that 
“[t]he physical location of the user does not have any impact on the transformative 
nature of the proposed uses.”1500  With respect to software, they argue that providing 
remote access “presents software (and software-dependent digital materials) as 
historical artifacts for research and teaching purposes,” which is a “fundamentally 
different purpose relative to the original consumer and commercial purposes of 
software.”1501  Regarding video games, proponents state that “[g]ameplay for research 
purposes serves a distinct purpose from primary entertainment and aesthetic value and 
facilitates research, comment or critique on the game.”1502   
Opponents argue the first factor weighs against fair use because the proposed use is 
commercial and non-transformative.  ESA cites cases stating that “[d]irect economic 
benefit is not required to demonstrate commercial use” and “‘repeated and exploitative 
 
REP. NO. 94-1476, at 74, reprinted in 1976 U.S.C.C.A.N. 5687–88 (“No provision of section 108 is 
intended to take away any rights existing under the fair use doctrine.”); SECTION 108 DISCUSSION 
DOCUMENT at 14 (“[T]he savings clause . . . was designed as an appropriate backstop to fill in 
potential legal gaps not addressed by the existing specific exception.”). 
1496 SPN & LCA Class 14 Initial at 15 (citing 2018 Recommendation at 242). 
1497 Id. at 22–23 (citing HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 101–02). 
1498 Google LLC v. Oracle Am., Inc., 141 S. Ct. 1183 (2021). 
1499 SPN & LCA Class 14 Initial at 15 (citing Blanch v. Koons, 467 F.3d 244, 253 (2d Cir. 2006)); see 
Tr. at 687:16–688:09 (Apr. 19, 2021) (Woodall, SPN); Tr. at 693:04–06 (Apr. 19, 2021) (Albert, SPN). 
1500 SPN & LCA Class 14 Initial at 14–15. 
1501 Id.; see also id. at 17–18 (noting that the video game “SimCity” was used for job training and 
that “[t]he purposes served by offsite access to preserved software are . . . transformative relative 
to the original commercial gaming uses of entertainment or job training purposes”). 
1502 SPN & LCA Class 14 Reply at 9. 

[PAGE 273]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
270 
copying of copyrighted works,’ even by a nonprofit organization, is considered 
commercial in a fair use analysis.”1503  They claim the proposed use is commercial 
because making preserved works available remotely would provide indirect economic 
benefits to the institutions by making them “eligible for grant funding or increasing 
donations or memberships.”1504  Opponents also contend that the proposed uses are not 
transformative, as “exemption beneficiaries would simply create new copies of works 
and provide access to them to patrons who would view them in their entirety.”1505  
While ESA concedes that “using preserved software ‘for research and teaching’ may be 
protected by fair use,” it adds that “it does not . . . follow that offsite access is needed for 
research and teaching, much less that providing online access to preserved video games 
for everyone is ‘for research and teaching.’”
1506  
As an initial matter, the Register concludes that proponents’ proposed expanded uses 
are non-commercial in nature.  While proponents suggest that they seek to remove the 
on-premises requirement in part so that they can secure increased funding,
1507 the 
proposed use of the software itself is intended to facilitate preservation, teaching, and 
research.  Further, the proposed exemption is restricted to activities “carried out without 
any purpose of direct or indirect commercial advantage,” which excludes any users who 
might engage in commercially motivated acts.   
With respect to preservation, research, and teaching uses, the first factor generally 
weighs in favor of fair use. 1508  As the 2018 Recommendation noted, research and 
teaching are identified in the preamble to section 107 as examples of fair uses, and “the 
 
1503 ESA Class 14 Opp’n at 12 (citing A&M Records, Inc. v. Napster, Inc., 239 F.3d 1004, 1015 (9th 
Cir. 2001); Wall Data Inc. v. Los Angeles Cty. Sheriff’s Dep’t, 447 F.3d 769, 779 (9th Cir. 2006)). 
1504 Id.; see also Joint Creators Class 14 Opp’n at 6 (“[P]roponents candidly acknowledge that their 
proposal is motivated by a desire to garner increased funding for the circumventing 
organizations.”). 
1505 Joint Creators Class 14 Opp’n at 6; see ESA Class 14 Opp’n at 12.  Joint Creators also suggest 
that “[t]he proposal for unlimited remote public access is more akin to space and format-shifting 
services of the kind rejected in prior proceedings than it is to true preservation uses.”  Joint 
Creators Class 14 Opp’n at 5. 
1506 ESA Class 14 Opp’n at 19. 
1507 SPN & LCA Class 14 Initial at 6–7. 
1508 See generally, Cambridge Univ. Press v. Patton, 769 F.3d 1232, 1267 (11th Cir. 2014) (noting that a 
nonprofit educational use is favored under the first fair use factor, but certain commercial 
educational uses could negate this conclusion); Diversey v. Schmidly, 738 F.3d 1196, 1203 (10th Cir. 
2013) (finding that distribution of a dissertation in a university library was “a non-commercial, 
educational purpose at the heart of the protection for fair use”); see also Sony Corp. of Am. v. 
Universal City Studios, Inc., 464 U.S. 417, 455 n.40 (1984) (observing that “a scholarly endeavor 
certainly has a stronger claim to fair use” compared to other uses). 

[PAGE 274]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
271 
legislative history and case law make clear that library and archival preservation is a 
favored purpose under the fair use analysis.”1509  In HathiTrust, the Second Circuit 
considered whether digitizing copyright-protected works and allowing member 
libraries to provide visually impaired patrons off-premises access to those works was a 
fair use.1510  The court held that, despite this act not being transformative, the first factor 
favored a finding of fair use.1511  Similarly, here, the proposed exemption would allow 
libraries, archives, and museums to make preserved works available for research and 
teaching.  Thus, regardless of whether the uses are considered transformative, they 
advance purposes that are generally favored under the first factor. 
Proponents’ proposed exemption, however, does not include any access restrictions that 
would ensure that the copyrighted works would actually be used primarily for research 
and educational uses.  In particular, opponents express concern that proponents’ 
proposed regulatory language does not limit usage of copies of video games in any way, 
suggesting that the exemption could be used not only by researchers or educators, but 
by “the general public, including for entertainment purposes.”
1512  Opponents object that 
proponents have “refused to engage concerning questions such as how . . . downstream 
users could be authenticated and their motivations known, how access could be 
supervised, and how limitations on access could be enforced.”1513  As examples, they 
suggest that the exemption could be limited to allowing access only to authenticated 
students doing research on a particular game, or to require controlled screensharing.1514  
Proponents, however, have objected to the inclusion of any such limitations in the 
proposed exemption.   
 
1509 17 U.S.C. § 107; 2018 Recommendation at 242. 
1510 HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 101–02. 
1511 Id. at 102 (citing H.R. REP. NO. 94–1476, at 73 (1976), reprinted in 1976 U.S.C.C.A.N. 5659, 5686; 
Sony, 464 U.S. at 455 n.40). 
1512 Joint Creators Class 14 Opp’n at 2; see also ESA Class 14 Opp’n at 6, 13 (arguing that removal 
of the premises limitation “is not preservation; that is offering an online arcade in violation of the 
exclusive rights of video game copyright owners, and to the detriment of an important market 
that such copyright owners can and do exploit and defend”). 
1513 Joint Creators & ESA Class 14 Post-Hearing Resp. at 2 (May 24, 2021). 
1514 See Tr. at 672:21–673:03 (Apr. 19, 2021) (Englund, ESA) (“I think if the proposal [involved] 
authenticated students that are doing a project on a particular game, that’s a different 
proposition. . . . [I]f you wrote a regulation to that effect, you could analyze it.  But again, merely 
saying that somebody is a university student ought to be able to play games through an emulator 
is not something that sounds like it would be a fair use.”); Tr. at 712:02–05 (Apr. 19, 2021) 
(Englund, ESA) (“[I]f you were to write a rule that talked about controlled screensharing . . . I 
think the fair use analysis would look different.”).   

[PAGE 275]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
272 
Proponents prefer to permit institutions to publicly display or perform the works in any 
manner they deem to be fair use.  During the hearing, proponents explained that they 
did not “lay out a clear . . . list of what our potential authorized offsite methods of access 
[are] because we believe that libraries and archival institutions need the flexibility to 
determine what is the best . . . non-infringing use for the particular work and for the 
particular circumstances.”1515  They suggested that preservation institutions would 
engage in their own “fact-specific and very individual” fair use analysis and that 
libraries “are very risk-averse institutions that are accustomed to making these kinds of 
decisions . . . on an individual, case-by-case basis.”1516   
The lack of specificity in the record and the text of the proposed exemption regarding 
how the works would be displayed or performed makes it difficult for the Register to 
evaluate the purpose and character of the proposed use.  Although proponents’ 
intention in making the video games available off-premises may be to facilitate 
education and research, opponents have presented credible evidence that at least some 
users are likely to use video games made available pursuant to a broad proposed 
exemption for entertainment purposes.1517  If a significant use of the works would be for 
the entertainment purposes for which the works were originally created, that would not 
be transformative or otherwise favor fair use under the first factor.
1518  The use of the 
preserved video games for entertainment purposes seems particularly likely given 
proponents’ unwillingness to impose user verification requirements or other measures 
that would make the video games more likely to be used solely for education or research 
purposes.  
The Register finds that the first factor weighs in favor of fair use for computer software 
because the works will be made available for research and educational purposes.  The 
addition of a limitation that the work be used by only one user at a time for a limited 
 
1515 Tr. at 658:16–21 (Apr. 19, 2021) (Albert, SPN); see also SPN & LCA Class 14 Reply at 9 
(“Qualifying institutions are capable of limiting remote access to authorized users and purposes; 
these conditions further ensure that remote access to video games will be fair use.”). 
1516 Tr. at 662:02–11 (Apr. 19, 2021) (Teitler, SPN). 
1517 ESA Class 14 Opp’n at 7–8 (citing 2018 ESA Class 8 Opp’n at 28) (noting several comments 
submitted for the 2018 video game preservation class that reflect the public’s desire to engage in 
entertainment uses of preserved works); see also Joint Creators & ESA Class 14 Post-Hearing Resp. 
at 3 (May 24, 2021) (describing how under the proposed exemption even an “eligible preservation 
organization” could be used as a “publicly-accessible online arcade”); Tr. at 722:02–19 (Apr. 19, 
2021) (Englund, ESA) (referencing an archive currently offering an online arcade of emulated 
games to the public). 
1518 As discussed further under the fourth factor, the Register is concerned that the proposed 
exemption does not effectively restrict users who are not engaged in preservation, research, or 
education, which could also have a detrimental effect on the market for certain works. 

[PAGE 276]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
273 
time gives additional assurance that the works will be used for research and educational 
purposes.1519  But the record provides cause for concern that video games may be used 
primarily for entertainment purposes, which would not favor fair use.  Thus, the first 
factor does not weigh in favor of a finding of fair use with respect to video games.  
Regarding the second fair use factor, proponents contend that the nature of the 
copyrighted works favors fair use because many of the programs they seek to access are 
functional works.1520  While proponents recognize that “video games involve creative 
components,” they state that researchers and students “use video games as a tool of 
study, not to merely enjoy the game for its aesthetic and commercial entertainment 
purposes.”1521  Proponents further state that the second factor “is never dispositive and 
often weighs neutrally when the creative works are used for transformative purposes, 
like the proposed preservation, research, and educational uses.”1522  Opponents disagree 
and note that “productivity software is quite distinct from video games, which are far 
more expressive and primarily played for entertainment purposes.”1523 
The Register does not agree that the presence of so-called functional programs in the 
proposed class tips this factor in favor of fair use.  As the Register previously observed, 
“all computer programs are by definition functional, as they are designed to accomplish 
a specific task”; to conclude that software uses were uniformly favored under the second 
factor “would overlook cases which have found this factor to weigh against the fair use 
of computer programs.”
1524  While this factor favors fair use in the context of software 
other than video games, it does not do so with respect to games, which are often highly 
expressive in nature. 1525   
As to the third fair use factor, the amount and substantiality of the portion used, 
proponents concede that their activities may involve copying programs in their entirety, 
 
1519 See SECTION 108 DISCUSSION DOCUMENT at 39 (proposing to limit access to “only one user at a 
time, for a limited time” for the distribution, public display, and public performance of certain 
works to protect against market harm). 
1520 SPN & LCA Class 14 Initial at 18. 
1521 Id. at 18–19. 
1522 SPN & LCA Class 14 Reply at 11. 
1523 Joint Creators Class 14 Opp’n at 6; ESA Class 14 Opp’n at 13. 
1524 See, e.g., Wall Data Inc. v. Los Angeles Cty. Sheriff’s Dep’t, 447 F.3d 769, 780 (9th Cir. 2006) 
(although the software products were “not purely creative,” the second factor weighed against 
fair use because they were developed over many years with substantial investment); Cable/Home 
Commc’n Corp. v. Network Prods., Inc., 902 F.2d 829, 844 (11th Cir. 1990) (protective nature of 
embedded software that descrambled satellite-transmitted programming for subscribers weighed 
against a “decoding pirate chip” being a fair use). 
1525 2015 Recommendation at 338. 

[PAGE 277]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
274 
but point to the Register’s prior acknowledgement that “it is sometimes necessary to 
copy an entire work to make a fair use.”1526  Proponents suggest that “research uses often 
require access to the entire work to support complete examination of its elements.”1527  
They assert that “[p]roviding remote access to preserved software may, in some cases, be 
impossible without using the entire work,” as “[e]mulation often requires the entire 
codebase to run functional software.”1528  Opponents disagree, arguing that because the 
proposed uses are non-transformative, this factor should not favor fair use.1529  The 
Register concludes that this factor does not necessarily weigh against fair use, as it may 
be necessary to copy an entire work to provide researchers with access to the work for 
educational or research purposes.1530   
Finally, proponents argue that the fourth fair use factor, the effect of the use upon the 
potential market for or value of the copyrighted work, favors fair use because only 
works that are no longer reasonably available in the commercial marketplace would be 
subject to the exemption.1531  Proponents also claim that the proposed uses would not 
disrupt the market because such uses are transformative.1532 
With respect to video games, proponents recognize that “game production firms may 
occasionally cycle works out of commerce as a market strategy,” but assert “the vast 
majority of out-of-commerce works are essentially abandoned and will never be 
reissued or translated to newer environments.”1533  They further claim that, with respect 
to “superseded” video games,1534 such works “are rarely available on digital 
marketplaces through the current rightsholder because games require continued 
support from the developer to work with new platforms,” and these games “are less 
 
1526 SPN & LCA Class 14 Initial at 19 (citing 2018 Recommendation at 243). 
1527 Id. (also noting that “courts have discounted the impact of the third factor when the use of a 
copyrighted work is transformative”). 
1528 Id. 
1529 ESA Class 14 Opp’n at 13; Joint Creators Class 14 Opp’n at 7. 
1530 Cf. HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 98–99 (holding that third factor favored fair use where creation of 
digital copies of entire books was necessary to enable full-text search).   
1531 SPN & LCA Class 14 Initial at 20–21 (“[R]emote access to preserved software does not cause 
market harm where the copyright owner has ceased exploiting the work commercially.”). 
1532 SPN & LCA Class 14 Reply at 11–12, 20. 
1533 Id. at 12. 
1534 Superseded video games are original or older works that have updated versions.  SPN & LCA 
Class 14 Initial at 21. 

[PAGE 278]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
275 
likely to be maintained if the game is not lucrative or has few users and low 
demand.”1535   
Joint Creators argue that “there is substantial evidence that older ‘retro’ and legacy 
video games are in increasing demand and are available in the marketplace at 
consumer-friendly price points.”1536  ESA similarly contends that “[t]here is substantial 
market demand for legacy games” and provides several examples of video games that 
have been reintroduced into the market.1537  ESA states that “publisher-authorized 
emulators of legacy games are an important existing and potential market for video 
game copyright owners” and provides current examples.1538   
In light of the lack of evidence of a market for legacy software other than video games, 
the Register finds there is a low risk of market harm based on the software use cases 
described in Class 14(a).  The Register cannot, however, say the same for the 
performance or display of video games, as contemplated in Class 14(b).  As the 
Register’s 2015 Recommendation explained, “[t]he performance and display of a video 
game for visitors in a public space is a markedly different activity than efforts to 
preserve or study the game in a dedicated archival or research setting.”1539  Opponents 
have presented evidence both that there is a substantial market for legacy video games 
and that those games are commonly reintroduced into the market.   
Further, the Register shares opponents’ concerns that the exemption as proposed does 
not include appropriate safeguards to prevent users from further distributing or making 
entertainment uses of video games.  Although proponents did not believe that it 
“make[s] sense to require particular, specific security measures” in their exemption,1540 
they agree that certain measures could “reasonably prevent mass circulation of 
[preserved] works.”1541  While the Register can appreciate proponents’ desire to have 
more flexibility to implement their own security measures,1542 including minimum 
 
1535 Id. at 21–22. 
1536 Joint Creators Class 14 Opp’n at 2–3 (citing articles discussing the value of remastering or 
continuing to sell “classic” or “legacy” video games); see also ESA Class 14 Opp’n at 2–4. 
1537 ESA Class 14 Opp’n at 2–4, 7 (citing examples where Microsoft, Nintendo, Sony, Sega, 
Blizzard, Konami, Blaze Entertainment, Atari and other video game publishers re-released older 
video games, including for use on modern consoles or pre-installed on new consoles). 
1538 Id. at 7. 
1539 2015 Recommendation at 342; Tr. at 720:21–721:07 (Apr. 19, 2021) (Englund, ESA). 
1540 Tr. at 684:24–685:01 (Apr. 19, 2021) (Albert, SPN). 
1541 SPN & LCA Class 14 Reply at 7 (referencing “emulation, time-limited loans, and other, similar 
measures”). 
1542 Id. at 6–7 (quoting SECTION 108 DISCUSSION DOCUMENT at 21). 

[PAGE 279]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
276 
security measures could address some of opponents’ concerns regarding potential 
market harms.  Further, the Register observes that section 108 provides “useful and 
important guidance as to Congress’s intent regarding . . . the types of uses that are most 
likely to qualify as fair.”1543  The exclusion of audiovisual works (including video games) 
from the section 108(d) and (e) exemptions supports proponents’ argument that copying 
and distribution of video games for education and research purposes is to be less likely 
to be considered fair use than similar activity involving other categories of works.  
Balancing the four fair use factors, the Register finds that proponents have met their 
burden of showing that the proposed off-premises uses are likely to be fair with respect 
to software, but not with respect to video games.  Having concluded that the proposed 
use is not likely to be noninfringing in the context of video games, the Register analyzes 
the remaining issues only with respect to software. 
c. Causation 
Opponents argue that any asserted adverse effects on preservation are not caused by the 
use of TPMs or the anticircumvention prohibition.1544  ESA points out that the current 
exemption already allows for preservation, and therefore the premises limitation has no 
impact on institutions’ ability to engage in that activity.1545  While proponents concur 
that works can be preserved under the current exemption, they contend that without an 
expanded exemption, post-preservation research and teaching activities would be 
inhibited.1546 
The Register finds that proponents have met their burden of showing that the 
prohibition on circumvention of access controls limits their ability to make the 
noninfringing uses described above.  Those activities would be adversely affected by the 
prohibition on circumvention to the extent they occur off-premises. 
d. Asserted Adverse Effects  
The Class 14(a) proposed exemption is limited to circumvention for nonprofit 
preservation activities, including post-preservation research and teaching activities, and 
the parties’ arguments under the section 1201 statutory factors address substantially 
overlapping issues.  The Register considers these factors together and will identify any 
analytical differences.  
 
1543 2018 Recommendation at 267 (quoting 2015 Recommendation at 342). 
1544 ESA Class 14 Opp’n at 15; Joint Creators Class 14 Opp’n at 7 (“Petitioners do not establish that 
access controls are the cause of their purported problems.”). 
1545 ESA Class 14 Opp’n at 15–16. 
1546 Tr. at 702:06–09 (Apr. 19, 2021) (Band, LCA); SPN & LCA Class 14 Initial at 4–14. 

[PAGE 280]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
277 
Under the first statutory factor, proponents argue that an expanded exemption will 
increase the availability for use of copyrighted works and that increased access to 
preserved works will encourage research and teaching.1547  For the second factor—the 
availability for use of works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational 
purposes— proponents state that the “core purpose of this exemption is to allow 
preservationists to preserve, maintain, and increase availability of digital resources for 
research and educational purposes” and that “[a]llowing preservationists to furnish 
these resources offsite will enable a flourishing of research and scholarship.”1548   
For the third statutory factor, which addresses the prohibition’s impact on “criticism, 
comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research,” proponents state that 
such restrictions “particularly burden[] research purposes” because “legacy software 
often requires obsolete hardware or software environments to run.”1549  Regarding 
educational uses, proponents claim that “many libraries do not host classrooms where 
students could permissibly access software collections” and that the proposed 
exemption allows the use of preserved digital materials to benefit distance education.1550  
They note that the COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the need for such programs.1551 
The Register finds that these three statutory factors favor the requested exemption.  As 
in the last rulemaking, proponents provided evidence that granting the exemption 
would benefit preservation, research, and education by making software available to 
researchers and teachers who would not be able to access these works without an 
exemption.   
With respect to the fourth statutory factor, proponents repeat arguments made in the 
fair use analysis, including that “[t]he proposed exemption is limited to out-ofcommerce works which are unavailable on primary markets.”
1552  As discussed above, 
the Register finds that no evidence has been presented that the proposed use would 
affect the market for software.  The Register therefore finds that this factor favors that 
proposed exemption.   
 
1547 SPN & LCA Class 14 Initial at 27–28. 
1548 Id. at 28. 
1549 Id. at 29. 
1550 Id. 
1551 SPN & LCA Class 14 Reply at 16–19. 
1552 Id. at 11; SPN & LCA Class 14 Initial at 20 (quoting Am. Geophysical Union v. Texaco Inc., 60 F.3d 
913, 930–31 (2d Cir. 1994)) (“The proposed uses do not have any ‘impact on potential licensing 
revenues for traditional, reasonable, or likely to be developed markets’ because there is literally 
no market for the software.”). 

[PAGE 281]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
278 
The Register does not find any additional factors relevant to the asserted adverse effects 
in these proposed classes.   
Based on the foregoing, the Register finds that users are adversely affected by the 
prohibition on circumvention in their ability to engage in noninfringing preservation, 
research, or teaching activities involving software, or are likely to be so adversely 
affected during the next three years. 
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA supports the adoption of expanded exemptions for Class 14, including by 
removing the premises limitation.1553  It also “recommends that the eligibility 
requirements for libraries, archive[s], and museums in the software preservation 
exemption be adopted into the video game preservation exemption.”1554  Further, NTIA 
would not object to proponents’ proposal to add a requirement that distributions under 
the exemption must be for “teaching, scholarship, or research,” though it believes such 
language is unnecessary.
1555 
NTIA agrees with the Register that the TEACH Act, the Music Modernization Act, and 
section 108 “would not serve as the exclusive basis for an exemption,” but believes that 
consideration of these provisions is appropriate when evaluating fair use.1556  While 
acknowledging that section 108 generally does not cover audiovisual works, it does not 
find this statutory exclusion to be critical.1557  Instead, NTIA states that it “remains 
optimistic that efforts to modernize Section 108 will be successful and can help address 
the needs expressed in this rulemaking, but it does not believe that the rulemaking 
should wait for such changes when there are clear needs today that the Librarian can 
address under her authority.”1558   
While NTIA does not discount opponents’ concerns related to piracy and other market 
harms related to video games, it believes that “[o]n balance, the risk [to video games by 
an expanded exemption] can be reduced by the additional eligibility requirements found 
in the software preservation exemption, including the need for the institutions to adopt 
reasonable security requirements to protect the covered activities under the exemption 
 
1553 NTIA Letter at 112. 
1554 Id. 
1555 Id. at 121–23; see 17 U.S.C. § 108(d)(1); SPN & LCA Class 14 Reply at 7. 
1556 NTIA Letter at 114; see also id. at 118 (“Section 108 should not be the sole consideration for 
noninfringing uses in this rulemaking process, as that section does not comprehensively address 
modern digital preservation scenarios.”). 
1557 Id. at 114 n.587. 
1558 Id. 

[PAGE 282]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
279 
and that their staff or volunteers provide professional services normally associated with 
the institution.”1559  Like proponents, NTIA would not prescribe specific security 
measures via regulation.1560 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
In light of the foregoing, the Register recommends granting an expanded exemption for 
Class 14(a) and modifying, but not removing the premises limitation from, the 
exemption for Class 14(b).  As discussed, the heightened risk of market harm in the 
context of video games requires proponents to offer a more specific analysis than was 
provided here as to how their proposed exemption could be limited to prevent 
unauthorized uses of games made available off-premises.  Given the much more limited 
market for the software described in Class 14(a), as well as the lack of opposition to that 
proposal, the Register concludes that a narrow expansion is warranted in that class. 
The recommended Class 14(a) exemption will reflect the proponents’ request to remove 
the premises language, with two limitations: any off-premises distribution, display, or 
performance must be solely for the purposes of private study, scholarship, or research; 
and only one user will be able to access the preserved software at a time, and for a 
limited time.  The purpose-based restriction is taken from section 108 and is intended to 
reflect Congress’s guidance regarding the appropriate scope of preservation activities.1561  
Similarly, the inclusion of single user and limited time restrictions will minimize the risk 
of substitutional use of the software.1562   
The recommended Class 14(b) language does not incorporate proponents’ proposal to 
remove the premises limitation, but incorporates their request to import the existing 
software preservation exemption’s eligibility requirements for libraries, archives, and 
museums.  The Register appreciates that libraries, archives, and museums may have 
legitimate interests in making commercially unavailable video games available offsite 
for use in teaching, research, or scholarship in appropriate circumstances.  The Register 
is concerned, however, that the exemption, as proposed, does not contain appropriately 
tailored restrictions to ensure that uses would be limited to bona fide teaching, research, 
or scholarship uses and would affect the market for the original works.  The Register is 
open to considering a more specific exemption request in the future upon a fuller record. 
 
1559 Id. at 118–19 n.611. 
1560 Id. at 122–23. 
1561 See 17 U.S.C. § 108(d), (e) (restricting statutory exemption when a library or archives has 
“notice that the copy or phonorecord would be used for any purpose other than private study, 
scholarship, or research”); see also SPN & LCA Class 14 Reply at 2 (suggesting private study, 
scholarship, or research limitation for Class 14(b)). 
1562 See SECTION 108 DISCUSSION DOCUMENT at 38–39 (discussing the value of such conditions). 

[PAGE 283]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
280 
Accordingly, the Register recommends that the Librarian designate the following 
classes: 
(1) (i) Video games in the form of computer programs embodied in physical or 
downloaded formats that have been lawfully acquired as complete games, 
when the copyright owner or its authorized representative has ceased to 
provide access to an external computer server necessary to facilitate an 
authentication process to enable gameplay, solely for the purpose of: 
(A) Permitting access to the video game to allow copying and 
modification of the computer program to restore access to the game for 
personal, local gameplay on a personal computer or video game 
console; or 
(B) Permitting access to the video game to allow copying and 
modification of the computer program to restore access to the game on a 
personal computer or video game console when necessary to allow 
preservation of the game in a playable form by an eligible library, 
archives, or museum, where such activities are carried out without any 
purpose of direct or indirect commercial advantage and the video game 
is not distributed or made available outside of the physical premises of 
the eligible library, archives, or museum. 
(ii) Video games in the form of computer programs embodied in physical or 
downloaded formats that have been lawfully acquired as complete games, that 
do not require access to an external computer server for gameplay, and that are 
no longer reasonably available in the commercial marketplace, solely for the 
purpose of preservation of the game in a playable form by an eligible library, 
archives, or museum, where such activities are carried out without any 
purpose of direct or indirect commercial advantage and the video game is not 
distributed or made available outside of the physical premises of the eligible 
library, archives, or museum. 
(iii) Computer programs used to operate video game consoles solely to the 
extent necessary for an eligible library, archives, or museum to engage in the 
preservation activities described in paragraph (b)(17)(i)(B) or (b)(17)(ii) of this 
section. 
(iv) For purposes of this paragraph (b)(17), the following definitions shall 
apply: 
(A) For purposes of paragraphs (b)(17)(i)(A) and (b)(17)(ii) of this 
section, “complete games” means video games that can be played by 

[PAGE 284]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
281 
users without accessing or reproducing copyrightable content stored or 
previously stored on an external computer server. 
(B) For purposes of paragraph (b)(17)(i)(B) of this section, “complete 
games” means video games that meet the definition in paragraph 
(b)(17)(iv)(A) of this section, or that consist of both a copy of a game 
intended for a personal computer or video game console and a copy of 
the game’s code that was stored or previously stored on an external 
computer server. 
(C) “Ceased to provide access” means that the copyright owner or its 
authorized representative has either issued an affirmative statement 
indicating that external server support for the video game has ended 
and such support is in fact no longer available or, alternatively, server 
support has been discontinued for a period of at least six months; 
provided, however, that server support has not since been restored. 
(D) “Local gameplay” means gameplay conducted on a personal 
computer or video game console, or locally connected personal 
computers or consoles, and not through an online service or facility. 
(E) A library, archives, or museum is considered “eligible” if—  
(1) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are open 
to the public and/or are routinely made available to researchers 
who are not affiliated with the library, archives, or museum; 
(2) The library, archives, or museum has a public service 
mission; 
(3) The library, archives, or museum’s trained staff or volunteers 
provide professional services normally associated with libraries, 
archives, or museums; 
(4) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are 
composed of lawfully acquired and/or licensed materials; and 
(5) The library, archives, or museum implements reasonable 
digital security measures as appropriate for the activities 
permitted by this paragraph (b)(17). 
(2) (i) Computer programs, except video games, that have been lawfully 
acquired and that are no longer reasonably available in the commercial 
marketplace, solely for the purpose of lawful preservation of a computer 
program, or of digital materials dependent upon a computer program as a 

[PAGE 285]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
282 
condition of access, by an eligible library, archives, or museum, where such 
activities are carried out without any purpose of direct or indirect commercial 
advantage.  Any electronic distribution, display, or performance made outside 
of the physical premises of an eligible library, archives, or museum of works 
preserved under this paragraph may be made to only one user at a time, for a 
limited time, and only where the library, archives, or museum has no notice 
that the copy would be used for any purpose other than private study, 
scholarship, or research. 
(ii) For purposes of the exemption in paragraph (b)(18)(i) of this section, a 
library, archives, or museum is considered “eligible” if— 
(A) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are open to the 
public and/or are routinely made available to researchers who are not 
affiliated with the library, archives, or museum; 
(B) The library, archives, or museum has a public service mission; 
(C) The library, archives, or museum’s trained staff or volunteers 
provide professional services normally associated with libraries, 
archives, or museums; 
(D) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are composed of 
lawfully acquired and/or licensed materials; and 
(E) The library, archives, or museum implements reasonable digital 
security measures as appropriate for the activities permitted by this 
paragraph (b)(18). 
 
 
 
 

[PAGE 286]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
283 
O. Proposed Class 15: Computer Programs—3D Printing  
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption 
Proponents seek to expand the current exemption that permits the circumvention of 
access controls on computer programs in 3D printers to enable the use of nonmanufacturer-approved feedstock.  The current exemption language encompasses: 
Computer programs that operate 3D printers that employ microchip-reliant 
technological measures to limit the use of feedstock, when circumvention is 
accomplished solely for the purpose of using alternative feedstock and not for 
the purpose of accessing design software, design files, or proprietary data.1563   
Michael Weinberg filed a petition seeking to replace the word “feedstock” with 
“material,” and to remove the phrase “microchip-reliant” from the exemption.
1564  FSF 
filed comments generally supporting this exemption, but did not provide any evidence 
or substantive argument regarding the merits of the specific proposal.1565  Mr. 
Weinberg’s petition was unopposed. 
For the reasons discussed below, the Register recommends adoption of the proposed 
modifications. 
b. Overview of Issues 
As described in previous rulemakings, 3D printing involves “various technologies that 
translate digital files into physical objects by adding successive layers of material.”1566  In 
2018, the Office noted that “[t]hese materials or ‘feedstock’ are typically ABS or PLA 
plastics, but can also be metals, waste plastics, woods, or bio-tissue.”1567 
Manufacturers use verification measures, such as microchips or other technology, to 
ensure that the printing material is manufacturer-approved before the printer’s software 
allows it to print 3D objects.1568  Without circumventing these verification protocols, 
 
1563 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(14). 
1564 Michael Weinberg Class 15 Pet. at 2. 
1565 FSF Class 15 Initial at 1. 
1566 2018 Recommendation at 319 (quoting 2015 Recommendation at 356). 
1567 2018 Recommendation at 319 (citing 2015 Recommendation at 357). 
1568 2018 Recommendation at 320 (citing 2015 Recommendation at 357); see Weinberg Class 15 
Initial at 1 (“Some 3D printers may limit their materials using technology that does not primarily 
rely on microchips for validation.”).  

[PAGE 287]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
284 
owners of TPM-protected 3D printers cannot use competitors’ printing material or 
adjust their printers to use alternative material.   
In the 2015 rulemaking, the Register found that “proponents [had] established that 
TPMs constrain the types of feedstock that can be used in 3D printers and that this is 
likely to adversely affect noninfringing uses of the software that controls that 
functionality.”1569  When recommending adoption of that exemption, the Register limited 
circumvention to TPMs that utilized “microchip-based verification systems,” as the 
then-existing record “was limited to 3D printers that employ” such systems.1570  The 
Register recommended the exemption using the word “feedstock,” as that was the term 
proposed by the petitioner,1571 but the Register’s Recommendation used the terms 
“feedstock” and “material” interchangeably.1572  The 2018 rulemaking retained that 
wording, which was not the subject of public discussion.1573  
2. Discussion 
As an initial matter, the Register views replacing the word “feedstock” with the word 
“material” as a non-substantive change.  The Register agrees that the words “feedstock” 
and “material” are “functionally interchangeable,”
1574 as reflected in past 
rulemakings.1575  Mr. Weinberg contends that “material” is “in much more common 
usage across the [3D printing] industry” and that amending the language “will help to 
avoid any unintended disputes or confusion.” 1576  In support of his position, Mr. 
 
1569 2015 Recommendation at 376. 
1570 Id. 
1571 See 2015 Public Knowledge 3D Printers Pet. at 2. 
1572 2015 Recommendation at 357.  During previous rulemakings, commenters also used the two 
terms interchangeably.  See, e.g., 2018 Stratasys Class 12 Opp’n at 7, 9; 2015 Digital Right to Repair 
Class 26 Supp. at 820, 1026; 2015 Freedom Software Conservancy Class 26 Supp. at 1; 2015 
Intellectual Property Owners Association Class 26 Opp’n at 3–4; 2015 Public Knowledge & LCA 
Class 26 Supp. at 3–5; 2015 Stratasys Class 26 Opp’n at 5–6. 
1573 2018 Recommendation at 319, 329. 
1574 Michael Weinberg Class 15 Initial at 2, 4; see id. (stating that word “material” is a “catch-all 
term for matter used in a wide range of 3D printing technologies as applied to a wide range of 
uses”). 
1575 See 2015 Recommendation at 357; 2018 Stratasys Class 12 Opp’n at 7, 9; 2015 Digital Right to 
Repair Class 26 Supp. at 820, 1026; 2015 Freedom Software Conservancy Class 26 Supp. at 1; 2015 
Intellectual Property Owners Association Class 26 Opp’n at 3–4; 2015 Public Knowledge & LCA 
Class 26 Supp. at 3–5; 2015 Stratasys Class 26 Opp’n at 5–6. 
1576 Michael Weinberg Class 15 Initial at 2, 4; see id. at 3 (“ Although the term ‘feedstock’ is used in 
the 3D printing industry to identify the matter used by 3D printers to produce objects, it is much 
more common to use the term ‘material.’”). 

[PAGE 288]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
285 
Weinberg included screenshots of 3D printer manufacturers’ websites showing use of 
the word “materials” instead of “feedstock” when discussing the different printing 
materials that can be used for 3D printing.1577   
Concluding that changing the word “feedstock” to “material” does not substantively 
change the application of the exemption or have a particular impact on the statutory 
factors, the Register focuses the analysis on proponent’s proposal to remove the term 
“microchip-reliant.” 
Mr. Weinberg requests that the phrase “microchip-reliant” be removed because “[s]ome 
3D printers may limit their materials using technology that does not primarily rely on 
microchips for validation.”1578  He explains that “in recent years manufacturers in the 2D 
printing space have moved beyond . . . microchip-based verification techniques, relying 
on other methods for verifying the source of materials.”1579  Mr. Weinberg states that HP 
(a manufacturer of 2D and 3D printers) implemented “HP Auto Sense” technology for 
2D printing that “uses optical scanners to identify [HP photo paper and] media used in 
printers, instead of a RFID-based verification technique.”1580  While “processing and 
responding to the signal produced by the optical sensors itself relies on microchips,” Mr. 
Weinberg asserts that “the technical role of microchips in the process could raise 
questions about the applicability of the exemption” in cases of 3D printers relying on 
other methods to verify the source of materials, even though users would circumvent 
TPMs for identical purposes (i.e., interoperability with third-party materials).1581 
The Office has previously concluded that TPMs applied to 3D printers are often 
employed to limit access to works protected by copyright, and Mr. Weinberg’s 
submissions indicate that these additional TPMs operate in the same manner.1582  
Similarly, because the expansion is directed at the same uses the Office has previously 
 
1577 See Michael Weinberg Class 15 Initial at 3; MAKERBOT MATERIALS FOR METHOD, 
MAKERBOT, https://www.makerbot.com/3d-printers/materials/method-materials/ (last visited 
Oct. 13, 2021); OUR MATERIALS, STRATASYS, https://www.stratasys.com/materials/search (last 
visited Oct. 13, 2021); Metal 3D Printing - The DMLS Technology How Does DMLS Work in Detail?, 
EOS, https://www.eos.info/en/industrial-3d-printing/additive-manufacturing-how-itworks/dmls-metal-3d-printing (last visited Oct. 13, 2021); 3D Printing Materials & Binders, EXONE, 
https://www.exone.com/en-US/3d-printing-materials-and-binders (last visited Oct. 13, 2021). 
1578 Michael Weinberg Class 15 Initial at 1. 
1579 Id. at 4. 
1580 Id.  
1581 Id. at 4–5. 
1582 See 2018 Recommendation at 322 (“find[ing] that at least some works included in the 
proposed expanded class are protected by copyright”); id. at 322 n.1954 (similar); 2015 
Recommendation at 367 (similar). 

[PAGE 289]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
286 
concluded are likely to be fair, and because Mr. Weinberg indicates that these additional 
TPMs perform the same function as microchip-based verifications, the Register finds 
that Mr. Weinberg has met his burden of showing that the current qualifying language 
limits his ability to make the noninfringing uses of 3D printer operating systems.1583 
Regarding the section 1201 statutory factors, Mr. Weinberg adopts the “analysis of the 
adverse effects on noninfringing uses in the 2018 Recommendation.”1584  In 2018, the 
Acting Register adopted the conclusions from the 2015 Recommendation with respect to 
statutory factors one through four, finding that the record had not expanded or 
changed.
1585  The Register does so here again.  Regarding the first statutory factor, the 
availability for use of copyrighted works, the “record does not demonstrate that [the 
proposed] exemption would threaten the availability of [3D printer operating] software, 
or, indeed, that a viable market for this type of software exists separate from the printers 
themselves.”
1586  Again, the second and third factors, concerning the availability for use 
of works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational purposes and the impact 
that the prohibition on circumvention has on criticism, comment, news reporting, 
teaching, scholarship, or research, “do not appear to be germane to this class,” and no 
evidence was set forth concerning these factors.1587  With respect to the fourth factor, 
there is nothing to disrupt the prior conclusions that “there is no independent market for 
3D printer operating software,”1588 and no evidence was provided “to suggest that the 
3D printers operate as secure distribution platforms for creative works”1589 or that the 
exemption is “likely to diminish the value of a 3D printer’s copyrighted software.”1590   
Under the current record, the Register concludes that removal of the term “microchipreliant” may facilitate additional beneficial or innovative uses of alternate material, 
without altering the overall analysis upon which this exemption has been previously 
adopted.  The record, while limited, demonstrates that 3D printers may use TPMs 
 
1583 See 2018 Recommendation at 325 (finding proposed uses likely to be fair); 2015 
Recommendation at 367–72 (same). 
1584 Michael Weinberg Class 15 Initial at 2. 
1585 2018 Recommendation at 326; see 2015 Recommendation at 372–75.  In 2018, the Acting 
Register also focused on safety considerations under the fifth factor, which are not the subject of 
this rulemaking.  See 2018 Recommendation at 326–28. 
1586 2018 Recommendation at 326 (first alteration added) (quoting 2015 Recommendation at 372). 
1587 2015 Recommendation at 373. 
1588 2018 Recommendation at 326 (citing 2015 Recommendation at 373–74). 
1589 2018 Recommendation at 326 (citing 2015 Recommendation at 374). 
1590 2015 Recommendation at 374. 

[PAGE 290]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
287 
besides microchips to ensure use of manufacturers’ printing materials1591 and that use of 
the proposed exemption would be for the identical purpose as the existing exemption.  
Thus, the Register does not view the removal of “microchip-reliant” as substantively 
altering the balance of the statutory factors, which favors granting the exemption. 
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA agrees that an expansion of the current exemption is warranted.  It states that 
replacing “feedstock” with the term “material” incorporates “commonplace 
terminology” into the regulatory language and furthers NTIA’s longstanding position 
that exemptions “should be intelligible to the average user in a class.”1592  NTIA also 
notes that the Office has previously used the two terms interchangeably,1593 but 
understands that the replacement is not meant to “materially alter” the scope of the 
class.1594   
Additionally, NTIA recommends removing the “microchip-reliant” language.  While it 
acknowledges that the record for non-microchip-based verification methods was limited, 
it “cautions against being overly specific in describing the types of TPMs at issue,” to 
ensure that exemptions address actual or likely adverse effects.1595  Further, NTIA states 
that “eliminating the ‘micro-chip reliant’ text would not inappropriately expand the 
class of work[s] covered,” but would “reduce uncertainty and risk” pertaining to 
noninfringing activities that are covered.1596 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
After consideration, the Register recommends revising the exemption by replacing the 
word “feedstock” with the word “material,” and removing the term “microchip-reliant” 
from the exemption.  The Register recommends that the Librarian designate the 
following class: 
Computer programs that operate 3D printers that employ technological 
measures to limit the use of material, when circumvention is 
accomplished solely for the purpose of using alternative material and 
 
1591 See Michael Weinberg Class 15 Initial at 4 (noting that “the underlying intent and behavior of 
manufacturers using these [verification] technologies is the same”). 
1592 NTIA Letter at 126. 
1593 Id. at 126 n.647. 
1594 Id. at 126 (quoting Michael Weinberg Class 15 Initial at 4). 
1595 NTIA Letter at 127. 
1596 Id. at 129. 

[PAGE 291]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
288 
not for the purpose of accessing design software, design files, or 
proprietary data. 
  

[PAGE 292]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
289 
P. Proposed Class 16: Computer Programs—Copyright License 
Investigation   
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption 
SFC petitions for a new exemption that would permit the circumvention of access 
controls for the purpose of investigating whether a particular computer program 
includes free and open source software (“FOSS”), and if so, whether the use of the 
program complies with applicable license terms.
1597 
SFC describes FOSS as “software developed by volunteer communities and licensed for 
the benefit of everyone.”1598  FOSS can be “freely used, modified, and shared . . . without 
a licensing fee or royalty obligation,” provided that users comply with the terms of any 
applicable FOSS license.1599  Common conditions include requirements that users 
“provide a copy of the copyright notice or author attribution and a copy of the FOSS 
license within the software or its documentation,”
1600 or agree to license any derivative 
works under the same FOSS license terms and provide a copy of the source code for the 
modified software.1601  Where a FOSS user fails to comply with the license conditions, 
organizations such as SFC may seek to enforce compliance by requiring the licensee to 
amend relevant documentation, provide a copy of the source code for any derivative 
work based on the FOSS, and/or license the derivative work on the same FOSS license 
conditions.1602  SFC’s initial petition requested an exemption to investigate potential 
infringement of these FOSS programs, as well as to make “lawful use of computer 
programs (e.g., copying, modifying, redistributing, and updating free and open source 
software (FOSS)).”1603 
SFC and FSF submitted comments in support of the proposed exemption.1604  Opposition 
comments were received from DVD CCA and AACS LA; EDA, and AED; Joint Creators; 
 
1597 SFC Class 16 Pet. at 2. 
1598 Id. at 1 
1599 SFC Class 16 Initial at 2; see also FSF Class 16 Initial at 1 (stating that “users are free to study, 
share, and improve the software”). 
1600 SFC Class 16 Initial at 2 & n.5 (citing The MIT License, Open Source Initiative, 
https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT (last visited Oct. 15, 2021)). 
1601 Software Study at 62 (citing GNU General Public License Version 3, GNU.org (June 29, 2007), 
https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html); SFC Class 16 Initial at 2 (same). 
1602 See SFC Class 16 Initial at 2, 4–5. 
1603 SFC Class 16 Pet. at 2. 
1604 SFC Class 16 Initial; FSF Class 16 Initial. 

[PAGE 293]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
290 
and Marcia Wilbur.1605  The opposition commenters raised several objections concerning 
the scope of the proposed exemption, including that it was not properly limited to a 
particular class and that it lacked “standard limitations common to previously granted 
exemptions.”1606 
In response, SFC refined the scope of the exemption in its reply comment, proposing the 
following amended language: 
Computer programs, where the circumvention is undertaken on a lawfully 
acquired device or machine on which the computer program operates, the 
circumvention [is] solely for the purpose of investigating a potential copyright 
infringement where the circumvention is performed by, or at the direction of, a 
party that has standing to bring a breach of license claim and where such 
circumvention does not constitute a violation of applicable law.
1607 
SFC’s amended proposal adopts several of opponents’ suggestions: it (1) removes 
reference to making general lawful uses from the original proposal; (2) states that 
circumvention must be “solely for the purpose of” the covered activities; (3) limits the 
class of eligible users; (4) adds a prohibition against violating other laws; and (5) 
requires that the person engaged in circumvention must have “lawfully acquired [the] 
device or machine on which the computer program operates.”1608  For purposes of the 
public hearing on this exemption, the amended language from SFC’s reply comment 
was considered the operative proposal.
1609  The Register likewise evaluates the proposed 
exemption and the remaining issues based on the amended language. 
For the reasons discussed below, the Register recommends that the proposed exemption 
be granted. 
b. Overview of Issues 
Although SFC’s amendments to the exemption language largely moot a number of 
discrete issues raised by opponents, opponents reiterate overarching objections to the 
proposal as a whole.  Opponents primarily dispute that circumvention is necessary to 
investigate potential infringement, suggesting that FOSS licensors could instead obtain 
 
1605 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 16 Opp’n; EDA & AED Class 16 Opp’n; Joint Creators Class 16 
Opp’n; Marcia Wilbur Class 16 Opp’n. 
1606 Joint Creators Class 16 Opp’n at 4–7.  See also DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 16 Opp’n at 5; 
EDA & AED Class 16 Opp’n at 5–6. 
1607 SFC Class 16 Reply at 3. 
1608 Id. 
1609 See Tr. at 265:23–277:17 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Smith, U.S. Copyright Office; Williams, Joint Creators; 
Ayers, DVD CCA & AACS LA; Chestek, SFC). 

[PAGE 294]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
291 
the information by requesting it from alleged infringers directly or demanding it in 
discovery in litigation.1610  Other questions concerning the scope and language of the 
proposed exemption include the following: 
Concerns related to specific types of machines or devices, and types of software.  SFC initially 
provided a list of various device types, but did not otherwise distinguish between types 
of devices or machines that could be investigated for potential software infringement.1611  
SFC likewise made no distinction concerning the types of computer programs that may 
contain infringing code.
1612  In refining its request to “[c]omputer programs, where the 
circumvention is undertaken on a lawfully acquired device or machine on which the 
computer program operates,” SFC notes that the amended class is the same as that for 
the existing exemption for security research.1613  Opponents contend the evidentiary 
record is inadequate to support an exemption for this relatively broad category of 
devices.1614  DVD CCA and AACS LA specifically object to the inclusion of DVD and 
Blu-ray players, expressing concern that circumvention of embedded software on these 
devices would expose cryptographic keys and facilitate piracy.1615  Joint Creators request 
video game consoles and set-top boxes be excluded from any exemption, particularly 
given the lack of evidence of FOSS infringement and threats of piracy and unauthorized 
access to expressive copyrighted works posed by circumvention.1616  And EDA and AED 
warn that, in the context of vehicles, the exemption raises issues of safety, compliance 
with other regulations and vehicle engineering standards, and exposure of trade 
secrets.1617 
Purpose of investigation.  Whether, as initially requested, the proposed exemption should 
extend to investigating infringement of proprietary software as well as FOSS remains 
unresolved.1618  SFC states that it is “unaware of any facts or policy” that would support 
distinguishing between the types of software being infringed, while acknowledging that 
 
1610 See DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 16 Opp’n at 7; Joint Creators Class 16 Opp’n at 2, 4. 
1611 SFC Class 16 Initial at 5–6 (providing examples including routers, televisions, thermostats, 
and doorbells); SFC Class 16 Pet. at 2. 
1612 See SFC Class 16 Initial at 6. 
1613 SFC Class 16 Reply at 3. 
1614 See DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 16 Opp’n at 4; EDA & AED Class 16 Opp’n at 4–5; Joint 
Creators Class 16 Opp’n at 1–3. 
1615 See DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 16 Opp’n at 9, 13–18. 
1616 See Joint Creators Class 16 Opp’n at 2–3, 6–7. 
1617 See EDA & AED Class 16 Opp’n at 8–12. 
1618 See SFC Class 16 Reply at 3. 

[PAGE 295]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
292 
its focus is specifically on FOSS.1619  Opponents generally disfavor allowing the 
exemption to include investigating infringement of proprietary software.1620  In the event 
the Register were to conclude that the exemption should be limited to investigating 
potential FOSS infringement, SFC proposed additional, alternative language for 
consideration.1621   
Eligibility to investigate software infringement.  Under SFC’s proposal, any circumvention 
to investigate a potential infringement must be “performed by, or at the direction of, a 
party that has standing to bring a breach of license claim.”1622  Opponents express 
concern that bad actors might abuse the exemption under the guise of investigating 
infringement without any reasonable basis for believing the underlying computer 
program might contain FOSS.  To address this, opponents propose that users have 
sufficient knowledge or a “particularized reason” to believe that a computer program 
may contain FOSS before circumventing TPMs to further investigate.
1623 
Post-circumvention obligations.  Opponents express concerns about devices being left 
exposed after circumvention takes place, particularly if no FOSS violation is found, 
arguing that this may facilitate piracy or unauthorized access to expressive works.
1624  
Joint Creators propose additional safeguards, such as a requirement “similar to Section 
117 that the device/program be restored/re-encrypted after the investigation.”1625  
2. Discussion 
a. Scope of the Proposed Class 
In its petition, SFC sought to allow access to computer programs on “the hard drive, 
firmware, or RAM, or other permanent or temporary storage media of a computer or 
 
1619 Id. at 3–4; see SFC Class 16 Initial at 6 (“[T]he rationale that justifies this exception for FOSS is 
equally applicable to all software.  A copyright owner-licensor should not have to break the law 
to determine whether their copyright is being infringed.”).  
1620 See Tr. at 300:14–301:04 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Williams, Joint Creators). 
1621 See SFC Class 16 Reply at 3–4 (adding the language limiting the exemption to investigating 
use of “free and open source computer programs”). 
1622 SFC Class 16 Reply at 3. 
1623 See Joint Creators Class 16 Opp’n at 3; EDA & AED Class 16 Opp’n at 5 (noting the absence of 
any justification for investigating “such as a judicial or administrative order, or even reasonable 
suspicion of infringing use”); Tr. at 268:16–269:09 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Williams, Joint Creators); Tr. at 
270:15–271:03 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Ayers, DVD CCA & AACS LA). 
1624 See Joint Creators Class 16 Opp’n at 6; DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 16 Opp’n at 18–19; Tr. at 
290:25–291:23 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Ayers, DVD CCA & AACS LA); Tr. at 302:23–303:17 (Williams, Joint 
Creators). 
1625 Joint Creators Class 16 Opp’n at 7; see Tr. at 268:06–15 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Williams, Joint Creators). 

[PAGE 296]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
293 
embedded computing device (including ‘internet-of-things’ devices like IP-enabled 
doorbell cameras, baby monitors, and thermostats; smart phones and other portable 
computing devices; laptop and desktop computers; and networking devices such as 
routers).”1626  SFC expanded on this by providing a list of types of devices for which SFC 
has received “credible reports” that the manufacturer does not comply with FOSS 
license terms.
1627  SFC cites a recent survey in which 99% of audited codebases contained 
open source software,1628 and asserts that these devices are “all likely to be using 
FOSS.”1629 
As noted above, SFC significantly amended the proposed class to mirror the language of 
the existing security research exemption, including by explicitly requiring that the 
device or machine be “lawfully acquired.”  Under the amended proposal, any 
circumvention must be undertaken “solely for the purpose of” investigating a potential 
infringement.  SFC also circumscribed the class of eligible users by requiring that “the 
circumvention is performed by, or at the direction of, a party that has standing to bring a 
breach of license claim.”
1630   
Opponents argue that an exemption covering software, generally, would fail to satisfy 
the legislative history’s requirement that a class should be “a narrow and focused subset 
of the broad categories of works . . . identified in Section 102 of the Copyright Act.”1631  
 
1626 SFC Class 16 Pet. at 2. 
1627 SFC Class 16 Initial at 5–6 (servers, laptop and desktop computers, remote computing 
environments/cloud virtual machines, network attached storage (NAS) devices, tablet computers, 
Android phones, routers/switches/access points, modems, speakers and other audiovisual 
equipment, television sets, set-top boxes, DVRs, gaming consoles, VoIP phones/analog telephone 
adapters, video calling appliances, IP cameras, cars, aerial drones, industrial automation 
machines/computers numerical control (CNC) routers, thermostats, dashcams, alarm systems, 
doorbells, watches).  
1628 See id. at 3 & n.7 (citing SYNOPSYS, 2020 OPEN SOURCE SECURITY AND RISK ANALYSIS REPORT 7 
(2020)). 
1629 Id. at 6.  SFC indicated that, in some instances, a forensic investigation of the device is 
conducted to investigate and confirm the existence of FOSS—one that would presumably require 
circumvention of TPMs.  SFC declined to disclose how it was gaining access to TPM-protected 
software, also noting that infringers have used this information to implement countermeasures to 
thwart investigations.  See id. at 4 & n.16, 6–7; Tr. at 279:16–280:02 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Chestek, SFC); 
Tr. at 305:02–06 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Chestek, SFC); Tr. at 306:12–20 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Smith, U.S. 
Copyright Office; Chestek, SFC). 
1630 SFC Class 16 Reply at 3. 
1631 Commerce Comm. Report at 38; see DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 16 Opp’n at 2, 5 (stating 
that, like the repair and modification proposals in class 12, this proposal is “impermissibly 
broad”); EDA & AED Class 16 Opp’n at 4–5 (stating that the proposed class “sweepingly applies 
 

[PAGE 297]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
294 
Opponents observe that SFC provides only “vague references or suggestions” relating to 
the pervasiveness of software generally.1632  Opponents observe parallels to the 2018 
rulemaking, where the Acting Register declined to recommend a proposed expansion of 
the repair exemption to a “broad panoply” of software-enabled devices, and assert that 
similar evidentiary shortcomings exist in SFC’s proposal.1633  DVD CCA and AACS LA 
noted that, in 2018,  the Acting Register refined the class for the expanded repair 
exemption to the “types of devices for which there [was] a cognizable record,” but 
argued that a more limited class cannot be refined from the current record and such an 
approach is “essentially impossible.”1634     
As an initial matter, the Register concludes that the proposed use—investigating software 
copyright infringement—is appropriately limited to investigating  FOSS infringement 
because FOSS investigations predominate the evidentiary record.1635  Second, the 
Register concludes that any exemption should require users to have a good-faith, 
reasonable belief in the need for the investigation before engaging in circumvention.  
Indeed, SFC indicated that such a “generalized” standard would be acceptable as it 
aligns with SFC’s existing practices to “observ[e] the attributes and behavior of the 
device or the software” and “review[] its advertising or its documentation” to “make an 
educated guess” about whether a program contains FOSS.
1636 
Further, the Register determines that it is appropriate to consider a proposed exemption 
without further enumerating specific devices or machines within which FOSS software 
may be embedded.  The Office has considered similar issues in previous rulemakings.  
As proponents note, in 2018, the Acting Register considered the limitation on types of 
devices eligible for the security research exemption and, finding the scope of the 
 
to an unlimited set of ‘users’ for all ‘computer programs’—irrespective of any particular type of 
machine or device— for any ‘lawful uses’” and is “ambiguous as to the ‘copyrighted works’ 
subject to the proposed exemption”); Joint Creators Class 16 Opp’n at 1–3 (stating that the 
proposed class is “too broad”). 
1632 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 16 Opp’n at 4–8. 
1633 Id. at 5–6 (citing 2018 Recommendation at 191–92); see also EDA & AED Class 16 Opp’n at 6–7 
(“TPMs will vary immensely by copyrighted work.”); Joint Creators Class 16 Opp’n at 3 (“It is 
impossible to address all of the access controls and methods of circumvention covered by the 
petition in this proposed class because SFC seeks an exemption covering circumvention of all 
access controls protecting computer programs.”). 
1634 See DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 16 Opp’n at 6 (quoting 2018 Recommendation at 192); see also 
Joint Creators Class 16 Opp’n at 6–7.   
1635 See SFC Class 16 Reply at 3–4; SFC Class 16 Initial at 6 (“[SFC] seeks approval of this request 
for its own work investigating breach of FOSS licenses . . . .”); Tr. at 300:14–301:04 (Apr. 7, 2021 
(Williams, Joint Creators); Tr. at 312:11–313:01 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Chestek, SFC). 
1636 SFC Class 16 Initial at 4; Tr. at 299:13–25 (Amer, U.S. Copyright Office; Chestek, SFC). 

[PAGE 298]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
295 
proposed class appropriate, recommended that the exemption be broadened to 
encompass “[c]omputer programs, where the circumvention is undertaken on a lawfully 
acquired device or machine on which the computer program operates.”1637  The Acting 
Register explained that the renewed proposal appropriately described “a particular 
class” because “computer programs are a subcategory of literary works” and the 
“proposed class . . . is further refined by reference to a specific set of permitted 
activities.”1638  The Acting Register observed that computer programs are not an 
“inherently overbroad category”; rather, a class of works may be appropriate in scope 
“where the record establishes that users of such works are similarly affected by the 
prohibition on circumvention, and where . . . the class is further narrowed by reference 
to particular types of uses.”1639 
Here, proponents have submitted evidence that users are being adversely affected in the 
same way by TPMs on computer programs across various types of devices and 
machines.  SFC has reported receiving “credible reports” that multiple types of devices 
have used FOSS in a manner that does not comply with the licensing conditions.1640  SFC 
and FSF report that they receive a combined total of 286 reports of FOSS infringement 
annually;1641 SFC added that it can only investigate half of the reports it receives due to 
the pervasiveness of the issue.1642  As SFC notes, “[s]oftware is no longer just the purview 
of companies with business models based primarily on the exploitation of copyright,” 
but now is offered by a variety of businesses as “a component of their primary product 
or service offering.”1643  Moreover, the class is further refined by the limited nature of the 
proposed use.  Despite the differences in the type of TPM on a particular device, the 
objective of the requested circumvention is the same: investigation of FOSS license 
violations.  Thus, the Register concludes that the proposed class is sufficiently defined to 
constitute “a particular class of works” within the meaning of the statute. 
Although the Register concludes that there are sufficient commonalities as to how 
software would be investigated and by whom to make a device-agnostic class—rather 
than a device-by-device analysis—appropriate here , she acknowledges opponents’ 
 
1637 2018 Recommendation at 289, 313–14. 
1638 Id. at 289. 
1639 Id. (citing House Manager’s Report at 7). 
1640 SFC Class 16 Initial at 5. 
1641 See FSF Class 16 Initial at 2; Tr. at 278:17–279:15 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Chestek, SFC). 
1642 SFC Class 16 Initial at 3–4. 
1643 SFC Class 16 Initial at 5; see Tr. at 297:16–20 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Chestek, SFC) (“90 percent of 
[smart devices] run on Linux”); see also SYNOPSYS, 2021 OPEN SOURCE SECURITY AND RISK ANALYSIS 
REPORT 8 (2021), available at https://www.synopsys.com/software-integrity/resources/analystreports/open-source-security-risk-analysis.html.  

[PAGE 299]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
296 
objections to certain types of devices and machines being included in the class.  
Accordingly, the Register will consider opponents’ piracy-related and other devicespecific concerns below in her discussion of the fourth fair use factor and the statutory 
factors under section 1201(a)(1)(C). 
b. Works Protected by Copyright 
The proposed exemption implicates at least two types of computer programs.  The 
operating systems and applications stored on the devices or machines on which they 
operate constitute “computer programs” within the meaning of section 101.1644  Further, 
the FOSS that may be contained within those operating systems and applications 
constitute computer programs.1645  The Register therefore finds that the works included 
in the proposed class are protected by copyright. 
c. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
SFC asserts that it is fair use to reverse engineer a computer program to investigate 
whether it contains FOSS code but does not satisfy FOSS license conditions.1646  SFC also 
argues that where reverse engineering is unnecessary, reading the computer code to 
determine whether it contains FOSS is a noninfringing use.
1647  SFC contends that 
opponents do not contest that the proposed use is noninfringing, but instead focus on 
the “potential for knock-on risks after circumvention.”1648  Indeed, opponents express 
concern that circumvention of TPMs to access computer programs on devices that also 
contain or provide access to other expressive works could harm the market for those 
works.1649  EDA and AED also argue that such investigatory activities could be 
disruptive to expectations of FOSS licensees who may be relying on “contractually 
enumerated methods for making open source components available to downstream 
users at the election of the licensee.”1650  By “usurp[ing] the discretion provided in the 
license,” they argue, the proposed exemption would interfere with license rights and 
with “security measures that properly protect other software components.”1651   
Ultimately, the Register concludes that investigating computer programs for the 
purpose of identifying potential FOSS infringement is likely to be a fair use.  Regarding 
 
1644 See 2018 Recommendation at 194; Software Study at 2–3; SFC Class 16 Initial at 7. 
1645 See, e.g., SFC Class 16 Initial at 1, 7. 
1646 See id. at 8. 
1647 See id. 
1648 SFC Class 16 Reply at 4. 
1649 See DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 16 Opp’n at 13–18; Joint Creators Class 16 Opp’n at 6. 
1650 EDA & AED Class 16 Opp’n at 5. 
1651 Id. 

[PAGE 300]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
297 
the first fair use factor, the purpose and character of the use, the Register agrees that 
both reverse engineering and examining copyrighted software code to investigate 
potential infringement are noninfringing purposes.  Courts have found reverse 
engineering computer programs to analyze their functionality to be transformative.1652  
The Supreme Court has favorably cited such cases to illustrate types of uses—
specifically of computer programs—that can be deemed fair. 1653  The Office has taken a 
similar approach in past rulemakings, relying on these cases to conclude that, at least in 
some circumstances, jailbreaking devices to access their firmware is likely to be a fair 
use.
1654  Thus, accessing a computer program to understand it is a purpose that the 
courts and the Office have consistently determined favors fair use. 
The second fair use factor, the nature of the copyrighted work, also favors finding a fair 
use.  The record indicates that the computer programs that proponents typically 
investigate are largely functional, rather than expressive, in nature.  All of the examples 
provided were of programs embedded within devices to enable or enhance device 
functionality.
1655  Opponents do not dispute that the computer programs proponents 
seek to access are functional.  Rather, they raise concerns that circumvention of TPMs on 
devices such as video game consoles and disc players would jeopardize protection of 
other, more expressive works.
1656  These concerns are considered below in the adverse 
effects analysis. 
On the third fair use factor, participants do not squarely address the amount and 
substantiality of the work used.  It appears that the proposal anticipates using up to the 
entirety of the work to determine where FOSS may exist within a computer program.  
As the Office has previously noted in the context of repair, “most computer programs do 
not have a specific beginning, middle, or end, which can make it difficult to identify the 
source of the problem within the code.”
1657  Similar logic applies here, where users are 
seeking to identify instances of FOSS in the source code, which may require copying the 
 
1652 See Sony Comput, Ent. v. Connectix, Inc., 203 F.3d 596, 608 (9th Cir. 2000); Sega Enters. v. 
Accolade, 977 F.2d 1510, 1520 (9th Cir. 1992); Atari Games Corp. v. Nintendo of Am. Inc., 975 F.2d 832, 
843–44 (Fed. Cir. 1992) (determining that reverse engineering an authorized copy of a work to 
understand and distinguish protected from unprotected elements of a work constitutes fair use). 
1653 See Google LLC v. Oracle Am., Inc., 141 S. Ct. 1183, 1198–99 (2021).  
1654 See 2018 Recommendation at 167–72 (jailbreaking voice assistant devices); 2015 
Recommendation at 213–15 (jailbreaking smart televisions); id. at 188–89 (jailbreaking 
smartphones and all-purpose mobile computing devices). 
1655 See SFC Class 16 Initial at 3–5 (“smart” doorbells, wireless routers, televisions). 
1656 See DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 16 Opp’n at 13–18; Joint Creators Class 16 Opp’n 6–7. 
1657 Software Study at 41. 

[PAGE 301]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
298 
code into a test environment for review.1658  Moreover, even where the entirety of the 
work is used, that is not dispositive under the third factor, as courts have permitted such 
uses where necessary to achieve a transformative purpose.1659  Indeed, in the previous 
two rulemakings, the Office noted that even if the proposed activity would involve 
reproducing a copyrighted program in its entirety, this factor should be given little 
weight in those circumstances.1660  Applying that reasoning here, the Register finds the 
amount used is reasonable relative to the intended purpose. 
As to the fourth fair use factor, the effect of the use upon the potential market for or 
value of the copyrighted work, SFC argues that investigation of TPM-protected software 
will have no negative effect on the value of such works because the activity “does not 
create any publicly available copy of the accused software.”1661  It further contends that 
the investigating party has an incentive not to distribute the TPM-circumvented 
software because “[i]f not kept confidential, the owner of the accused work would have 
a claim of infringement of the copyright of any non-FOSS portions of the accused 
work.”1662  SFC also argues that an infringer who “incorporat[es] FOSS without 
complying with the license” deprives FOSS developers of “substantial benefits,” 
including “genera[ting] market share for their programs by providing certain 
components free of charge” and enhancing their reputations in the field.1663  Proponents 
further assert that investigating FOSS infringement provides a “public benefit” that 
“assures all consumers receive rights guaranteed by copyleft licenses.”1664   
In response, opponents suggest that the exemption could harm the market for devices, 
including video game consoles, set-top boxes, and disc players, in cases where the 
device software and the TPMs protecting the system serve as a bulwark against 
piracy.
1665  Opponents assert that once the firmware on these devices is accessed, 
irrespective of the purpose, the digital ecosystem is compromised such that it can no 
 
1658 See SFC Class 16 Initial at 6–7. 
1659 See Google, 141 S. Ct. at 1189 (“The ‘substantiality’ factor will generally weigh in favor of fair 
use where . . . the amount of copyright was tethered to a valid, and transformative, purpose.”); 
Sony Comput. Ent. v. Connectix, 203 F.3d 596, 605–06 (9th Cir. 2000). 
1660 See 2018 Recommendation at 204; 2015 Recommendation at 235–36. 
1661 SFC Class 16 Initial at 10. 
1662 Id. at 10 n.33. 
1663 Id. at 9–10 & n.32 (quoting Jacobsen v. Katzer, 535 F.3d 1373, 1379 (Fed. Cir. 2008).   
1664 Id. at 3–5 (citing examples of where enforcement of FOSS license terms led to open-source 
wireless router software and replacement software for Samsung televisions); see id. at 9 n.32 
(“Improvement to a product can come rapidly and free of charge from an expert not even known 
to the copyright holder.”). 
1665 See DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 16 Opp’n at 13–18; Joint Creators Class 16 Opp’n at 6–7. 

[PAGE 302]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
299 
longer effectively prevent piracy.1666  Opponents reason that because the compromised 
code can no longer serve as a secure platform for the development and distribution of 
legitimate content, the value of these devices will be diminished.1667 
In the case of functional software embedded in devices, the Office has previously 
focused on whether the programs were “distributed as standalone works,” concluding 
that where programs have no value independent from the device, “repairing these 
programs is not likely to interfere with any market likely exploited by the copyright 
owner.”1668  Applying that reasoning, to the extent the software at issue here is 
embedded within the device, investigating the programs for potential infringement or 
violation of license terms is unlikely to harm the market for the embedded software.  
This factor accordingly favors fair use. 
Considering the fair use factors together, the Register finds that the proposed use is 
likely to be a fair use.  The Register will consider additional provisions in light of 
opponents’ concern with respect to devices that play expressive content, as discussed 
below. 
d. Causation 
Proponents assert that TPMs—including passwords and encryption— restrict access to 
potentially infringing software on devices and machines that proponents seek to 
investigate.1669   SFC states that section 1201’s prohibition against circumvention is “the 
only cause of the described adverse effects” and that TPMs are “the only barrier” to 
investigating computer programs that may be infringing FOSS.1670  The Register finds 
that the record shows that the statutory prohibition on circumvention of access controls 
limits participants’ ability to conduct such investigation.  But for the prohibition, users 
likely could gain lawful access to the copyrighted computer programs for this purpose. 
e. Asserted Adverse Effects  
i. Evidence of Adverse Effects 
Proponents argue that copyright owners, specifically those with standing to bring a 
breach of license claim in FOSS works, are adversely affected in their ability to pursue 
 
1666 See DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 16 Opp’n 14–18. 
1667 See id. at 13–19; Joint Creators Class 16 Opp’n at 6–7. 
1668 Software Study at 41. 
1669 See SFC Class 16 Initial at 6–7. 
1670 Id. at 11; see also FSF Class 16 Initial at 2 (“[FSF] has conducted investigations and enforcement 
of copyright violations on free software packages for over thirty years, but that work is 
increasingly stymied by [TPMs].”). 

[PAGE 303]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
300 
investigation of specific instances of potential software copyright infringement.  SFC 
explains that it usually begins investigating a report of potential infringement by 
observing the behavior of the software or device and reviewing the software 
documentation to determine whether further investigation is warranted.1671  “[M]ere 
observation,” however, is generally insufficient because software is mostly 
“invisible.”1672  As SFC notes, “[c]omputer software may be unique among all 
copyrighted works for the reason that one often cannot detect copying simply by 
observation.”1673  Thus, to thoroughly investigate noncompliance with FOSS license 
conditions, proponents must review the source code.  SFC acknowledges that in some 
cases it can access software without circumvention, but frequently its investigation is 
inhibited by TPMs.1674  SFC described steps it can take—whether guessing the password 
or disassembling a device—that may be construed as steps taken to “avoid” or “bypass” 
TPMs, making the organization “susceptible” to liability under section 1201.1675   
In response, opponents advance two arguments.  First, they contend that to the extent 
proponents are able to access the software, TPMs are not effectively preventing access 
and, accordingly, there would be no liability for bypassing such TPMs.1676  Similarly, 
opponents note that where a copyright owner seeks to bypass TPMs to access its own 
work, it may do so without violating section 1201(a) because the owner is authorizing 
the circumvention.
1677  Opponents suggest that there is no real threat of harm from 
litigation because any section 1201 claim or counterclaim for circumvention would fail if 
the amount added to FOSS was not independently copyrightable or because the FOSS 
investigator would have equitable defenses, such as “clean hands.”1678  Because of this, 
they contend that “the alleged harm is speculative.”1679  SFC responds by highlighting 
the uncertainty about whether certain investigatory activities are prohibited under 
section 1201(a), as well as the independently actionable nature of such claims.1680  The 
threat of litigation, SFC contends, adversely affects non-profit organizations in that they 
 
1671 See SFC Class 16 Initial at 4. 
1672 Id. at 3. 
1673 Id.; FSF Class 16 Initial at 2 (stating that, even where the software is accessible, investigation is 
difficult because “users often need to search the obfuscated form of the work to find hints that 
free software is included”). 
1674 See SFC Class 16 Initial at 6. 
1675 See id. at 7. 
1676 See DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 16 Opp’n at 8. 
1677 See Joint Creators Class 16 Opp’n at 2.   
1678 See DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 16 Opp’n at 9–10. 
1679 Id. at 10 & n.18. 
1680 See SFC Class 16 Reply at 8. 

[PAGE 304]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
301 
may forgo pursuing meritorious investigations due to the risk of liability.1681  SFC also 
observes that the purpose of section 1201 exemptions is “specifically to avoid [the] 
eventuality” of having to assert a defense in litigation.1682   
Second, opponents argue that adequate alternatives to circumvention exist such that the 
exemption is unnecessary.
1683  Joint Creators suggest that proponents could negotiate 
compliance if a FOSS owner “(1) approaches a potential software user; (2) informs the 
user of its suspicions and of the reasonable nature of the license terms; and (3) expresses 
no desire to sue unless compliance is not forthcoming.”
1684  Opponents further suggest 
FOSS owners could “write a pre-lawsuit letter to the alleged infringer requesting access 
to a program for purposes of investigation of infringement.”1685  Finally, opponents 
suggest that FOSS owners can pursue litigation, noting that “where there is a 
particularized reason to believe infringement has occurred, the Federal Rules of Civil 
Procedure allow an attorney to file a complaint and to seek discovery to access the code 
at issue to analyze it for infringement.”1686   
SFC responds that “[c]opyright infringers typically do not freely admit to their 
infringement” and that efforts to negotiate compliance before confirming that the 
accused work contains FOSS are likely to be futile.1687  It further notes that owners would 
 
1681 See SFC Class 16 Initial at 10; see also FSF Class 16 Initial at 2 (stating that FOSS owners 
“should never fear punishment for simply trying to discover free software licenses”). 
1682 See SFC Class 16 Reply at 7–8. 
1683 See DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 16 Opp’n at 10. 
1684 Joint Creators Class 16 Opp’n at 4; see Tr. at 269:10–21 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Williams, Joint Creators); 
Tr. at 302:04–13 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Williams, Joint Creators). 
1685 Joint Creators Class 16 Opp’n at 3–4; see DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 16 Opp’n at 11. 
1686 Joint Creators Class 16 Opp’n at 2; see DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 16 Opp’n at 11 (noting 
that if a cease-and-desist letter is ignored, it could be grounds for willful infringement claims); Tr. 
at 270:15–271:03 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Ayers, DVD CCA & AACS LA) (observing that “there are rules of 
civil procedure that . . . address how evidence is to be made available to the parties in a contract 
dispute, in a legal dispute, and this proposal . . . essentially sidesteps that”); Tr. at 289:05–18 (Apr. 
7, 2021) (Ayers, DVD CCA & AACS LA) (observing that the proposed exemption would privilege 
FOSS authors over other copyright owners that “have had to follow legal steps, legal procedures, 
in order to pursue the circumvention devices and tools” that violate section 1201); Tr. at 301:15–
302:03 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Williams, Joint Creators) (commenting that if an owner knows that “90 
percent of a given market is running Linux,” then “circumvention to investigate isn’t necessary” 
because “[t]hey already have everything they need to move forward with the complaint” and 
“get[] what they need through discovery”). 
1687 See SFC Class 16 Reply at 7–8; see also Tr. at 276:13–277:01 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Chestek, SFC) 
(commenting that imposing a “duty [on copyright owners] to go to the hardware manufacturers 
or the software manufacturers to ask for a copy” would not be “feasible”); Tr. at 307:19–309:15 
 

[PAGE 305]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
302 
need “a reasonable basis for sending a cease and desist letter, for which the investigation 
being discussed is a necessary predicate.”1688  As to pursuing litigation, SFC responds 
that this approach is “unfeasible given the number of claims reported” and would 
impose an “undue burden on the courts.”1689 
Weighing the participants’ arguments, the Register concludes that SFC has made a 
sufficient showing that TPMs are adversely affecting the ability of users to investigate 
potential infringement of FOSS in software-enabled devices.  In many cases, users may 
suspect a computer program is infringing FOSS, but must examine the program’s code 
to confirm that suspicion.  The alternatives to circumvention offered by proponents all 
have notable drawbacks that may impede the proposed noninfringing activity.1690  In 
particular, SFC notes that requests for access to software are routinely ignored.1691  
Further, the costs and burdens of filing a lawsuit may be prohibitive for many users, 
particularly where the objective is compliance with FOSS licensing terms, not 
damages.1692   
ii. Statutory Factors 
Turning to the section 1201 statutory factors, on the first factor, proponents argue the 
current prohibition is impeding investigations of FOSS noncompliance that could lead to 
more derivative works being made available.  SFC contends that “incorporat[ing] FOSS 
without complying with the license . . . effectively remove[s] the [derivative] software 
from the commons” and thereby diminishes its availability for use.
1693  In response, 
opponents EDA and AED comment that FOSS is “freely available irrespective of 
incorporation into any particular device or program,” so TPMs are not affecting their 
availability; and in any event, licensees should have the flexibility to “provide access and 
use in a variety of ways pursuant to the license.”1694  DVD CCA and AACS LA warn that 
 
(Apr. 7, 2021) (Chestek, SFC; Smith, U.S. Copyright Office) (discussing SFC’s protocol where they 
typically approach potential infringers with “fairly compelling evidence” to successfully achieve 
compliance and avoid their letter being disregarded). 
1688 SFC Class 16 Reply at 7. 
1689 Id. at 7–8; see Tr. at 277:08–16 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Chestek, SFC). 
1690 See Section 1201 Report at 122 (indicating that the Office “will . . . evaluate the burdens or 
costs involved with an alternative and, depending on the circumstances, find them to either rise 
to the level of an adverse effect or to just be a mere inconvenience”). 
1691 See SFC Class 16 Reply at 7; Tr. at 317:02–318:08 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Chestek, SFC). 
1692 See Tr. at 306:21–307:07 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Chestek, SFC) (commenting that the “first step” under 
FOSS community enforcement standards “is to work with the manufacturer to try to gain 
compliance,” and that going to court is “fairly antithetical” to those standards). 
1693 SFC Class 16 Initial at 9. 
1694 EDA & AED Class 16 Opp’n at 7–8. 

[PAGE 306]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
303 
allowing circumvention of TPMs on disc players would diminish these devices’ ability 
to serve as secure distribution platforms for expressive works—pr otection that creators 
rely on to recoup their investment in producing works like motion pictures.1695  
Consequently, they argue, circumvention would disincentivize creators from making 
works available on these devices, as well as discourage investment in creating new 
works.  In support, opponents cite the Register’s 2012 analysis recommending against a 
proposed exemption for jailbreaking video game consoles.1696   
Overall, the Register finds this statutory factor favors the proposed exemption.  In prior 
rulemakings, the Office has consistently found that exemptions to allow noninfringing 
analysis of computer programs are likely to promote the availability of copyrighted 
works.
1697  The Office has reached that conclusion notwithstanding generalized concerns 
regarding the security of distribution platforms.1698  Indeed, the Office has repeatedly 
recommended exemptions for devices that allow motion picture playback.1699  Moreover, 
opponents’ argument appears more germane to the effect of the proposed exemption on 
the market for copyrighted works, discussed below, than to works’ availability for use. 
Concerning the second statutory factor, SFC notes that its policy is to make publicly 
available any derivative works it obtains through investigation and enforcement of FOSS 
license conditions, which furthers archival and preservation purposes.1700  Because such 
works also “become the basis for larger FOSS projects,” such as OpenWrt, SFC argues 
that investigation also leads to projects that educate new software developers.1701  On the 
third factor, SFC states that TPMs have a “significant negative impact” on teaching and 
 
1695 See DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 16 Opp’n at 12–13. 
1696 See DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 16 Opp’n at 12 (citing 2012 Recommendation at 48). 
1697 See, e.g., 2018 Recommendation at 174 (jailbreaking voice assistance devices); id. at 312 
(security research); 2015 Recommendation at 190 (jailbreaking smartphones and portable allpurpose mobile computing devices). 
1698 Cf. 2018 Recommendation at 181 (“For opponents to establish that this statutory factor weighs 
against the exemption on the ground that it would adversely affect the market for their own 
creative works, they must offer more than speculation about the role the access controls 
protecting the device firmware may play in protecting access to those works.”). 
1699 See, e.g., 2015 Recommendation at 216 (jailbreaking smart televisions); 2015 Recommendation 
at 190 (jailbreaking smartphones and portable all-purpose mobile computing devices). 
1700 See SFC Class 16 Initial at 8–9. 
1701 Id.; see also FSF Class 16 Initial at 1 (noting that FOSS, by its nature, is free to study, share, and 
improve, inability to circumvent TPMs on works that incorporate FOSS without complying with 
license terms “interfere[s] with the ability to enjoy these freedoms”).  

[PAGE 307]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
304 
research because they “prevent others from being able to learn from, comment on and 
criticize the accused software’s use and implementation of the FOSS.”1702 
Addressing the second and third statutory factors, EDA and AED argue that because 
SFC’s initial proposal lacked clarity as to the users, uses, and copyrighted works at issue, 
“there has been no showing that any archival, preservation, educational, critical, 
reportorial, or scholarly use is implicated.”1703  In addition, they assert there is “no 
adverse impact” on such uses “because FOSS works, by their very nature, are otherwise 
freely available to users outside the context of being embedded in a particular device or 
program.”1704  In response, SFC notes that the exemption is not about obtaining access to 
FOSS generally, but rather “to investigate infringement of a particular software program 
on a particular device,” for which “[t]here is no substitute software available.”1705   
The record shows that the prohibition against circumvention limits FOSS compliance 
investigations, which in turn, limits the ability of users to learn from derivative software 
that otherwise would be freely available.  The Register credits proponents’ views and 
concludes that these factors favor an exemption. 
Participants’ arguments with respect to the fourth statutory factor overlap with those 
concerning the fourth fair use factor.  Opponents warn of risks to other expressive 
content from weakening the digital ecosystem.
1706  In their view, circumvention of TPMs 
on video game consoles, set-top boxes, and disc players can facilitate piracy and thereby 
harm the market for and diminish the value of copyrighted works.1707  They note that the 
Office has previously rejected proposed jailbreaking and repair exemptions for video 
 
1702 SFC Class 16 Initial at 9 & n.30 (noting that TPMs inhibit the “collaborative development of 
software” that is a guiding principle behind FOSS and citing, as an example, NASA’s open source 
policy, one purpose of which is to “enhance and enable innovation and discovery”); see also FSF 
Class 16 Initial at 2. 
1703 EDA & AED Class 16 Opp’n at 8; see also DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 16 Opp’n at 11 
(contending that “[t]he analysis of the statutory factors is inapposite to the reasoning the Register 
provided for the preservation of computer programs or even video games”). 
1704 EDA & AED Class 16 Opp’n at 8. 
1705 SFC Class 16 Reply at 5 (comparing to investigations of proprietary software, the fact that 
“there are plenty of other copies available” is irrelevant to investigating whether copies installed 
on specific devices exceed the scope of the license).  
1706 See DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 16 Opp’n 14–18 (noting that “[e]ven well-intentioned 
exemptions can unintentionally impose undue stress on the [content protection ecosystem]” and 
that exposure of cryptographic keys can facilitate widespread piracy of DVD and Blu-ray discs); 
Joint Creators Class 16 Opp’n at 6–7. 
1707 See DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 16 Opp’n at 14–18; Joint Creators Class 16 Opp’n at 6–7; Tr. 
at 286:14–24 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Williams, Joint Creators); Tr. at 288:16–289:04 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Ayers, 
DVD CCA & AACS LA). 

[PAGE 308]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
305 
game consoles because of the potential harm to the markets for the expressive works 
they play and the devices themselves.1708  Opponents argue this logic likewise applies to 
set-top boxes and disc players, which “also incorporate access controls that protect 
copyrighted content against infringement and unauthorized access.”1709 
Proponents point to the harm of the current prohibition on creators of FOSS works who 
are deprived of economic benefits— enhanced reputation, market share for other 
programs, and free product improvements made by other developers— when others use 
FOSS but do not comply with license conditions.1710  SFC responds to opponents’ 
concerns by noting that the proposed exemption would not “affirmatively permit any 
subsequent use of any materials accessed” via investigation and, if a user exceeded the 
scope of the exemption by distributing expressive content or encryption keys, device 
manufacturers and copyright owners could pursue legal remedies.1711  In addition, SFC 
observes that “the devices being investigated are typically sold without content, so there 
would be no possible exposure of games or movies when new devices are 
investigated.”1712 
While maintaining their fundamental opposition to the proposed exemption, opponents 
propose two additional limitations on the scope of the exemption to limit its potential 
for collateral damage to the protection of other expressive works: (1) the language of the 
exemption should explicitly prohibit gaining access to unauthorized content or 
facilitating infringement;1713 and (2) similar to the current repair exemption and the 
requirements of section 117, the device or machine should be reencrypted and restored 
to its original specifications after the investigation.1714 
Given the concern that circumvention of TPMs on certain devices—even for a 
noninfringing purpose—may compromise the digital content ecosystem, the Office has 
 
1708 See Joint Creators Class 16 Opp’n at 6 (citing 2018 Recommendation at 206; 2012 
Recommendation at 49); Tr. at 302:23–303:13 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Williams, Joint Creators). 
1709 Joint Creators Class 16 Opp’n at 6; see DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 16 Opp’n at 13–19; Tr. at 
291:18–23 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Ayers, DVD CCA & AACS LA) (explaining how removal of firmware 
from disc players could expose cryptographic keys that, in turn, could be used to create a 
circumvention tool). 
1710 See SFC Class 16 Initial at 9–10 & n.32. 
1711 SFC Class 16 Reply at 6; see Tr. at 275:08–18 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Chestek, SFC). 
1712 SFC Class 16 Reply at 6.  SFC also argues that FOSS investigations should not be stymied by a 
manufacturer’s decision to design a particular device in a way that accessing the firmware would 
also expose other content.  See id. at 4 & n.10; Tr. at 294:10–295:04 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Chestek, SFC). 
1713 See Joint Creators Class 16 Opp’n at 7; Tr. at 287:21–25 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Williams, Joint Creators). 
1714 See Joint Creators Class 16 Opp’n at 7; Tr. at 268:06–15 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Williams, Joint Creators); 
Tr. at 286:25–287:20 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Williams, Joint Creators). 

[PAGE 309]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
306 
in other contexts recommended additional limitations in cases where the record suggests 
an otherwise appropriate proposed exemption may jeopardize protections to expressive 
works.1715  The Register concludes that a similar limitation is appropriate here.  
Specifically, the proposed exemption should include the qualifying language “where the 
copy of the computer program, or the device or machine on which it operates, is not 
used or maintained in a manner that facilitates copyright infringement.”  The Register 
interprets this limitation to not only prohibit misuse of the exemption to gain access to 
unauthorized content or facilitate infringement, but also to require users to take 
reasonable steps to secure computer programs, and the devices on which they operate, 
during and after circumvention.  Generally, this means a user should reencrypt and 
restore the device to its original specifications.  SFC has indicated, however, that this 
may not be practicable for all devices in that, depending on the type of device, restoring 
or reencrypting it after circumvention may not be possible because disassembly in the 
course of a FOSS investigation has rendered it unrepairable.
1716  In these instances, the 
device should instead be securely maintained or destroyed once it is no longer needed 
for the investigation.  Indeed, in at least some cases, SFC appears to have followed this 
practice by destroying a device in the course of investigating it for FOSS license 
noncompliance.
1717  Absent the additional limitation, this factor might disfavor the 
exemption due to the potential harm to the market for expressive works.  But with the 
limitation mitigating this potential harm, and because the evidence indicates that the 
current prohibition is inhibiting investigation of license violations that diminish the 
value that FOSS creators derive from their works, this factor slightly favors the 
exemption. 
 
1715 See, e.g., 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(2)(i)(C) (requiring that motion picture accessibility for K-12 
education be “stored by the educational institution in a manner intended to reasonably prevent 
unauthorized further dissemination of a work”); id. § 201.40(b)(8) (requiring that jailbreaking 
voice assisted devices not be “accomplished for the purpose of gaining unauthorized access to 
other copyrighted works”); id. § 201.40(b)(9) (requiring that repair of a vehicle not be 
“accomplished for the purpose of gaining unauthorized access to other copyrighted works”); id. § 
201.40(b)(10) (requiring that repair of home appliance and home system not be “accomplished for 
the purpose of gaining unauthorized access to other copyrighted works”); id. § 201.40(b)(11)(ii) 
(requiring that “information derived from the [good-faith security research] is used primarily to 
promote the security or safety of the class of devices or machines on which the computer 
program operates, or those who use such devices or machines, and is not used or maintained in a 
manner that facilitates copyright infringement”). 
1716 See Tr. at 272:22–273:22 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Chestek, SFC) (objecting to a requirement to “return [a 
device] to a condition where it’s still operable” while noting that a set-top box that runs on FOSS 
may be “restore[d] . . . to its original operating condition”). 
1717 See Tr. at 273:24–273:04 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Chestek, SFC); see also SFC Class 16 Initial at 7 (noting 
that in certain cases SFC “must sacrifice the motherboard of [a] device, taking it apart and 
connecting to it with specialized electronics hardware”). 

[PAGE 310]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
307 
On the fifth statutory factor, consideration of such other factors as the Librarian deems 
appropriate, EDA and AED assert that permitting circumvention to investigate FOSS 
compliance would frustrate efforts to take “reasonable steps” to keep information secret 
as required for protection under the Defend Trade Secrets Act and the EU Trade Secrets 
Directive.1718  SFC responds by noting that this concern is theoretically “true of every 
single exemption,” and argues that it is “not true that trade secrets will be forfeited” by 
virtue of the proposed exemption because “the information will still not be ‘generally 
known’ or ‘readily ascertainable’ to others and the trade secret status is maintained.”1719   
The Office’s general practice is to limit its analysis under the fifth factor to matters 
bearing on traditional copyright concerns, absent unusual circumstances.1720  Such 
circumstances are not present here.  Moreover, under SFC’s amended proposal, the 
circumvention is permissible only so far as it “does not constitute a violation of 
applicable law.”1721   
After weighing the statutory factors, the Register concludes that the prohibition on 
circumvention of TPMs is causing, or is likely to cause, adverse effects on the 
noninfringing investigation of potential infringement of FOSS by other computer 
programs.  The Register further concludes that excluding set-top boxes, disc players, or 
vehicles from the exemption is not warranted.  As noted above, there are exemptions 
currently in place for devices and media that access motion pictures—for example, the 
 
1718 See EDA & AED Class 16 Opp’n at 10–12.  EDA and AED raised additional arguments under 
this factor about the proposed exemption interfering with other regulations and the potential 
impact on vehicle engineering and safety.  See id. at 8–12.  These arguments, however, are mooted 
by SFC removing subpart (b) its exemption about “making lawful use” and adding the provision 
that circumvention to investigate a potential software infringement “does not constitute a 
violation of applicable law.”  Compare SFC Class 16 Pet. at 2, with SFC Class 16 Reply at 3; see also 
SFC Class 16 Reply at 6–7.  In addition, EDA and AED’s argument that the proposed exemption 
should not exceed the bounds of the permanent exemption for reverse engineering in 1201(f) 
misunderstands the role of the triennial rulemaking, in which the Librarian may adopt temporary 
exemptions to “accommodate changing marketplace realities and ensure that access to 
copyrighted works for lawful purposes is not unjustifiably diminished,” relative to the 
permanent exemptions enacted by Congress.  See Section 1201 Report at 2 (citing Commerce 
Comm. Report at 35–36). 
1719 See SFC Class Reply at 6–7.  SFC also asks the Librarian to consider under this factor the 
hardship the prohibition against circumvention creates for FOSS owners who seek to investigate 
potential infringement, but are blocked by TPMs and inhibited from circumvention by the threat 
of a section 1201 claim or counterclaim in litigation.  See SFC Class 16 Initial at 10.  As discussed 
above, the Register considered this concern in evaluating opponents’ arguments that adequate 
alternatives to circumvention exist. 
1720 See Section 1201 Report at 125–26. 
1721 SFC Class 16 Reply at 6–7. 

[PAGE 311]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
308 
jailbreaking exemptions for smartphones, tablets, and smart TVs, as well as the 
exemptions for educational, accessibility, and other uses of motion pictures on DVD and 
Blu-ray discs.  As in those contexts, the Register concludes that a limited exemption 
containing appropriate safeguards may properly encompass these types of devices.  
While opponents raise legitimate concerns over piracy, those objections “relate primarily 
to the possibility that the proposed exemption could be abused, not to the purpose and 
character of the activities for which proponents seek an exemption.”1722 
Video game consoles.  The inclusion of video game consoles, however, warrants additional 
scrutiny.  Even after limiting the scope of the proposed class, the use, and the users, and 
adding guardrails against abuse of the exemption to gain unauthorized access to 
expressive content, the Register cannot conclude that, based on the record, proponents 
have demonstrated actual or likely adverse effects on investigating FOSS in video game 
consoles.  Although proponents submit that they have received “credible reports” 
relating to “gaming consoles,” they were unable to provide any examples of where FOSS 
had been investigated or found in such devices.1723  The Office has consistently 
recognized that proposed exemptions involving game consoles raise particular market 
concerns in light of the piracy risk associated with circumvention in this context.1724  
Here, the Register agrees with opponents that the present record with respect to 
consoles is too thin to outweigh this potential risk.  For these reasons, the Register 
concludes that video game consoles should be excluded from the proposed exemption. 
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA recommends granting the proposed exemption, with one change to remove 
language requiring compliance with other applicable laws as a condition of the 
exemption and replace it with a sentence providing notice about compliance with other 
laws.1725  NTIA finds that opponents’ remaining objections to SFC’s amended proposal 
“lack overall validity and substantiation.”1726  First, NTIA concludes that the “legal 
alternatives” proposed by opponents are not feasible because they would require “a 
level of evidence that only the outcome of the petitioned investigation would 
provide.”1727  For similar reasons, NTIA is unpersuaded by opponents’ suggestion that 
users should have particularized knowledge of a potential FOSS infringement to engage 
 
1722 2018 Recommendation at 197. 
1723 See SFC Class 16 Initial at 5; Tr. at 304:04–12 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Chestek, SFC). 
1724 See 2018 Recommendation at 206 (“In multiple past rulemakings, the Office has rejected 
proposed jailbreaking exemptions for video game consoles . . . because of the potential harm to 
the market.”). 
1725 See NTIA Letter at 131, 133. 
1726 Id. at 131. 
1727 Id. at 131–32. 

[PAGE 312]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
309 
in circumvention because gathering this knowledge is “the very purpose of the 
exemption.”1728  Further, NTIA concludes that requiring users to have a good-faith, 
reasonable belief in the need for the investigation is “unnecessary since a good faith 
reasonable belief is already the proponent’s existing best practice.”1729  Finally, NTIA 
does not support a proposed requirement that circumventers “restore, delete, or destroy 
devices and software once the investigation has concluded” because, unlike for repair, 
“there is no need to return the device to an operable condition,” and further uses of a 
circumvented device beyond FOSS investigation would be outside the scope of the 
exemption.1730 
Overall, the Register agrees with NTIA’s comments in support of the SFC’s proposed 
exemption.  The Register, however, does not recommend removal of the provision 
requiring compliance with other laws.  SFC added this limitation to its amended 
proposal and, as NTIA notes, there is no subsequent discussion of its removal in the 
record.1731  Thus, there is insufficient evidence to support a finding of adverse effects 
resulting from the “other laws” provision.  In addition, the Register incorporates a goodfaith, reasonable belief requirement into the regulatory language to align the basis for 
circumvention with SFC’s practices and require other potential users of the proposed 
exemption to follow this standard.  Finally, the Register concludes that an additional 
limitation that devices not be used or maintained in a manner that facilitates 
infringement is appropriate to ensure that circumvented devices are not misused after 
an investigation concludes. 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
After thorough consideration, the Office concludes that proponents have demonstrated 
a need for this exemption and recommends adopting it with the limitations discussed 
above.  First, the purpose of the investigation must be limited to whether a computer 
program potentially infringes FOSS.  Second, the user of the exemption must have a 
good-faith, reasonable belief in the need for the investigation.  Third, because the nature 
of a particular FOSS violation may vary, a user of the exemption must be a party that, if 
noncompliant FOSS were to be discovered, would have standing to bring either a breach 
of license claim or a copyright infringement claim.  Fourth, to further underscore that 
the exemption does not authorize circumvention for purposes going beyond those 
specified, it includes the additional requirement that “the copy of the computer 
program, or the device or machine on which it operates, is not used or maintained in a 
 
1728 Id. at 132. 
1729 Id. at 132–33. 
1730 Id. at 133. 
1731 See id. at 133 n.685. 

[PAGE 313]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
310 
manner that facilitates copyright infringement.”  And finally, the exemption excludes 
video game consoles from the types of devices on which TPMs may be circumvented. 
Accordingly, the Register recommends that the Librarian designate the following class: 
Computer programs, solely for the purpose of investigating a potential 
infringement of free and open source computer programs where: 
(i) The circumvention is undertaken on a lawfully acquired device or 
machine other than a video game console, on which the computer 
program operates; 
(ii) The circumvention is performed by, or at the direction of, a party 
that has a good-faith, reasonable belief in the need for the investigation 
and has standing to bring a breach of license or copyright infringement 
claim;  
(iii) Such circumvention does not constitute a violation of applicable 
law; and  
(iv) The copy of the computer program, or the device or machine on 
which it operates, is not used or maintained in a manner that facilitates 
copyright infringement. 
 
  

[PAGE 314]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
311 
Q. Proposed Class 17: All Works—Accessibility  
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption 
Petitioners American Council of the Blind, American Foundation for the Blind, 
Association for the Education and Rehabilitation of the Blind and Visually Impaired, 
Association of Late-Deafened Adults, Association of Transcribers and Speech-to-Text 
Providers, Association on Higher Education and Disability, Benetech/Bookshare, 
Gallaudet University Technology Access Program, HathiTrust, Hearing Loss Association 
of America, Library Copyright Alliance, National Association of the Deaf, National 
Federation of the Blind, the Perkins Braille & Talking Book Library, and 
Telecommunications for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing, Inc. (collectively, “Accessibility 
Petitioners”)1732 request a new exemption broadly permitting circumvention to address 
the accessibility needs of individuals with disabilities.  Proponents seek an exemption 
allowing circumvention to create accessible versions of any inaccessible copyrighted 
works.  Their requested regulatory language is as follows: 
Any work protected by a technological protection measure where circumvention 
is undertaken for the purpose of creating an accessible version of the work for 
people with disabilities.
1733 
FSF filed a comment expressing general support for this exemption but did not 
provide evidence or substantive arguments regarding the specific proposal.1734  
Joint Creators, DVD CCA and AACS LA, and AAP filed comments opposing the 
proposed exemption.1735   
 
1732 Some of these organizations also filed comments in support of Classes 3 and 8.  For simplicity, 
in this section, “ Accessibility Petitioners” refers to the coalition of accessibility groups who filed 
comments in support of Class 17. 
1733 Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Initial at 10.   
1734 FSF Class 17 Initial at 2. 
1735 Joint Creators Class 17 Opp’n at 4 (objecting in part because proposed exemption language 
“makes no reference to remuneration or payment of a fair price to obtain a copy” and “lacks a 
workable definition of the users covered”); DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 17 Opp’n at 3 (arguing 
proposed language “far exceeds the parameters of a permissible class”); AAP Class 17 Opp’n at 1 
(faulting proponents’ “failure to properly identify a particular class of copyrighted works”) 

[PAGE 315]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
312 
b. Overview of Issues 
Proponents request an exemption permitting circumvention of “all works” for the 
purpose of creating accessible versions.1736  They argue that Congress has evinced a 
“clear intent to make all the features of the information age accessible to people with 
disabilities,” and that as a matter of “civil and human rights,” individuals with 
disabilities require a “broad and clear exemption” so that they can “adapt copyrighted 
works for their own, individual needs.”1737  Proponents believe that “the difficult 
challenge of interpreting a patchwork of underinclusive Section 1201 exemptions” leave 
disabled individuals unable to engage in “new non-infringing accessibility uses [that] 
arise as facts on the ground change.”
1738  Specifically, proponents fault the triennial, 
class-by-class nature of the section 1201 rulemaking, which they view as a barrier to 
disabled individuals and third parties who want to engage in creative solutions to 
accessibility issues soon after they are identified.
1739  In a sense, proponents seek a single 
exemption that would function similarly to the permanent statutory exceptions to 
section 1201, some of which are also not specific to a particular category of copyrighted 
work.1740   
Opponents object to this class primarily on the grounds that the statute does not give the 
Librarian the authority to adopt a class consisting of “all works” sharing a particular 
 
1736 Proponents describe their exemption broadly as permitting circumvention “for non-infringing 
accessibility uses.”  Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Initial at 10; see also Tr. at 69:20–70:01 (April 
5, 2021) (Reid, American Council of the Blind) (advocating in favor of broad regulatory language 
because “there are a wide array of circumstances” in which someone may need to “engage in 
accessibility”); Tr. at 71:01–71:05 (April 5, 2021) (Reid, American Council of the Blind) (“this 
exemption is designed to enable accessibility activities by individuals and third parties that may 
not be bound at all by disability law but are, in fact, on sort of the cutting edge of making 
copyrighted works accessible”). 
1737 Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Initial at 8–10. 
1738 Id. at 8. 
1739 See id. at 8 (arguing “creative third-party approaches to accessibility can arise in response to 
new technological barriers” but are currently “stifled by the necessity of waiting years on end 
and the burden of navigating the triennial review”); id. at 9 (advocating for an exemption that 
“make[s] clear that the widespread need for accessibility . . . can be met without waiting for years 
for the instantiation of the triennial review or the Office’s lengthy review”); Accessibility 
Petitioners Class 17 Reply at 8 (advocating for “a broad, clear, efficient exemption for accessibility 
for people with disabilities, rather than the current piecemeal approach, which is encumbered by 
three-year delays”). 
1740 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(h) (creating exception, regardless of copyrighted work, where component 
or part “prevent[s] the access of minors to material on the Internet”), (i) (creating exception 
unbounded by category of work where, among other things, a technological protection measure 
“contains the capability of collecting or disseminating personally identifying information”). 

[PAGE 316]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
313 
attribute.1741  DVD CCA and AACS LA emphasize the Office’s prior analysis of how to 
define a class of works and argue that “proponents have not provided any persuasive 
basis for the Register to alter her interpretation of the rulemaking” and that the 
proposed class is “simply impermissibly broad.”1742  Joint Creators similarly argue that 
the proposed exemption “is beyond the Librarian’s authority to adopt” because, in their 
view, “different categories of works present unique circumstances.”1743  For example, 
Joint Creators note that sound recordings “are largely available without access controls” 
in many formats, whereas an exemption for video games would raise unique issues of 
consumer privacy and cybersecurity.
1744  Joint Creators also fault the proposed 
exemption language as failing to impose any limits to reduce the risk of market harm to 
copyright owners, such as requiring that circumvented copies be lawfully acquired, 
limiting distribution of accessible material to individuals with disabilities, or imposing a 
market check to so that the exemption only applies to works that are unavailable in 
accessible form.1745  Finally, Joint Creators also argue that the proposed exemption “lacks 
a workable definition of the users covered.”1746 
Proponents advance three key legal arguments to support the proposed class.  First, they 
argue that, notwithstanding the Office’s prior determinations,1747 a “class of works” 
can—and should— be defined to span multiple section 102 categories, provided they 
share the common attribute of “works [that] are inaccessible to their users.”1748  Second, 
they argue that making inaccessible copyrighted works accessible is an 
 
1741 See Joint Creators Class 17 Opp’n at 2–3 (arguing “all works” exemptions do not comply with 
the Office’s “longstanding regulatory guideposts”); DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 17 Opp’n at 3 
(“the proposed class for all copyrighted works, as the NPRM noted, far exceeds the parameters of 
a permissible class”); AAP Class 17 Opp’n at 2 (“ AAP agrees with the Register’s assessment [in 
the NPRM] of the Librarian’s authority under section 1201”). 
1742 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 17 Opp’n at 4–7, 8. 
1743 Joint Creators Class 17 Opp’n at 3 & n.9 (quoting NPRM at 65,309). 
1744 Id. at 3–4. 
1745  Id. (noting that “the proposed exemption language does not limit circumvention to motion 
pictures or other works that are not available in accessible formats” and providing examples of 
limitations not proposed). 
1746 Id. at 4. 
1747 See, e.g., Section 1201 Report at 26 (“ As a starting point, each class of works must be a subset of 
one of the broad categories of works . . . identified in section 102”) (internal quotations omitted); 
2018 Recommendation at 13 (similar). 
1748 Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Initial at 28. 

[PAGE 317]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
314 
“uncontroversially fair, noninfringing use”1749 that the prohibition on circumvention 
prevents.  Third, they argue that the statutory factors favor granting a “broad, general 
exemption for accessibility” so that individuals with disabilities are not burdened by 
repeated participation in the section 1201 rulemaking and are instead able to “creatively 
push technical boundaries and fill accessibility gaps” in the market.1750   
As the Office has stated, “[g]enerally, public policy favors removing impediments to 
access for individuals with disabilities.”1751  Accessibility is “not merely a matter of 
convenience,” but it ensures that individuals with disabilities have “meaningful access 
to the same content that individuals without such impairments are able to perceive.”1752  
For years, therefore, the Office has advocated a comprehensive review of section 121 so 
that it can be updated to address changes in the marketplace and the modern needs of 
the disabled community.1753  And the Register has remained mindful that for individuals 
with disabilities, proposed exemptions “may represent the difference between having 
and not having access to the works” available to others.1754  For these reasons, the Office 
has recommended that Congress enact a permanent exemption for accessibility into 
law.1755 
 
1749 Id. at 18–19 (citing Sony v. University City Studios, 464 U.S. 417 (1984) and Authors Guild v. 
HathiTrust, 755 F.3d 87 (2d. Cir. 2014)); see also Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Reply at 20 
(arguing that “accessibility is fair use” and thus “the proposed exemption is plainly confined by 
noninfringing fair use boundaries”). 
1750 Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Initial at 23–27 (using COVID-19 pandemic as example of 
unanticipated situation where increased use of inaccessible digital resulted in barriers for 
individuals who were blind or visually impaired); id. at 8–10 (arguing that “new barriers to 
accessibility [can] materialize during the interim period of each triennial review” and a broad 
exemption would allow for individuals with disabilities to engage in self-help or seek assistance 
without the need to wait for the conclusion of the next rulemaking); Accessibility Petitioners 
Class 17 Reply at 12–14 (arguing in favor of a broad exemption because individuals with 
disabilities “are typically the most knowledgeable about their own needs and limits, and 
therefore are the best parties for determining what accommodations are necessary”). 
1751 2018 Recommendation at 104 (quoting 2012 Recommendation at 21). 
1752 2012 Recommendation at 22. 
1753 See, e.g., The Register’s Perspective on Copyright Review: Hearing Before the H. Comm. on the 
Judiciary, 114th Cong. 26 (2015) (statement of Maria A. Pallante, Register of Copyrights) 
(supporting legislative attention so section 121 can “better address the current needs of the 
visually impaired community and developments in the commercial marketplace”). 
1754 2018 Recommendation at 104.  
1755 Section 1201 Report at 86 (recommending making the accessibility exemption for e-books 
permanent “[i]n light of the repeating granting of the temporary exemption [for e-books] and the 
underlying public policy of reducing burdens on people who are blind or print-disabled”).   

[PAGE 318]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
315 
For the reasons explained below, the record for this class and the policy interests in 
accessibility support an exemption to enable individuals with disabilities to use alternate 
input devices to play video games.  The record does not, however, support an 
exemption covering other copyrighted works or accessibility uses. 
2. Discussion 
a. Scope of the Proposed Class 
As discussed above, section 1201 provides that the Librarian may adopt exemptions for 
“users of a copyrighted work which is in a particular class of copyrighted works, if such 
persons are, or are likely to be in the succeeding 3-year period, adversely affected by 
virtue of such prohibition in their ability to make noninfringing uses of that particular 
class of works.”1756  In considering potential exemptions, the Librarian is to determine 
whether such users are, or are likely to be, “adversely affected by the prohibition under 
subparagraph (A) in their ability to make noninfringing uses under this title of a 
particular class of copyrighted works.”1757  The legislative history states that Congress 
“intend[ed] that the ‘particular class of copyrighted works’ be a narrow and focused 
subset of the broad categories of works of authorship than is identified in Section 102 of 
the Copyright Act.”
1758  The House Manager’s Report similarly described section 102 
categories as “a starting point for this decision” that must then be further narrowed to 
ensure that the works within a single class are affected by the prohibition on 
circumvention “in the same way.”1759   
In the NPRM, the Office noted that “[a]s presently suggested, this proposed exemption 
is beyond the Librarian’s authority to adopt because it does not meet the statutory 
requirement to describe “a particular class of copyrighted works.”1760  The Office further 
explained that “petitioners are required to establish ‘distinct, verifiable and measurable 
impacts’ on noninfringing uses, and those impacts must be caused by the statutory 
prohibition on circumvention.”1761 
Proponents argue that the Office’s approach to defining a class of works is “based off a 
faulty interpretation” of the statute and that the Register should instead recommend a 
 
1756 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(B). 
1757 Id. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 
1758 Commerce Comm. Report at 38. 
1759 House Manager’s Report at 7 (providing example of books and computer software as literary 
works under section 102 that would not experience the same adverse effects from section 
1201(a)). 
1760 NPRM at 65,309. 
1761 Id. 

[PAGE 319]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
316 
class of works sharing “obvious common attributes,” users, and uses, regardless of 
section 102 category.1762  In proponents’ view, the proposed class satisfies the suggested 
standard because it is limited to users who “are either unable to access the works” “or 
are attempting to make such works accessible,” and because it allows “an indisputably 
fair and noninfringing use.”
1763 
Proponents also argue that there is precedent for the Office revisiting how to define a 
class of works, and they point to the Office previously crafting narrow classes based on 
their use or user, rather than simply identifying subcategories of works within the 
section 102 categories.  For example, proponents note
1764 that in 2006, the Office 
concluded that a class of works could start with a section 102 class and then 
“additionally be refined” by the use or user of the class, even though it had previously 
concluded that such narrowing was “not permissible” under the statute.
1765  Proponents 
also point to the Register’s creation of classes for “video games,” which are not a section 
102 class but are instead comprised of both audiovisual and literary elements by virtue 
of their visual display and underlying source code.1766  In their view, the Register’s 
adoption of classes for video games further illustrates her flexibility to adopt a class 
spanning “all works” that are inaccessible. 
After considering the record for this proceeding, the analysis of prior proceedings, and 
the statutory text and legislative history, the Register concludes that neither she nor the 
Librarian has the authority to define the broad class of works that proponents request.  It 
has been, and remains, the Register’s view that the statutory reference to “a particular 
class of copyrighted works” does not permit defining a class to encompass all categories 
of works, with limitations based solely on the type of use or user.
1767  For that reason, the 
 
1762 Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Initial at 27–28. 
1763 Id. at 28. 
1764 Id. at 29–30. 
1765 2006 Recommendation at 10; contra 2003 Recommendation at 84–85 (concluding that usebased classes of works were “inconsistent with the narrowly tailored authority provided to the 
Librarian of Congress to exempt particular classes of adversely affected works”); Exemption to 
Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 
65 Fed. Reg. 64,556, 64,562 (Oct. 27, 2000) (rejecting NTIA suggestion of use-based classes because 
the “only examples cited and guidance provided in the legislative history” led to the conclusion 
that classes must be defined “primarily by reference to the attributes of the works” rather than 
their users or uses). 
1766 Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Initial at 30 (citing 2010 Recommendation at 178). 
1767 For that reason, when the Register began considering uses and users in 2006, she cautioned 
that “classifying a work solely by reference to the medium on which the work appears, or the 
access control measures applied to the work,” is beyond what Congress contemplated for this 
proceeding.  2006 Recommendation at 10 (citing 2003 Recommendation at 11–13). 

[PAGE 320]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
317 
Office has repeatedly declined to recommend proposed exemptions that have failed to 
define the class of works to be covered with sufficient particularity.1768  For example, the 
Office has rejected requests to recommend a class of works for all fair uses1769—a class 
that proponents suggested in a post-hearing submission.1770 
In arguing for a different reading, proponents point to the Commerce Committee 
Report’s discussion of the rulemaking’s role as a “fail-safe” mechanism to address 
unanticipated changes in the marketplace, as well as the legislative history for section 
102, which describes the categories as “illustrative” and containing areas of potential 
overlap.
1771  Neither source of legislative history, however, can override the statutory 
directive that exemptions be defined based on “a particular class of copyrighted works.”  
In any event, the statements relied on by proponents are not inconsistent with the 
Office’s interpretation.  Moreover, the legislative history of the 1976 Copyright Act—
which predates the DMCA by twenty years—does not provide persuasive authority for 
construing the language of section 1201.   
While the Register is unable to recommend a single exemption covering all categories of 
copyrighted works, there is no dispute that proponents seek to access works protected 
by copyright.  And there is precedent for evaluating exemptions for a single use that 
might involve separate exemptions for separate categories of works.1772  The Register 
 
1768 See, e.g., 2018 Recommendation at 131–32; Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of 
Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 79 Fed. Reg. 73,856, 73,859 (Dec. 
14, 2014); 2006 Recommendation at 17–19. 
1769 See 2003 Recommendation at 82–84 (rejecting request for class of all works for “noninfringing 
uses, e.g., fair use and private uses” because such a class would be “a blanket exemption for all 
works— in effect, an administrative abrogation of §1201(a)(1)”); see also Section 1201 Report at 
103–04 (noting that Congress created the triennial proceeding as the mechanism to consider the 
impact of section 1201 on fair uses and seeing “no basis for abandoning that basic framework”). 
1770 See Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Post-Hearing Resp. at 21–22 (June 4, 2021) (“object[ing] to 
a specific remuneration requirement” and stating that the regulatory language should at most 
“simply requir[e] an underlying, noninfringing, accessibility-directed use” so that the legality of 
circumvention would “be handled by the contours of fair use”). 
1771 See Tr. at 104:10–105:15 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Hersch, American Council of the Blind); Commerce 
Comm. Report at 36 (addressing role of rulemaking as a “’fail-safe’ mechanism”); H.R. REP. NO. 
94-1476 at 53 (1976) (describing the “seven broad categories” in section 102 and explaining the list 
“does not necessarily exhaust the scope of ‘original works of authorship’”).  But see COMPENDIUM 
(THIRD) § 307 (section 102 gives courts “the flexibility to interpret the scope of the existing subject 
matter categories, but only Congress has the authority to create entirely new categories of 
authorship”). 
1772 See 2015 Recommendation at 107–08 (considering dual requests for space-shifting that 
involved literary works and audiovisual works).  In this proceeding, the Register has considered 
 

[PAGE 321]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
318 
will therefore consider Class 17 a request for separate exemptions covering each section 
102 category, with each exemption seeking to permit circumvention “for the purpose of 
creating an accessible version of the work for people with disabilities.”1773  
b. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Accessibility Petitioners argue that the proposed exemption will enable noninfringing 
use because “[m]aking works accessible is an uncontroversially noninfringing fair 
use.”1774  The first fair use factor considers the purpose and character of the use, 
including whether it is transformative.  In Authors Guild v. HathiTrust, the court 
concluded that converting inaccessible works into accessible ones for print-disabled 
users was not transformative because it did not “add[] something new” to the 
underlying work but instead had the same purpose as that of the works’ authors: to 
allow the works to be read or listened to.1775  But the court noted that lack of 
transformativeness “does not end the analysis,”1776 and it ultimately concluded that this 
factor favored fair use.  The court relied on the Supreme Court’s decision in Sony Corp. of 
America v. Universal City Studios, Inc., which noted that “[m]aking a copy of a 
copyrighted work for the convenience of a blind person is expressly identified by the 
House Committee Report as an example of fair use, with no suggestion that anything 
more than a purpose to entertain or to inform need motivate the copying.”
1777  The 
HathiTrust court also found it significant that Congress has repeatedly enacted 
legislation designed to ensure that individuals with disabilities have equal opportunity 
and can fully participate in society.1778   
The Register agrees that creating accessible versions of inaccessible copyrighted works, 
while not transformative, is a favored purpose for fair use.  The Office has recognized 
that individuals with disabilities seek accessible copyrighted works not merely as “a 
 
text and data mining uses for both motion pictures and literary works in Class 7 as well as 
preservation uses for both computer programs and video games in Class 14. 
1773 Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Initial at 10. 
1774 Id. at 18. 
1775 755 F.3d 87, 101–02 (2d. Cir. 2014) (noting that providing for accessibility “enables a larger 
audience to read those works, but the underlying purpose of the HDL’s use is the same as the 
author’s original purpose”); see also Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 579 (1994) 
(transformative uses “add[] something new, with a further purpose or different character, 
altering the first with new expression, meaning, or message”). 
1776 HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 101. 
1777 Id. at 102 (quoting Sony v. University City Studios, 464 U.S. 455 n.40 (1984)). 
1778 Id. (quoting 42 U.S.C. § 12101(a)(7)). 

[PAGE 322]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
319 
matter of convenience,”1779 but because those works are necessary for them to fully 
participate in society.   The Register accordingly concludes that this factor weighs 
strongly in favor of fair use. 
For the second fair use factor, the nature of the work, proponents argue that the works 
are “heterogeneous” but do not provide additional analysis other than noting that the 
second factor is not dispositive.1780  Because the proposed exemption would permit 
creating accessible versions of all copyrighted works, including of highly creative ones 
“closer to the core of intended copyright protection than others,” the Register finds that 
this factor does not weigh in favor of fair use.1781  This factor, however, is of limited 
significance to the overall analysis.1782  As to the third fair use factor, the amount and 
substantiality of the work used, proponents do not squarely address how much of a 
work is used when converting an inaccessible version into an accessible one.1783  Courts 
have recognized, however, that this factor does not necessarily disfavor fair use where 
copying a work in its entirety is necessary to achieve a favored purpose.
1784  Moreover, 
the court in HathiTrust and the Office have found that copying a full work to make it 
accessible does not weigh against fair use.1785  The same conclusion is appropriate here. 
Under the fourth fair use factor, proponents suggest that because of “the routine failure 
of copyright holders to address markets of accessible works,” the exemption as 
formulated would not cause significant market harm to copyright owners, who choose 
“not to serve the market of people with disabilities.”1786  Opponents dispute this 
 
1779 See 2012 Recommendation at 22 (noting that e-book exemption was “not merely a matter of 
convenience, but is instead intended to enable individuals who are blind or visually impaired to 
have meaningful access to the same content that individuals without such impairments are able 
to perceive”). 
1780 Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Initial at 21 (noting that the works at issue in this class “share 
a common characteristic of inaccessibility, [but] the formats and genres come in many different 
forms”).  
1781 See Campbell, 510 U.S. at 586.   
1782 See HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 102 (quoting Davis v. Gap, Inc., 246 F.3d 152, 175 (2d Cir. 2001) (“The 
second statutory factor, the nature of the copyrighted work . . . , is rarely found to be 
determinative.”)). 
1783 See Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Initial at 21–22 (stating in heading that the amount used 
“varies” but providing no additional detail in text). 
1784 HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 98 (“For some purposes, it may be necessary to copy the entire 
copyrighted work, in which case Factor Three does not weigh against a finding of fair use”); see 
also Campbell, 510 U.S. at 586–87 (“we recognize that the extent of permissible copying varies with 
the purpose and character of the use”). 
1785 HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 98, 102–03; 2018 Recommendation at 98-99. 
1786 Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Initial at 22–23. 

[PAGE 323]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
320 
characterization, commenting that “many motion pictures are available in accessible 
formats,” pointing to “efforts to expand accessibility features on consoles and video 
games,” and stating that their industries view accessibility to be “extremely 
important.”1787  But proponents argue that the proposed exemption would address 
“accessibility gaps” where, even if a work is made accessible for some types of 
disabilities, smaller populations with less common disabilities will continue to have 
unmet needs.
1788 
In the NPRM, the Office noted that proponents must “provide evidence and legal 
analysis sufficient to enable the Office to make a particularized assessment” of potential 
market harm, including by providing information about “the availability of accessibleformat versions of works in the marketplace.”1789  Proponents did not discuss these 
issues, instead “object[ing] to a specific remuneration requirement.”1790  Opponents 
express concern that, under the exemption as proposed, circumvention would be 
allowed even where accessible versions have been made available in the marketplace, 
resulting in remediated copies displacing sales of accessible copies.
1791  They also raise 
concerns that remediated material could be further distributed to individuals who do 
not have disabilities, substituting for sales of authorized copies in the market.1792   
In addressing exemptions in related contexts, the Office has identified certain 
considerations that are relevant under the fourth factor.  First, the Office has found it 
significant whether accessible versions of the relevant works are currently available, 
pointing out that where “an accessible version is not available in the marketplace,” 
creating such a version is unlikely to harm the market for the work.1793  Second, the 
Office has noted that the fourth factor analysis is affected by whether the copies subject 
 
1787 Joint Creators Class 17 Opp’n at 3–4. 
1788 See Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Initial at 10; Tr. at 115:08–117:01 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Bernard, 
University of Michigan) (explaining the distinction between making a work “accessible for large 
populations of people who have disabilities” and accessible “for all of the people who have 
disabilities” as well as that “sometimes companies can’t make it more accessible or won’t make it 
more accessible” for certain populations). 
1789 NPRM at 65,309. 
1790 Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Post-Hearing Resp. at 21–22 (June 4, 2021). 
1791 See Joint Creators Class 17 Opp’n at 3 (noting that “many motion pictures are available in 
accessible formats” but exemption was not limited “to motion pictures or other works that are 
not available in accessible formats”). 
1792 See id. at 4 (raising concerns about proposed exemption’s failure to “disallow further 
dissemination of the copies beyond disabled individuals with a need for them” or to require that 
copies “be protected by any security measures to avoid further dissemination”). 
1793 2018 Recommendation at 100. 

[PAGE 324]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
321 
to an exemption are lawfully obtained.1794  Acquiring copies in violation of law “would 
weigh heavily against a fair use finding, as it plainly is conduct that, were it to become 
widespread, would adversely affect the . . . copyright owner’s potential market.”1795  
Finally, to protect against downstream market harms, the Office has included language 
in prior exemptions to prevent copies from being disseminated to parties other than the 
intended beneficiaries.1796 
The Register continues to believe that these limitations are critical to the fair use 
analysis.  The Register therefore will assume for purposes of this analysis that the 
proposed exemption is limited to lawfully obtained copies of works and would allow 
circumvention only where the user has determined that accessible copies are not 
reasonably available at a fair price.  The Register will also assume that accessible copies 
made under any exemption will not be further distributed to individuals who do not 
need them for accessibility purposes. 
Subject to these limitations, the Register concludes that the fourth factor would likely 
weigh in favor of fair use.  As the HathiTrust court found, when copyright owners have 
chosen to “forgo royalties that are generated through the sale of [accessible copies]” by 
not selling such versions, the fourth factor weighs in favor of fair use.1797  And assuming 
that the copies are lawfully obtained and are distributed only to those who need them, 
copyright owners’ concerns about market substitution are significantly mitigated.   
Based on the foregoing, the Register concludes that proponents met their burden to 
show that at least some of the activity in which they seek to engage is likely fair use.  The 
Register therefore will consider whether proponents have demonstrated that they are, or 
are likely to be, adversely affected in their ability to engage in such uses with respect to 
particular categories of copyrighted works.    
 
1794 See 2012 Recommendation at 24–25 (recommending exemption for e-book accessibility where 
the work was “lawfully obtained by a blind or other person with a disability”). 
1795 2018 Recommendation at 298. 
1796 See id. at 32–33 (requiring exemption beneficiaries to use TPMs to “reasonably prevent 
unauthorized further dissemination” of works to align with section 110(2)); id. at 110 (imposing 
similar limitation on accessibility exemption to “reflect the record testimony” that accessible 
videos are made available to students through secure distribution platforms); cf. 17 U.S.C. § 
121(b)(1)(B) (requiring copies made under this section to “bear a notice that any further 
reproduction or distribution in a format other than an accessible format is an infringement”). 
1797 HathiTrust, 755 F.3d at 103 (quoting party’s brief and citing party testimony); see also H.R. REP. 
NO. 94-1476 at 73 (noting that accessible copies of books were “not usually made by the 
publishers for commercial distribution”). 

[PAGE 325]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
322 
c. Asserted Adverse Effects1798  
Because proponents are presumed to “have greater knowledge of and access to evidence 
demonstrating adverse effects on noninfringing uses,” they bear the burden of 
producing evidence of adverse effects.1799  This evidence “cannot be hypothetical, 
theoretical, or speculative, but must be real, tangible, and concrete.”1800  The Register will 
recommend exemptions where the preponderance of the evidence shows that users are, 
or are likely to be, adversely affected in their ability to make a noninfringing use.1801   
The Office has given proponents multiple opportunities to offer evidence of the harms 
that this proposed exemption is meant to rectify.  In the NPRM, the Office cautioned 
proponents that they would need to “establish distinct, verifiable, and measurable 
impacts” on noninfringing use and noted that it was “not clear to what extent various 
TPMs are effectively applied to every category of work in section 102, some of which 
may not readily lend themselves to such measures (e.g., sculptural works).”1802  In their 
comments, proponents provided some examples of works and TPMs, but they broadly 
“urge[d] the Office not to impose on people with disabilities the burden of pinpointing 
every detail and every instance of problematic TPMs.”1803  At the hearing, the Office 
again pressed proponents to explain the basis for their view that “there are adequate 
commonalities across the various [TPMs], types of works, as well as effects on the 
market or adverse effects, to make this a suitable exemption.”1804  Proponents did not 
point to specific TPMs or works but instead made a broader policy argument that the 
parties “should agree upon a system that incorporates accessibility as an inherent aspect 
of copyright law and determine how best to best guard against abuses without putting 
that burden on people with disabilities.”
1805  In a post-hearing letter, the Office asked 
 
1798 As discussed below, in this class the issue of causation is intertwined with the question of 
whether proponents have provided sufficient evidence of adverse effects resulting from TPMs.  
The Register therefore will consider those issues together. 
1799 Section 1201 Report at 110 (noting that “as a practical matter, the burden of production will 
effectively be on exemption proponents”) (emphasis omitted). 
1800 Id. at 120. 
1801 Id. at 111. 
1802 NPRM at 65,309 (internal quotation marks omitted). 
1803 Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Initial at 10–14; see also Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 
Reply at 8 (criticizing case-by-case analysis of harm as a “piecemeal approach, which is 
encumbered by three-year delays”). 
1804 Tr. at 78:22–79:01 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Smith, U.S. Copyright Office). 
1805 Tr. at 83:01–05 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Rosenblum, National Association for the Deaf); see also Tr. at 
79:18–80:09 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Rosenblum, National Association for the Deaf) (testifying that some 
caption projects receive DMCA notices based on allegations such activity is infringing, and that 
 

[PAGE 326]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
323 
proponents to provide additional information about how TPMs adversely affect 
“particular categories of works as set forth in section 102” for the Register’s analysis.1806  
Proponents responded by “urg[ing] the Office to reconsider taking the same piecemeal 
approach that underpins other accessibility-related exemptions from Section 1201’s 
anticircumvention measures and grant the exemption as proposed.”1807  They did, 
however, provide additional information relating to certain types of works—specifically, 
audiovisual works, video games, literary works, and computer software in medical 
devices.1808 
After reviewing the full record, the Register is unable conclude that proponents have 
met their burden of producing “real, tangible, and concrete” evidence of adverse effects 
from a sufficiently wide array of TPMs and categories of works to justify the exemption 
as proposed.  While proponents provide significant detail about accessibility issues for 
users of copyrighted works, many of their examples do not mention TPMs.
1809  Instead, 
proponents have provided evidence showing that there are many situations in which 
mass market technology does not account for the needs of particular members of the 
 
“[i]f the provision of captioning or audio description on any copyrighted content were not 
considered a copyright infringement simply because it is the provision of accessibility, then we 
would not have this problem”); Tr. at 82:03–10 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Rosenblum, National Association 
for the Deaf) (arguing that “the policy for copyright” should not require disability advocates to 
provide “each specific instance of inaccessibility” in the rulemaking proceeding to justify an 
exemption); Tr. at 82:18–19 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Rosenblum, National Association for the Deaf) (“ As a 
matter of public policy, this choice is easy.”); Tr. at 90:03–12 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Bernard, University of 
Michigan) (arguing that statute “doesn’t prescribe a circumstance where you couldn’t identify all 
classes of works that meet a certain set of criteria” and that the Office “is well-situated to address 
this fundamental public policy concern”). 
1806 Copyright Office Class 17 Post-Hearing Letter at 2 (May 6, 2021). 
1807 Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Post-Hearing Resp. at 1 (June 4, 2021). 
1808 Id. at 6–13. 
1809 For example, proponents discuss research projects “identif[ied] and imagine[d]” by Professor 
Christian Vogler at Gallaudet University, such as letting users modify the format, pace, and 
content of subtitles in a given audiovisual work or interact with a tactile interface for digitized 
images.  Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Initial at 16–17.  There is no suggestion, however, that 
TPMs protecting the image or the audiovisual work (or its captions) would prevent these 
projects.  Similarly, proponents note attorney Haben Girma’s work developing a solution that 
allowed her to have someone type spoken words on a Bluetooth keyboard and have that text 
reproduced on a Braille computer for her to read and orally reply to.  Accessibility Petitioners 
Class 17 Reply at 12–13 (citing Kimberly Adams, Innovating for Disability, Because You Have To, 
MARKETPLACE (Aug. 11, 2020), https://www.marketplace.org/shows/marketplace-tech/disabilityinnovation-assistive-technology-braille/).  Neither Ms. Girma’s interview nor proponents’ 
comment explains how or whether TPMs interfered with her technical solution. 

[PAGE 327]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
324 
disabled community, who are left to design their own solutions.1810  The Register credits 
proponents’ evidence and testimony that the disabled community is frequently faced 
with accessibility gaps as a result of designers not taking their needs into account.  But 
Congress created this proceeding to address the harm from technological protection 
measures that inhibit noninfringing uses of copyrighted works.  With the exception of a 
few instances, discussed below, proponents have not shown that these accessibility gaps 
are the result of TPMs, as opposed to, for example, the failure of the commercial 
marketplace to address accessibility needs.   
The Register understands proponents’ argument to be that, given a significant lack of 
accessible materials in the market, proponents should be able to create works that fit 
their needs, and an exemption will allow them to circumvent technological protection 
measures when those measures stand in the way of that process.1811  But proponents bear 
the burden of providing sufficient evidence for the Register to conclude that adverse 
effects, as a result of TPMs, are “not merely possible, but probable” across all 
copyrighted works.1812  To be clear, the Register does not expect proponents to provide 
evidence of every type of TPM and the specific accessibility use it inhibits.1813  But 
 
1810 See, e.g., Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Initial at 12 (discussing colorblind viewers of the 
2018 World Cup unable to distinguish between the jerseys of the competing teams); Rebecca 
Seales, World Cup 2018: Why millions of fans see the football like this, BBC News (July 11, 2018), 
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-44535687 (noting colorblind issue and solutions such as 
changing stadium signage and redesigning ticketing websites); Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 
Initial at 26 (noting that most websites fail to fully comply with the Web Content Accessibility 
Guidelines 2.0 and that Zoom pinning feature that can help with interpretation is not available 
for users by default); Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Reply at 13 (giving example of YouTube 
creator and gamer WallsiesDGP who created his own system for playing games because 
traditional input methods did not work for him and alternatives in the market were dramatically 
more expensive than a homemade solution).  
1811 See Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Initial at 9 (suggesting exemption will ensure the 
disabled community “can have some means of engaging in self-help or seeking the assistance of 
third parties to access those works on equal terms when copyright holders fail to make access 
available”); Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Reply at 12 (“people with disabilities themselves are 
typically the most knowledgeable about their own needs and limits, and therefore are the best 
parties for determining what accommodations are necessary in order to allow them the ability to 
meaningfully access content”); Accessibility Petitioner Class 17 Post-Hearing Resp. at 3 (June 4, 
2021) (describing exemption as allowing the disabled community “to flexibly access copyrighted 
works on equitable terms”). 
1812 See Section 1201 Report at 121. 
1813 Contra Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Initial at 14 (suggesting Office’s approach imposes 
“the burden of pinpointing every detail and every instance of problematic TPMs”).   

[PAGE 328]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
325 
proponents must offer sufficient information to allow the Office to fairly assess the 
extent to which TPMs impede or are likely to impede the uses being proposed.1814   
As noted above, the Register will treat the current proposal as a request for separate 
accessibility exemptions for each category of copyrightable work.  Viewed in that light, 
there is not enough evidence to show adverse effects for most categories.  For example, 
proponents do not address literary works in their written comments, and their posthearing letter states only that it is “not clear” whether the new recommended exemption 
for Class 8 would fully address accessibility issues as to such works.1815  Nor have 
proponents provided evidence of the need to circumvent TPMs on sound recordings.  
Instead, at the hearing, proponents testified that “generally, sound recordings don’t 
have technological protections.”1816  There is similarly not evidence of an inability to 
access musical compositions, dramatic works, choreographic works, sculptural works, 
or architectural works as a result of technological protection measures.
1817   
The Register also finds that proponents have not made a showing of adverse effects on 
noninfringing accessibility uses of computer programs.  Proponents’ record for 
computer programs is focused on medical device software and specifically discusses the 
ability of an individual with diabetes to modify the software on their insulin pump to 
 
1814 Cf. 2018 Recommendation at 299–302 (recommending removal of device limitation for security 
research exemption because proponents had offered examples of a broad array of device types, 
such as cryptographic banking, avionics, toll collection systems, and non-implantable medical 
devices, as well as “a variety of TPMs” for which the adverse effects were the same).   
1815 Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Post-Hearing Resp. at 11–12 (June 4, 2021) (agreeing that 
“many—or perhaps all —[accessibility] circumstances will be sp ecifically covered” by section 121 
and the corresponding language in Class 8 but suggesting Class 17 could “eliminate any 
uncertainty”). 
1816 Tr. at 91:01–02 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Band, Library Copyright Alliance).  In their post-hearing letter, 
proponents offer brief examples of technologies that could be adversely affected by TPMs, but 
these examples are too speculative to serve as the evidentiary basis for this exemption.  See 
Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Post-Hearing Resp at 18–19 (June 4, 2021) (providing two 
examples of hypothetical uses for sound recordings and providing four examples of hypothetical 
uses of musical works, two of which involved bundled audiovisual displays and three of which 
are digital sound recordings).   
1817 Proponents briefly suggest that audiovisual recordings of some of these works could 
hypothetically be encumbered by TPMs that prevent the use of software that analyzes and 
describes those works in an accessible way, but in such a situation the relevant class of works 
would be audiovisual works, not choreographic or other works.  See Accessibility Petitioners 
Class 17 Post-Hearing Resp. at 18 (June 4, 2021) (providing two examples of applications 
generating captions or audio descriptions of a “digital recording” of a choreographic or dramatic 
work). 

[PAGE 329]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
326 
administer insulin automatically based on glucose levels.1818  Though proponents 
suggest that under current law, “chronic illnesses are often considered disabilities,”1819 
the Register disagrees that modifying medical device software by those with such 
illnesses is within the scope of a class of works addressing accessibility.  This exemption 
is predicated on the argument that “[m]aking works accessible to people with sensory 
disabilities” is fair use.1820  But the software on an insulin pump in not “inaccessible” to 
someone with diabetes in the same sense that an audiovisual work is inaccessible to 
someone who is partially deaf.  Moreover, proposed exemptions to facilitate access to 
software in medical devices are separately considered in Classes 9 and 12.  And because 
medical devices are the only basis for including software in this class, the Register finds 
that proponents have not shown an adverse effect on noninfringing use from their 
inability to circumvent TPMs on computer programs. 
Proponents have, however, provided sufficient evidence for the Register to consider the 
adverse effects on noninfringing use with respect to two types of works: video games 
and audiovisual works protected by Encrypted Media Extensions (“EMEs”).  Each is 
discussed below. 
i. Video Game Accessibility  
For video games, proponents raise two types of adverse effects.  First, proponents 
suggest that individuals with disabilities may have difficulty using their own input 
devices, such as controllers or mouse and keyboard alternatives.1821  Second, proponents 
point to game design decisions that create accessibility issues, such as the formatting (or 
lack) of captions for in-game dialogue and short timing windows for taking certain 
actions (“quick time events”) that may be difficult for some disabled gamers.
1822  
Proponents argue that video games have TPMs that prevent the modification of game 
 
1818 Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Initial at 12–13 (discussing software patch for the FreeStyle 
LibreLink); Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Post-Hearing Resp. at 12–13 (June 4, 2021) 
(providing additional information about medical devices).   
1819 Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Post-Hearing Resp. at 13 (June 4, 2021). 
1820 Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Initial at 19. 
1821 See Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Initial at 13 (citing GameGuard TPM as limiting use of 
input hardware other than “a standard keyboard and mouse”); Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 
Reply at 13 (citing statement from game content creator WallsiesDGP that “pre-made accessible 
controllers, such as the Xbox adaptive controller, are often very expensive”); Accessibility 
Petitioners Class 17 Post-Hearing Resp. at 10 (June 4, 2021) (“some DRM schemes specifically 
interfere with the use of accessible controllers and user interfaces by blocking the interoperability 
of unauthorized third-party hardware or applications with games”).  
1822 See Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Post-Hearing Resp. at 9–10 (June 4, 2021).  

[PAGE 330]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
327 
software and the use of third-party applications or hardware, which inhibits both 
desired accessibility uses.1823 
In support of these arguments, proponents offer three sources of evidence.  First, they 
make multiple references to a report (titled Includification) by the AbleGamers 
Foundation that discusses accessibility issues in game design.1824  Second, they point to 
the experience of a game content creator, WallsiesDGP, who broadcasts gameplay on 
Twitch and has discussed his experience designing his own setup for accessibility.1825  
Third, they offer general comments and testimony that video games can have TPMs 
such as GameGuard, which limit disabled individuals in using third-party applications 
and hardware that can address accessibility gaps.1826 
Input devices.  The Register finds that the record for this class is sufficient to establish 
the likelihood that some gamers with disabilities will be adversely affected in their 
ability to use nonstandard input devices to play some video games on general-purpose 
computers.  Specifically, they have pointed to the TPM GameGuard, which limits some 
games on Windows from using alternate input methods.1827  GameGuard appears to be a 
 
1823 See Tr. at 108:08–18 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Reid, American Council of the Blind) (arguing that if TPMs 
on video games were circumvented, technologists “could actually design basically retrofitted 
accessibility features” such as “unique control schemes” and captions); but see Accessibility 
Petitioners Class 17 Post-Hearing Resp. at 9 (June 4, 2021) (testifying to general existence of TPMs 
on gaming distribution platforms but declining to explain how the TPMs inhibit accessibility 
features as “beyond the scope of this response”).  
1824 AbleGamers Foundation, Includification: A Practical Guide to Game Accessibility (2012), available 
at https://accessible.games/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/AbleGamers_Includification.pdf 
(“Includification”). 
1825 Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Reply at 13 (citing WallsiesDGP, Homemade disabled accessible 
PC gaming setup with no Xbox accessible controller, YOUTUBE (Mar. 2, 2021), 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VHttKRQqas0); see also WallsiesDGP, TWITCH.TV, 
https://www.twitch.tv/wallsiesdgp (last visited Oct. 15, 2021). 
1826 Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Initial at 13 (discussing GameGuard and noting that it 
interferes with third-party software and hardware); Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 PostHearing Resp. at 9 (June 4, 2021) (discussing various TPMs used in video games); Tr. at 108:08–18 
(Apr. 5, 2021) (Reid, American Council of the Blind) (TPMs like “Game Guard or similar 
technologies” can interfere with development of new accessibility tools). 
1827 See GameGuard Product Brochure, nProtect, 
https://www.inca.co.kr/include_file/pdf_down/nProtect_GameGuard_en.pdf (last visited Oct. 15, 
2021) (GameGuard “system requirements” require the Windows operating system, with support 
for 32-bit and 64-bit installations).   

[PAGE 331]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
328 
type of anti-cheating software,1828 but the Includification report and statements by the 
report’s authors suggest that GameGuard interferes with gamers with disabilities using 
alternate inputs for accessibility purposes.  Proponents have provided a link to a video 
demonstrating this type of activity.  In the video, a gamer with limited movement in his 
fingers uses a joystick and pedal buttons to move his character, with specialized 
software recognizing the joystick and pedal and converting their data into keyboard 
inputs.
1829  He also uses software to convert microphone input into keyboard commands 
(e.g., when WallsiesDGP says the word “reload,” the software imitates the keyboard 
command to reload a weapon).1830  To the extent TPMs like GameGuard prevent a game 
from recognizing those inputs, they limit the ability of gamers with disabilities to engage 
in this noninfringing use.  Based on this unrebutted evidence, the Register finds it likely 
that disabled gamers playing games protected by TPMs like GameGuard will experience 
adverse effects if they are unable to circumvent the TPMs to use alternate input 
methods.   
Though proponents have made a showing of adverse effects with respect to games 
running on general-purpose computers, they have not provided sufficient evidence as to 
video game consoles.  Historically, the Office has closely scrutinized proposed 
exemptions involving game consoles due to heightened piracy risks,
1831 and opponents 
have raised similar concerns in this class.1832  Proponents have not discussed this 
background, nor have they proposed limitations that would minimize the risk of 
piracy.1833  Further, proponents have not provided evidence that GameGuard or similar 
 
1828 See GameGuard, nProtect, https://gameguard.nprotect.com/en/index.html (last visited Oct. 17, 
2021) (describing software as “[d]etect[ing] various hack tools that can be abused in games such 
as auto macros, speed hacks and wall hacks” and detecting “illegal free server[s]”). 
1829 WallsiesDGP, Homemade disabled accessible PC gaming setup with no Xbox accessible controller, 
YOUTUBE (Mar. 2, 2021), https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VHttKRQqas0. 
1830 Id. at 3:55–4:45. 
1831 2012 Recommendation at 43 (analyzing fair use factor four impact on requested exemption for 
jailbreaking consoles); see also 2015 Recommendation at 199–200 (crediting 2012 conclusion about 
piracy risks and concluding that proponents had offered “sparse evidence” that failed to satisfy 
their evidentiary burden and lacked “a legal or factual basis to support a different outcome 
here”).   
1832 See Joint Creators Class 17 Opp’n at 3–4 (raising concerns about the importance of 
technological measures “protecting video game consoles” and expressing concerns that 
circumvention “could create substantial risk not only with respect to copyright protection, but 
also consumer privacy as well as console security”). 
1833 See Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Reply at 11 (describing limitations as “implicit” in their 
regulatory language and declining to provide specific proposals); Accessibility Petitioners Class 
17 Post-Hearing Resp. at 21–22 (June 4, 2021) (suggesting Office should propose limitations in the 
 

[PAGE 332]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
329 
TPMs prevent the use of third-party accessibility devices with game consoles.1834  For 
these reasons, the Register concludes that there is not a record of adverse effects for 
accessible input devices on video game consoles. 
Game design decisions.  After considering the evidence, the Register finds that 
proponents have failed to provide sufficient evidence to show sufficiently “real, 
tangible, and concrete” harm to support an exemption for modifying game design 
decisions.  While proponents suggest that, hypothetically, it is possible to “modify 
games to add captions” or allow bypassing “mandatory quick time events,”1835 they do 
not provide evidence of how or whether such modifications can be done.  Their most 
relevant evidence, the Includification report, illustrates the issue.  The report was written 
to advise developers and publishers on ways to address accessibility “as [they] develop 
[their] games.”
1836  While the report suggests that video game developers can design for 
accessibility in the first instance, proponents have not shown that it is possible for users 
to modify the software to make the in-game accessibility changes they desire.  
Proponents have also insufficiently addressed whether TPMs are the barrier for software 
modification.  For example, proponents suggest that “proprietary platform schemes” 
employ DRM to prevent modification of the game software distributed on those 
platforms,
1837 but it is unclear whether that DRM prevents proponents from running 
modified software or simply works to authenticate games as legally purchased or 
licensed.1838 
 
first instance but declining to endorse a “specific remuneration requirement” beyond generally 
requiring “lawful access”). 
1834 Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Post-Hearing Resp. at 9–10 (June 4, 2021) (briefly mentioning 
existence of DRM in platforms from Microsoft, Sony, and Nintendo but declining to address 
“how each of these technologies interface with specific modes of making games accessible”). 
1835 Id.  The accessibility use of modifying game captions was raised for the first time in the posthearing letter. 
1836 Includification at 5; see Includification, Accesible.Games, https://accessible.games/includification/ 
(website by AbleGamers Foundation describing Includification report as “a huge leap forward for 
accessibility”); see also Includification at 7 (stating document was produced as a result of 
“request[s] of many game development studios” to respond to the desire from studios to “add 
accessibility for disabled gamers”).  
1837 See Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Post-Hearing Resp. at 9 (June 4, 2021) (pointing to DRM 
employed by “Valve, Epic, Microsoft, Sony, and Nintendo”). 
1838 For example, though The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim Special Edition is available on Steam (and thus 
according to proponents, uses Valve’s DRM), it appears that visually impaired gamers can install 
mods that alter the size or presentation of interface elements and modify how colors are 
displayed in the game.  See, e.g., MyGoodEye and Gopher, Imaginator – Visual Control Device for 
Skyrim, NEXUS MODS (Dec. 27, 2019), 
 

[PAGE 333]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
330 
ii. Audiovisual Works – Encrypted Media Extensions (“EMEs”) 
Proponents also raise accessibility questions about audiovisual works, though their 
written comments focus only on videos available on the internet that are protected by 
Encrypted Media Extensions (“EMEs”), an HTML standard that “provid[es] APIs to 
control playback of encrypted content.”1839  According to proponents, EMEs 
“indiscriminately block[] ‘any authorized alterations to videos, including color-shifting’” 
and other tools that could make these videos accessible.1840  Proponents offer the 
example of a smartphone application called DanKam, which can “shift[] the colors 
displayed on devices, replacing the colors that [colorblind individuals] are unable to 
perceive with colors that they can actually see.”1841  Proponents assert that EMEs 
preclude a variety of assistive technologies that involve modifying or manipulating 
video playback, such as identifying and skipping past strobing effects that could trigger 
epileptic seizures or shifting the colors in a video so they can be perceived by a 
colorblind viewer.
1842 
As evidence of these adverse effects, proponents point to the Worldwide Web 
Consortium (“W3C”)’s technical documentation for EMEs, documentation about the 
DanKam smartphone app, and several posts by author and activist Cory Doctorow on 
 
https://www.nexusmods.com/skyrimspecialedition/mods/4577 (mod “allows you to separately 
control visual elements like Brightness, Contrast, [and] Saturation”); Fhaarkas, SkyHUD, NEXUS 
MODS (Sept. 8, 2018), https://www.nexusmods.com/skyrimspecialedition/mods/463 (mod offers 
“built-in support for font mods” and can be adjusted by modifying file in game subdirectory).  
The same appears to be possible for PC games purchased from the Epic Games Store and 
protected by Epic’s DRM.  See EgoKat, Where is the mod folder for Epic Games Launcher?, REDDIT: 
R/SURVIVINGMARS (Oct. 18, 2019), 
https://www.reddit.com/r/SurvivingMars/comments/djly64/where_is_mod_folder_for_epic_gam
es_launcher/ (discussion thread explaining how to install mods for games purchased on the Epic 
Game Store). 
1839 Encrypted Media Extensions, W3C Recommendation (Sept. 18, 2017), 
https://www.w3.org/TR/encrypted-media/; see Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Initial at 11–12 
(discussing EMEs protecting online videos).  Proponents also briefly suggest there is a need to 
remediate “audiovisual work[s] that [are] not eligible for remediation under the Class 3 
exemption,” but they offer no evidence of that need beyond that conclusory statement.  
Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Post-Hearing Resp. at 19 (June 4, 2021) (providing brief 
examples of disabilities requiring circumvention of audiovisual works). 
1840 Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Initial at 11 (quoting Cory Doctorow, Disabilities vs. DRM: the 
World Cup Edition, ELECTRONIC FRONTIER FOUNDATION (June 22, 2018), 
https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2018/06/disabilities-vs-drm-world-cup-edition).  
1841 Id. at 11–12. 
1842 Id. 

[PAGE 334]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
331 
the EFF website.1843  The W3C documentation is highly technical, and it briefly addresses 
accessibility in a note stating that “support content, such as captions, described audio, 
and transcripts should not be encrypted” because “encrypting such tracks would prevent 
them from being widely available for use with accessibility features in user agent 
implementations.”1844  The DanKam documentation describes the app’s settings and 
explains the developer’s motivations.1845  The posts by Mr. Doctorow criticize the W3C’s 
decision to adopt EMEs as part of the HTML5 web standard.1846 
The Register has reviewed this evidence and concludes that it does not establish that 
viewers of online videos seeking to engage in noninfringing uses are likely to be 
adversely affected if they cannot circumvent EMEs.  First, while proponents declined to 
specify “how EMEs function at a technical level,” according to the technical 
documentation, EMEs appear to be a general framework for HTML5 webpages to 
include DRM-protected video, with the webpage author choosing what type of DRM to 
 
1843 See id. at 10–12 (citing Encrypted Media Extensions, W3C (Sept. 18, 2017), 
https://www.w3.org/TR/encrypted-media/; Dan Kaminsky, Dankam, DAN KAMINSKY’S BLOG, 
https://dankaminsky.com/dankam/ (last visited Oct. 15, 2021); Cory Doctorow, Disabilities vs. 
DRM: the World Cup Edition, ELECTRONIC FRONTIER FOUNDATION (June 22, 2018), 
https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2018/06/disabilities-vs-drm-world-cup-edition; Cory Doctorow, 
Human Rights and TPMs: Lessons from 22 Years of the U.S. DMCA, ELECTRONIC FRONTIER 
FOUNDATION (Sept. 9, 2020), https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2020/09/human-rights-and-tpmslessons-22-years-us-dmca).  
1844 Encrypted Media Extensions, W3C (Sept. 18, 2017), https://www.w3.org/TR/encrypted-media/ 
(emphasis in original).   
1845 See Dan Kaminsky, Dankam, DAN KAMINSKY’S BLOG, https://dankaminsky.com/dankam/ (last 
visited Sept. 20, 2021) (explaining how to use app’s basic and advanced settings); Dan Kaminsky, 
Dankam: Augmented Reality For Color Blindness, DAN KAMINSKY’S BLOG (DEC. 15, 2010), 
https://dankaminsky.com/2010/12/15/dankam/ (discussing motivation behind developing app 
and what it shows end users); Paul Ridden, DanKam app clears up color blind confusion, NEW ATLAS 
(Jan. 4, 2011), https://newatlas.com/dankam-smartphone-app-helps-color-blind/17451/ (same).   
1846 Cory Doctorow, Disabilities vs. DRM: the World Cup Edition, ELECTRONIC FRONTIER 
FOUNDATION (June 22, 2018), https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2018/06/disabilities-vs-drm-worldcup-edition (using 2018 World Cup and colorblind issues as illustration of “just the start of the 
ways that EME . . .  will interfere with accessibility”); Cory Doctorow, Human Rights and TPMs: 
Lessons from 22 Years of the U.S. DMCA, ELECTRONIC FRONTIER FOUNDATION (Sept. 9, 2020), 
https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2020/09/human-rights-and-tpms-lessons-22-years-us-dmca 
(describing section 1201 as “incompatible with human rights” and giving example of EMEs as 
potentially limiting ability of individuals with photosensitive epilepsy from skipping strobing 
effects in videos). 

[PAGE 335]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
332 
use on the video, if any.1847  Put another way, the fact that a video complies with the 
EME specification in HTML5 does not necessarily mean the video is encumbered by a 
TPM, because “[i]mplementation of Digital Rights Management is not required for 
compliance with [the EME] specification.”1848  Whether an HTML5 video is protected by 
a TPM, and whether that TPM prevents modification of video playback, will vary in 
each case based on the particular video and the particular protection method.1849  
Second, the DanKam app does not appear to be directly relevant to the adverse effects of 
EMEs.  DanKam is a smartphone app that was released in December 2010, almost seven 
years before the W3C adopted the EME specification.
1850  While DanKam appears to be 
no longer available for download on iOS or Android devices, it has been described as an 
“augmented reality application” that appears to work largely by color-shifting video 
input from a smartphone’s camera.1851  Based on the Register’s understanding of the 
 
1847 See Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Post-Hearing Resp. at 7–8 (June 4, 2021) (describing EME 
as an API “designed to facilitate the playback of video content on web browsers using a variety of 
different DRM technologies”); Encrypted Media Extensions, W3C (Sept. 18, 2017), 
https://www.w3.org/TR/encrypted-media/ (EME specification “does not define a content 
protection or Digital Rights Management system” and “[i]mplementation of Digital Rights 
Management is not required for compliance with this specification”); see also Ars Staff, Over many 
objections, W3C approves DRM for HTML5, ARS TECHNICA (July 10, 2017), 
https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2017/07/over-many-objections-w3c-approvesdrm-for-html5/ (“EME is not itself a DRM system.  Rather, it is a specification that allows 
JavaScript applications to interact with DRM modules to handle things like encryption keys and 
decrypting the protected data.”). 
1848 Encrypted Media Extensions, W3C (Sept. 18, 2017), https://www.w3.org/TR/encrypted-media/. 
1849 Moreover, the Register notes that W3C appears to have considered this issue and concluded 
that EMEs do not interfere with video accessibility.  See EME and accessibility, W3C (Mar. 8, 2017), 
https://www.w3.org/2017/03/eme-accessibility.html#relevant (noting that “[r]epeated analysis 
and testing has shown no barriers to accessing captions, transcripts, or audio description of 
video”). 
1850 Compare Dan Kaminsky, Dankam: Augmented Reality For Color Blindness, DAN KAMINSKY’S BLOG 
(DEC. 15, 2010), https://dankaminsky.com/2010/12/15/dankam/ (2010 post announcing app 
release) with W3C Publishes Encrypted Media Extensions (EME) as a W3C Recommendation, W3C 
(Sept. 18, 2017), https://www.w3.org/2017/09/pressrelease-eme-recommendation.html.en (2017 
press release by W3C announcing EME recommendation). 
1851 See Dan Kaminsky, Dankam: Augmented Reality For Color Blindness, DAN KAMINSKY’S BLOG 
(DEC. 15, 2010), https://dankaminsky.com/2010/12/15/dankam/ (citing positive reviews that 
mention “us[ing] it today in the real world” such as inside a Target store or to view multicolor 
LEDs on physical devices). 

[PAGE 336]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
333 
record,1852 the DanKam app would not be affected by EMEs because it works by viewing 
the visual appearance of real-world objects and color-shifts them when displaying them 
on a smartphone screen.  Apps like DanKam do not access digital video files, so TPMs 
on the file do not affect a user’s ability to view the video through a smartphone camera 
and colorshift how the video is displayed within the app. 
Third, the posts by Mr. Doctorow do not provide sufficient evidence of adverse effects to 
satisfy proponents’ burden.  The first post suggests that EMEs were the reason 
colorblind viewers had difficulty watching a 2018 World Cup match,1853 but the only 
evidence in the record discussing that match references a television broadcast, not online 
streaming or online DRM preventing a viewer from color-shifting the video.1854  The 
second post briefly mentions EMEs as potentially inhibiting “automated tools to identify 
and skip past strobing effects in videos that could trigger dangerous seizures” but 
provides no additional information.1855 
Because proponents have failed to explain how EMEs inhibit accessibility uses, the 
Register cannot recommend an exemption covering audiovisual works protected by 
EMEs.   
iii. Statutory Factors 
In light of her determination that proponents have provided sufficient evidence of 
adverse effects with respect to video game inputs, the Register now considers the section 
1201 statutory factors in relation to that exemption.  The first factor, the availability for 
 
1852 To the extent this understanding of the record is incorrect, proponents had the obligation to 
provide the necessary context for the Register to evaluate it.  See Section 1201 Report at 110 (as a 
practical matter, proponents have the burden of production “simply because they have greater 
knowledge of and access to evidence demonstrating adverse effects”). 
1853 Cory Doctorow, Disabilities vs. DRM: the World Cup Edition, ELECTRONIC FRONTIER 
FOUNDATION (June 22, 2018), https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2018/06/disabilities-vs-drm-worldcup-edition. 
1854 See Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Initial at 12 (comment stating that “because of EME,” 
viewers of 2018 World Cup could not perceive difference between jerseys of the two teams); 
Rebecca Seales, World Cup 2018: Why millions of fans see the football like this, BBC News (July 11, 
2018), https://www.bbc.com/news/world-44535687.  The BBC story links to a tweet with a 
screenshot of what appears to be an online video of the match, but there is not enough 
information for the Register to make any conclusions about the relevant TPMs and adverse 
effects.  See @seanhargrave, Sean Hargrave, Twitter (July 4, 2018), 
https://twitter.com/seanhargrave/status/1014418349101666304/photo/1.  
1855 See Cory Doctorow, Human Rights and TPMs: Lessons from 22 Years of the U.S. DMCA, 
ELECTRONIC FRONTIER FOUNDATION (Sept. 9, 2020), 
https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2020/09/human-rights-and-tpms-lessons-22-years-us-dmca.   

[PAGE 337]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
334 
use of copyrighted works, supports an exemption for using alternate input methods in 
video games.  If gamers with disabilities are able to use accessible controllers or similar 
input devices, the exemption will increase the availability of games for lawful uses by 
those users.   
The second and third statutory factors do not affect the Register’s analysis of this 
exemption.  An exemption expanding the input methods that can be used to use to play 
games would have only an incidental impact on archival, preservation, and educational 
uses.  The same is true for scholarly uses such as criticism, comment, and news 
reporting.  This exemption may enable some new scholarship, but it primarily allows 
individuals with disabilities to engage in recreational uses of video games. 
The fourth statutory factor, addressing the effect on the market for or value of 
copyrighted works, supports this exemption.  Provided the exemption is limited to 
accessibility uses and includes the market safeguards discussed above—notably a 
market check requirement—there is no indication that it would adversely affect the 
market for video games.  In fact, by increasing the number of gamers able to play games 
lawfully, the exemption could well benefit that market.  
Finally, the Register concludes that the fifth statutory factor, which allows the Librarian 
to consider any other “appropriate” issues, weighs in favor of this exemption.  As the 
Office has previously noted, public policy strongly favors providing accommodations 
for accessibility.1856   
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA supports an exemption “covering any work protected by a TPM for the 
accessibility purposes detailed by proponents.”1857  It disagrees with the Office’s 
assessment in the NPRM that exemptions cannot cover a class of “all works,” and 
instead reads the statute to permit classes to be “flexibly construed though whichever 
lens is most efficient.”
1858   
NTIA advises that “public policy concerns should push the Librarian to grant this 
exemption,” and notes that the hearing testimony was focused on “the public policy 
reasons to permit this exemption.”1859  NTIA concedes that granting the exemption as 
 
1856 See, e.g., 2018 Recommendation at 104 (“[g]enerally, public policy favors removing 
impediments to access for individuals with disabilities”) (quoting 2012 Recommendation at 21) 
(alteration in original). 
1857 NTIA Letter at 135. 
1858 Id. at 136. 
1859 Id. at 136–37. 

[PAGE 338]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
335 
proposed would “break new ground” but urges that “it is the right thing to do.”1860  It 
finds supporting precedent in the Librarian’s renewal of the exemption for e-book 
accessibility in 2010, notwithstanding “a particularly thin case for renewing” that 
provision.1861  In NTIA’s view, the statute requires only “a finding that the prohibition 
on circumvention has or is likely to have an adverse effect on people’s ability to make 
non-infringing uses of copyrighted works.  Once there is a finding that a TPM does 
affect such uses (e.g., non-infringing uses for accessibility purposes), the Librarian does 
not need to delve into a TPM’s technical specifications . . . or whether the TPM is 
particularly impacting a subsection of works of authorship listed in section 102(a).”1862 
The Register respectfully disagrees with this reading.  Section 1201 provides that the 
Librarian “shall make the determination . . . of whether persons who are users of a 
copyrighted work are, or are likely to be . . . adversely affected . . . in their ability to 
make noninfringing uses under this title of a particular class of copyrighted works.”1863  
The Librarian cannot make such a determination absent evidence of actual or likely 
adverse effects pertaining to particular classes of works.  Nor does a finding of adverse 
effects involving one class negate the statutory obligation to “make the determination” 
as to another “particular class.”  As explained above, the Register finds that proponents 
have provided sufficient evidence and analysis to enable such a determination with 
respect to video game input devices.  She concludes, however, that the record for this 
class does not support a broader exemption. 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
The Register is sympathetic to the policy goals underpinning this proposed class.  All 
participants in this rulemaking, including opponents, agree that copyrighted material 
should be accessible to individuals with disabilities to the same extent that it is  
1860 Id. at 138. 
1861 Id. 
1862 Id. at 139. 
1863 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C); see also 2003 Recommendation at 82–84 (rejecting request for class of 
all works for “noninfringing uses, e.g., fair use and private uses” because such a class would be 
“a blanket exemption for all works—in effect, an administrative abrogation of §1201(a)(1)”).  

[PAGE 339]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
336 
accessible to those without disabilities.1864  And the Office has repeatedly expressed 
support for a broad statutory review to address modern digital accessibility issues.1865   
But the Register and the Librarian are limited by the authority granted to them under 
the law.  Proponents at various points of this proceeding have emphasized the broad 
policy goals of the proposed exemption, which they note would “go beyond what the 
bounds of what disability law specifically requires” and “contribute to the inclusive and 
accessible digital future.”1866  They seek a “broad and clear” exemption aimed at 
removing the burden from the disabled community to petition for accessibility separate 
exemptions on a triennial basis.1867  This proceeding, however, is governed by an explicit 
statutory command that exemptions be for “particular class[es]” of works, and Congress 
has explained that the term refers to a “narrow and focused subset of the broad 
categories of works of authorship.”1868  An exemption for all copyrighted works cannot 
fit within those limits, which only Congress has the power to alter.   
The Register therefore has evaluated, as she must, whether proponents have provided 
sufficient evidence of an actual or likely adverse effect on noninfringing uses of 
particular types of copyrighted works.  For the reasons discussed above, she concludes 
that the evidence submitted is insufficient with respect to most of the categories of 
works cited by proponents.  But proponents have demonstrated that, absent an 
exemption, disabled individuals are, or are likely to be, limited in their ability to use 
 
1864 See AAP Class 17 Opp’n at 2 (objecting to Class 17 as outside the Librarian’s statutory 
authority but supporting requested expansion of Class 8); DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 17 Opp’
n at 3 & n.1 (agreeing that accessibility concerns “are of substantial significance” and stating 
support for “any new reasonable proposals”); Joint Creators Class 17 Opp’n at 2 (Joint Creators 
“believe strongly that accessibility issues are very important and would welcome the opportunity 
to voluntarily cooperate with Petitioners and others to improve the availability of accessible 
content”). 
1865 See 2012 Recommendation at 24; Section 1201 Policy Study at 86 (noting Office’s support for 
“crafting a digital age update to exceptions in copyright law for persons who are blind or visually 
impaired”) (quoting Register’s Perspective on Copyright Review: Hearing Before H. Comm. on the 
Judiciary, 114th Cong. 26 (2015) (statement of Maria A. Pallante, Register of Copyrights and Dir., 
U.S. Copyright Office)); see also 2018 Recommendation at 104 (stating that “[g]enerally, public 
policy favors removing impediments to access for individuals with disabilities”) (quoting 2012 
Recommendation at 21) (alteration in original). 
1866 Tr. at 75:23–76:03 (Apr. 5, 2021) (Reid, American Council of the Blind); Accessibility Petitioners 
Class 17 Initial at 17; see also id. at 9 (exemption would “serve the core goals of the Americans 
with Disabilities Act”); Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Reply at 9–10 (exemption would “ensure 
that people with disabilities have an avenue to fulfill their civil right ‘to live in the world’ through 
the cultural, economic, and democratic opportunities that attach to copyrighted works”). 
1867 See Accessibility Petitioners Class 17 Initial at 8. 
1868 Commerce Comm. Report at 38. 

[PAGE 340]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
337 
alternate input methods while playing certain video games.  The Register therefore 
recommends an exemption allowing circumvention of TPMs for the purpose of 
facilitating such activities. 
In crafting the recommended language, the Register has imposed several limitations.  
First, circumvention must be undertaken for the sole purpose of enabling alternate 
inputs, as proponents did not introduce evidence of a need to modify game behavior.  
Second, the Register has limited the exemption to games on general-purpose computers 
because there is no evidence of adverse effects for video game console input methods.  
Third and finally, the Register recommends language requiring that the circumvented 
video game be lawfully acquired.   
As explained above, accessibility uses are most clearly fair when coupled with 
limitations to minimize the risk of market substitution.  The Register has addressed this 
concern in past exemptions by recommending that copyright owners be “remunerated, 
as appropriate” or that exemption beneficiaries first determine that an accessible version 
cannot be obtained at a fair price in a timely manner.
1869  Here, however, there is no 
evidence that a market exists for “accessible” versions of the relevant games—that is, 
versions distributed without GameGuard or similar anti-cheating TPMs that prevent use 
of alternate input devices.  In this respect, the record in this class differs from that of 
other classes, in which copyright owners have provided evidence of an existing market 
for accessible versions of the works at issue.  Therefore, in lieu of a specific remuneration 
or market check requirement, the exemption seeks to ensure that developers are 
appropriately compensated by requiring that circumvented video games be “lawfully 
obtained.”  Further, the requirement that circumvention be solely for the purpose of 
enabling accessible input methods will address opponents’ concerns that an exemption 
could be used for video game piracy or hacking.  
Accordingly, the Register recommends that the Librarian designate the following class:  
Video games in the form of computer programs, embodied in lawfully 
acquired physical or downloaded formats, and operated on a general-purpose 
computer, where circumvention is undertaken solely for the purpose of 
allowing an individual with a physical disability to use software or hardware 
input methods other than a standard keyboard or mouse. 
 
 
1869 See 2018 Recommendation at 108–10 (requiring that educational institutions “determine[] that 
an accessible version is not available, not available at a fair price, or not available in a timely way” 
before circumventing audiovisual works); 2012 Recommendation at 23–25 (requiring that 
copyright owners be “remunerated, as appropriate” for circumvented e-books). 

[PAGE 341]
section 1201 rulemaking
u.s. copyright office
appendix  recommended regulatory language

[PAGE 342]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
1 
Recommended Regulatory Language 
(a) General. This section prescribes the classes of copyrighted works for which the 
Librarian of Congress has determined, pursuant to 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C) and (D), that 
noninfringing uses by persons who are users of such works are, or are likely to be, 
adversely affected. The prohibition against circumvention of technological measures that 
control access to copyrighted works set forth in 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(A) shall not apply to 
such users of the prescribed classes of copyrighted works.  
(b) Classes of copyrighted works. Pursuant to the authority set forth in 17 U.S.C. 
1201(a)(1)(C) and (D), and upon the recommendation of the Register of Copyrights, the 
Librarian has determined that the prohibition against circumvention of technological 
measures that effectively control access to copyrighted works set forth in 17 U.S.C. 
1201(a)(1)(A) shall not apply to persons who engage in noninfringing uses of the 
following classes of copyrighted works: 
(1) Motion pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in 17 
U.S.C. 101, where the motion picture is lawfully made and acquired on a DVD 
protected by the Content Scramble System, on a Blu-ray disc protected by the 
Advanced Access Content System, or via a digital transmission protected by a 
technological measure, and the person engaging in circumvention under 
paragraphs (b)(1)(i) and (b)(1)(ii)(A) and (B) of this section reasonably believes 
that non-circumventing alternatives are unable to produce the required level of 
high-quality content, or the circumvention is undertaken using screen-capture 
technology that appears to be offered to the public as enabling the reproduction 
of motion pictures after content has been lawfully acquired and decrypted, 
where circumvention is undertaken solely in order to make use of short portions 
of the motion pictures in the following instances: 
(i) For the purpose of criticism or comment: 
(A) For use in documentary filmmaking, or other films where the 
motion picture clip is used in parody or for its biographical or 
historically significant nature; 
(B) For use in noncommercial videos (including videos produced 
for a paid commission if the commissioning entity’s use is 
noncommercial); or 
(C) For use in nonfiction multimedia e-books. 
(ii) For educational purposes: 

[PAGE 343]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
2 
(A) By college and university faculty and students or kindergarten 
through twelfth-grade (K-12) educators and students (where the 
K-12 student is circumventing under the direct supervision of an 
educator), or employees acting at the direction of faculty of such 
educational institutions for the purpose of teaching a course, 
including of accredited general educational development (GED) 
programs, for the purpose of criticism, comment, teaching, or 
scholarship; 
(B) By faculty of accredited nonprofit educational institutions and 
employees acting at the direction of faculty members of those 
institutions, for purposes of offering massive open online courses 
(MOOCs) to officially enrolled students through online platforms 
(which platforms themselves may be operated for profit), in film 
studies or other courses requiring close analysis of film and media 
excerpts, for the purpose of criticism or comment, where the 
MOOC provider through the online platform limits transmissions 
to the extent technologically feasible to such officially enrolled 
students, institutes copyright policies and provides copyright 
informational materials to faculty, students, and relevant staff 
members, and applies technological measures that reasonably 
prevent unauthorized further dissemination of a work in 
accessible form to others or retention of the work for longer than 
the course session by recipients of a transmission through the 
platform, as contemplated by 17 U.S.C. 110(2); or 
(C) By educators and participants in nonprofit digital and media 
literacy programs offered by libraries, museums, and other 
nonprofit entities with an educational mission, in the course of 
face-to-face instructional activities, for the purpose of criticism or 
comment, except that such users may only circumvent using 
screen-capture technology that appears to be offered to the public 
as enabling the reproduction of motion pictures after content has 
been lawfully acquired and decrypted.  
(2)  
(i) Motion pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in 
17 U.S.C. 101, where the motion picture is lawfully acquired on a DVD 
protected by the Content Scramble System, on a Blu-ray disc protected by 
the Advanced Access Content System, or via a digital transmission 
protected by a technological measure, where:  

[PAGE 344]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
3 
(A) Circumvention is undertaken by a disability services office or 
other unit of a kindergarten through twelfth-grade educational 
institution, college, or university engaged in and/or responsible 
for the provision of accessibility services for the purpose of adding 
captions and/or audio description to a motion picture to create an 
accessible version for students, faculty, or staff with disabilities;  
(B) The educational institution unit in paragraph (b)(2)(i)(A) of 
this section has a reasonable belief that the motion picture will be 
used for a specific future activity of the institution and, after a 
reasonable effort, has determined that an accessible version of 
sufficient quality cannot be obtained at a fair market price or in a 
timely manner, including where a copyright holder has not 
provided an accessible version of a motion picture that was 
included with a textbook; and  
(C) The accessible versions are provided to students or educators 
and stored by the educational institution in a manner intended to 
reasonably prevent unauthorized further dissemination of a work.  
(ii) For purposes of paragraph (b)(2) of this section,  
(A) “Audio description” means an oral narration that provides an 
accurate rendering of the motion picture; 
(B) “Accessible version of sufficient quality” means a version that 
in the reasonable judgment of the educational institution unit has 
captions and/or audio description that are sufficient to meet the 
accessibility needs of students, faculty, or staff with disabilities 
and are substantially free of errors that would materially interfere 
with those needs; and 
(C) Accessible materials created pursuant to this exemption and 
stored pursuant to paragraph (b)(2)(i)(C) of this section may be 
reused by the educational institution unit to meet the accessibility 
needs of students, faculty, or staff with disabilities pursuant to 
paragraphs (b)(2)(i)(A) and (B) of this section. 
(3)  
(i) Motion pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in 
17 U.S.C. § 101, where the motion picture is lawfully acquired on a DVD 
protected by the Content Scramble System, or on a Blu-ray disc protected 
by the Advanced Access Content System, solely for the purpose of lawful 

[PAGE 345]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
4 
preservation or the creation of a replacement copy of the motion picture, 
by an eligible library, archives, or museum, where:  
(A) Such activity is carried out without any purpose of direct or 
indirect commercial advantage;  
(B) The DVD or Blu-ray disc is damaged or deteriorating;   
(C) The eligible institution, after a reasonable effort, has 
determined that an unused and undamaged replacement copy 
cannot be obtained at a fair price and that no streaming service, 
download service, or on-demand cable and satellite service makes 
the motion picture available to libraries, archives, and museums at 
a fair price; and  
(D) The preservation or replacement copies are not distributed or 
made available outside of the physical premises of the eligible 
library, archives, or museum.  
(ii) For purposes of paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this section, a library, archives, 
or museum is considered “eligible” if—  
(A) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are open to 
the public and/or are routinely made available to researchers who 
are not affiliated with the library, archives, or museum;  
(B) The library, archives, or museum has a public service mission;  
(C) The library, archives, or museum’s trained staff or volunteers 
provide professional services normally associated with libraries, 
archives, or museums;  
(D) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are 
composed of lawfully acquired and/or licensed materials; and  
(E) The library, archives, or museum implements reasonable 
digital security measures as appropriate for the activities 
permitted by paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this section. 
(4)  
(i) Motion pictures, as defined in 17 U.S.C. § 101, where the motion 
picture is on a DVD protected by the Content Scramble System, on a Bluray disc protected by the Advanced Access Content System, or made 
available for digital download where:  

[PAGE 346]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
5 
(A) The circumvention is undertaken by a researcher affiliated 
with a nonprofit institution of higher education, or by a student or 
information technology staff member of the institution at the 
direction of such researcher, solely to deploy text and data mining 
techniques on a corpus of motion pictures for the purpose of 
scholarly research and teaching;   
(B) The copy of each motion picture is lawfully acquired and 
owned by the institution, or licensed to the institution without a 
time limitation on access; 
(C) The person undertaking the circumvention views or listens to 
the contents of the motion pictures in the corpus solely for the 
purpose of verification of the research findings; and  
(D) The institution uses effective security measures to prevent 
further dissemination or downloading of motion pictures in the 
corpus, and to limit access to only the persons identified in 
paragraph (b)(4)(i)(A) of this section or to researchers affiliated 
with other institutions of higher education solely for purposes of 
collaboration or replication of the research.  
(ii) For purposes of paragraph (b)(4)(i) of this section:  
(A) An institution of higher education is defined as one that: 
(1) Admits regular students who have a certificate of 
graduation from a secondary school or the equivalent of 
such a certificate;  
(2) Is legally authorized to provide a postsecondary 
education program; 
(3) Awards a bachelor’s degree or provides not less than a 
two-year program acceptable towards such a degree;  
(4) Is a public or other nonprofit institution; and  
(5) Is accredited by a nationally recognized accrediting 
agency or association.   
(B) The term “effective security measures” means security 
measures that have been agreed to by interested copyright owners 
of motion pictures and institutions of higher education; or, in the 
absence of such measures, those measures that the institution uses 

[PAGE 347]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
6 
to keep its own highly confidential information secure.  If the 
institution uses the security measures it uses to protect its own 
highly confidential information, it must, upon a reasonable 
request from a copyright owner whose work is contained in the 
corpus, provide information to that copyright owner regarding 
the nature of such measures. 
(5)  
(i) Literary works, excluding computer programs and compilations that 
were compiled specifically for text and data mining purposes, distributed 
electronically where: 
(A) The circumvention is undertaken by a researcher affiliated 
with a nonprofit institution of higher education, or by a student or 
information technology staff member of the institution at the 
direction of such researcher, solely to deploy text and data mining 
techniques on a corpus of literary works for the purpose of 
scholarly research and teaching;   
(B) The copy of each literary work is lawfully acquired and owned 
by the institution, or licensed to the institution without a time 
limitation on access; 
(C) The person undertaking the circumvention views the contents 
of the literary works in the corpus solely for the purpose of 
verification of the research findings; and  
(D) The institution uses effective security measures to prevent 
further dissemination or downloading of literary works in the 
corpus, and to limit access to only the persons identified in 
paragraph (b)(5)(i)(A) of this section or to researchers or to 
researchers affiliated with other institutions of higher education 
solely for purposes of collaboration or replication of the research.  
(ii) For purposes of paragraph (b)(5)(i) of this section:  
(A) An institution of higher education is defined as one that: 
(1) Admits regular students who have a certificate of 
graduation from a secondary school or the equivalent of 
such a certificate;  
(2) Is legally authorized to provide a postsecondary 
education program;  

[PAGE 348]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
7 
(3) Awards a bachelor’s degree or provides not less than a 
two-year program acceptable towards such a degree;  
(4) Is a public or other nonprofit institution; and  
(5) Is accredited by a nationally recognized accrediting 
agency or association.   
(B) The term “effective security measures” means security 
measures that have been agreed to by interested copyright owners 
of literary works and institutions of higher education; or, in the 
absence of such measures, those measures that the institution uses 
to keep its own highly confidential information secure.  If the 
institution uses the security measures it uses to protect its own 
highly confidential information, it must, upon a reasonable 
request from a copyright owner whose work is contained in the 
corpus, provide information to that copyright owner regarding 
the nature of such measures. 
(6)  
(i) Literary works or previously published musical works that have been 
fixed in the form of text or notation, distributed electronically, that are 
protected by technological measures that either prevent the enabling of 
read-aloud functionality or interfere with screen readers or other 
applications or assistive technologies:  
(A) When a copy or phonorecord of such a work is lawfully 
obtained by an eligible person, as such a person is defined in 17 
U.S.C. § 121; provided, however, that the rights owner is 
remunerated, as appropriate, for the market price of an 
inaccessible copy of the work as made available to the general 
public through customary channels; or 
(B) When such a work is lawfully obtained and used by an 
authorized entity pursuant to 17 U.S.C. § 121. 
(ii) For the purposes of paragraph (b)(6)(i) of this section, a “phonorecord 
of such a work” does not include a sound recording of a performance of a 
musical work unless and only to the extent the recording is included as 
part of an audiobook or e-book.  
(7) Literary works consisting of compilations of data generated by medical 
devices or by their personal corresponding monitoring systems, where such 
circumvention is undertaken by or on behalf of a patient for the sole purpose of 

[PAGE 349]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
8 
lawfully accessing data generated by a patient’s own medical device or 
monitoring system.  Eligibility for this exemption is not a safe harbor from, or 
defense to, liability under other applicable laws, including without limitation the 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, the Computer Fraud 
and Abuse Act of 1986, or regulations of the Food and Drug Administration. 
(8) Computer programs that enable wireless devices to connect to a wireless 
telecommunications network, when circumvention is undertaken solely in order 
to connect to a wireless telecommunications network and such connection is 
authorized by the operator of such network.  
(9) Computer programs that enable smartphones and portable all-purpose 
mobile computing devices to execute lawfully obtained software applications, 
where circumvention is accomplished for the sole purpose of enabling 
interoperability of such applications with computer programs on the smartphone 
or device, or to permit removal of software from the smartphone or device. For 
purposes of this paragraph (b)(9), a “portable all-purpose mobile computing 
device” is a device that is primarily designed to run a wide variety of programs 
rather than for consumption of a particular type of media content, is equipped 
with an operating system primarily designed for mobile use, and is intended to 
be carried or worn by an individual.  
(10) Computer programs that enable smart televisions to execute lawfully 
obtained software applications, where circumvention is accomplished for the sole 
purpose of enabling interoperability of such applications with computer 
programs on the smart television, and is not accomplished for the purpose of 
gaining unauthorized access to other copyrighted works.  For purposes of this 
paragraph (b)(10), “smart televisions” includes both internet-enabled televisions, 
as well as devices that are physically separate from a television and whose 
primary purpose is to run software applications that stream authorized video 
from the internet for display on a screen. 
(11) Computer programs that enable voice assistant devices to execute lawfully 
obtained software applications, where circumvention is accomplished for the sole 
purpose of enabling interoperability of such applications with computer 
programs on the device, or to permit removal of software from the device, and is 
not accomplished for the purpose of gaining unauthorized access to other 
copyrighted works. For purposes of this paragraph (b)(11), a “voice assistant 
device” is a device that is primarily designed to run a wide variety of programs 
rather than for consumption of a particular type of media content, is designed to 
take user input primarily by voice, and is designed to be installed in a home or 
office.  

[PAGE 350]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
9 
(12) Computer programs that enable routers and dedicated network devices to 
execute lawfully obtained software applications, where circumvention is 
accomplished for the sole purpose of enabling interoperability of such 
applications with computer programs on the router or dedicated network device, 
and is not accomplished for the purpose of gaining unauthorized access to other 
copyrighted works.  For the purposes of this paragraph (b)(12), “dedicated 
network device” includes switches, hubs, bridges, gateways, modems, repeaters, 
and access points, and excludes devices that are not lawfully owned. 
(13) Computer programs that are contained in and control the functioning of a 
lawfully acquired motorized land vehicle or marine vessel such as a personal 
automobile or boat, commercial vehicle or vessel, or mechanized agricultural 
vehicle or vessel, except for programs accessed through a separate subscription 
service, when circumvention is a necessary step to allow the diagnosis, repair, or 
lawful modification of a vehicle or vessel function, where such circumvention is 
not accomplished for the purpose of gaining unauthorized access to other 
copyrighted works.  Eligibility for this exemption is not a safe harbor from, or 
defense to, liability under other applicable laws, including without limitation 
regulations promulgated by the Department of Transportation or the 
Environmental Protection Agency. 
(14) Computer programs that are contained in and control the functioning of a 
lawfully acquired device that is primarily designed for use by consumers, when 
circumvention is a necessary step to allow the diagnosis, maintenance, or repair 
of such a device, and is not accomplished for the purpose of gaining access to 
other copyrighted works. For purposes of this paragraph (b)(14): 
(i) The “maintenance” of a device is the servicing of the device in order to 
make it work in accordance with its original specifications and any 
changes to those specifications authorized for that device; and 
(ii) The “repair” of a device is the restoring of the device to the state of 
working in accordance with its original specifications and any changes to 
those specifications authorized for that device. For video game consoles, 
“repair” is limited to repair or replacement of a console’s optical drive 
and requires restoring any technological protection measures that were 
circumvented or disabled.  
(15) Computer programs that are contained in and control the functioning of a 
lawfully acquired medical device or system, and related data files, when 
circumvention is a necessary step to allow the diagnosis, maintenance, or repair 
of such a device or system.  For purposes of this paragraph (b)(15): 

[PAGE 351]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
10 
(i) The “maintenance” of a device or system is the servicing of the device 
or system in order to make it work in accordance with its original 
specifications and any changes to those specifications authorized for that 
device or system; and 
(ii) The “repair” of a device or system is the restoring of the device or 
system to the state of working in accordance with its original 
specifications and any changes to those specifications authorized for that 
device or system. 
(16)  
(i) Computer programs, where the circumvention is undertaken on a 
lawfully acquired device or machine on which the computer program 
operates, or is undertaken on a computer, computer system, or computer 
network on which the computer program operates with the authorization 
of the owner or operator of such computer, computer system, or 
computer network, solely for the purpose of good-faith security research. 
(ii) For purposes of paragraph (b)(16)(i) of this section, “good-faith 
security research” means accessing a computer program solely for 
purposes of good-faith testing, investigation, and/or correction of a 
security flaw or vulnerability, where such activity is carried out in an 
environment designed to avoid any harm to individuals or the public, 
and where the information derived from the activity is used primarily to 
promote the security or safety of the class of devices or machines on 
which the computer program operates, or those who use such devices or 
machines, and is not used or maintained in a manner that facilitates 
copyright infringement. 
(iii) Good-faith security research that qualifies for the exemption under 
paragraph (b)(16)(i) of this section may nevertheless incur liability under 
other applicable laws, including without limitation the Computer Fraud 
and Abuse Act of 1986, as amended and codified in title 18, United States 
Code, and eligibility for that exemption is not a safe harbor from, or 
defense to, liability under other applicable laws. 
(17)  
(i) Video games in the form of computer programs embodied in physical 
or downloaded formats that have been lawfully acquired as complete 
games, when the copyright owner or its authorized representative has 
ceased to provide access to an external computer server necessary to 

[PAGE 352]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
11 
facilitate an authentication process to enable gameplay, solely for the 
purpose of: 
(A) Permitting access to the video game to allow copying and 
modification of the computer program to restore access to the 
game for personal, local gameplay on a personal computer or 
video game console; or 
(B) Permitting access to the video game to allow copying and 
modification of the computer program to restore access to the 
game on a personal computer or video game console when 
necessary to allow preservation of the game in a playable form by 
an eligible library, archives, or museum, where such activities are 
carried out without any purpose of direct or indirect commercial 
advantage and the video game is not distributed or made 
available outside of the physical premises of the eligible library, 
archives, or museum. 
(ii) Video games in the form of computer programs embodied in physical 
or downloaded formats that have been lawfully acquired as complete 
games, that do not require access to an external computer server for 
gameplay, and that are no longer reasonably available in the commercial 
marketplace, solely for the purpose of preservation of the game in a 
playable form by an eligible library, archives, or museum, where such 
activities are carried out without any purpose of direct or indirect 
commercial advantage and the video game is not distributed or made 
available outside of the physical premises of the eligible library, archives, 
or museum. 
(iii) Computer programs used to operate video game consoles solely to 
the extent necessary for an eligible library, archives, or museum to engage 
in the preservation activities described in paragraph (b)(17)(i)(B) or 
(b)(17)(ii) of this section. 
(iv) For purposes of this paragraph (b)(17), the following definitions shall 
apply: 
(A) For purposes of paragraphs (b)(17)(i)(A) and (b)(17)(ii) of this 
section, “complete games” means video games that can be played 
by users without accessing or reproducing copyrightable content 
stored or previously stored on an external computer server. 
(B) For purposes of paragraph (b)(17)(i)(B) of this section, 
“complete games” means video games that meet the definition in 

[PAGE 353]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
12 
paragraph (b)(17)(iv)(A) of this section, or that consist of both a 
copy of a game intended for a personal computer or video game 
console and a copy of the game’s code that was stored or 
previously stored on an external computer server. 
(C) “Ceased to provide access” means that the copyright owner or 
its authorized representative has either issued an affirmative 
statement indicating that external server support for the video 
game has ended and such support is in fact no longer available or, 
alternatively, server support has been discontinued for a period of 
at least six months; provided, however, that server support has 
not since been restored. 
(D) “Local gameplay” means gameplay conducted on a personal 
computer or video game console, or locally connected personal 
computers or consoles, and not through an online service or 
facility. 
(E) A library, archives, or museum is considered “eligible” if— 
(1) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are 
open to the public and/or are routinely made available to 
researchers who are not affiliated with the library, 
archives, or museum; 
(2) The library, archives, or museum has a public service 
mission; 
(3) The library, archives, or museum’s trained staff or 
volunteers provide professional services normally 
associated with libraries, archives, or museums; 
(4) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are 
composed of lawfully acquired and/or licensed materials; 
and 
(5) The library, archives, or museum implements 
reasonable digital security measures as appropriate for the 
activities permitted by this paragraph (b)(17). 
(18)  
(i) Computer programs, except video games, that have been lawfully 
acquired and that are no longer reasonably available in the commercial 
marketplace, solely for the purpose of lawful preservation of a computer 

[PAGE 354]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
13 
program, or of digital materials dependent upon a computer program as 
a condition of access, by an eligible library, archives, or museum, where 
such activities are carried out without any purpose of direct or indirect 
commercial advantage.  Any electronic distribution, display, or 
performance made outside of the physical premises of an eligible library, 
archives, or museum of works preserved under this paragraph may be 
made to only one user at a time, for a limited time, and only where the 
library, archives, or museum has no notice that the copy would be used 
for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research. 
(ii) For purposes of the exemption in paragraph (b)(18)(i) of this section, a 
library, archives, or museum is considered “eligible” if—  
(A) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are open to 
the public and/or are routinely made available to researchers who 
are not affiliated with the library, archives, or museum; 
(B) The library, archives, or museum has a public service mission; 
(C) The library, archives, or museum’s trained staff or volunteers 
provide professional services normally associated with libraries, 
archives, or museums; 
(D) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are 
composed of lawfully acquired and/or licensed materials; and 
(E) The library, archives, or museum implements reasonable 
digital security measures as appropriate for the activities 
permitted by this paragraph (b)(18). 
(19) Computer programs that operate 3D printers that employ technological 
measures to limit the use of material, when circumvention is accomplished solely 
for the purpose of using alternative material and not for the purpose of accessing 
design software, design files, or proprietary data. 
(20) Computer programs, solely for the purpose of investigating a potential 
infringement of free and open source computer programs where: 
(i) The circumvention is undertaken on a lawfully acquired device or 
machine other than a video game console, on which the computer 
program operates; 
(ii) The circumvention is performed by, or at the direction of, a party that 
has a good-faith, reasonable belief in the need for the investigation and 
has standing to bring a breach of license or copyright infringement claim;  

[PAGE 355]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding October 2021 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
14 
(iii) Such circumvention does not constitute a violation of applicable law; 
and  
(iv) The copy of the computer program, or the device or machine on 
which it operates, is not used or maintained in a manner that facilitates 
copyright infringement. 
(21) Video games in the form of computer programs, embodied in lawfully 
acquired physical or downloaded formats, and operated on a general-purpose 
computer, where circumvention is undertaken solely for the purpose of allowing 
an individual with a physical disability to use software or hardware input 
methods other than a standard keyboard or mouse. 
(c) Persons who may initiate circumvention. To the extent authorized under 
paragraph (b) of this section, the circumvention of a technological measure that 
restricts wireless telephone handsets or other wireless devices from connecting to 
a wireless telecommunications network may be initiated by the owner of any 
such handset or other device, by another person at the direction of the owner, or 
by a provider of a commercial mobile radio service or a commercial mobile data 
service at the direction of such owner or other person, solely in order to enable 
such owner or a family member of such owner to connect to a wireless 
telecommunications network, when such connection is authorized by the 
operator of such network. 

[PAGE 356]
u .s. copyright of fi ce · library of  congress · 101  independence avenue se · washington, dc 20559 · www.copyright.gov