[PAGE 1]
united states copyright office
Section 1201 Rulemaking:  
Ninth Triennial Proceeding to Determine  
Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention
recommendation of the register of copyrights  october 2024

[PAGE 2]
October 18, 2024 
Carla Hayden 
Librarian of Congress 
Library of Congress 
101 Independence Ave. SE 
Washington, DC 20540 
Dear Dr. Hayden: 
Pursuant to my statutory obligation under 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C), please find 
the attached recommendation relating to the rulemaking on exemptions from the 
prohibition on circumvention of technological protection measures that control access to 
copyrighted works. 
Sincerely, 
Shira Perlmutter 
Register of Copyrights and Director 
U.S. Copyright Office 
cc: Meg Williams, General Counsel, Library of Congress 

[PAGE 3]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
i 
 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: 
Ninth Triennial Proceeding to Determine 
Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention 
 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
I. INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 1 
II. OVERVIEW OF THE NINTH TRIENNIAL RULEMAKING ........................................ 3 
III. LEGAL BACKGROUND ................................................................................................... 10 
IV. RENEWAL RECOMMENDATIONS ............................................................................... 19 
V. DISCUSSION OF NEW PROPOSED CLASSES ............................................................. 44 
A. Proposed Class 1: Audiovisual Works—Criticism and Comment—
Noncommercial Videos  ............................................................................................... 44 
B. Proposed Class 2: Audiovisual Works—Criticism and Comment— 
Massively Open Online Courses (“MOOCs”) ........................................................... 52 
C. Proposed Classes 3(a) and 3(b): Audiovisual Works and Literary Works— 
Text and Data Mining—Scholarly Research and Teaching...................................... 68 
D. Proposed Class 4: Computer Programs— 
Generative AI Research .............................................................................................. 103 
E. Proposed Class 5: Computer Programs— 
Repair of Commercial Industrial Equipment .......................................................... 137 
F. Proposed Classes 6(a) and 6(b): Computer Programs and Video Games—
Preservation .................................................................................................................. 163 
G. Proposed Class 7: Computer Programs— 
Vehicle Operational Data ............................................................................................ 195 
APPENDIX:  
Recommended Regulatory Language

[PAGE 4]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
1 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
In 1998, as part of the Digital Millenium Copyright Act (“DMCA”), Congress 
added section 1201 to Title 17 to provide greater legal protection for copyright 
owners in the emerging digital environment.  Section 1201 generally makes it 
unlawful to “circumvent a technological measure that effectively controls access 
to” a copyrighted work.1   
Congress also established a set of permanent exemptions to the prohibition on 
circumvention, as well a procedure to put in place limited temporary 
exemptions.  Every three years, the Librarian of Congress, upon the 
recommendation of the Register of Copyrights, is authorized to adopt temporary 
exemptions, with respect to certain classes of copyrighted works, to remain in 
effect for the ensuing three‐year period.  Congress established this rulemaking as 
a “‘fail‐safe’ mechanism” to ensure that the prohibition on circumvention would 
not adversely affect the public’s ability to make lawful uses of copyrighted 
works, including activities protected by the fair use doctrine.2   
The triennial rulemaking occurs through a formal public process administered 
by the Register, who consults with the Assistant Secretary for Communications 
and Information of the Department of Commerce.3  Participants must meet 
specific legal and evidentiary requirements in order to qualify for a temporary 
exemption.  The Register’s recommendations are based on her conclusions as to 
whether each proposed exemption meets those statutory requirements.4  As 
prescribed by the statute, she considers whether the prohibition on 
circumvention is having, or is likely to have, adverse effects on users’ ability to 
make noninfringing uses of a particular class of copyrighted works.  Petitioners 
must provide evidence sufficient to allow the Register to draw such a conclusion. 
The first section 1201 rulemaking was completed in 2000, and subsequent 
rulemakings have taken place on a triennial basis.  In the nearly 25 years since 
the first rulemaking, public interest and participation have grown—as has the 
 
1 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(A). 
2 Id. § 1201(a)(1)(B)–(D). 
3 Id. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 
4 The Office has provided detailed analyses of the statutory requirements in its 2017 policy study 
on section 1201 and elsewhere.  See U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, SECTION 1201 OF TITLE 17 at 105–127 
(2017), https://www.copyright.gov/policy/1201/section‐1201‐full‐report.pdf (“Section 1201 
Report”). 

[PAGE 5]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
2 
 
number of temporary exemptions granted.5  In the first rulemaking, only two 
exemptions were granted; this year, the Register recommends granting over two 
dozen. 
Several petitions the Copyright Office received during this ninth triennial 
rulemaking proceeding implicate major policy issues related to emerging 
technology.  Many of these issues go beyond the scope of the authority provided 
to the Librarian under section 1201, and therefore cannot be addressed in this 
proceeding.  The Register’s recommendations here must be based on legal and 
evidentiary requirements set out in the statute.  Given their importance, these 
issues may be the subject of current or future action in Congress or other 
government agencies. 
This Recommendation sets forth the Register’s analysis and conclusions 
regarding exemptions proposed for the upcoming three-year period.   
 
5 Id. at 25. 

[PAGE 6]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
3 
 
II. OVERVIEW OF THE NINTH TRIENNIAL RULEMAKING 
A. Rulemaking Process 
The Copyright Office (“Office”) initiated the ninth triennial rulemaking 
proceeding by issuing a notice of inquiry (“NOI”) on June 8, 2023.6  The NOI 
requested petitions for renewal, comments in response to petitions for renewal, 
and petitions for new exemptions, including proposals to expand current 
exemptions.7  These public submissions were due between July 7, 2023 and 
August 25, 2023.8 
On October 19, 2023, the Office issued a notice of proposed rulemaking 
(“NPRM”) identifying the existing exemptions that the Register intended to 
recommend for renewal, and providing a description of the proposed classes for 
new and expanded exemptions.9  Public submissions were due between 
December 22, 2023 and March 19, 2024.  The Office received approximately 50 
submissions in response to the NPRM.10   
After analyzing the written comments regarding proposed new and expanded 
exemptions, the Office held three days of public hearings from April 16–18, 2024, 
 
6 Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted Works, 88 Fed. Reg. 
37,486, 37,487 (June 8, 2023) (“NOI”). 
7 Id.  See Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted Works, 82 Fed. 
Reg. 29,804, 29,806 (June 30, 2017) (petitions to expand a current exemption are treated as 
petitions for new exemptions) (“Renewal may only be sought for current exemptions as they are 
currently formulated, without modification.  This means that if a proponent seeks to engage in 
any activities not currently permitted by an existing exemption, a petition for a new exemption 
must be submitted.”). 
8 NOI at 37,486; Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted Works: 
Notice and Request for Public Comment, 88 Fed. Reg. 42,891 (July 5, 2023).   References to renewal 
petitions and comments in response are by party and class name (abbreviated where appropriate) 
followed by “Renewal Pet.,” “Renewal Opp’n,” and “Renewal Supp.”  References to petitions for 
new exemptions and comments in response are by party name and class number followed by 
“Pet.,” “Initial,” “Opp’n,” or “Reply” for comments submitted in the first, second, or third round, 
as applicable. 
9 Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted Works, 88 Fed. Reg. 
72,013 (Oct. 19, 2023) (“NPRM”). 
10 Comments received in this rulemaking are available on the Office’s website.  See Ninth Triennial 
Section 1201 Proceeding, 2024 Cycle, U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2024/ 
(last visited Oct. 17, 2024); see also Late Filed Comments, U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, 
https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2024/late‐filings/ (last visited Oct. 17, 2024).  

[PAGE 7]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
4 
 
via Zoom.11  Forty-one individuals representing 19 stakeholder groups offered 
their views on specific proposed exemptions, and an additional four individuals 
took part in an audience participation session.  After the hearings, the Office 
issued written questions to participants regarding two of the proposed classes 
and received seven responses.12  It then held three ex parte meetings with 
participants concerning three proposed classes.13  In addition, it received three 
letters about the rulemaking from other federal agencies and government 
officials.14   
The Register consulted with the National Telecommunications and Information 
Administration (“NTIA”), in the Department of Commerce, as required by 
section 1201(a)(1).  NTIA actively participated in the rulemaking process, 
providing input at key stages in meetings convened by the Office, and 
participated in the virtual public hearings where it engaged directly by asking 
questions.  NTIA communicated its views on each of the proposed exemptions in 
writing to the Register on September 24, 2024.15  These recommendations 
 
11 Video recordings of these hearings are available on the Office’s website and YouTube pages.  
See Ninth Triennial Section 1201 Rulemaking Public Hearings, U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, 
https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2024/hearings.html (last visited Oct. 17, 2024); U.S. COPYRIGHT 
OFFICE, YOUTUBE, https://www.youtube.com/uscopyrightoffice/ (last visited Oct. 17, 2024).  
Under each proposed class, citations to hearing transcripts refer to that particular class.  Hearing 
transcripts for each individual class are available on the Office’s webpage.  Transcripts of Public 
Hearings in the Ninth Triennial Section 1201 Rulemaking, U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, 
https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2024/hearing‐transcripts/ (last visited Oct. 17, 2024). 
12 Participants’ post‐hearing letter responses are available on the Office’s website.  Post-Hearing 
Questions, U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2024/post‐hearing/ (last 
visited Oct. 17, 2024). 
13 Ex Parte Communications, U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2024/ex‐
parte‐communications/ (last visited Oct. 17, 2024).  The Office required participants to comply 
with its ex parte regulation, codified at 37 C.F.R. § 205.24.  This regulation requires that parties 
submit a meeting request and summary to the Office after an ex parte meeting, which is 
substantially the same process employed in prior section 1201 rulemakings.  Exemptions to 
Permit Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted Works, 85 Fed. Reg. 65,293, 65,310 
(Oct. 17, 2020). 
14 The letters are available on the Office’s website.  Letters Between the U.S. Copyright Office, Other 
Agencies, and Other Government Officials, U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, 
https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2024/USCO‐letters/ (last visited Oct. 17, 2024). 
15 Letter from Alan Davidson, Assistant Sec’y for Commc’ns & Info. Adm’r, Nat’l Telecomms. & 
Info. Admin., U.S. Dep’t of Commerce, to Shira Perlmutter, Register of Copyrights and Dir., U.S. 
Copyright Office (Sept. 24, 2024) (“NTIA Letter”). 

[PAGE 8]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
5 
 
incorporate and respond to that valuable input.  As discussed with respect to 
each class of exemption, the Register and NTIA agree on many issues.  On issues 
where views may vary, the discussions have helped to shape the Register’s 
recommendations. 
The Office has greatly benefited from the robust public participation in the ninth 
triennial proceeding.  Having taken all views expressed into account, the 
Register recommends the following with regard to renewals, and the proposed 
new and expanded exemptions. 
B. Summary of Recommendations of Renewal Exemptions 
The Register recommends renewal of all of the exemptions adopted in the 
previous section 1201 proceeding as to which a petition for renewal was filed.  As 
to the current exemption permitting circumvention of video games in the form of 
computer programs for the purpose of allowing an individual with a physical 
disability to use alternative software or hardware input methods, no such 
petition was filed.16  The following is a list of the other current exemptions, all 
recommended for renewal:  
• Excerpts of audiovisual works,  
o For criticism or comment, 
▪ For use in nonfiction multimedia e-books 
▪ For use in documentary films and other films where the use 
is in parody or for a biographical or historically significant 
nature 
▪ For use in noncommercial videos 
o For educational uses, 
▪ By college and university or K–12 faculty and students, or 
employees acting at the direction of faculty 
▪ By faculty and employees of massive open online courses 
(“MOOCs”) offered by eligible educational institutions 
 
16 NPRM at 72,015 n.19. 

[PAGE 9]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
6 
 
▪ By educators and participants in digital and literacy 
programs offered by libraries, museums and other 
nonprofits 
• Audiovisual works, for the provision of captioning and/or audio 
description by disability services offices or similar units at educational 
institutions for students, faculty, or staff with disabilities 
• Audiovisual works, for the purpose of lawful preservation or creation of a 
replacement copy by eligible libraries, archives, or museums 
• Literary works or previously published musical works that have been 
fixed in the form of text or notation, for use with assistive technologies for 
persons who are blind or visually impaired, or who have print disabilities  
• Literary works consisting of compilations of data generated by medical 
devices and corresponding personal monitoring systems 
• Computer programs that enable wireless devices to connect to a wireless 
telecommunications network (“unlocking”) 
• Computer programs that operate the following types of devices, to allow 
the device to interoperate with or to remove software applications 
(“jailbreaking”): 
o Smartphones  
o Tablets and portable all-purpose mobile computing devices 
o Smart TVs, including video streaming devices 
o Voice assistant devices 
o Routers and dedicated network devices 
• Computer programs that operate the following types of devices, to allow 
diagnosis, maintenance, and repair: 
o Motorized land vehicles, marine vessels, and agricultural vehicles 
or vessels 
o Devices primarily designed for use by consumers, except video 
game consoles that do not contain optical drives 

[PAGE 10]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
7 
 
o Medical devices and systems 
• Computer programs, for purposes of good-faith security research 
• Video games for which outside server support has been discontinued, to 
allow individual play by gamers and lawful preservation of games by 
libraries, archives, and museums (as well as necessary jailbreaking of 
console computer code for preservation uses only), and lawful 
preservation of discontinued video games that never required server 
support 
• Computer programs other than video games, for the lawful preservation 
of computer programs and computer program-dependent materials by 
libraries, archives, and museums 
• Computer programs that operate 3D printers, to allow use of alternative 
material 
• Computer programs, for purpose of investigating potential infringement 
of free and open-source computer programs 
C. New and Expanded Exemptions 
In addition to three new exemption requests, the Register received a number of 
requests to amend, or expand existing exemption classes.  These requests are 
treated as new exemption requests and analyzed in the same manner.17   
The Office organized the petitions for new or expanded exemptions into seven 
classes based on the categories of work and the types of activity at issue.  The 
Register recommends that exemptions be adopted or expanded, in whole or in 
part, in four of those classes as follows: 
• Class 3(a) and 3(b):  Expansion of the exemption for audiovisual and 
literary works, for the purpose of text and data mining for scholarly 
research and teaching by allowing researchers affiliated with other 
nonprofit institutions of higher education to access corpora for 
independent research and by modifying the provisions concerning 
 
17 Requests for language changes are not considered to be renewal petitions reviewed under the 
Office’s streamlined renewal process.  The inquiry in determining whether the renewal process 
should be used is whether the petition proposes any modification to t he language of the 
exemption, regardless of its rationale. 

[PAGE 11]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
8 
 
security measures and viewing the contents of copyrighted works within 
a corpus. 
• Class 5:  New exemption for computer programs that control retail-level 
commercial food preparation equipment for purposes of diagnosis, 
maintenance, and repair.18 
• Class 7:  New Exemption for computer programs, for purposes of 
accessing, storing, and sharing operational data, including diagnostic and 
telematics data, of motorized land vehicles, marine vessels, and 
commercial and agricultural vehicles or vessels. 
The Register recommends denying the following new or expanded exemption 
proposals: 
• Class 1:  Revision of the text of the exemption for excerpts of audiovisual 
works to incorporate language used in the fourth triennial section 1201 
rulemaking. 
• Class 2:  Expansion of the exemption for audiovisual works for 
educational purposes in MOOCs to allow circumvention by online 
educational entities to include for-profit and unaccredited entities. 
• Class 4:  New exemption for computer programs, for purposes of goodfaith artificial intelligence (“AI”) trustworthiness research. 
• Class 6(a) and 6(b):  Expansion of the exemption for preservation of 
computer programs and video games, except with respect to clarifying the 
single-user limitation in the current computer program preservation 
exemption to reflect that preservation institutions can allow a copy of a 
computer program to be accessed by as many individuals as there are 
circumvented copies legally owned.19 
It is important to emphasize that a decision to deny a request is not based on a 
policy determination regarding the benefits or merits of the activity 
described.  Rather, it is compelled by the requirements of the section 1201 
 
18 The Register does not recommend granting an exemption for the broader proposed class, which 
would cover all software‐enabled commercial and industrial equipment.   
19 The Register does not recommend granting the proposed expansion of this exemption that 
would otherwise remove the single‐user limitation.   

[PAGE 12]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
9 
 
rulemaking process, under which proponents must satisfy specific legal and 
evidentiary standards as set out below.  In some instances where these standards 
have not been met, the underlying policy concerns could be addressed through 
the legislative process by establishing permanent exemptions, as the Office has 
urged in the past in the context of repair activities20 and in this cycle as well in 
the context of accessibility.21  Petitioners also have another opportunity in the 
next triennial rulemaking proceeding to seek a temporary exemption and submit 
additional relevant evidence. 
 
20 See Section 1201 Report at 88–90 (“The Office has previously recognized section 1201’s potential 
effect on legitimate repair activities.  In 2015 testimony to Congress, the Register noted that 
‘consumers have voiced discomfort that Section 1201 prevents them from engaging in activities, 
such as the repair of their automobiles and farm equipment, which previously had no 
implications under copyright law.’”). 
21 See also 2021 Recommendation at 314 (“‘[G]enerally, public policy favors removing 
impediments to access for individuals with disabilities.’  Accessibility is ‘not merely a matter of 
convenience,’ but it ensures that individuals with disabilities have ‘meaningful access to the same 
content that individuals without such impairments are able to perceive.’ . . . [F]or individuals 
with disabilities, proposed exemptions ‘may represent the difference between having and not 
having access to the works’ available to others.  For these reasons, the Office has recommended 
that Congress enact a permanent exemption for accessibility into law.”) (quoting 2018 
Recommendation at 104; 2012 Recommendation at 22). 

[PAGE 13]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
10 
 
III. LEGAL BACKGROUND 
A. Section 1201(A)(1) 
In 1998, Congress enacted the DMCA to implement provisions of the World 
Intellectual Property Organization (“WIPO”) Copyright Treaty and WIPO 
Performances and Phonograms Treaty.  Title I of the DMCA added a new 
chapter 12 to title 17 of the United States Code, which prohibits circumvention of 
technological measures employed by or on behalf of copyright owners to control 
access to their works.  In enacting section 1201, Congress recognized that the 
same features making digital technology a valuable delivery mechanism—the 
ability to quickly create and distribute near-perfect copies of works on a vast 
scale—also carry the potential to enable piracy to a degree unimaginable in the 
analog context.  As a result, Congress sought to support copyright owners’ use of 
mechanisms known as “technological protection measures” (“TPMs”) when 
offering works in digital form.   
Section 1201(a)(1), which governs this rulemaking proceeding, states, in pertinent 
part, that “[n]o person shall circumvent a technological measure that effectively 
controls access to a work protected under [title 17].”  The phrase “circumvent a 
technological measure” means “to descramble a scrambled work, to decrypt an 
encrypted work, or otherwise to avoid, bypass, remove, deactivate, or impair a 
technological measure, without the authority of the copyright owner.”22  A 
technological measure that “effectively controls access to a work” is one that “in 
the ordinary course of its operation, requires the application of information, or a 
process or a treatment, with the authority of the copyright owner, to gain access 
to the work.”23 
Congress created permanent exemptions to preserve access to works for certain 
beneficial purposes (e.g., library browsing, reverse engineering), allowing users 
to legally circumvent TPMs in limited circumstances.  As originally drafted, 
however, section 1201 did not provide a process outside of legislation to create 
additional exemptions.  The House of Representatives’ Committee on Commerce 
was concerned that the lack of an ability to avoid the circumvention prohibition 
might undermine the fair use of copyrighted works.24  The Committee concluded 
 
22 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(3)(A). 
23 Id. § 1201(a)(3)(B).   
24 H.R. REP. NO. 105‐551, pt. 2, at 35–36 (1998) (“Commerce Comm. Report”). 

[PAGE 14]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
11 
 
that it would “be appropriate to modify the flat prohibition against the 
circumvention of effective technological measures that control access to 
copyrighted materials, in order to ensure that access for lawful purposes is not 
unjustifiably diminished.”25  Congress thus created this rulemaking proceeding 
to address lawful uses of copyrighted works not covered by the permanent 
exemptions. 
The Commerce Committee characterized the rulemaking proceeding as a “‘failsafe’ mechanism,” stating that “[t]his mechanism would monitor developments 
in the marketplace for copyrighted materials, and allow the enforceability of the 
prohibition against the act of circumvention to be selectively waived, for limited 
time periods, if necessary to prevent a diminution in the availability to 
individual users of a particular category of copyrighted materials.”26  
Section 1201(a) makes such temporary exemptions available if the Librarian of 
Congress determines that noninfringing uses of certain classes of works are, or 
are likely to be, adversely affected by the prohibition against circumvention in 
the succeeding three-year period.27  The three-year exemption period is intended 
to allow exemption proposals to be “fully considered and fairly decided on the 
basis of real marketplace developments,”28 and be flexible enough to 
accommodate these developments.     
As explained by the Commerce Committee, “[t]he goal of the [section 1201 
rulemaking] proceeding is to assess whether the implementation of technological 
protection measures that effectively control access to copyrighted works is 
adversely affecting the ability of individual users to make lawful uses of 
copyrighted works.”29 
B. Permanent Exemptions 
The permanent exemptions, established in section 1201(a)(1) address nonprofit 
libraries, archives, and educational institutions; law enforcement, intelligence, 
and other government activities; reverse engineering; encryption research; 
protection of minors; protection of personally identifying information; and 
 
25 Id. at 36. 
26 Id.   
27 See id. 
28 Id. 
29 Id. at 37.   

[PAGE 15]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
12 
 
security testing.  These statutory exemptions can apply to TPMs that control 
access to copyright works, as well as extend to trafficking in technologies, 
products, services, or devices that are primarily designed or produced for 
purposes of circumventing such TPMs.30  By comparison, temporary exemptions 
promulgated under section 1201(a)(1) apply only to the circumvention of TPMs 
that control access to copyrighted works.  Accordingly, the Librarian of Congress 
does not have authority to adopt—nor does the Register have authority to 
recommend—exemptions from these anti-trafficking prohibitions as part of the 
triennial rulemaking process.31  Nor can the Librarian exempt any parties from 
their duty to comply with other laws, including contractual obligations or noncopyright statutes or regulations.32 
C. Burden of Proof  
As the Office has noted, “it is the totality of the rulemaking record (i.e., the 
evidence provided by commenters or administratively noticed by the Office) that 
must, on balance, reflect the need for an exemption by a preponderance of the 
evidence.  Such evidence must, on the whole, show that it is more likely than not 
that users of a copyrighted work will, in the succeeding three‐year period, be 
adversely affected by the prohibition on circumvention in their ability to make 
noninfringing uses of a particular class of copyrighted works.”33 
Proponents seeking “an exemption from the prohibition on circumvention bear 
the burden of establishing that the requirements for granting an exemption have 
been satisfied.”34  In the Office’s 2017 policy study on section 1201 (“Section 1201 
 
30 Section 1201(a)(2) restricts trafficking in those that are used to circumvent technological 
measures that control access to copyrighted works (referred to as “access controls”).  Similarly, 
section 1201(b) restricts trafficking in those that are used to circumvent technological measures 
that protect the exclusive rights of the copyright owners in their works, including the right to 
reproduce these works (referred to as “copy controls”). 
31 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(E) (“Neither the exception under subparagraph (B) from the 
applicability of the prohibition contained in subparagraph (A), nor any determination made in a 
rulemaking conducted under subparagraph (C), may be used as a defense in any a ction to 
enforce any provision of this title other than this paragraph.”).   
32 See id.  
33 Section 1201 Report at 112. 
34 U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, SECTION 1201 RULEMAKING: SIXTH TRIENNIAL PROCEEDING TO DETERMINE 
EXEMPTIONS TO THE PROHIBITION ON CIRCUMVENTION, RECOMMENDATION OF THE REGISTER OF 
COPYRIGHTS at 13 (2015) (“2015 Recommendation”), 
 

[PAGE 16]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
13 
 
Report”), it clarified that there are “two distinct burdens: the ‘burden of 
persuasion,’ i.e., which party loses if the evidence is closely balanced, and the 
‘burden of production,’ i.e., which party bears the obligation to come forward 
with evidence at different points in the proceeding.”35  Practically speaking, “the 
burden of production will effectively be on exemption proponents, simply 
because they have greater knowledge of and access to evidence demonstrating 
adverse effects on noninfringing uses.”36   
As for the burden of persuasion, the Register will recommend granting an 
exemption only “when the preponderance of the evidence in the record shows 
that the conditions for granting an exemption have been met.”37 
D. Defining an Exemption Class 
Section 1201(a)(1) specifies that an exemption adopted as part of this rulemaking 
apply to “a particular class of works.”38  The starting point for determining a 
“particular class” is the list of categories appearing in section 102 of title 17, such 
as literary works, musical works, and sound recordings.39  But, as the legislative 
history made clear, “the ‘particular class of copyrighted works’ [is intended to] 
be a narrow and focused subset of the broad categories of works . . . identified in 
Section 102 of the Copyright Act.”40  For example, while the category of “literary 
works” under section 102(a)(1) “embraces both prose creations such as journals, 
periodicals or books, and computer programs of all kinds,” Congress explained 
that “[i]t is exceedingly unlikely that the impact of the prohibition on 
circumvention of access control technologies will be the same for scientific 
 
https://www.  copyright.gov /‌‌1201/2015/registers‐recommendation.pdf.  References to the 
Register’s recommendations in prior rulemakings are cited by the year of publication followed by 
“Recommendation” (e.g., “2018 Recommendation”).  Prior Recommendations are available on the 
Copyright Office website at https://www.copyright.gov/1201/. 
35 Section 1201 Report at 110 (quoting Shaffer v. Weast, 546 U.S. 49, 56 (2005) (quotation marks and 
alterations omitted)). 
36 Id.   
37 Id. at 111–12; see 2015 Recommendation at 13–14 (accord). 
38 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(B).   
39 STAFF OF H. COMM. ON THE JUDICIARY, 105TH CONG., SECTION‐BY‐SECTION ANALYSIS OF H.R. 2281 
AS PASSED BY THE UNITED STATES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ON AUGUST 4, 1998, at 7 (Comm. Print 
1998) (“House Manager’s Report”).   
40 Commerce Comm. Report at 38 (emphasis added).   

[PAGE 17]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
14 
 
journals as it is for computer operating systems.”41  Accordingly, “these two 
categories of works, while both ‘literary works,’ do not constitute a single 
‘particular class’ for purposes of” section 1201(a)(1).42   
At the same time, Congress emphasized that the Librarian “should not draw the 
boundaries of ‘particular classes’ too narrowly.”43  Thus, while the category of 
“motion pictures and other audiovisual works” in section 102 “may 
appropriately be subdivided, for purposes of the rulemaking, into classes such as 
‘motion pictures,’ [or] ‘television programs,’” it would be inappropriate “to 
subdivide overly narrowly into particular genres of motion pictures, such as 
Westerns, comedies, or live action dramas.”44   
Determining the appropriate scope of a “class of works” for an exemption may 
also involve consideration of the adverse effects an exemption may have on the 
market for or value of copyrighted works.  For example, the class might be 
defined in part by reference to the medium on which the works are distributed, 
or even to the access control measures applied to them.  In particular, classes 
may be refined by reference to the particular type of use and/or user to which the 
exemption will apply.45  In some cases, “the Office’s ability to narrowly define 
the class is what enable[s] it to recommend the exemption at all.”46  
In sum, “[d]eciding the scope or boundaries of a ‘particular class’ of copyrighted 
works as to which the prohibition contained in section 1201(a)(1) has been shown 
to have had an adverse impact is an important issue” to be determined based 
upon the law and facts developed in the proceeding.47  The Register must look to 
the specific record before her to assess the proper scope of the class for a 
proposed exemption. 
E. Section 1201 Factors 
In considering whether to recommend an exemption, the Register inquires: “Are 
users of a copyrighted work adversely affected by the prohibition on 
 
41 House Manager’s Report at 7.   
42 Id. 
43 Id. 
44 Id. 
45 2015 Recommendation at 17–18; Section 1201 Report at 26. 
46 Section 1201 Report at 109. 
47 House Manager’s Report at 7.   

[PAGE 18]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
15 
 
circumvention in their ability to make noninfringing uses of a class of 
copyrighted works, or are users likely to be so adversely affected in the next 
three years?”48  This test breaks down into several elements. 
1. Copyrightable Works at Issue 
The first requirement for an exemption is that the class include at least some 
works protected by copyright.49  The statute refers to a “class of copyrighted 
works”50 and provides that the circumvention ban applies only to a TPM that 
controls access to “a work protected under this title.”51 
2. Noninfringing Use 
The second requirement is that the proposed uses are noninfringing under title 
17.52  Noninfringing uses include those protected by copyright exceptions, such 
as fair use (section 107), the exceptions for libraries and archives (section 108), 
and exceptions for adaptations of computer programs (section 117).  As the 
Office has explained: 
The Register will look to the Copyright Act and relevant judicial 
precedents when analyzing whether a proposed use is likely to be 
noninfringing.  The statutory language requires that the use is or is 
likely to be noninfringing, not merely that the use might plausibly be 
considered noninfringing.  As the Register has indicated previously, 
there is no “rule of doubt” favoring an exemption when it is unclear 
that a particular use is a fair or otherwise noninfri nging use.  Thus, 
[the record] must show more tha n that a particular use could be 
noninfringing.  Rather, the [record] must establish that the proposed 
use is likely to qualify as noninfringing under relevant law.53  
While “this standard does not require ‘controlling precedent directly on point,’ 
the rulemaking is not an appropriate venue for breaking new ground in fair use 
 
48 Section 1201 Report at 114–15; see 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C) (italics omitted). 
49 Section 1201 Report at 115; see 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(A), (a)(1)(C). 
50 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 
51 Id. § 1201(a)(1)(A). 
52 Section 1201 Report at 115–17; see 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 
53 2015 Recommendation at 15; see Section 1201 Report at 115–16. 

[PAGE 19]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
16 
 
jurisprudence.”54  Proponents must therefore provide sufficient detail that the 
proposed uses are cognizable for the Register to evaluate and determine whether 
they are likely to be noninfringing under relevant statutory and case law. 
3. Causation  
The third requirement is that the statutory prohibition on circumventing access 
controls is the cause of the adverse effects.55  “Adverse impacts that flow from 
other sources, or that are not clearly attributable to implementation of a 
technological protection measure, are outside the scope of the rulemaking.”56  For 
example, adverse effects stemming from “marketplace trends, other 
technological developments, or changes in the roles of libraries, distributors or 
other intermediaries” are not cognizable harms under the statute.57 
4. Adverse Effects and the Section 1201 Statutory Factors 
The final requirement is that users are either adversely affected, or are likely to 
be adversely affected, in their ability to make noninfringing uses during the next 
three years.58  Proponents must show that circumvention is necessary to avoid 
the alleged adverse effects.  This element is analyzed in reference to section 
1201(a)(1)(C)’s statutory factors: 
(i) the availability for use of copyrighted works; 
(ii) the availability for use of works for nonprofit archival, preservation, 
and educational purposes;  
(iii) the impact that the prohibition on the circumvention of technological 
measures applied to copyrighted works has on criticism, comment, 
news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research;  
(iv) the effect of circumvention of technological measures on the market for 
or value of copyrighted works; and  
 
54 Section 1201 Report at 10–11, 28, 116–17 (quoting 2010 Recommendation at 12).  
55 Id. at 115, 117; see 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 
56 Commerce Comm. Report at 37; House Manager’s Report at 6 (similar).  
57 House Manager’s Report at 6. 
58 Section 1201 Report at 115; see 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C). 

[PAGE 20]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
17 
 
(v) such other factors as the Librarian considers appropriate.59   
In applying these factors, the Register “balances ‘[t]he harm identified by a 
proponent of an exemption . . . with the harm that would result from an 
exemption.’”60  Weighing these factors may require consideration of the benefits 
that the technological measure brings with respect to the overall creation and 
dissemination of works in the marketplace, in addition to any negative impact.  
As the legislative history explains, “the rulemaking proceedings should consider 
the positive as well as the adverse effects of these technologies on the availability 
of copyrighted materials.”61 
Congress stressed that the “main focus of the rulemaking proceeding” should be 
on “whether a substantial diminution” of the availability of works for 
noninfringing uses is “actually occurring” in the marketplace.62  To prove the 
existence of adverse effects, it is necessary to demonstrate “distinct, verifiable 
and measurable impacts” occurring in the marketplace, as exemptions “should 
not be based upon de minimis impacts.”63  Thus, “mere inconveniences” or 
“individual cases” do not satisfy the rulemaking standard.64   
To the extent a proponent relies on claimed future impacts rather than existing 
impacts, such future adverse impacts must be “likely.”65  An exemption may be 
based upon anticipated, rather than actual, adverse impacts “only in 
extraordinary circumstances in which the evidence of likelihood of future 
 
59 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C); see Section 1201 Report at 115, 118. 
60 Section 1201 Report at 118 (alteration and omission in original) (quoting Exemption to 
Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 
76 Fed. Reg. 60,398, 60,403 (Sept. 29, 2011); Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of 
Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 73 Fed. Reg. 58,073, 58,078 (Oct. 6, 
2008); Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access 
Control Technologies, 70 Fed. Reg. 57,526, 57,528 (Oct. 3, 2005); Exemption to Prohibition on 
Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 67 Fed. Reg. 
63,578, 63,581 (Oct. 15, 2002)). 
61 House Manager’s Report at 6. 
62 Id. 
63 Commerce Comm. Report at 37. 
64 House Manager’s Report at 6.  
65 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(B)–(C).   

[PAGE 21]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
18 
 
adverse impact during that time period is highly specific, strong and 
persuasive.”66  
In sum, for a finding of adverse effects, the evidence in the record “cannot be 
hypothetical, theoretical, or speculative, but must be real, tangible, and concrete.  
Ultimately, the evidence must show that adverse effects are not merely possible, 
but probable (i.e., more likely than not to be occurring or likely to occur in the 
next three years).”67 
 
66 House Manager’s Report at 6. 
67 Section 1201 Report at 120–21. 

[PAGE 22]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
19 
 
IV. RENEWAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
In each rulemaking cycle, the number of temporary exemptions granted has 
increased.68 Fortunately, the streamlined renewal process adopted in the Seventh 
Triennial Rulemaking in 2018 has reduced the burden on petitioners requesting 
renewal of existing exemptions and has facilitated the Office’s efficient 
evaluation of submissions.69  Section 1201 authorizes the Librarian of Congress to 
adopt temporary exemptions upon the recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights in a rulemaking proceeding conducted every three years, and 
existing exemptions are reevaluated for renewal as part of this proceeding.70 
As set forth in the NPRM, the Register received petitions to renew all but one of 
the twenty-six exemptions adopted in the eighth triennial rulemaking.71  The 
Office received six comments opposing renewal of four exemptions but 
determined that none demonstrated any changes in law or facts or other bases 
 
68 Compare 2003 Recommendation at 5 (“The first § 1201 rulemaking took place three years ago, 
and on October 27, 2000, the Librarian announced noninfringing users of two classes of works 
would not be subject to the prohibition on circumvention of access controls.”) with 2010 
Recommendation at 19 (describing Office’s evaluation of exemptions for twenty‐five classes of 
works) and 2021 Recommendation at 1 (describing Office’s evaluation of seventeen renewal 
classes and seventeen new classes). 
69 See NPRM at 72,015 (“The streamlined renewal process was praised by participants during the 
ensuing rulemaking, and the Office has employed it in subsequent rulemakings.”) (citing 2018 
Recommendation at 19 n.80 (collecting transcript testimony from 2018 rulemaking)). 
70 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(B)–(D); see also NPRM at 72,015 (describing streamlined renewal 
process). 
71 A renewal petition was not filed for the current exemption permitting circumvention of video 
games in the form of computer programs for the purpose of allowing an individual with a 
physical disability to use alternative software or hardware input methods.  See 37 C.F.R. § 
201.40(b)(21) (2023). 

[PAGE 23]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
20 
 
for not granting the corresponding renewal petitions.72  Accordingly, the NPRM 
proposed renewing all twenty-five exemptions supported by renewal petitions.73   
The Register now finalizes the NPRM’s proposal to recommend renewal of all 
exemptions for which the Office received petitions.  The renewal petitions and 
lack of meaningful opposition demonstrated that the conditions that led to 
adoption of the exemptions are likely to continue during the next triennial 
period.  These existing exemptions, and the bases for the recommendation to 
renew each exemption in accordance with the streamlined renewal process, are 
briefly summarized below.  Where noted, the renewed exemptions serve as a 
baseline in considering requests for expansion in this rulemaking.  The 
recommended regulatory language for all exemptions in this rulemaking 
(including renewals, expanded exemptions, and wholly new exemptions) is set 
forth in the Appendix. 
A. Audiovisual works—educational and derivative uses   
Multiple individuals and organizations petitioned to renew the exemption 
codified at 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1), which covers the use of short portions of 
motion pictures for various educational and derivative uses.74  The Office did not 
receive meaningful opposition to renewal.  Renewal of each of this exemption’s 
subparts was unopposed, except for noncommercial videos, as discussed below.  
 
72 See NPRM at 72,015 (“not find[ing] sufficient opposition to any existing exemption that 
supports refusing renewal”); see also Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access Controls on 
Copyrighted Works, 85 Fed. Reg. 37,399, 37,402 (June 22, 2020) (describing “meaningful 
opposition” standard).  The Office also received one untimely opposition comment.  See 
AdvaMed Medical Device Repair Opp’n.  As has been made clear in past cycles, the Register has 
no obligation to consider untimely comments.  See 2006 Recommendation at 48 (“While it is 
preferable that all interested parties make their views known in the rulemaking process, they 
must do so in compliance with the process that is provided for public comment, or offer a 
compelling justification for their failure to do so.  They have failed to offer such justification.  If 
these extremely untimely submissions were accepted, it would be difficult to imagine when it 
ever would be justified to reject an untimely comment.  Such a precedent would be an invitation 
to chaos in future rulemakings.”); see also, e.g., 2010 Recommendation at 111 n.376, 115 n.394 
(referring to late comments not considered in 2006 rulemaking).  Regardless, AdvaMed’s 
comment would not have been outcome determinative, as it conveyed arguments repeated in 
other timely comments.  
73 To the extent any renewal petition proposed uses beyond the current exemption, for purposes 
of considering renewal the Office analyzed whether the petition provided sufficient information 
to warrant renewal of the exemption in its current form.  See NPRM at 72,015. 
74 See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1).  

[PAGE 24]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
21 
 
The existing exemption and its various subparts collectively serve as the baseline 
in assessing whether to recommend any expansion to Classes 1 and 2.  
1. Audiovisual works—criticism and comment—filmmaking 
Multiple organizations petitioned to renew the exemption for motion pictures for 
uses in documentary films or other films where the use is in a parody or for the 
work’s biographical or historically significant nature.75  No oppositions were 
filed against renewal.  The petitions summarized the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption, and the petitioners demonstrated personal 
knowledge and experience.  The International Documentary Association and 
Kartemquin Educational Films (together, “Joint Filmmakers”)—which represent 
thousands of independent filmmakers across the nation—stated that they 
“kn[e]w firsthand filmmakers who have found it necessary to rely on this 
exemption . . . [and] ha[d] also heard from filmmakers through [their] 
educational programs, services, and events who have needed to rely on the 
exemption.”76  For example, petitioners indicated that TPMs such as encryption 
continue to prevent filmmakers from accessing needed material and that this is 
“especially true for the kind of high fidelity motion picture material filmmakers 
need to satisfy both distributors and viewers.”77  And New Media Rights 
(“NMR”) represented that “[i]f the exemption was not renewed, individuals 
would be unable to make noninfringing uses of . . . copyrighted works” in the 
filmmaking industry.78 
2. Audiovisual works—criticism and comment—noncommercial 
videos 
Two organizations petitioned to renew the exemption for motion pictures for 
uses in noncommercial videos.79  The Organization for Transformative Works’ 
(“OTW”) petitioned for renewal of this exemption but also requested changes to 
 
75 See Int’l Documentary Ass’n & Kartemquin Educ. Films (together, “Joint Filmmakers”) 
Documentary Films Renewal Pet.; New Media Rights (“NMR”) Documentary Films Renewal Pet.   
76 Joint Filmmakers Documentary Films Renewal Pet. at 3. 
77 Id. 
78 NMR Documentary Films Renewal Pet. at 3. 
79 See NMR Noncom. Videos Renewal Pet.; Org. for Transformative Works (“OTW”) Noncom. 
Videos Renewal Pet. 

[PAGE 25]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
22 
 
the exemption’s language.80  To the extent OTW’s petition requested changes, the 
Office treated it as a petition for an expansion, addressed as Class 1 below.  The 
DVD Copy Control Association (“DVD CCA”) and Advanced Access Content 
System Licensing Administrator, LLC (“AACS LA”) submitted joint comments in 
response to both OTW’s petition for renewal and to proposed Class 1.81  The 
Entertainment Software Association (“ESA”), the Motion Picture Association 
(“MPA”), and the Recording Industry Association of America (“RIAA”) 
(collectively, “Joint Creators I”) also submitted an opposition to adoption of 
Class 1 based on OTW’s petition.82  Neither group of opponents, however, 
objected to renewal of this exemption as currently written; they opposed only 
OTW’s suggested changes.83  The Office therefore did not receive meaningful 
opposition to renewal of the exemption in its present form. 
The petitions demonstrated the continuing need and justification for the 
exemption, and the petitioners demonstrated personal knowledge and 
experience.  For example, OTW, one of the petitioners, has advocated for the 
noncommercial video exemption in past triennial rulemakings and stated that it 
has heard from “a number of noncommercial remix artists” who have used the 
exemption and anticipate needing to use it in the future.84  OTW included an 
account from an academic who stated that footage ripped from DVDs and Blu-
 
80 See generally OTW Noncom. Videos Renewal Pet.  These commenters objected to OTW’s 
proposed new language, arguing that the proposal would require a modification of the 
exemption, which cannot properly be sought through a petition for renewal.  See DVD Copy 
Control Association (“DVD CCA”) & Advanced Access Content System Licensing Administrator, 
LLC (“AACS LA”) Noncom. Videos Renewal Opp’n; see also 2021 DVD CCA & AACS LA 
Noncom. Videos Opp’n; 2021 Joint Creators Noncom. Videos Opp’n.  The Office agreed and has 
addressed the proposed modifications “as part of the full rulemaking proceeding, . . . [including] 
this request . . . as one . . . of the proposed new classes discussed below.”  NPRM at 72,016. 
81 See DVD CCA & AACS LA Noncom. Videos Renewal Opp’n; DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 
Opp’n. 
82 See Entertainment Software Association (“ESA”), Motion Picture Association (“MPA”), and the 
Recording Industry Association of America (“RIAA”) (together, “Joint Creators I”) Class 1 Opp’n. 
83 See Joint Creators I Class 1 Opp’n at 2 (“ESA, MPA, and RIAA once again do not oppose renewal of 
the existing exemption for motion pictures on DVDs, Blu‐ray discs, and digitally transmitted video 
for use in noncommercial videos as codified at 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1)(i)(B).”) (emphasis added); 
DVD CCA & AACS LA Noncom. Videos Renewal Opp’n at 1 (“object[ing] to the proposal found 
in the renewal petition submitted by the Organization for Transformative Work” but not 
objecting to renewal of the exemption without modification). 
84 OTW Noncom. Videos Renewal Pet. at 3. 

[PAGE 26]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
23 
 
ray is preferred by “vidders” (noncommercial remix artists) because “it is high 
quality enough to bear up under the transformations that vidders make to it.”85  
Similarly, NMR stated that its clients have found it necessary to rely on this 
exemption and will continue to make these types of uses in the next triennial 
period.86 
3. Audiovisual works—criticism and comment—multimedia ebooks 
Authors Alliance, the American Association of University Professors (“AAUP”), 
and independent documentary producer and screenwriter Bobette Buster filed a 
joint petition to renew the exemption for the use of motion picture excerpts in 
nonfiction multimedia e-books.87  No oppositions were filed against renewal.  
The petition demonstrated the continuing need and justification for the 
exemption.  For example, Professor Buster stated that she is continuing work on 
her e-book series, “Deconstructing Master Filmmakers,” and that “use of highresolution video is essential to her project,” and “high-resolution video continues 
to be unavailable without the circumvention of technological protection 
measures.”88  The joint petition indicated that Professor Buster is “an active 
proponent, supporter, and user of the existing exemption for the use of film clips 
in multimedia nonfiction ebooks” and was therefore “well-situated to affirm that 
the record supporting the Office’s promulgation of the previous exemption 
remains applicable today.”89  
4. Audiovisual works—criticism, comment, teaching, or 
scholarship—universities and K–12 educational institutions   
Multiple individuals and organizations petitioned to renew the exemption for 
motion pictures for educational purposes by college and university or K–12 
faculty and students.90  No oppositions were filed against renewal.  The petitions 
 
85 Id. 
86 NMR Noncom. Videos Renewal Pet. at 3. 
87 Buster, Authors All. & Am. Ass’n of Univ. Professors (“AAUP”) Nonfiction Multimedia E‐Books 
Renewal Pet. 
88 Id. at 3. 
89 Id. 
90 See Decherney, Carpini, Soc’y for Cinema and Media Studies (“SCMS”) & Library Copyright 
Alliance (“LCA”) (together, “Joint Educators I”) AV Educ. Renewal Pet.; Brigham Young Univ.—
Idaho Intellectual Property Office (“BYU‐Idaho”) AV Educ. Renewal Pet.  

[PAGE 27]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
24 
 
demonstrated the continuing need and justification for the exemption, indicating 
that educators and students continue to rely on excerpts from digital media for 
class presentations and coursework.  Peter Decherney, Michael Delli Carpini, the 
Library Copyright Alliance (“LCA”), and the Society for Cinema and Media 
Studies (“SCMS”) (collectively, “Joint Educators I”) provided several examples of 
professors using DVD clips in the classroom.  For example, “University of 
Pennsylvania professor Meta Mazaj teaches World Film History . . . [and] uses 
hundreds of clips to compare and contrast formal techniques of editing, 
cinematography, staging, and more.”91  Brigham Young University-Idaho 
Intellectual Property Office (“BYU-Idaho”) stated that “film excerpts serve as 
valuable teaching tools in colleges, universities, and K-12 educational settings, 
enabling educators to illustrate and analyze specific scenes, themes, or 
techniques” in their courses, particularly given that “not all films or excerpts are 
readily available [through streaming platforms] for institutional access.”92 
In addition, co-petitioner Peter Decherney declared that he “continues to rely 
heavily on this exemption in teaching his course on Multimedia Criticism,” in 
which his students “produce short videos analyzing media.”93  Joint Educators I 
asserted that the “entire field of teaching and scholarship” on multimedia 
criticism “could not have existed in the United States without fair use and the 
1201 educational exemption.”94  Through these submissions, petitioners 
demonstrated personal knowledge and experience with this exemption based on 
their past participation in the section 1201 triennial rulemaking and their 
representation of thousands of digital and literacy educators and other members 
supporting educators and students. 
5. Audiovisual works—criticism and comment—massive open 
online courses (“MOOCs”)   
Joint Educators I also petitioned to renew the exemption for motion pictures for 
educational uses in MOOCs.95  No oppositions were filed against renewal.  The 
petitioners demonstrated the continuing need and justification for the exemption, 
stating that instructors continue to rely on it to develop, provide, and improve 
 
91 Joint Educators I AV Educ. Renewal Pet. at 3. 
92 BYU‐Idaho AV Educ. Renewal Pet. at 3. 
93 Joint Educators I AV Educ. Renewal Pet. at 3. 
94 Id. 
95 See Joint Educators I AV Educ. MOOCs Renewal Pet. 

[PAGE 28]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
25 
 
MOOCs, as well as increase the number of (and therefore access to) MOOCs in 
the field of film and media studies.96  Joint Educators I further noted that the 
“exemption has become even more vital since the COVID-19 pandemic and the 
continuing shift of our education systems to include online learning.”97  As 
teachers and proponents of MOOCs—most of whom have advocated for this 
exemption in prior rulemakings—Joint Educators I demonstrated personal 
experience with and knowledge of this exemption. 
6. Audiovisual works—criticism and comment—digital and media 
literacy programs  
The LCA and Professor Renee Hobbs of the University of Rhode Island 
petitioned to renew the exemption for motion pictures for educational uses in 
nonprofit digital and media literacy programs offered by libraries, museums, 
and other nonprofits.98  No oppositions were filed against renewal.  The petition 
demonstrated the continuing need and justification for the exemption, and 
petitioners demonstrated personal knowledge and experience.  For example, 
Professor Hobbs “designed digital and media literacy programs offered by . . . 
institutions[] including libraries, museums, and other nonprofit entities.”99  
According to petitioners, “[l]ibrarians, museums, and other nonprofit entities 
across the country have relied on the exemption . . . and will continue to need to 
circumvent technological protections so as to enable noninfringing uses of 
motion pictures in their digital and literacy programs.”100  
B. Audiovisual works—accessibility 
The Association of Transcribers and Speech-to-Text Providers (“ATSP”) and 
LCA petitioned to renew the exemption for motion pictures for the provision of 
captioning and/or audio description by disability services offices or similar units 
 
96 Joint Educators I noted that “before the exemption was granted, there were only 2 or 3 MOOCs 
in the field of film and media studies, and they relied primarily on public domain examples.  
Today, there are dozens more MOOCs on film and media offered by US colleges, universities, 
and others.  Petitioner Professor Decherney’s popular course on the history of Hollywood has 
now reached nearly 75,000 students in over 190 countries.  As a result of the growth of online 
learning during the pandemic, his enrollment has more than doubled since March 2020.”  Id. at 3. 
97 Id. 
98 LCA & Hobbs AV Educ. Nonprofits Renewal Pet. 
99 Id. at 3. 
100 Id. 

[PAGE 29]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
26 
 
at educational institutions for students, faculty, or staff with disabilities.101  No 
oppositions were filed against renewal.  The petitioners demonstrated the 
continuing need and justification for the exemption, and, as “represent[atives of] 
disability services professionals and supporting entities collectively responsible 
for the regular provision of captioning and audio description services for 
thousands of students,” personal knowledge and experience with the 
exemption.102  They asserted that using various media, including motion pictures, 
promotes student engagement and learning, but many motion pictures do not 
include captions or audio descriptions created by their producers or 
distributors.103  They further stated that the “exemption enables disability 
services offices and similar units to ensure that students with disabilities have 
access to the same advantages as their peers in the pursuit of education.”104 
C. Audiovisual works—preservation or replacement—library, archives, 
and museum 
LCA petitioned to renew the exemption for motion pictures for preservation or 
the creation of a replacement copy by an eligible library, archives, or museum.105  
No oppositions were filed against renewal.  LCA, which represents over 100,000 
libraries and more than 300,000 library personnel, demonstrated the continuing 
need and justification for the exemption.106  It asserted that “[c]ultural heritage 
institutions across the country have relied on the exemption granted in the eighth 
rulemaking cycle to make preservation and replacement copies of the motion 
pictures in their collections stored on DVDs and Blu-ray discs,” many of which 
are not currently available for purchase or streaming.107  As DVD and Blu-ray 
discs deteriorate, “libraries, archives, and museums will continue to need to 
circumvent technological protections so as to make preservation and 
replacement copies of the motion pictures in their collections.”108  LCA also 
 
101 See Association of Transcribers and Speech‐to‐Text Providers (“ATSP”) & LCA Captioning 
Renewal Pet. 
102 Id. at 3. 
103 Id. 
104 Id. 
105 See LCA Preservation Renewal Pet. 
106 Id. at 3. 
107 Id. 
108 Id. 

[PAGE 30]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
27 
 
demonstrated its personal knowledge of the exemption, having petitioned for its 
adoption in the eighth triennial rulemaking. 
D. Audiovisual works—text and data mining—scholarly research and 
teaching 
Authors Alliance, AAUP, and LCA jointly petitioned to renew the exemption for 
text and data mining of motion pictures by researchers affiliated with a nonprofit 
institution of higher education, or at the direction of such researchers, for the 
purpose of scholarly research and teaching.109  Petitioners demonstrated the 
continuing need for this exemption, citing many researchers who rely on it.  For 
example, Professor James Lee at the University of Cincinnati, who researches 
depictions of climate change, is using the exemption “to build a corpus of . . . 
films [and] to then conduct text and data mining, searching for climate change 
markers across those materials.”110  Another researcher attempting to 
“quantitatively fingerprint acting styles of different eras, genres, and 
individuals” uses the exemption to extract video files from hundreds of DVDs 
and process them using machine learning-based methods to establish body-pose 
data on actors.111  And petitioners emphasized that many other researchers “are 
actively planning projects that would rely on the TDM exemption.”112  Petitioners 
also demonstrated their personal experience with this exemption, having 
advocated for its adoption in the eighth triennial rulemaking proceeding.113   
DVD CCA and AACS LA objected to renewal of this exemption, arguing that the 
previous rulemaking record is no longer reliable.114  According to DVD CCA and 
AACS LA, the Office’s 2021 recommendation was premised on the fact that 
“there [were] no [existing] large-scale libraries of digital motion pictures 
available for text and data mining.”115  The Register’s findings were not limited 
on such a premise.  In 2021, opponents of the exemption (including DVD CCA 
and AACS LA) asserted, as they do now, that “[i]n fact, licenses [we]re available” 
 
109 See Authors All., AAUP & LCA AV Text and Data Mining Renewal Pet. 
110 Id. at 3. 
111 See id. 
112 Id. 
113 See, e.g., 2021 Recommendation at 102. 
114 See DVD CCA & AACS LA AV Text and Data Mining Renewal Opp’n at 2–4. 
115 Id. at 2–3 n.1 (quoting 2021 Recommendation at 119). 

[PAGE 31]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
28 
 
for text and data mining.116  The Register concluded that while there may have 
been a “nascent, but growing” market for licenses,117 proponents were unable to 
obtain the “large-scale” licenses for the quantity of audiovisual works needed to 
engage in text and data mining.118   
Petitioners asserted that there have not been any legal changes or market 
developments that would disturb the Office’s previous analysis or materially 
impact the record upon which the Register relied in her previous 
recommendation.119  According to the petitions, “[c]ommercially licensed text 
and data mining products continue to be made available to research institutions, 
as they were at the time of the 2021 exemption and as is reflected in the existing 
record, but these licensed products do not allow researchers to license the full 
array of texts and films that are needed to engage in the research they seek to 
do.”120 
DVD CCA and AACS LA’s opposition in the current proceeding did not provide 
evidence of licensing options for the text and data mining uses that have 
developed since the 2021 rulemaking.  Their submission did not demonstrate 
that digital-motion-picture libraries offer a reasonable alternative to 
circumvention.121  Although licensing markets may be changing, opponents did 
not present sufficient evidence for the Register to conclude that market 
development is adequate to warrant not renewing this exemption.  In accord 
 
116 2021 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 7 Opp’n at 14–15 (characterizing testimony by Professor 
Lauren Tilton as “suggesting research groups need financial resources to license [ ] works ” for 
text and data mining but not indicating “that licenses are [un]available, that rightsholders are 
unwilling to license the works, or even that the fees for such licenses are unreasonable”).  During 
that cycle, MPA, Alliance for Recorded Music, and ESA, filed a joint submission arguing that an 
exemption was unnecessary because “copyright owners of motion pictures already license[d] 
other educational uses, such as remote streaming, and could potentially license the uses at issue.”  
2021 Joint Creators Class 7 Opp’n at 6. 
117 2021 Recommendation at 112–13. 
118 Id. at 119 (“For researchers interested in studying motion pictures, there are no existing large ‐
scale libraries of digital motion pictures available for text and data mining.”); see also 2021 Tr. at 
415:22–416:07 (Apr. 7, 2021) (Bamman, Univ. of Cal., Berkeley) (stating that “licensing for 
movies” was a problem for text and data mining because such activities could not be “carr[ied] 
out if there’s any single studio that doesn’t allow the licenses for those terms”). 
119 Authors All., AAUP & LCA AV Text and Data Mining Renewal Pet. at 4. 
120 Id. 
121 See DVD CCA & AACS LA AV Text and Data Mining Renewal Opp’n at 3. 

[PAGE 32]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
29 
 
with the evidence that the Register found to be convincing in the previous 
rulemaking, petitioners in this cycle stated that, still, products available for 
licensing cannot meet researchers’ needs.122  Accordingly, DVD CCA and AACS 
LA’s opposition does not preclude renewal, and the Register finds it appropriate 
to rely on the prior record in recommending renewal.123 
This existing exemption serves as the baseline in assessing whether to 
recommend any expansions in Class 3(a). 
E. Literary works—text and data mining—scholarly research and 
teaching 
Authors Alliance, AAUP, and LCA also jointly petitioned to renew the 
exemption for text and data mining of literary works that were distributed 
electronically by researchers affiliated with a nonprofit institution of higher 
education, or at the direction of such researchers, for the purpose of scholarly 
research and teaching.124  The petition largely echoed the same organizations’ 
joint petition for text and data mining of audiovisual works, but renewal of this 
exemption is unopposed.  The petitioners demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption, as well as their personal knowledge of the 
exemption, stating that they “have continued to work with researchers, . . . many 
of whom are now actively relying on the TDM exemption in their research or 
developing plans to do so in the very near future.”125  As an example, they 
highlighted the work of Associate Vice Provost for Digital Scholarship and 
Associate Professor of Digital Humanities James Lee at the University of 
Cincinnati, who “is researching depictions of changes in climate . . . using the 
exemption to build a corpus of novels and films to then conduct text and data 
mining, searching for climate change markers across those materials.”126  
 
122 See Authors All., AAUP & LCA AV Text and Data Mining Renewal Pet. at 4. 
123 As in the NPRM, the Register also notes that opponents did not provide affirmative evidence 
of “new legal or factual developments that implicate ‘the reliability of the previously‐analyzed 
administrative record,’” as required by the Notice of Inquiry.  NOI at 37,488 (quoting Exemptions 
to Permit Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted Works, 85 FR 65,293, 65,295 (Oct. 15, 
2020)).  “Unsupported conclusory opinion and speculation” do not form a sufficient basis for the 
Office “to refuse to recommend renewing an exemption it would have otherwise recommended 
in the absence of any opposition.”  Id.  
124 See Authors All., AAUP & LCA LW Text and Data Mining Renewal Pet. 
125 Id. at 3. 
126 Id. 

[PAGE 33]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
30 
 
Petitioners stated that other research projects dependent on this exemption are 
“just now taking shape . . . at Stanford University, UC Berkeley, Dartmouth 
University, Bowdoin College, Temple University, the University of Cincinnati, 
and the University of Illinois Urbana-Campaign . . . .”127  They also asserted that 
“there are no material changes in facts, law, technology, or other circumstances 
that would justify failing to renew” this exemption.128  
This existing exemption serves as the baseline in assessing whether to 
recommend any expansions in Class 3(b). 
F. Literary works—assistive technologies 
Multiple organizations jointly petitioned to renew the exemption for literary 
works or previously published musical works that have been fixed in the form of 
text or notation, distributed electronically, and include access controls that 
interfere with assistive technologies.129  No oppositions were filed against 
renewal.  The petitioners demonstrated the continuing need and justification for 
the exemption, stating that individuals who are blind, visually impaired, or 
print-disabled are significantly disadvantaged with respect to obtaining 
accessible e-book content because TPMs interfere with the use of assistive 
technologies.130  Petitioners noted that the record underpinning this exemption 
“has stood and been re-established in the past seven triennial reviews, dating 
back to 2003,” and that their members frequently cite “accessibility of e-books . . . 
as a top priority.”131  Additionally, petitioners demonstrated personal knowledge 
and extensive experience with the assistive technology exemption, as they are all 
organizations that advocate for the blind, visually impaired, and print-disabled. 
G. Literary works—medical device data 
The Coalition of Medical Device Patients and Researchers (“the Coalition”) 
petitioned to renew the exemption covering access to patient data on medical 
 
127 Id. 
128 Id. at 4. 
129 See Am. Council of the Blind, Am. Found. for the Blind, HathiTrust & LCA Assistive 
Technologies Renewal Pet. 
130 Id. at 3. 
131 Id. at 3–4. 

[PAGE 34]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
31 
 
devices or monitoring systems.132  No oppositions were filed against renewal of 
this exemption.  The Coalition explained the continuing need and justification for 
the exemption, stating that “the exemption is vital to patients’ ability to monitor 
the data output of medical devices that monitor and maintain their health” and 
to medical research.133  The Coalition demonstrated personal knowledge and 
experience with this exemption, citing member Hugo Campos’s experiences as a 
patient who has needed access data from his implanted defibrillator.134  It also 
demonstrated its personal knowledge of the exemption from its research 
regarding medical devices.135 
H. Computer programs—unlocking 
The Institute of Scrap Recycling Industries, Inc. (“ISRI”) petitioned to renew the 
exemption for computer programs that operate wireless devices, to allow 
connection of a new or used device to an alternative wireless network 
(“unlocking”).136  No oppositions were filed against renewal.  The petition 
demonstrated the continuing need and justification for the exemption, stating 
that “ISRI members continue to purchase or acquire donated cell phones, tablets, 
laptops, and a variety of other wireless devices no longer needed by their 
original owners and try to make the best possible use of them through resale or 
recycling,” which requires unlocking the devices so they may be used on other 
carriers.137  Moreover, ISRI noted that the number of 5G-enabled devices has 
continued to grow since the previous rulemaking, meaning there are more 
devices that may require unlocking for the reasons discussed in previous 
rulemakings.138  Having “been involved in the [section] 1201 triennial 
 
132 See Coalition of Medical Device Patients and Researchers Medical Devices (“Coalition”) 
Renewal Pet. 
133 Id. at 3. 
134 See id. 
135 See id. 
136 See Institute of Scrap Recycling Industries, Inc. (“ISRI”) Unlocking Renewal Pet.   
137 Id. at 3. 
138 See id.  ISRI also notes that the increased number of devices does not implicate the reliability of 
the factual record, as new devices continue to use modems by a single chipset vendor —
Qualcomm— which was the basis for the Office’s expansion of this exemption to all wireless 
devices in the last rulemaking.  See 2021 Recommendation at 161–63 (explaining that “proponents 
have provided sufficient evidence for the Register to conclude that the 2015 fair use analysis 
applies with equal force to unlocking all types of wireless devices” because most wireless devices 
in the United States use modems manufactured by Qualcomm). 

[PAGE 35]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
32 
 
proceedings for several cycles,” including the initial adoption of this exemption, 
and representing nearly “1,600 companies operating in nearly 5,000 locations in 
the U.S. and 41 countries worldwide that process, broker, and consume scrap 
commodities,” ISRI demonstrated personal knowledge and experience.139   
I. Computer programs—jailbreaking  
Multiple organizations petitioned to renew the four exemptions for computer 
programs that enable electronic devices to interoperate with or to remove 
software applications (“jailbreaking”).140  These exemptions permit 
circumvention for the purpose of jailbreaking (1) smartphones and other portable 
all-purpose computing devices, (2) smart televisions, (3) voice assistant devices, 
and (4) routers and dedicated networking devices.141  No oppositions were filed 
against renewal.  The petitioners demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemptions and their personal knowledge and experience.  
For example, in its petition regarding smart phones and other mobile devices, the 
Electronic Frontier Foundation (“EFF”) asserted that it “spoke to many device 
users who currently rely on the jailbreaking exemption and anticipate continuing 
to rely on the exemption in the future” for uses such as installing alternative 
operating systems, keeping older smartphones and other mobile computing 
devices functional, and customizing application functionality.142  Its petition for 
renewal of the exemption for smart TVs indicated that “smart televisions 
continue to employ access controls that prevent consumers from modifying their 
devices to interoperate with software applications.  [EFF was] not aware of any 
likely anticipated changes to this industry practice[, and because] many of the 
same devices discussed in the previous rulemaking round are still in use today 
 
139 ISRI Unlocking Renewal Pet. at 3. 
140 Electronic Frontier Foundation (“EFF”) submitted three separate petitions, each advocating for 
renewal of a different jailbreaking exemption, and Software Freedom Conservancy (“SFC”) 
submitted two separate petitions for different jailbreaking exemptions, all of which are addressed 
in this section.  See EFF Smartphone and Portable All‐Purpose Mobile Computing Device 
Jailbreaking Renewal Pet.; NMR Smartphone and Portable All‐Purpose Mobile Computing 
Device Jailbreaking Renewal Pet.; EFF Smart TVs Jailbreaking Renewal Pet.; SFC Smart TVs 
Jailbreaking Renewal Pet.; EFF Voice Assistant Devices Jailbreaking Renewal Pet.; SFC Routers 
and Dedicated Network Devices Jailbreaking Renewal Pet. 
141 See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(9–12). 
142 EFF Smartphone and Portable All‐Purpose Mobile Computing Device Jailbreaking Renewal 
Pet. at 3. 

[PAGE 36]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
33 
 
and will be in the next three years, the need to jailbreak persists.”143  
Additionally, EFF in its petition for renewal of the exemption for voice assistant 
devices represented that these “devices rely on software updates . . . [to remain] 
functional[, but] manufacturers typically stop providing software support after it 
is no longer profitable for them to do so, effectively bricking hardware that is 
otherwise functional”—forcing users “to rely on jailbreaking their devices to 
install new software.”144  The Software Freedom Conservancy (“SFC”) similarly 
stated that there is a continuing need to install alternative firmware and security 
updates to networking devices and routers that are subject to TPMs.145  
Collectively, the petitions demonstrated that without this exemption, TPMs 
installed on the enumerated products would have an adverse effect on various 
noninfringing uses. 
J. Computer programs—repair of motorized land vehicles, marine 
vessels, or mechanized agricultural vehicles or vessels 
iFixit and MEMA, The Vehicle Suppliers Association (“MEMA”), petitioned to 
renew the exemption for computer programs that control motorized land 
vehicles, marine vessels, or mechanized agricultural vehicles or vessels for 
purposes of diagnosis, repair, or modification of a vehicle or vessel function.146  
No oppositions were filed against renewal.147  The petitioners each represent or 
advise individuals and businesses that perform vehicle service and repair and 
have personal experience with this exemption through those activities.148  They 
demonstrated the continuing need and justification for the exemption.  For 
example, MEMA stated that its membership “continues to see firsthand that the 
exemption is helping protect consumer choice and a competitive market, while 
mitigating risks to intellectual property and vehicle safety”—particularly as 
“every year vehicle computer programs become more important and essential to 
today’s motor vehicles.”149  It cautioned that failure to renew the exemption 
 
143 EFF Smart TVs Jailbreaking Renewal Pet. at 3. 
144 EFF Voice Assistant Devices Jailbreaking Renewal Pet. at 3. 
145 See SFC Routers and Dedicated Network Devices Jailbreaking Renewal Pet. at 3. 
146 See MEMA, The Vehicle Suppliers Ass’n (“MEMA”) Vehicle Repair Renewal Pet.; iFixit Vehicle 
Repair Renewal Pet. 
147 Additionally, the American Farm Bureau Federation (“ AFBF”) submitted an untimely 
comment “strongly support[ing]” renewal.  AFBF Vehicle Repair Renewal Supp. at 1. 
148 MEMA Vehicle Repair Renewal Pet. at 3; iFixit Vehicle Repair Renewal Pet. 3. 
149 MEMA Vehicle Repair Renewal Pet. at 3. 

[PAGE 37]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
34 
 
would significantly constrain vehicle owners’ choices in the vehicle service 
industry by restricting many repair shops from accessing critical software.150  It 
also asserted that without the exemption, consumers’ access to telematics data 
about vehicle performance would be limited.151  Additionally, iFixit emphasized 
that about 20% of American consumers perform repairs on their own vehicles, 
but “TPMs wall off access to non-copyrightable parameters and software 
functions that must be altered for a car owner to perform the work necessary to 
improve or optimize vehicle performance.”152   
In the 2021 rulemaking, the Register expanded the exemption from “motorized 
land vehicles” including “agricultural vehicles.”153  She agreed that “users of 
marine vessels [we]re adversely affected in the same manner as users of land 
vehicles, in particular, tractor owners.”154  “[T]he Register credit[ed] the 
similarities between marine vessels and land vehicles . . . [and ultimately] 
conclude[ed] that . . . prohibition against circumvention . . . [was] likely to 
adversely affect diagnosis, repair, and lawful modification of a vessel function 
for marine vessels,” as well as functions for land vehicles, including agricultural 
land vehicles such as tractors.155  The Office did not receive any evidence 
indicating that these categories of vehicles and vessels should be treated 
differently in this cycle. 
K. Computer programs—repair of devices designed primarily for use by 
consumers 
EFF petitioned to renew the exemption for computer programs that control 
devices designed primarily for use by consumers, for the diagnosis, maintenance, 
or repair of the device.156  The Office did not receive meaningful opposition to 
 
150 Id. 
151 Id.  Accessing this data facilitates accurate repairs and can be shared beneficially with other 
parties such as insurance companies that offer discounts for safe driving.  See id. 
152 iFixit Vehicle Repair Renewal Pet. at 3. 
153 See 2015 Recommendation at 218–20, 248–49.  The Register recommended some expansion of 
the vehicle repair exemption in 2018, and in that rulemaking, maintained the exemption’s express 
inclusion of “mechanized agricultural vehicles.”  See 2018 Recommendation at 230. 
154 2021 Recommendation at 222.   
155 Id. at 223. 
156 See EFF Device Repair Renewal Pet. 

[PAGE 38]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
35 
 
renewal.157  The petitioners demonstrated the continuing need and justification 
for the exemption.  For example, EFF asserted that “[m]anufacturers of these 
devices continue to implement technological protection measures that inhibit 
lawful repairs, maintenance, and diagnostics, and they show no sign of changing 
course.”158  EFF has personal knowledge of this exemption, as it “has been 
involved with the section 1201 rulemaking process since its inception and has 
specifically advocated for device repair exemptions . . . .”159   
L. Computer programs—repair of medical devices and systems 
Multiple organizations petitioned to renew the exemption to access computer 
programs that are contained in and control the functioning of medical devices or 
systems, and related data files, for purposes of diagnosis, maintenance, or 
repair.160  Each of the petitioners repairs, maintains, services, or sells medical 
systems and devices and thus has personal experience with this exemption.  
Three organizations submitted timely opposition comments, and the Office 
 
157 Although Author Services submitted a comment opposing this renewal, it stated that it had 
“no objection to the exemption as applied to . . . consumer devices to allow consumers to repair 
products on their own initiative.”  Author Servs. Device Repair Renewal Opp’n at 1.  Rather, 
Author Services opposes renewing the exemption “in its present form” to the extent that it 
encompasses “[o]ther devices . . . [that] can only be purchased and used by someone who 
possess[es] particular qualifications or has been specifically trained in the use of the device.”  Id. 
at 1–2.  As noted in the NPRM, this exemption was crafted to cover consumer devices.  The devices 
that Author Services described in its opposition would fall outside this category since they are 
available only to individuals with specialized qualifications or training.  See NPRM at 72,020–21 
(citing 37 C.F.R. 201.40(b)(14) (2023) (limiting the exemption to “a lawfully acquired device that is 
primarily designed for use by consumers”)).  Therefore, Author Services’ opposition addresses 
devices outside the scope of the existing exemption and does not show that the previous 
rulemaking record is no longer reliable.  See id. at 72,020–21.  Other petitioners requested an 
expansion to this exemption to encompass “commercial industrial equipment .” See generally Class 
5. 
158 EFF Device Repair Renewal Pet. at 3. 
159 Id. 
160 See Avante Health Sols., Avante Diagnostic Imaging & Avante Ultrasound (collectively, 
“Avante”) Medical Device Repair Renewal Pet.; Crothall Facilities Mgmt., Inc. (“Crothall”) 
Medical Device Repair Renewal Pet.; Metropolis Int’l (“Metropolis”) Medical Device Repair 
Renewal Pet.; TriMedx Holdings, LLC (“TriMedx”) Medical Device Repair Renewal Pet.; TTG 
Imaging Sols., LLC (“TTG”) Medical Device Repair Renewal Pet. 

[PAGE 39]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
36 
 
received one additional opposition after the deadline.161  As discussed in the 
NPRM, four of the five petitions provided evidence of the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption, as well as evidence of petitioners’ personal 
experience with this exemption.162  For example, Avante Health Solutions, 
Avante Diagnostic Imaging, and Avante Ultrasound (collectively, “Avante”) 
stated that “the use of TPMs in medical systems and devices is widespread” and 
that manufacturers “have developed new systems that further restrict access to 
use of necessary software tools.”163  Metropolis and TriMedx argued that because 
of the trend toward using this type of software to control medical devices and 
systems, the exemption is necessary to enable device repair and maintenance 
services that ensure continuity and efficiency of patient care.164   
In opposition, the American Consumer Institute (“ACI”) and the Medical 
Imaging & Technology Alliance (“MITA”) argued that the exemption 
undermines the U.S. Food and Drug Administration’s (“FDA”) maintenance and 
repair standards for the intricate equipment used in patient care and therefore 
increases the risk of harm to patients whose equipment may not be serviced by 
individuals with adequate training.165  MITA asserted that congressional and 
FDA policies on medical device cybersecurity directly conflict with this 
exemption.166  MITA and Philips North America, LLC (“Philips”) also argued 
that the Supreme Court’s decision in Andy Warhol Found. for the Visual Arts v. 
Goldsmith167 undermined the validity of the previous rulemaking’s analysis 
 
161 See Am. Consumer Inst. (“ ACI”) Medical Device Repair Renewal Opp’n; Medical Imaging & 
Tech. All. (“MITA”) Medical Device Repair Renewal Opp’n; Philips North Am., LLC Medical 
Device Repair Renewal Opp’n; Advanced Med. Tech. Ass’n (“ AdvaMed”) Medical Device Repair 
Renewal Opp’n (filed late). 
162 The fifth petition contained only two brief sentences stating that the ability to service medical 
devices “can be impacted” by software restrictions.  Crothall Medical Device Repair Renewal Pet. 
at 3.   
163 Avante Medical Device Repair Renewal Pet. at 5.  Avante also has personal knowledge of this 
exemption, as it proposed this exemption in the previous rulemaking.  Avante was referred to as 
“Transtate” in the Register’s 2021 Recommendation.  See 2021 Register’s Recommendation at 190. 
164 See TriMedx Medical Device Repair Renewal Pet. at 3; Metropolis Device Repair Renewal Pet. 
at 3; TTG Medical Device Repair Renewal Pet. at 3. 
165 See ACI Medical Device Repair Renewal Opp’n at 1–2; MITA Medical Device Repair Renewal 
Opp’n at 1. 
166 MITA Medical Device Repair Renewal Opp’n at 1. 
167 598 U.S. 508 (2023). 

[PAGE 40]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
37 
 
because it held that commercial, non-transformative uses are less likely to qualify 
as fair.168  The Advanced Medical Technology Association’s (“AdvaMed”) late 
opposition comment made similar arguments regarding FDA policy and the fair 
use analysis.169 
The Register addressed opponents’ arguments concerning FDA regulation of 
medical devices and congressional policy in the last rulemaking.170  As stated in 
the 2021 Recommendation, “the Register generally does not consider other 
regulatory schemes as part of the adverse effects analysis because the focus of 
this proceeding is on copyright-related considerations.”171  Moreover, opponents’ 
comments do not take into account the FDA’s statements regarding the safety of 
circumvention in this context or the fact that granting an exemption under 
section 1201 does not absolve any user from compliance with other relevant laws 
and regulations.172 
Regarding opponents’ fair use arguments, the Register concludes that the 
Office’s analysis from the 2021 cycle remains sound.  In 2021, the Register found 
that repair of medical devices and equipment, like other forms of repair, was 
likely transformative under the first fair use factor.173  The Recommendation 
explained that repair “supports—rather than displaces—the purpose of the 
 
168 See MITA Medical Device Repair Renewal Opp’n at 2–6; Philips Medical Device Repair 
Renewal Opp’n at 5–8. 
169 See AdvaMed Medical Device Repair Renewal Opp’n at 2–9. 
170 See 2021 Recommendation at 228–29 (addressing opponents’ argument “that ‘unauthorized 
ISOs’ present an acute risk to patient safety because, unlike OEMs, these organizations are not 
obligated to adhere to FDA Quality System Regulation (QSR) requirements”).   
171 Id. at 229. 
172 See id. (“[T]he FDA . . . highlight[ed] . . . it[s] ‘determin[ation] that the available evidence was 
insufficient to conclude whether or not there is a widespread public health concern relating to 
medical device servicing’ and ‘did not justify imposing additional regulatory requirements on 
ISOs.’”).  The FDA also indicated that it “d[id] not share [opponents’] view that an exemption 
from liability under 17 U.S.C. § 1201 for circumvention . . . would . . . jeopardize the safety and 
effectiveness of medical devices . . . .”  Letter from Suzanne B. Schwartz, Dir., Office of Strategic 
P’ships & Tech. Innovation, FDA, to Kevin R. Amer, Acting Gen. Counsel & Assoc. Register of 
Copyrights, U.S. Copyright Office at 3 (Aug. 13, 2021) (citing FDA, STRENGTHENING 
CYBERSECURITY PRACTICES ASSOCIATED WITH SERVING OF MEDICAL DEVICES: CHALLENGES AND 
OPPORTUNITIES (2021), https://www.fda.gov/media/150144/download). 
173 See 2021 Recommendation at 208–09.  

[PAGE 41]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
38 
 
embedded programs that control the device.”174  In other words, the purpose of 
the use of software in repair is to render a non-functional device functional 
again, while the original purpose of the software is to operate a device that 
functions as designed.  Because this analysis is part of the record that justified 
recommending the exemption in 2021, opponents needed to show that the Warhol 
decision constitutes intervening legal precedent rendering the Office’s prior fair 
use analysis invalid.  They have failed to do so.   
The Warhol decision does not substantially change how the Office would analyze 
the uses at issue in this exemption.  Opponents pointed to language in the 
Court’s decision holding that uses which “share the same or highly similar 
purposes” as the copyrighted work weigh against fair use.175  But this statement 
echoes the Court’s earlier holding in Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc. that the 
first factor focuses on whether a use “supplant[s] the original” or “instead adds 
something new, with a further purpose or different character . . . .”176  It also 
mirrors the Court’s analysis in Google LLC v. Oracle America, Inc., which favorably 
quoted Campbell and reiterated that “the word ‘transformative’ . . . describe[s] a 
copying use that adds something new and important” and is therefore more 
likely to be fair.177  Warhol therefore did not overrule these decisions, but rather 
built upon them.178  Because these decisions collectively align with the analysis in 
the Register’s 2021 Recommendation, renewal remains appropriate. 
 
174 Id. at 201 (quoting U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, SOFTWARE‐ENABLED CONSUMER PRODUCTS 40 (2016), 
https://www.copyright.gov/policy/software/ software‐full‐report.pdf (“Software Study”)).  Prior 
to 2021, the Office’s previous fair use analyses of repair explained, “a finding of fair use is not 
necessarily precluded when the new use coincides generally with the original use of a work. ”  
2015 Recommendation at 234. 
175 MITA Medical Device Repair Renewal Opp. at 4 (quoting Warhol, 598 U.S. at 532–33). 
176 510 U.S. 569, 579 (1994) (internal quotations omitted).  Further, to the extent opponents read 
Campbell to require that a new use add “new expression, meaning or message” to be considered 
fair, see MITA Medical Device Repair Opp. at 4, the Court in Warhol clarified that such “meaning 
or message [i]s simply relevant to whether the new use serve[s] a purpose distinct from the 
original, or instead supersede[s] its objects,” and is not determinative or required.  Warhol, 598 
U.S. at 542 (citing Campbell, 510 U.S. at 579). 
177 593 U.S. 1, 29–30 (2021) (quoting Campbell, 510 U.S. at 579). 
178 For this reason, the Eleventh Circuit recently denied a motion for rehearing in a case involving 
fair use decided prior to the Warhol decision, concluding that the intervening Supreme Court 
opinion did not affect its analysis of transformativeness under the first fair use factor or the 
“balance of the four factors.”  Apple Inc. v. Corellium, Inc., No. 21‐cv‐12835, 2023 U.S. App. LEXIS 
22252, at *3 (11th Cir. Aug. 23, 2023) (denying petition for rehearing and rehearing en banc). 

[PAGE 42]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
39 
 
M. Computer programs—security research 
Multiple organizations and security researchers petitioned to renew the 
exemption permitting circumvention for purposes of good-faith security 
research.179  No oppositions were filed against renewal, and one group of security 
and policy professionals that identified themselves as a “group of hackers at DEF 
CON” submitted a comment in support of the petition.180  Petitioners 
demonstrated the continuing need and justification for the exemption, as well as 
personal knowledge and experience.  For example, Professor J. Alex Halderman 
of the University of Michigan’s Center for Computer Security and Society and 
Professor Matthew D. Green of Johns Hopkins University, who both “active[ly] 
participa[ted] in past triennial reviews for exemptions intended to mitigate the 
potential adverse effects resulting from legitimate security research,” highlighted 
the need to find and detect vulnerabilities in voting machines, encryption devices 
underpinning the financial industry, smartphones, and other devices.181  They 
emphasized that “[s]ecurity researchers play a vital role in this work, as 
vulnerability disclosure and remediation are key to securing existing 
infrastructure.”182  SFC similarly stated that this exemption is necessary to enable 
important security testing and to ensure that device users’ privacy is protected 
and any security issues are corrected.183  The petition from Professors Matt Blaze 
of Georgetown University Law Center and Steven Bellovin of Columbia 
University’s Department of Computer Science asserted that in the past three 
years, one of them “receive[d] threats of prospective litigation from copyright 
holders in connection with his security research on software in voting 
systems.”184  Finally, MEMA stated that its membership “has seen firsthand that 
 
179 See Blaze & Bellovin Security Research Renewal Pet.; Halderman & Green Security Research 
Renewal Pet.; MEMA Security Research Renewal Pet.; SFC Security Research Renewal Pet. 
180 See A Group of Hackers at DEFCON Security Research Renewal Supp. (noting that the 
exemption has led to “the creation of software to fix vulnerabilities, as well as papers and 
presentations on security research”). 
181 Halderman & Green Security Research Renewal Pet. at 3. 
182 Id. 
183 SFC Security Research Renewal Pet. at 3. 
184 Blazer & Bellovin Security Research Renewal Pet. at 3. 

[PAGE 43]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
40 
 
the exemption is helping encourage innovation in the automotive industry while 
mitigating risks to intellectual property and vehicle safety.”185  
N. Video games—preservation 
The Software Preservation Network (“SPN”) and LCA jointly petitioned to 
renew the exemption for individual play by gamers and preservation of video 
games by a library, archives, or museum for which outside server support has 
been discontinued, and preservation by a library, archives, or museum, of 
discontinued video games that never required server support.186  No oppositions 
were filed against renewal, and one individual filed a comment in support.187  
Petitioners stated that libraries, archives, and museums continue to need the 
exemption to preserve and curate video games in playable form.  For example, 
the petition highlighted the “Strong National Museum of Play, [which] has a 
substantial number of TPM-encumbered video games in its collections that will 
need preservation treatment that requires circumvention in the coming years.”188  
Petitioners stated that “[o]ther video game collection librarians report a similar 
ongoing need with respect to their collections” and that the “§1201 exemption 
has become a crucial tool in their ongoing efforts to save digital game culture 
before it disappears.”189  They demonstrated personal knowledge and experience 
through past participation in section 1201 rulemakings and through their 
representation of members who have relied on this exemption. 
This existing exemption serves as the baseline in assessing whether to 
recommend any expansions in Class 6(b). 
O. Computer programs—preservation 
SPN and LCA jointly petitioned to renew the exemption for the preservation of 
computer programs other than video games, and computer program-dependent 
materials, by libraries, archives, and museums.190  No oppositions were filed 
against renewal, and one individual filed a comment in support.191  Petitioners 
 
185 MEMA Security Research Renewal Pet. at 3. 
186 See Software Preservation Network (“SPN”) & LCA Abandoned Video Game Renewal Pet. 
187 See Burt Abandoned Video Game & Software Preservation Renewal Supp.  
188 SPN & LCA Abandoned Video Game Renewal Pet. at 3. 
189 Id. 
190 See SPN & LCA Software Preservation Renewal Pet. 
191 See Burt Abandoned Video Game & Software Preservation Supp.  

[PAGE 44]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
41 
 
indicated that libraries, archives, and museums continue to need the exemption 
to preserve and curate software and materials dependent on computer programs.  
For example, the petition stated that remotely accessing preserved computer 
programs “fulfill[s] cultural heritage institutions’ missions to support research, 
analysis, and other scholarly re-use of the historical record (and to do so 
equitably and inclusively).”192  Other SPN members reported providing an offsite researcher “access to born-digital materials using remote access to legacy 
software.”193  And petitioners represented that “[r]esearch interest in preserved 
software will only grow as scholars and students become increasingly aware of 
the research value of these materials.”194  Finally, they demonstrated personal 
knowledge and experience through past participation in section 1201 
rulemakings relating to access controls on software and through representing 
major library associations with members who have relied on this exemption.195 
This existing exemption serves as the baseline in assessing whether to 
recommend any expansions in Class 6(a). 
P. Computer programs—3D printers 
Michael Weinberg petitioned to renew the exemption for computer programs 
that operate 3D printers to allow use of alternative material.196  No oppositions 
were filed against renewal.197  The petition demonstrated the continuing need 
and justification for the exemption, and the petitioner demonstrated personal 
knowledge and experience.  Specifically, Mr. Weinberg declared that he is a 
member of the 3D printing community and has been involved with this 
exemption’s renewal and modification in each cycle it has been considered.198  
Additionally, he stated that while 3D printer manufacturers “continue to use 
TPMs to limit the types of materials used in printers,” since the last rulemaking 
proceeding, there has been “an expansion of third-party materials available for 
 
192 SPN & LCA Software Preservation Renewal Pet. at 3. 
193 Id. 
194 Id. 
195 Id. 
196 See Weinberg 3D Printers Renewal Pet. 
197 Additionally, Skizit Powers submitted one late comment in support.  See Powers 3D Printers 
Renewal Supp. 
198 Weinberg 3D Printers Renewal Pet. at 3. 

[PAGE 45]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
42 
 
3D printers” due to the current exemption, which has assured manufacturers and 
users that their uses would not violate section 1201.199 
Q. Computer programs—copyright license investigation 
SFC petitioned to renew the exemption for computer programs, for the purpose 
of investigating potential infringement of free and open-source computer 
programs.200  No oppositions were filed against renewal of this exemption.  The 
petition demonstrated the continuing need and justification for the exemption, 
including through discussion of how TPMs, such as encryption, “prevent[ ] the 
investigation of computer programs” within various devices that use free and 
open source software (“FOSS”) to operate.201  Because many consumer devices—
from laptops to IP-enabled doorbells, baby monitors, and thermostats—contain 
FOSS, “software authors, publishers, [ ] developers, [and] consumers . . . have an 
interest in investigating what FOSS is on a particular device and how it is being 
used.”202  SFC indicated that barriers to investigating FOSS will “continue to exist 
. . . [and would] prevent these users from obtaining access to the relevant 
copyrighted works” without the exemption.203  As a participant in the previous 
rulemaking and “the nonprofit home for dozens of FOSS projects representing 
well over a thousand volunteer contributors,” SFC has personal knowledge and 
experience regarding the exemption.204   
R. Computer programs—video game accessibility 
In 2021, the Register found that the record “support[ed] an exemption to enable 
individuals with disabilities to use alternate input devices to play video 
games.”205  The Office has previously noted the strong justifications for this 
exemption206 and recommended that Congress enact a permanent exemption to 
 
199 Id. 
200 See SFC Copyright License Investigation Renewal Pet. 
201 Id. at 3. 
202 Id. 
203 Id. 
204 Id. 
205 2021 Recommendation 315. 
206 Id. at 314 (“‘[G]enerally, public policy favors removing impediments to access for individuals 
with disabilities.’  Accessibility is ‘not merely a matter of convenience,’ but it ensures that 
individuals with disabilities have ‘meaningful access to the same content that individuals without 
 

[PAGE 46]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
43 
 
enable such accessibility.207  Nonetheless, given the constraints of the rulemaking 
process,208 because the Office did not receive a petition to renew the current 
exemption, the Register is not able to recommend its renewal.209  The Office 
continues to support enactment of a permanent exemption.  
 
such impairments are able to perceive.’ . . . [F]or individuals with disabilities, proposed 
exemptions ‘may represent the difference between having and not having access to the works’ 
available to others.  For these reasons, the Office has recommended that Congress enact a 
permanent exemption for accessibility into law.”) (quoting 2018 Recommendation at 104; 2012 
Recommendation at 22). 
207 See Section 1201 Report at 86 (recommending making the accessibility exemption for e ‐books 
permanent “[i]n light of the repeated granting of the temporary exemption [for e‐books] and the 
underlying public policy of reducing burdens on people who are blind or print ‐disabled”). 
208 The streamlined renewal process first adopted in the Seventh Triennial Rulemaking eases the 
burden on petitioners seeking to renew existing exemptions.  Under current procedures, it is not 
an onerous process for any individual or organization to request a renewal.  See NPRM at 72,015 
(“The streamlined renewal process was praised by participants [for its efficiency] during the 
ensuing rulemaking, and the Office has employed it in subsequent rulemakings.”) (citing 2018 
Recommendation at 19 n.80 (collecting transcript testimony from 2018 rulemaking)). 
209 Kelvin Hammond submitted a late comment requesting renewal of this exemption, despite the 
lack of a renewal petition.  See Hammond Video Game Accessibility Renewal Supp. 

[PAGE 47]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
44 
 
V. DISCUSSION OF NEW PROPOSED CLASSES 
A. Proposed Class 1: Audiovisual Works—Criticism and Comment—
Noncommercial Videos  
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption and Register’s 
Recommendation  
The Office received one petition seeking an amendment to the language of the 
existing exemption relating to noncommercial videos and permitting the 
circumvention of access controls protecting motion pictures on DVDs, Blu-ray 
discs, and digitally transmitted video in order to use excerpts for criticism and 
comment.210  Petitioner OTW describes itself as a “public interest organization 
dedicated to protecting and preserving noncommercial works created by fans 
based on existing works.”211  It filed a renewal petition asking the Register to 
amend the language of the exemption for noncommercial videos codified at 37 
C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1).  Because OTW’s petition requested alterations to an existing 
exemption, the Office considers it a request for an expansion.212   
OTW proposed rewriting the text of the current exemption related to 
noncommercial videos, which is being renewed, by reverting to language used in 
the 2010 rulemaking, when the exemption was initially adopted.213  Petitioner 
stated that its proposed changes would not substantively alter the exemption but 
 
210 OTW Class 1 Pet.   
211 Id. at 1. 
212 As noted above, although OTW styled its petition as a proposed renewal, the Office does not 
treat requests for language changes as renewal petitions under its streamlined renewal process.  
OTW’s claim that it does “not request[] an expansion of the existing exemption” but instead seeks 
“a more understandable restatement” of what the exemption allows does not change this 
conclusion.  Id. at 4.  Although the Office understands that OTW is seeking clarity rather than a 
change in substance, the inquiry in determining the availability of the renewal process is whether 
the petition proposes any modification to the language of the exemption —regardless of the basis 
for that proposal.  
213 OTW’s petition references “language defining the exempted class from the 2008 rulemaking . . . 
.”  Id.  The Office issued a notice of proposed rulemaking in 2008, but that rulemaking was not 
finalized until 2010.  Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection 
Systems for Access Control Technologies, 73 Fed. Reg. 79,425 (Dec. 29, 2008); 2010 
Recommendation at 19.  Accordingly, this recommendation refers to the 2010 rulemaking. 

[PAGE 48]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
45 
 
would render it more understandable to users.  It made essentially the same 
request in the 2021 cycle, which the Register recommended against.   
In this proceeding, OTW did not file comments or participate in hearings after its 
initial petition.  Because it has not met its burden to justify any change to the 
exemption’s text and has not submitted any evidence that would render the 
Register’s previous analysis unreliable, the Register again does not recommend 
adoption of OTW’s proposed expansion.  As noted above, she does recommend 
renewal of the existing exemption for noncommercial videos.  
b. Overview of the Issues 
Codified at 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1), the current exemption permits circumvention 
for various uses, including in noncommercial videos.  OTW states that its 
proposed amendment would clarify the scope of the exemption by incorporating 
the language used when noncommercial videos were first added to the 
exemption.214 
The current exemption now codified at 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1)(i)(B) reads in 
relevant part: 
noninfringing uses of . . .  [m]otion pictures (including television 
shows and videos) . . . where the motion picture is lawfully made 
and acquired on a DVD protected by the Content Scramble System, 
on a Blu-ray disc protected by the Advanced Access Content System, 
or via a digital t ransmission protected by a technological measure, 
and the person engaging in circumvention under paragraphs 
(b)(1)(i) and (b)(1)(ii)(A) and (B) of this section reasonably believes 
that non -circumventing alternatives are unable to  produce the 
required level of high -quality content, or the circumvention is 
undertaken using screen -capture technology that appears to be 
offered to the public as enabling the reproduction of motion 
pictures after content has been lawfully acquired and de crypted, 
where circumvention is undertaken solely in order to make use of 
short portions of the motion pictures in the following instances: . . 
. For the purpose of criticism or comment  . . . in noncommercial 
 
214 OTW Class 1 Pet. at 4. 

[PAGE 49]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
46 
 
videos (including videos produced for a paid commission if the 
commissioning entity’s use is noncommercial) . . . .215 
OTW contends that the bolded language in the existing exemption should be 
amended because “[t]he complexity of the provision substantially increases the 
difficulty of communicating and implementing the exemptions in practice.”216  It 
proposes replacing the bolded language above with the following language that 
was used in the 2010 rulemaking:  
when circumvention is accomplished solely in order to accomplish 
the incorporation of short portions of motion pictures into new 
works for the purpose of criticism or comment, and where the 
person engaging in circumvention believes and has reasonable 
grounds for believing that circumvention is necessary to fulfill the 
purpose of the use.217 
It states that the proposed language would “clarify the exemption for ordinary 
users.”218  The Office received no comments in support of the proposal, no 
requests from OTW or other parties to participate in the public hearings, and no 
other evidence in support of the proposal.   
Joint Creators I and DVD CCA and AACS LA each filed separate comments 
opposing OTW’s request to change the language of the exemption.219  They 
pointed out that OTW submitted a nearly identical petition in the 2021 cycle and 
that the “Office ultimately concluded [] modification of the [exemption’s] 
language was unnecessary” because the exemption as written permitted the uses 
 
215 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)–(b)(1)(i)(B) (emphasis added). 
216 OTW Class 1 Pet. at 4. 
217 Id. (discussing rulemaking cycle that began in 2008 and concluded in 2010) ; see 2010 
Recommendation at 72. 
218 OTW Class 1 Pet. at 4. 
219 See DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 2–3 (“DVD CCA and AACS LA object to the 
proposal to alter the language of the current exemption for noncommercial videos.”); Joint 
Creators I Class 1 Opp’n at 2 (stating that they “do not oppose renewal of the existing exemption 
for motion pictures on DVDs, Blu‐ray discs, and digitally transmitted video for use in 
noncommercial videos as codified at 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1)(i)(B)” but oppose Petitioner’s 
suggested “substantive change in the language of the existing exemption”). 

[PAGE 50]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
47 
 
OTW described.220  Joint Creators I also noted that adopting OTW’s proposed 
language could result in unintended substantive changes to the exemption 
because the language from the 2010 cycle no longer reflects the full scope of the 
existing exemption.221  Joint Creators I highlighted, for example, that since 2010, 
the exemption has been expanded to encompass works acquired on Blu-ray disc 
or received via a digital transmission.222 
2. Discussion 
OTW’s current petition must be considered in the context of the history of this 
exemption, which has been amended a number of times, as well as OTW’s 
unsuccessful 2021 petition which sought the same amendment it requests in this 
proceeding.  The exemption for criticism and comment was expanded to include 
noncommercial videos in the 2010 rulemaking.  In that proceeding, the Register 
recommended expanding the exemption because doing so facilitated 
“transformative uses [of audiovisual works] . . .  [that were] socially beneficial … 
[and] implicate[d] core First Amendment values reflected in the fair use 
doctrine,” including comment and criticism.223  The exemption was further 
amended and expanded in the fifth and sixth triennial rulemakings.  For 
example, the Register recommended adding language addressing screen-capture 
technology in 2012, as access to that technology expanded and improved, making 
it “a satisfactory alternative to circumvention” “[f]or uses that do not require 
higher-quality images[.]”224  Subsequently, in 2012, the exemption was expanded 
 
220 Joint Creators I Class 1 Opp’n at 2; see also DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 3 (“In the 
last proceeding, the Register rejected the modification, in part, on Petitioner’s multiple 
concessions, including that the ‘existing exemption is enough in the sense that it provides an 
exemption for what vidders do.’”)  (quoting 2021 Recommendation at 40–41).  Neither group 
opposes renewal of the exemption in its current form.   
221 See Joint Creators I Class 1 Opp’n at 2; see also DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 3.   
222 See Joint Creators I Class 1 Opp’n at 3. 
223 2010 Recommendation at 72. 
224 2012 Recommendation at 134.  While the 2010 exemption required only that “the person 
engaging in circumvention believe[] and ha[ve] reasonable grounds for believing that 
circumvention is necessary,” 2010 Recommendation at 72, all amendments adopted after the 2010 
cycle more specifically required users to evaluate whether alternatives to circumvention, such as 
screen-capture technology, could produce video clips of sufficient quality for users’ purposes.  
See Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access 
Control Technologies, 77 Fed. Reg. 65,260, 65,278 (Oct. 6, 2012); Exemption to Prohibition on 
Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 80 Fed. Reg. 
 

[PAGE 51]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
48 
 
to include, on a limited basis, commissioned videos,225 and in 2015, the 
exemption was again expanded to include Blu-ray discs and digital 
transmissions.226   
As noted above, in the last rulemaking, OTW made the same request to amend 
the exemption “to align with the language of the 2010 exemption . . . .”227  In that 
rulemaking, it submitted supporting comments and participated in a public 
hearing on its proposed exemption.228  During the 2021 public hearing, OTW 
confirmed that the “existing exemption [wa]s enough in the sense that it 
provide[d] an exemption for what vidders [(creators of certain types of 
noncommercial videos)] do.”229  It also acknowledged that although it believed 
the proposed language would clarify the boundaries of the exemption, it 
“actually [did]n’t think that any change [wa]s necessary” to accommodate its 
 
65,944, 65,962 (Oct. 28, 2015); Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright 
Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 83 Fed. Reg. 54.010, 54,028 (Oct. 26, 2018); 
Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, 86 Fed. Reg. 59,627, 59,637 (Oct. 28, 2021).  Opponents observed that OTW did not 
reference any limitations on methods of circumvention, despite the presence of such limitations 
in the current exemption.  See Joint Creators I Class 1 Opp’n at 3 (citing 37 C.F.R. § 
201.40(b)(1)(i)(B)). 
225 See Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access 
Control Technologies, 77 Fed. Reg. 65,260, 65,278 (stating that noncommercial works may include 
videos created pursuant to a paid commission, provided that the commissioning entity uses the 
work solely in a noncommercial manner, and adding language to exemption regarding screen ‐
capture technology); 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1) (including “videos produced for a paid commission 
if the commissioning entity’s use is noncommercial”). 
226  See Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access 
Control Technologies, 80 Fed. Reg. 65,944, 65,949 (expanding exemption to include Blu‐ray discs 
and digital transmissions).  In its petition, OTW stated that these works should still be included 
in the exemption even if the Register recommends adopting its proposed language.  See OTW 
Class 1 Pet. at 4 (“Returning to the simple, functionally similar language of the initial remix 
exemption (with the addition of Blu-Ray) [“and streaming where necessary”] would clarify the 
exemption for ordinary users and further the Office’s stated policies of increasing public 
accessibility and transparency.”) (emphasis added).   
227 2021 OTW Noncom. Videos Renewal Pet.  
228 See id.; 2021 Tr. at 149 (Apr. 6, 2021) (noting OTW participation). 
229 2021 Recommendation at 40–41 (citing 2021 Tr. at 252:18–20 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Rosenblatt, OTW)).  
In the 2021 cycle, OTW proposed additional changes to the exemption in its supplementary 
filings—for example, objecting to the phrasing of the exemption’s reference to screen ‐capture 
technology.  See 2021 Recommendation at 41–42.  OTW did not raise these issues in this cycle’s 
proceedings.  

[PAGE 52]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
49 
 
stakeholders’ uses.230  Joint Creators I and DVD CCA and AACS LA opposed 
OTW’s request.231  Based on the entire record before her, the Register concluded 
that “the existing exemption already cover[ed] OTW’s proposed use, so no 
changes [we]re warranted at th[at] time.”232  Accordingly, she did not 
recommend and the Librarian did not grant the proposed expansion.233   
OTW’s present petition repeats its 2021 argument that the proposed language 
change “would clarify the exemption for ordinary users and further the Office’s 
stated policies of increasing public accessibility and transparency.”234  Pursuant 
to its statutory obligations, the Office requested input from the public as to 
“whether there [we]re legal or factual circumstances that ha[d] changed and 
warrant[ed] altering the determination from the prior rulemaking.”235 
As the proponent of an expanded exemption, OTW bears the burden of showing 
that modification is warranted.236  In this proceeding, it has submitted only its 
petition in support of the proposed amendment.  The petition stated that OTW 
had heard from “a number of noncommercial remix artists” (“vidders”) who 
have used the exemption in the past and anticipate needing to use it in the 
future.237  It also described an academic’s perspective that “vidders” prefer 
footage ripped from DVDs and Blu-ray because “it is high quality enough to bear 
up under the transformations that vidders make to it—which now routinely 
include changes of color, speed, cropping and zooming, masking, animations 
and other cgi [sic], and even explorations of the z-axis and 3D.”238  These 
statements support renewal of the current exemption, but no evidence was 
offered to support the proposal to modify the exemption’s language by OTW or 
 
230 2021 Recommendation at 42 (citing 2021 Tr. at 245:11–14, 21–24 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Rosenblatt, 
OTW)). 
231 See 2021 Joint Creators I Class 1 Opp’n; see also 2021 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n. 
232 2021 Recommendation at 40. 
233 Id. (“[N]o changes are warranted at this time.”). 
234 OTW Class 1 Pet. at 4 (discussing rulemaking cycle that began in 2008 and concluded in 2010); 
see NPRM at 72,024; 2021 OTW Noncom. Videos Renewal Pet. at 4. 
235 NPRM at 72,024. 
236 2015 Recommendation at 13; see DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 4; Joint Creators I 
Class 1 Opp’n at 4. 
237 OTW Class 1 Pet. at 3. 
238 Id. 

[PAGE 53]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
50 
 
any other proponent.  Neither OTW nor any other proponent participated in 
public hearings in support of its suggested changes.   
As the Office stated in the NPRM, “where an exemption request resurrects legal 
or factual arguments that have been previously rejected, the Office will continue 
to rely on past reasoning to dismiss such arguments in the absence of new 
information.”239  The record from the 2021 rulemaking does not support granting 
OTW’s proposed expansion.240  As determined in 2021, the rule in its present 
formulation provides adequate leeway to make non-commercial videos using 
short clips of motion pictures.241   
Nothing in the current record warrants a different conclusion.  No proponent has 
demonstrated new or changed legal or factual circumstances that would justify 
the Register altering her prior recommendation.242  As the proponent of the 
expansion, OTW has not met its burden.243  Accordingly, the Register again 
“concludes that the existing exemption already covers OTW’s proposed use, so 
no changes are warranted at this time.”244   
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA expressed its “understand[ing] that the . . . Office [may] determine that a 
recommendation for denial is the most appropriate path forward in this 
instance” given the procedural posture of OTW’s request.245  It, however, 
supported the proposed modification to this class, based on the view that 
 
239 Section 1201 Report at 147; see also Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright 
Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 79 Fed. Reg. 55,687, 55,690 (Sept. 17, 2014). 
240 “OTW made the same request to amend the language of the exemption in the previous 
rulemaking [, and t]he Office ultimately concluded that modification of the language was 
unnecessary, based on statements by OTW to that effect.”  NPRM at 72,024 (citing 2021 OTW 
Class 1 Pet.; 2021 Recommendation at 40–42). 
241 See NPRM at 72,024 & n.158 (citing 2021 Recommendation at 42); see also 2021 
Recommendation at 40–41 (quoting 2021 Tr. at 252:18–20 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Rosenblatt, OTW)) 
(“OTW’s representative confirmed . . . that the ‘existing exemption is enough in the sense that it 
provides an exemption for what vidders do.’”). 
242 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 1 Opp’n at 3–4. 
243 Proponents “must provide more than a ‘de minimis showing made in support of the proposed 
exemption.’”  2021 Recommendation at 62–63 (quoting 2006 Recommendation at 76). 
244 Id. at 40.  The Register further incorporates her analysis from the previous rulemaking.  See id. 
at 40–42. 
245 NTIA Letter at 19. 

[PAGE 54]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
51 
 
“[t]here is clearly a strong need to structurally alter the way exemptions are 
written” to make them more user friendly.246  NTIA “acknowledge[d] that 
petitioners should follow the correct protocol when submitting” this type of 
request but also expressed “concern[] that there may not be an adequate 
mechanism” for users to request this type of linguistic clarification, as opposed to 
a substantive alteration.247  It generally recommended that the Office “consider 
addressing this dynamic more comprehensively to arrive at a procedurally 
efficient solution.”248  As to Class 1 specifically, NTIA recommended “that the 
Register clarify whether [OTW’s] proposed change is functionally equivalent to 
the current temporary exemption[,]” and “[i]f there is functional equivalence, 
[NTIA] recommend[ed] the Office seek to replace the regulatory language or 
note in guidance . . . that the language is equivalent.”249  It did not, however, 
identify any reasons why it found OTW’s proposed language more transparent 
than the current exemption.   
The Register appreciates NTIA’s input.  The Office has provided clear guidance 
to participants in the 1201 proceedings regarding the need to submit supporting 
comments,250 which did not occur here.  Absent evidence to support OTW’s 
petition, the Register continues to find the amendment, or other restructuring of 
the exemption, unnecessary because, as discussed above, there is no evidence of 
adverse effects this change would remedy. 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
OTW’s petition in this cycle is nearly identical to its 2021 petition, which was 
denied, and the Office has received no evidence of changed circumstances that 
would support a departure from its prior reasoning.  The Register therefore does 
not recommend adoption of Proposed Class 1.  However, the Register 
recommends renewal of the existing exemption for noncommercial videos as 
written. 
 
246 Id. at 18–19 (noting that “[t]his petitioner, for example, has submitted the request for language 
modification on more than one occasion”). 
247 Id. at 19. 
248 Id. 
249 Id. 
250 Proponents “must provide more than a ‘de minimis showing made in support of the proposed 
exemption.’”  2021 Recommendation at 62–63 (quoting 2006 Recommendation at 76). 

[PAGE 55]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
52 
 
B. Proposed Class 2: Audiovisual Works—Criticism and Comment—
Massively Open Online Courses (“MOOCs”)   
1. Background 
a.  Summary of Proposed Exemption and Recommendation  
The Office received one petition to expand the existing exemption for 
circumvention of access controls protecting motion pictures on DVDs, Blu-ray 
discs, and digitally transmitted video for educational purposes in massive open 
online courses (“MOOCs”) by faculty and employees acting at the direction of 
faculty of accredited nonprofit educational institutions.251  The petition was filed 
by Peter Decherney, Professor of Cinema and Media Studies and English at the 
University of Pennsylvania, on behalf of himself and Sarah Banet-Weiser, 
Professor and Dean of the Annenberg School for Communication at the 
University of Pennsylvania, Shiv Gaglani, Ed Tech Entrepreneur and Medical 
Student, and SCMS (collectively, “Joint Educators II”).252  In the current 
rulemaking, similarly to the 2018 and 2021 proceedings, Joint Educators II 
requested that the exemption be extended to for-profit and nonaccredited online 
educational entities.  Specifically, they sought to expand the scope of the 
exemption for “educators . . . and preparers of online learning materials acting at 
the direction of educators” at “qualified online educational entities” to use short 
portions of motion pictures “for the purpose of teaching registered learners . . .  
in courses requiring close analysis of film and media excerpts when the 
transformative fair use of the excerpts contributes significantly to learning, for 
the purpose of criticism, comment, illustration, or explanation.”253  They defined 
“qualified educational entities” as “[o]nline entities registered with their state or 
local jurisdiction or by the federal government as an entity, for-profit or not-forprofit, with an educational purpose or mission.”254   
The petition was opposed by DVD CCA and AACS LA, and ESA, MPA, the 
News/Media Alliance (“N/MA”), and RIAA (collectively, “Joint Creators II”).  
Opponents argued that proponents have “failed to meet their burden of proof” 
by proffering an evidentiary record that is “thinner than it has been in the 
 
251 Peter Decherney, Sarah Banet‐Weiser, Shiv Gaglani & SCMS (together, “Joint Educators II”) 
Class 2 Pet. at 2; see 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1)(ii)(B) (current exemption). 
252 Joint Educators II Class 2 Pet. at 1; see 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1)(ii)(B) (current exemption). 
253 Joint Educators II Class 2 Reply at 2–3 (emphasis added). 
254 Id. at 3. 

[PAGE 56]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
53 
 
past.”255  They further contended that the only record of use provided cannot be 
said to be noninfringing.256 
For the reasons discussed below, the Register declines to recommend expansion 
of the proposed exemption.  While she supports the renewal of the existing 
exemption, the examples provided in this proceeding are too sparse to serve as 
the evidentiary basis for its expansion to educators and preparers of online 
course materials at for-profit and unaccredited institutions.   
b.  Overview of Issues 
First granted in the 2015 rulemaking, the current exemption encompasses the use 
by MOOCs of audiovisual works in online courses, “typically consist[ing] of prerecorded lectures that may be illustrated, as appropriate, with short clips and still 
images from audiovisual works.”257  In their petition and comments for this 
proceeding, Joint Educators II maintained that online learning continues to 
increase in popularity even after the COVID–19 pandemic has subsided.258  They 
offered evidence that demand is especially high for learning plans offered by 
nontraditional online entities, such as 2U, LinkedIn Learning, Skillshare, Udemy, 
etc.259  According to Joint Educators II, “[i]nnovation is opening the sector to forprofit and/or nonaccredited online educational entities . . . as these entities offer 
learning opportunities for students of all backgrounds.”260  Students of all ages 
and educational backgrounds seek these learning environments due to their 
“flexible, personalized, [and] practical skill approaches.”261  Therefore, Joint 
Educators II argued that “it is increasingly important that educators have free 
and efficient ways of accessing high-quality motion picture excerpts to educate 
populations often left behind.”262   
 
255 ESA, MPA, the News/Media Alliance (“N/MA”) & RIAA (together, “Joint Creators II”) Class 2 
Opp’n at 4; Tr. at 58:07–18 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Ayers, AACS LA). 
256 Tr. at 56:01–09 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Taylor, DVD CCA). 
257 2015 Recommendation at 31 (quoting 2015 Joint Educators Class 3 Pet. at 4). 
258 Joint Educators II Class 2 Initial at 2; Joint Educators II Class 2 Pet. at 2. 
259 Joint Educators II Class 2 Initial at 2, 5. 
260 Joint Educators II Class 2 Reply at 2. 
261 Joint Educators II Class 2 Initial at 2.  
262 Id. at 20. 

[PAGE 57]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
54 
 
Their proposed exemption language states that “qualified online educational 
entities through the online platform . . . to the extent technologically feasible” 
will “apply technological measures that reasonably prevent unauthorized further 
dissemination of a work in accessible form to others or retention of the work for 
longer than the learners registration with the qualified online educational 
entities.”263  The current version of the exemption relies on definitions in the 
Technology, Education and Copyright Harmonization (“TEACH”) Act, codified 
in section 110(2) of the Copyright Act.  Although Joint Educators II’s proposed 
language eliminates the express reference to section 110(2), they made clear 
during the hearing that they “are open to exactly the same limitations that exist 
in the TEACH Act,” and that they primarily are seeking an expansion of the 
current exemption to online courses offered by unaccredited and for-profit 
educational institutions.264  
Opponents argued against the proposed expansion, contending that Joint 
Educators II failed to meet their evidentiary burden.  Opponents asserted that 
there is essentially “no record” of a noninfringing use.265  They argued that the 
“breadth of the exemption” proposed, considering the full range of content 
offered on courses through platforms like Udemy, “requires a very different kind 
of analysis” and is “not something the Office has condoned before.”266 
2. Discussion 
a. Works Protected by Copyright 
As was the case when they filed petitions in 2018 and 2021, Joint Educators II’s 
proposal involves the use of short portions of copyrightable motion pictures for 
purposes of education and, potentially, comment and criticism.  The current 
proposal requests an exemption permitting circumvention of TPMs controlling 
access to the motion pictures.  As in the 2018 and 2021 proceedings, the Register 
finds that at least some of the works in question are protected by copyright.267 
 
263 Joint Educators II Class 2 Reply at 2–3. 
264 Tr. at 33:02–04, 33:14–18 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Decherney, Joint Educators II). 
265 Tr. at 56:01 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Taylor, DVD CCA). 
266 Tr. at 11:01–12 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators II). 
267 See 17 U.S.C. § 102(a)(6). 

[PAGE 58]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
55 
 
b.  Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Joint Educators II contended that the proposed uses fall within the favored 
purposes of education, criticism, and comment referenced in the preamble of 
section 107 of the Copyright Act, which provides in relevant part that “the fair 
use of a copyrighted work . . . for purposes such as criticism, comment, . . . 
teaching . . . , scholarship, or research, is not an infringement of copyright.”268  
They argued that the uses are therefore fair.269  In their initial comments, Joint 
Educators II asserted that their proposal would allow “qualified educational 
entities, such as 2U,270 LinkedIn Learning,271 Skillshare,272 Udemy,273 etc., to utilize 
motion picture excerpts for legitimate educational purposes.”274  However, they 
provided only two examples of motion picture clips used in courses hosted on 
for-profit, unaccredited platforms.  The first example is the course “Learn 
English with Movie Clips,” offered on Udemy, a for-profit, nonaccredited 
entity.275  Proponents explained that the course “is intended to use films to help 
its students learn the English language, however, currently the class only uses 
film stills.”276  The second course is “Storytelling,” which is a collaboration 
between Pixar and Khan Academy, using film clips with Pixar’s authorization.277  
Faculty for this course “use Pixar films to show how storytelling can draw from 
personal experiences to create intimate stories.”278   
 
268 Id. § 107. 
269 Joint Educators II Class 2 Initial at 12–15; Joint Educators II Class 2 Reply at 4–6. 
270 About, 2U, https://2u.com/about/ (last visited Oct. 17, 2024). 
271 LINKEDIN, https://learning.linkedin.com (last visited Oct. 17, 2024). 
272 SKILLSHARE, https://www.skillshare.com/en/ (last visited Oct. 17, 2024). 
273 UDEMY, https://www.udemy.com/ (last visited Oct. 17, 2024). 
274 Joint Educators II Class 2 Initial at 5 (footnotes added). 
275 Id. at 11; Joint Educators II Class 2 Reply at 3. 
276 Joint Educators II Class 2 Reply at 6.  It is unclear whether the course “only uses film stills.”  
Citing the landing page for the course, opponents asserted it uses actual video clips, and not 
merely stills.  DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 2 Opp’n at 10, Ex. 9.  
277 Joint Educators II Class 2 Initial at 11. 
278 Joint Educators II Class 2 Reply at 3.  In their initial comments, proponents also cited a lesson 
plan provided by Common Sense, a children’s advocacy group.  But after opponents noted that 
Common Sense is not registered as an education entity, proponents clarified that Common Sense 
“was never intended to be considered by the Joint Educators [II] as a qualified online educational 
 

[PAGE 59]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
56 
 
At the outset, opponents argued that proponents did not establish a record 
clearly identifying the particular uses they would like to make of protected 
works.  They contended that the record merely consists of “examples of 
technology platforms rather than actual [educators].”279  Opponents also raised 
concerns about how broadly the proposed regulatory language defines the 
exempted users.280  Thus, in recognition of these concerns, before addressing 
Joint Educators II’s asserted fair use claim, the Register considers how 
proponents define “educators” and “preparers of online learning materials” of 
“qualified online educational entities.” 
In recommending the existing exemption in 2015, the Register recognized the 
growth and importance of online education.281  Nonetheless, she credited 
opponents’ concern that an “‘unbounded exemption’ where ‘[a]nybody can 
declare that they’re teaching a MOOC’ and ‘anyone can be a student’” would be 
“anathema to the exemption process as envisioned by Congress.”282 
In the past two proceedings, Joint Educators II have sought to expand the current 
exemption to “online learning platforms,” with the acknowledgment that the line 
between academic institutions and nonacademic businesses that want to offer 
online courses “can be blurry.”283  Noting that a “broadly framed proposal would 
seemingly encompass any online video that could be characterized as an 
educational experience,”284 the Register found that the record proffered in the 
2021 proceeding did not justify expansion to “online learning materials” offered 
by “online learning platforms.”285 
 
entity, but rather as, a source generating an idea for an example of how a short excerpt of a 
motion picture can be employed by an educator as a transformed fair use.”  Id. 
279 Tr. at 8:13–24 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Ayers, AACS LA). 
280 Tr. at 10:01–22 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators II). 
281 See 2015 Recommendation at 72. 
282 Id. (quoting Tr. at 119:18–121:16 (May 27, 2015) (Turnbull, DVD CCA & AACS LA) and citing 
Tr. at 129:03–130:24 (May 27, 2015) (Williams, Joint Creators II)); see 2018 Recommendation at 54 
(similar). 
283 2021 Hearing Tr. at 234:07–09 (Apr. 6, 2021) (Decherney, Joint Educators II).  
284 2021 Recommendation at 50 (quoting 2018 Recommendation at 54 and 2015 Recommendation 
at 102). 
285 Id. 

[PAGE 60]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
57 
 
In this rulemaking, Joint Educators II sought to narrow the scope of their prior 
proposal by limiting it to “educators” and “preparers of online learning 
materials” acting on behalf of educators at for-profit or nonprofit entities when 
such entities are “registered with their state or local jurisdiction or by the federal 
government as an entity . . . with an educational purpose or mission.”286  
Proponents offered that the proof of an “educational purpose or mission” can be 
demonstrated through “tax documents,” like the “Form 990;” and “the 
establishment of the organization” through governing documents or “an SEC 
filing.”287  Joint Educators II also noted that many entities “have a stated purpose 
that you can find on the[] home page” of their website.288   
To demonstrate, Joint Educators II applied the proposed definition of qualified 
online educational entity to their two examples.  First, they considered Udemy, a 
for-profit, nonaccredited entity, whose mission, according to an SEC filing, is to 
“‘improve lives through learning.’”289  Joint Educators II argued that “Udemy 
would fall under the definition as a qualified online educational entity since 
improving lives through learning is an educational mission.”290  Next, they 
pointed to the Khan Academy, a nonprofit, nonaccredited entity, whose Form 
990 indicates that its mission is “a free world-class education for anyone, 
anywhere,” which they argued “demonstrates an educational purpose.”291   
In response, opponents raised three concerns.  First, DVD CCA and AACS LA 
challenged the meaning of “registered” and “purpose,” contending that 
“corporate documents” do not “necessarily . . . speak to the fact of whether or not 
its purpose as a [‘]registered purpose[’] is indeed an educational mission.”292  
Second, they argued that the limitation has no impact on what it characterized as 
“the more important aspect of . . . this rulemaking,” which is “who can 
circumvent.”293  Joint Creators II noted that “the question really isn’t whether or 
 
286 Joint Educators II Class 2 Reply at 2–3. 
287 Tr. at 16:22–17:09 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Decherney, Joint Educators II). 
288 Tr. at 17:22–18:03 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Decherney, Joint Educators II). 
289 Joint Educators II Class 2 Reply at 3. 
290 Id. 
291 Id. 
292 Tr. at 18:22–19:07 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Taylor, DVD CCA). 
293 Tr. at 19:08–16 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Taylor, DVD CCA). 

[PAGE 61]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
58 
 
not the platform itself has an educational mission”294 because the exemption 
“would not apply to Udemy.”295  Rather, the proposed exemption “would apply 
to the content creators on Udemy, of which . . . there are 75,000 or so.”296 
At the hearing, Joint Educators II’s representative agreed that the proposed 
expansion would include educators and preparers acting on behalf of educators 
who are affiliated with a “qualified educational entity,” and noted that their 
framework mirrors the current exemption, which applies to faculty affiliated 
with accredited nonprofit institutions.297  Opponents contended, however, that 
“[t]here’s a radical difference” between a faculty’s affiliation with an accredited 
nonprofit educational institution and “what we see at Udemy, where anybody 
can offer anything and there’s no vetting process.”298  DVD CCA and AACS LA 
stated, “Udemy expressly disavows the content on its platform” and “further 
states, ‘[y]ou and we agree that no joint venture, partnership, employment, 
contractor, or agency relationship exists between us.’”299  Because of this, they 
argued that “it’s very tenuous to suggest that it’s just like . . . serving as a faculty 
member at a non-profit accredited educational university.”300   
Third, opponents questioned the rigor of proponents’ “educational purpose or 
mission” standard.  For example, Joint Creators II described proponents’ 
principal example, Udemy, as “akin to YouTube or TikTok, where content 
creators provide classes and people can go and access on demand streams of 
informational content.”301  Illustrating the breadth of the proposed exemption, 
they pointed to courses Udemy user-instructors offer that appear to provide 
strategies for unusual skills, rather than educational content.302  Joint Creators II 
 
294 Tr. at 19:08–16 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Taylor, DVD CCA). 
295 Tr. at 19:18–25 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators II). 
296 Tr. at 19:18–25 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators II). 
297 Tr. at 22:05–21 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Decherney, Joint Educators II); see also 37 C.F.R. § 
201.40(b)(1)(ii)(B) (current exemption). 
298 Tr. at 22:25–23:04 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Taylor, DVD CCA). 
299 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 2 Opp’n at 3 (quoting Terms of Use – Section 9.7. Relationship 
Between Us, UDEMY, https://www.udemy.com/terms/). 
300 Tr. at 23:05–10 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Taylor, DVD CCA). 
301 Tr. at 10:13–22 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators II). 
302 Tr. at 11:02–07 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators II) (citing examples titled “How to get 
women obsessed with you even if you’re homeless” and “How to communicate with your animal 
telepathically”). 

[PAGE 62]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
59 
 
argued that exempting such users “is just not something the Office has condoned 
before or ought to no matter how the regulatory language gets tweaked.”303 
The Register agrees that Joint Educators II’s current proposal should be denied.  
As in previous proceedings, the record is insufficient to justify expansion to 
“educators” and “preparers of online learning materials” of “qualified online 
educational entities.”  Based on the record, it is unclear how proponents’ 
proposed expansion materially differs from its 2021 proposal for “online learning 
materials” offered by “online learning platforms.”304  While proponents proffered 
different regulatory language in this proceeding, the proposed limitation to 
“qualified educational entities” does not appear to place meaningful limits on 
who could make use of the proposed exemption.          
Even if the exemption were limited to the proposed uses described by Joint 
Educators II, the record does not adequately demonstrate they are likely 
noninfringing.  As noted above, Joint Educators II cited only two specific uses 
(fewer than the number cited in 2021 proceeding)—“Learn English with Movie 
Clips,” offered on Udemy, and “Storytelling,” offered by Khan Academy, which 
is provided with the consent of the copyright owner. 
Regarding the first fair use factor—the purpose and character of the use—Joint 
Educators II maintained that it favors fair use because the proposed use “is 
strictly for educational purposes by qualified educational entities.”305  They 
argued that “[e]ducators regularly repurpose motion picture excerpts into 
educational tools in a fashion that is highly transformative.”306  They contended 
that “the commercial nature of . . . qualified for-profit educational entities does 
not undermine their legitimacy or their entitlement to fair use protections” 
because, citing Campbell, “the more transformative the use, the more likely a 
court is to find for fair use, regardless of commercial nature.”307     
Opponents responded that the proffered examples are not particularly 
transformative, as the works are being used for precisely the purpose for which 
they were made.  Regarding Udemy’s course, “Learn English with Movie Clips,” 
 
303 Tr. at 11:10–12 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators II). 
304 See generally 2021 Joint Educators Class 1 Pet. 
305 Joint Educators II Class 2 Initial at 13. 
306 Id. 
307 Id. (citing Campbell, 510 U.S. at 580). 

[PAGE 63]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
60 
 
DVD CCA and AACS LA contended that the instructor merely uses “the 
inherent entertainment of movie clips to teach the English language, and in so 
doing” is “directly exploiting the works, in large part, for their original 
purpose—to bring viewers in and capture their attention through the creative 
elements embodied by the motion picture.”308  Joint Creators II noted that the 
proposed regulatory language is broader than the current exemption in that it 
does not only cover “criticism and comment but also illustration and 
explanation.”309  They contended that this seems to suggest the clips are being 
used merely “to show things that are shown in the movie.”310  They argued, 
“[t]hat is not a transformative purpose for using a movie.”311 
Joint Creators II further argued that even if proponents’ uses were 
transformative, “[s]ince the last proceeding, the Supreme Court has emphasized 
that even when a use can be considered transformative, it is not appropriate 
simply to assume that the transformative nature of the use trumps a commercial 
purpose.”312  They contended that “[h]ere, the Joint Educators II have not 
proposed an exemption that would ensure that all the commercial uses they 
would enable have purposes that outweigh their commercial nature.”313   
On the record presented, Joint Educators II have not demonstrated that their 
cited uses can be considered noninfringing.  The only relevant example cited 
relates to a for-profit entity.314  The nature of this entity’s uses, and in particular 
the activities of its user-instructors who were absent from this rulemaking, is 
unclear based on the evidence submitted.  Moreover, “whether the use of a 
copyrighted work has a further purpose or different character . . . is a matter of 
degree, and the degree of difference must be balanced against the commercial 
nature of the use.”315  “If an original work and a secondary use share the same or 
highly similar purposes, and the secondary use is of a commercial nature, the 
 
308 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 2 Opp’n at 9–10. 
309 Tr. at 26:02–10 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators II). 
310 Tr. at 26:02–10 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators II). 
311 Tr. at 26:02–10 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators II). 
312 Joint Creators II Class 2 Opp’n at 7 (discussing Warhol, 598 U.S. at 532). 
313 Id. 
314 As noted above, the course offered by Khan Academy is offered in partnership with the 
content owner, Pixar.   
315 Warhol, 598 U.S. at 532. 

[PAGE 64]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
61 
 
first factor is likely to weigh against fair use, absent some other justification for 
copying.”316  Accordingly, although a commercial purpose is not disqualifying, 
the for-profit nature of proponents’ principal example indicates that the first 
factor weighs against a finding of fair use. 
Under factor two—the nature of the copyrighted work—it is well established 
that motion pictures are creative and thus at the core of copyright’s protection.317  
But in the case of uses involving a favored purpose, the second factor may be of 
relatively limited importance to the overall analysis.318  As in 2015, 2018, and 
2021, the Register concludes that the second fair use factor slightly disfavors the 
proposed expansion.319 
Under the third factor—the amount and substantiality of the portion used in 
relation to the copyrighted work as a whole—the Register concludes that the 
limitation to circumvention for uses of “short portions” of motion pictures is 
integral to the various proposals.320  In the 2010 proceeding, the Register 
reviewed the meaning of “short portions” based on the record before her.321  
There, the evidence suggested that most uses involved “a relatively small portion 
of the copyrighted work,” “in some cases less than 1 minute and never more than 
3–5 minutes in length.”322  Thus, while recognizing that the extent of permissible 
copying may vary, for purposes of this class, the “short portions” limitation 
provides some guidance as to what is generally likely to be a fair use without 
imposing a wholly inflexible rule as to length.323   
Regarding the fourth factor—the effect of the use upon the potential market for 
or value of the copyrighted work—Joint Educators II contended that “[t]he 
Copyright Office has already acknowledged that the use of motion picture 
excerpts for educational purposes by K–12 schools, universities, and MOOCs has 
 
316 Id. 
317 See 2021 Recommendation at 43; 2018 Recommendation at 45; 2015 Recommendation at 70; 
2012 Recommendation at 128. 
318 See Campbell, 510 U.S. at 586. 
319 See 2021 Recommendation at 43; 2018 Recommendation at 45; 2015 Recommendation at 70 . 
320 See 2021 Recommendation at 43; 2018 Recommendation at 46; 2015 Recommendation at 70; 
2012 Recommendation at 128. 
321 See 2010 Recommendation at 51. 
322 Id. 
323 See 2021 Recommendation at 43; 2018 Recommendation at 46. 

[PAGE 65]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
62 
 
a minimal effect on the content market at best.”324  They asserted that the uses 
proposed in the petition are analogous to the uses by K–12 schools, universities, 
and MOOCs previously considered by the Register.  DVD CCA and AACS LA, 
by contrast, argued that “[c]opyright owners reasonably expect to license clips of 
their motion pictures.”325  Joint Creators II argued that the proposed expansion 
“would negatively affect copyright owners’ legitimate revenues from streaming 
and download services that publicly perform or otherwise transmit copies of 
motion pictures—some of which cater specifically to educational institutions.”326  
To demonstrate this licensing market, DVD CCA and AACS LA pointed to Joint 
Educators II’s Khan Academy example, noting that the “Pixar in a Box” course is 
“authorized by the content owner” via a “cooperative relationship.”327  In 
response, Joint Educators II contended that “copyright owners mainly sell their 
motion picture works for entertainment,” and “[t]he entertainment market serves 
a distinctive purpose from the educational sphere.”328 
Proponents provided only one example of a nonaccredited, nonprofit institution 
seeking to use the proposed exemption—Khan Academy.  Here, because the fair 
use inquiry is not limited by the scope of specific statutory factors under section 
107, the Register considers section 110(2).  Section 110(2) provides an exception 
for certain uses of copyrighted works by nonprofit educators in distance 
education,329 and requires that the transmitter must be “a governmental body or 
an accredited nonprofit educational institution.”330  As in the 2021 proceeding, the 
Register continues to believe that section 110(2) “provides useful and important 
guidance as to Congress’ intentions regarding the need for and nature of 
excepted uses to permit certain performances and displays of copyrighted works 
for distance learning.”331  Thus, while not foreclosing the possibility that a 
different conclusion might be warranted upon a fuller record, the Register cannot 
 
324 Joint Educators II Class 2 Initial at 14 (citing 83 Fed. Reg. 54,010, 54,010 (Oct. 26, 2018)). 
325 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 2 Opp’n at 11–12. 
326 Joint Creators II Class 2 Opp’n at 8. 
327 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 2 Opp’n at 4. 
328 Joint Educators II Class 2 Reply at 5. 
329 17 U.S.C. § 110(2); see also U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, REPORT ON COPYRIGHT AND DIGITAL 
DISTANCE EDUCATION (1999), https://www.copyright.gov/reports/de_rprt.pdf. 
330 17 U.S.C. § 110(2) (emphasis added). 
331 2021 Recommendation at 53 (quoting 2015 Recommendation at 74). 

[PAGE 66]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
63 
 
conclude that the current evidence regarding nonaccredited institutions 
establishes a likely noninfringing use. 
In regard to entities that seek to make the proposed uses of motion picture 
excerpts, the Register concludes that their status as for-profit organizations tips 
the fourth factor against fair use.  Given the substantial prevalence of commercial 
uses in the proposal, and the difficulty of separating educational uses from 
partially entertainment uses, the Register is unable to conclude that the proposed 
uses are likely to be noninfringing.   
c. Causation 
The Register finds that Joint Educators II have met their burden of showing that 
the statutory prohibition on circumvention of access controls limits their ability 
to engage in the proposed uses.  But for the prohibition, users likely could gain 
lawful access to the copyrighted motion pictures for those purposes.332 
d. Asserted Adverse Effects 
While it is unnecessary to address this issue in light of the fact that proponents 
have failed to establish a noninfringing use, the Register finds that even if there 
were noninfringing uses, the current record is insufficient to support a finding of 
adverse effects.   
As an initial matter, there is a dispute regarding the availability of alternatives to 
circumvention that would allow for-profit and nonaccredited educational entities 
to use short motion picture clips for purposes of teaching.  Opponents identified 
three alternatives.  DVD CCA and AACS LA noted that educators for for-profit 
and nonaccredited entities could create their own clips by performing and 
reading dialogue themselves.333  Both suggested that educators for for-profit and 
nonaccredited entities utilize non-circumventing screen capture technology or 
avail themselves of the clip-licensing market.334  While Joint Educators II did not 
respond to Joint Creators II’s first alternative, they did address the second and 
third.  Regarding screen capture technology, Joint Educators II argued that the 
 
332 Joint Educators II Class 2 Initial at 8 (“The DMCA’s statutory prohibition on circumventing 
access controls adversely impacts these educational entities uses of short excerpts of motion 
pictures to provide access to quality educational materials in achievement of equity across the 
United States education sector.”). 
333 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 2 Opp’n at 12. 
334 Id.; Joint Creators II Class 2 Opp’n at 14. 

[PAGE 67]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
64 
 
alternative “forces these qualified online educational entities to work with clips 
that are inferior in sound and picture quality, apparent in the opposition’s own 
exhibit.”335  Regarding clip licensing, Joint Educators II point out that “these 
services are not accessible to every educational institution,” and some services, 
like Swank Motion Pictures, Inc., “only offer entire films,” not clips.336       
Next, with respect to the first section 1201 statutory factor, Joint Educators II 
maintained that the “proposed exemption is not premised upon a general lack of 
availability of copyrighted works but rather the unavailability of works made 
inaccessible by TPMs for specific educational uses that would benefit students of 
nontraditional educational entities.”337  They asserted that the prohibition against 
circumvention “prevents nontraditional educational entities from equitable 
access to digital sources.”338  As to the second factor, Joint Educators II stated that 
“the use of the copyrighted material is the same here as in previously granted 
exceptions: educational.”339  Regarding the third factor, they maintained that 
“nonaccredited and/or for-profit entities engaging in education face the very 
same burdens their traditional counterparts face,” and that “[t]he use of quality 
film clips is today an essential tool for educating generations whose experiences 
are increasingly digitalized.”340  As to the fourth factor, Joint Educators II 
contended that the proposed use “would be strictly limited to minimize any 
potential effect on the market or value of copyrighted works,” and that the 
“motion picture excerpts are meant only for the limited purpose of educating 
students by emphasizing or illustrating a specific concept as part of an enhanced 
learning experience.”341     
Opponents contended that the factors do not favor the proposed exemption.  
DVD CCA and AACS LA argued that the proposal “will not result in the 
availability of more works,” as “[n]othing suggests that online learning platforms 
are presently unable to make or prepare educational materials.”342  They further 
 
335 Joint Educators II Class 2 Reply at 7–8. 
336 Id. at 6. 
337 Joint Educators II Class 2 Initial at 15. 
338 Id. 
339 Joint Educators II Reply Comment at 7. 
340 Id. 
341 Joint Educators II Class 2 Initial at 16. 
342 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 2 Opp’n at 14. 

[PAGE 68]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
65 
 
cautioned that “the creation of a broad, unwarranted exemption will negatively 
affect rightsholders’ confidence in the overall effectiveness of section 1201 if this 
rulemaking strays from its practice of creating narrow focused exemptions that 
run low risk of harming of the market for the works.”343  Regarding the fourth 
factor, they asserted use by “for-profit and nonaccredited entities threatens the 
digital content ecosystem,” and “would likely throw open the door for any 
‘online activities’ for all commercial and non-accredited entities.”344   
At the outset, consistent with her prior recommendations, the Register notes that 
it appears that non-circumventing screen capture technology may provide an 
adequate alternative to circumvention for certain uses of motion picture clips for 
criticism and comment that do not require access to higher-quality content.345  
Because the record, which includes only two examples, does not sufficiently 
reflect a need for higher-quality content, the Register takes notice of opponents’ 
exhibit showing a good screen capture of the Udemy course “Learn English with 
Movie Clips,”346 as well as their assertion that the quality of screen capture is 
“very good, especially, . . . for learners who are reviewing the lesson on a small 
screen device, such as a tablet, a laptop, a phone, and not in an expensive home 
theater arrangement.”347 
As noted above, proponents provided only two examples of cases that 
potentially engage in the proposed uses—one course offered through a for-profit 
entity and one course involving authorized use of content offered through a 
nonprofit, nonaccredited entity.  The full nature of their activities, and in 
particular the activities of the user-instructors who were absent in this 
rulemaking, is unclear based on the evidence submitted.  The Register therefore 
cannot assess whether, or to what extent, an expansion to such users might affect 
the availability of copyrighted works for educational purposes or impact relevant 
 
343 Id. 
344 Id. at 19–21. 
345 2021 Recommendation at 34 (noting that “certain uses of motion picture clips for criticism and 
comment do not require access to higher quality content, and that screen capture technology may 
be an alternative to circumvention” (citing 2015 Recommendation at 99)). 
346 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 2 Opp’n at 13, Ex. 11. 
347 Tr. at 36:10–19 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Ayers, AACS LA).  The Register notes that, in comparison, 
proponents in the 2015 proceeding for the existing exemption proffered “a variety of examples” 
that sufficiently demonstrated a need for higher‐quality content.  See 2015 Recommendation at 87. 

[PAGE 69]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
66 
 
markets.  She is open to revisiting this issue in the future should a more robust 
record be provided.   
3. NTIA Comments 
Consistent with its 2021 comments, NTIA supports Joint Educators II’s proposed 
expansion to include for-profit and nonaccredited educational institutions.348  
Addressing the insufficiency of the record to support the full scope of 
proponents’ request, NTIA also supports limiting the exemption to 
“nontraditional educational entities focusing on film study and language 
courses.”349  In its view, “a binary black-and-white distinction between 
traditional and non-traditional educational entities inadvertently leads the 
rulemaking process to adjudicate the educational value of an online education 
when considering an exemption.”350  It reiterated that “‘current circumstances . . . 
have obviated the need for strict reliance on this notion’ that exemptions should 
be strictly limited to the contours of the TEACH Act,” calling section 110(2) 
“‘instructive,’” but suggesting that it is “‘irrelevant to the circumstances at 
hand.’”351   
The Register appreciates the input from NTIA, but disagrees with its conclusions 
related to the copyright issues relevant to this petition.  Section 110(2) remains an 
appropriate guidepost for evaluating the nature of permitted uses of copyrighted 
works in distance education.  As noted above, with only one example proffered, 
the current record is insufficient to support the expansion of the existing 
exemption to cover uses by unaccredited nonprofit educational institutions.  
Further, the Register continues to believe that the predominantly commercial 
nature of most of the proposed beneficiaries remains significant in her 
assessment of both the fair use factors and the overall section 1201 analysis.               
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
The Register finds that the record lacks support to expand the existing exemption 
to for-profit and/or unaccredited educational entities.  Moreover, the Register 
 
348 NTIA Letter at 21. 
349 Id. at 23. 
350 Id. at 22. 
351 Id. at 23 (quoting Letter from Evelyn L. Remaley, Acting Assistant Sec’y for Commc’ns & Info. 
& Adm’r, Nat’l Telecomms. & Info. Admin., U.S. Dep’t of Commerce, to Shira Perlmutter, Register 
of Copyrights and Dir., U.S. Copyright Office, at 10 (Oct. 1, 2021)).  

[PAGE 70]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
67 
 
does not recommend adoption of proponents’ proposal to encompass the broad 
categories of “educators” and “preparers of online learning materials” of 
“qualified online educational entities,” as it does not place meaningful limits on 
who may make use of the proposed exemption.  The definition proffered for 
“qualified online educational entity” would allow essentially any for-profit 
and/or unaccredited entity with a broad information sharing objective or 
education-adjacent purpose to circumvent.  Such expansion would significantly 
weaken guardrails against abuse and potential infringement.  In light of these 
concerns, the Register does not recommend adoption of proposed Class 2. 

[PAGE 71]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
68 
 
C. Proposed Classes 3(a) and 3(b): Audiovisual Works and Literary 
Works—Text and Data Mining—Scholarly Research and Teaching 
1. Background 
a.  Summary of Proposed Exemptions and Register 
Recommendations 
Proposed Classes 3(a) and 3(b) seek to expand the existing exemptions, codified 
at 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(4) and 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(5), that permit circumvention 
of TPMs on copies of copyrighted motion pictures and literary works that were 
lawfully acquired to enable researchers to perform text and data mining for the 
purpose of scholarly research and teaching, but limit access to the corpora to 
outside researchers “solely for purposes of collaboration or replication of the 
research.”352  Proponents seek to permit academic researchers to share copies of 
corpora with researchers affiliated with other nonprofit institutions of higher 
education “for purposes of conducting independent text [and] data mining 
research and teaching, where those researchers are in compliance with the 
exemption.”353  As in 2021, the Office grouped the proposals into two classes: 
Class 3(a) pertaining to motion pictures and Class 3(b) pertaining to literary 
works. 
In response to the proposed expansions, the Association of American Publishers 
(“AAP”); MPA, N/MA and RIAA (together, “Joint Creators III”); DVD CCA and 
AACS LA; and the International Association of Scientific, Technical and Medical 
Publishers (“STM”) (together, the “opponents”) filed opposition comments.  
Those comments raised issues with both the proposed expansions and the 
existing exemptions.  They expressed concern that the “proposed new language 
would dramatically enlarge the scope of the exemptions adopted in 2021” and 
could lead to “a wide range of potentially infringing uses” of copyrighted 
works.354  They also raised issues with the existing exemptions’ security measures 
and viewing provisions.355 
 
352 37 C.F.R § 201.40(b)(4)–(5). 
353 Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3(a) Pet. at 2; Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3(b) Pet. at 2. 
354 MPA, N/MA & RIAA (together, “Joint Creators III”) Class 3(a) Opp’n at 5; see AAP Class 3(b) 
Opp’n at 2–3; DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 3(a) Opp’n at 12–13, 19–20.  
355 AAP Class 3(b) Opp’n at 8–13; DVD CCA &AACS 3(a) Opp’n at 1–5; Joint Creators III Class 
3(a) Opp’n at 5–9. 

[PAGE 72]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
69 
 
Through the comment and hearing process, both proponents and opponents 
sought clarification of the language of the existing exemptions.  Specifically, both 
parties discussed whether viewing the works in the corpus (“close viewing”) and 
annotating356 are research methods covered by the exemptions, and whether the 
security measures provisions are working as the Office intended.  While 
opponents did not raise these questions in opposition to the renewal petitions 
and instead waited to raise them in opposition to the requested expansions, the 
Register is sympathetic to the parties’ interest in resolving any uncertainty.  
Accordingly, as part of the review of the petition, the Register first draws on her 
analysis from the last rulemaking cycle to make recommendations on clarifying 
the existing text.  She then turns to an analysis of the request to expand the 
exemptions, which she grants in part and denies in part. 
b.  Overview of Issues 
During the 2021 cycle, the Librarian of Congress adopted exemptions permitting 
researchers affiliated with a nonprofit institution of higher education to conduct 
text and data mining on motion pictures and literary works for the purpose of 
scholarly research and teaching.  Since then, researchers have been able to 
engage in valuable research that was not previously possible.  For example, one 
researcher reports using the exemptions to analyze the representation of gender, 
race, and guns in films from 1980 to 2022,357 while another research team reports 
using them to analyze banned books in the 21st century.358 
After three years of utilizing the exemptions, researchers now claim that 
additional research based on text and data mining techniques is being stymied 
by the uncertainty surrounding whether and when the corpora at issue may be 
shared with researchers at outside institutions.  Authors Alliance, AAUP, and 
LCA (together, the “proponents”) seek to expand the exemptions “to permit 
researchers to share corpora with researchers affiliated with different nonprofit 
institutions of higher education for purposes of conducting independent text 
 
356 Close viewing and annotating audiovisual works “involves human users manually annotating 
audiovisual materials to produce data about media such as film and television.”  Authors All., 
AAUP & LCA Class 3 Initial at App. E at 1 (letter from Joel Burges & Emily Sherwood).  
Similarly, for literary works, the process may involve manually reviewing and tagging text 
according to a schema to prepare the corpus for computational analysis.  Tr. at 91:12–92:16 (Apr. 
17, 2024) (Howard‐Sukhil, Authors All.). 
357 Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3 Initial at App. C (letter from David Bamman). 
358 Id. at App. L (letter from Henry Alexander Wermer‐Colan). 

[PAGE 73]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
70 
 
[and] data mining research and teaching, where those researchers are in 
compliance with the exemption.”359  In other words, proponents request that the 
exemptions be expanded so that researchers can share corpora not only for 
collaboration on their own projects or replication of their own research, but also 
to facilitate outside researchers’ work on new projects.  
The parties also raised issues with the viewing provisions and security measures 
provisions of the existing exemptions.  While proponents explained that viewing 
the copyrighted works is necessary to conduct some text and data mining 
research,360 the opponents asserted that close viewing and annotating is not fair 
use and argued that the exemptions should limit the practice to an even greater 
extent.361  The opponents also raised issues with the security measures 
provisions.  In addition to raising concerns about the efficacy of these 
provisions,362 the opponents expressed frustration that only copyright owners—
and not trade associations—can make inquiries into security measures,363 and 
noted that the existing text creates uncertainty for copyright owners who may 
not know whether their works are contained in a corpus.364  
2. Discussion  
a.  Existing Exemptions: Scope of Research Methods and 
Process for Security Measures Confirmation 
i. Scope of Research Methods 
The current exemptions specify that “[t]he person undertaking the 
circumvention” may view or listen to the contents of copyrighted works in the 
corpus “solely for the purpose of verification of the research findings.”365  During 
the 2021 cycle, verification of the research findings was the only purpose for 
 
359 Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3(a) Pet. at 2; Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3(b) Pet. at 2. 
360 See, e.g., Tr. at 86:09–10 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Sherwood, Univ. of Rochester Librs.); Quinn 
Dombrowski Class 3 Reply at 4–5. 
361 See AAP Class 3 Opp’n at 11–17. 
362 Joint Creators III Class 3 Opp’n at 6–7, 9–10; AAP Class 3 Opp’n at 2–3. 
363 Tr. at 54:03–08 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Taylor, DVD CCA); Tr. at 58:17–19 (Apr. 17, 2024) 
(Charlesworth, AAP). 
364 See Tr. at 56:07–18 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Rotstein, Joint Creators III). 
365 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(4)(i)(C), (b)(5)(i)(C).   

[PAGE 74]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
71 
 
which researchers testified that they would need to view the works.366  In fact, 
petitioners initially stated in 2021 that “researchers would not be able to view the 
text of literary works or the content of motion pictures in the course of their 
research.”367  Over the course of the proceeding, however, it became clear that 
“proponents believed that it would in fact be necessary for researchers to view 
the content of the works to verify their methods and findings.”368  Opponents 
asserted that viewing the entirety of the copyrighted works is essentially spaceshifting, which the Office has consistently found not to be fair use.  Ultimately, 
the Register concluded that “the proposed use is likely to be transformative, 
notwithstanding researchers’ ability to view the content of the copyrighted works,”369 
and included language to limit viewing “solely to verify research results” to 
“ensure that the purpose of the use differs from the original expressive purposes 
for which the works were created.”370 
This cycle, proponents and opponents again differed in their views of when text 
and data mining research requires viewing the copyrighted works within the 
corpora and whether activities such as close viewing and annotating are, or 
should be, covered by the exemptions.  Proponents asserted that for some text 
and data mining research, close viewing and annotating is necessary, and that 
certain research would be limited if the copyrighted works could not be viewed 
and annotated.371  They explained that “converting the materials into a format 
compatible with computational analysis . . . may involve deleting text or marking 
 
366 2021 Recommendation at 104. 
367 Id. 
368 Id. 
369 Id. at 111 (emphasis added). 
370 Id. 
371 Tr. at 86:09–10 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Sherwood, Univ. of Rochester Librs.) (stating that “[f]or [their] 
research questions and purposes,” text and data mining would be limited if researchers could not 
view and/or annotate copyrighted works); see, e.g., Tr. at 86:13–14, 22–24 (Apr. 17, 2024) 
(Sherwood, Univ. of Rochester Librs.) (noting that “quantifying early representations of the 
LGBTQIA community in film and television requires a human to view [the copyrighted works] to 
generate that data” because “queer identities are not always discussed or evident by a character 
through dialogue”); see, e.g., Tr. at 91:23–92:15 (Howard‐Sukhil, Authors All.) (explaining that for 
a previous text and data mining project, she had to view copyrighted works and perform manual 
markups because particular narrative schema required “interpretive judgments regarding what 
events are happening and how individuals are described in the sample text”).  

[PAGE 75]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
72 
 
text” or “labeling materials with metadata[.]”372  Other times, converting literary 
text may require a human to “actually look” at the corpora text to confirm 
whether automated formatting was accurate.373  Being able to view the 
copyrighted works within the corpus may also raise novel research questions.374    
In contrast, the opponents argued that close viewing and annotating are not fair 
use375 and have requested that the regulatory text be revised to include more 
stringent limitations on viewing.376  They highlight the 2021 recommendation to 
limit viewing for the purpose of verification of research findings and argue that 
annotating is not sufficiently transformative.377 
The Register concludes that researchers should be able to view the contents of 
copyrighted works as part of their research, provided that any viewing that takes 
place is in furtherance of research objectives (e.g., processing or annotating works 
to prepare them for analysis) and not for the works’ expressive value.  Updating 
the existing exemptions to permit close viewing and annotating brings the 
regulatory text in line with the original fair use analysis from the 2021 
recommendation and does not require a new fair use analysis.378  With the 
additional information regarding the need to view the copyrighted work for 
 
372 Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3 Reply at 10–11. 
373 Quinn Dombrowski Class 3 Reply at 4–5 (explaining that some research methods require a 
human to view automatic formatting for quality control as “an essential prerequisite to make sure 
the files we’re analyzing contain what we think they contain—which is fundamental to our ability 
to make any legitimate claims using the results”). 
374 Id. at 3 (observing that research questions “about italics use and other typographic choices in 
different genres of literature across time” cannot be asked without viewing the copyrighted 
works because computational text analysis uses plain text formatting).  
375 AAP Class 3 Opp’n at 11–15; DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 3 Opp’n at 1–12; Tr. at 93:05–9 (Apr. 
17, 2024) (Rotstein, Joint Creators III) (“[H]uman review of a copyrighted work for annotation is 
an expressive use, and annotations are derivative works, can be derivative works or can be 
infringing if they’re unauthorized.”). 
376 AAP Class 3 Opp’n at 16–17 (proposing modifications to existing exemptions that limits 
viewing contents of the works in corpus “solely for the purpose of verification of statistical 
research findings and no other type of analysis” (new text in italics), and narrowly defines text and 
data mining to “computational research activities using algorithmic processes that do not involve 
the viewing of the contents of literary works other than as described in (b)(5)(i)(C) of this section 
and that result solely in statistical information about the literary works”). 
377 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 3 Opp’n at 1–5. 
378 See 2021 Recommendation at 111 (“[T]he proposed use is likely to be transformative, 
notwithstanding researchers’ ability to view the content of the copyrighted works.”).  

[PAGE 76]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
73 
 
research-related purposes now provided in the record, the Register finds the 
existing limitation on viewing overly restrictive.  Moreover, as text and data 
mining research is a relatively new field that is quickly evolving and the 
technology associated with it continues to improve,379 the Register determines 
that it is reasonable to modify the regulatory text to account for adapting 
research methods.  She concludes that “ensure[ing] that the purpose of the use 
differs from the original expressive purposes for which the works were 
created”380 can be achieved by changing the language of the exemptions to 
permit viewing or listening to the contents of the corpus “solely to conduct text 
and data mining research or teaching.”  
The AAP also asked the Register to address a “quirk” in the regulations that 
creates a disconnect between whom the regulations permit to view the 
copyrighted works and who is, in fact, doing so.381  Currently, the exemptions 
permit “[t]he person undertaking the circumvention” to view or listen to the 
copyrighted works.382  The 2021 recommendation, however, was explicit that 
under the exemptions, “researchers would be permitted to view or listen to the 
copyrighted works . . . .”383  The Register agrees that there is a disconnect 
between the 2021 recommendation and the regulatory text and recommends 
amending the regulatory text to apply to anyone performing text and data 
mining activities.384 
 
379 Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3 Initial at 9 (noting that digital humanities field is “young 
and small”); Id. at App. D at 2 (letter from John Bell) (“[B]etween the time when we finish our 
analysis and publish our results, our methods will be obsoleted by new technology and the first 
thing our readers will want to do is rerun the analysis using new models to produce more 
accurate results or examine a related research question that could not be addressed using current 
inference models.”). 
380 2021 Recommendation at 111. 
381 See Tr. at 90:02–07 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Charlesworth, AAP) (“So one sort of quirk in the regulation 
is it refers only to the person doing circumvention, but I assume that there are other people who 
have access to the corpus.  And so I think that needs to be clarified, that whatever the rule is 
would apply to all of them.”). 
382 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(4)(i)(C), 201.40(b)(5)(i)(C). 
383 2021 Recommendation at 111 (emphasis added). 
384 See AAP Class 3 Opp’n at 17 (proposing that 201.40(b)(5)(i)(C) be amended to read: “ Any 
person undertaking circumvention or research activities views the contents of the literary 
work . . .”). 

[PAGE 77]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
74 
 
Lastly, during the 2024 cycle, some proponents and opponents voiced concerns 
about the interplay between the exemptions and generative artificial intelligence 
(“AI”).  Proponents explained that “machine learning models are [] at the core of 
text and data mining research.”385  For example, machine learning models could 
be used in text and data mining to predict the probability of the next word in a 
sentence in order to determine the predictability of a novel,386 “infer[] a third 
dimension that does not exist in a two-dimensional film in order to understand 
how [] people are standing in space,”387 or recognize faces in a frame to 
“measur[e] representation for race and gender in Hollywood movies over the 
past 40 years.”388  Proponents warned that the lack of precision in terms like 
“generative AI” could have unintended consequences if incorporated into 
regulatory text and expressed concern that excluding generative AI from the 
exemptions might impact, or even end, the type of research these exemptions 
permit.389  They also warned that “over-specify[ing] how researchers are able to 
do [their work]” risks making the regulation obsolete as AI techniques and 
technology change in such a rapidly evolving field.390   
Opponents expressed concern that, absent a clear exclusion of generative AI, the 
existing exemptions may permit the accessed copyrighted works to be used to 
train generative AI systems.391  They highlighted the uncertainty surrounding the 
meaning of key terms and lack of “useful guidelines to differentiate such 
 
385 Tr. at 74:18–20 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Bamman, Univ. of Cal., Berkeley). 
386 Tr. at 75:07–20 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Bamman, Univ. of Cal., Berkeley). 
387 Tr. at 76:15–24 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Bell, Dartmouth College & Univ. of Maine). 
388 Tr. at 82:17–22 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Bamman, Univ. of Cal., Berkeley). 
389 Tr. at 76:05–77:05 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Bell, Dartmouth College & Univ. of Maine) (“I would just be 
careful about definitions excluding generative AI use that also impact the type of work that we’re 
talking about as an accidental [] side effect of trying to exclude true generative work in a sense 
that maybe more colloquially it might be understood.”); Tr. at 79:03–07 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Band, 
LCA) (“[W]e need to [] just not [] start using terms where we can then have unintended 
consequences in terms of basically shutting down this whole operation.”). 
390 Tr. at 81:02–05 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Hansen, Authors All.). 
391 AAP Class 3 Opp’n at 3, 12–14 (“[C]orpora and/or results of TDM research could also be 
(and seemingly are being) used for their expressive content, including for the development and  
training of generative AI systems.”); Joint Creators III Class 3 Opp’n at 13 (“[T]he proposed 
expansion would permit corpora to be distributed relatively freely among academic institutions 
to be used in the context of AI.”); see Tr. at 77:14–19 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Charlesworth, AAP) 
(expressing concern that research or data from academic research projects may be turned over to 
“a commercial entity . . . to exploit as generative AI material or to train AI systems”). 

[PAGE 78]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
75 
 
‘computational research’ from areas presently under review in the Office’s AI 
study.”392  They stressed that the use of copyrighted material to train AI systems 
is an unsettled area of law currently being litigated by the courts and should not 
be decided in this proceeding.393  
In light of these comments, the Office concludes that it is important to clarify the 
scope of the exemptions in their current form.  The exemptions do not limit or 
differentiate among the tools or methods researchers may employ in conducting 
research related to the audiovisual works or literary works in the corpora, and 
include no terms specific to AI.  Regardless of the techniques used, the 
exemptions allow researchers affiliated with nonprofit institutions of higher 
education to circumvent TPMs only for the purpose of conducting scholarly text and 
data mining research and teaching.  The research examples cited by petitioners 
reflect the understanding that the research and teaching activities at issue are 
focused on the contents of the corpora, and not their use outside of the context of 
text and data mining research and teaching.  It would be outside the scope of 
these exemptions to circumvent TPMs in order to compile training data for use in 
the development of generative AI models and systems or to use corpora 
previously compiled for text and data mining research for that purpose.  As to 
whether such uses may constitute fair use, as participants have noted, that 
question is beyond the scope of this rulemaking.394  Based on this record, the 
Register concludes that it is unnecessary to amend the existing exemptions to 
include language specific to any particular research tool, including AI. 
ii. Process for Security Measures Confirmation 
The current exemptions require institutions to “use[] effective security measures 
to prevent further dissemination or downloading of [the works] in the corpus 
and to limit access” only to the people specified in the exemptions.395  “Effective 
security measures” is defined to mean “security measures that have been agreed 
to by interested copyright owners of [the works] and institutions of higher 
 
392 Joint Creators III Class 3 Opp’n at 13. 
393 AAP Class 3 Opp’n at 3. 
394 2021 Recommendation at 10–11 (stating that the 1201 “rulemaking is not an appropriate venue 
for breaking new ground in fair use jurisprudence”) (quoting Section 1201 Report at 116 –17).  The 
Office will be publishing a report that addresses this issue as part of its initiative on copyright 
and artificial intelligence. 
395 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(4)(i)(D), 201.40(b)(5)(i)(D).   

[PAGE 79]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
76 
 
education; or, in the absence of such measures, those measures that the 
institution uses to keep its own highly confidential information secure.”396  If the 
institution takes the latter approach, “it must, upon a reasonable request from a 
copyright owner whose work is contained in the corpus, provide information to 
that copyright owner regarding the nature of such measures.”397   
The Register recommended these security measures in 2021 because text and 
data mining corpora may contain hundreds or even thousands of copyrighted 
works, and the potential for damage in the event of a security breach was too 
great to let researchers choose their own security measures.398  At the time, 
proponents had sought a requirement of “reasonable security measures” while 
the opponents had sought “specific security measures.”399  The Register 
concluded, however, that “[t]he record does not contain significant information 
regarding the appropriate security measures to include in the exemptions.”400  
Her recommendation encouraged parties to collaborate to develop appropriate 
security measures, and in the absence of consensus, to use the security measures 
they use to protect their own highly confidential information.401  To promote 
transparency, she recommended a requirement that, “upon the reasonable 
request of a copyright owner whose works are contained in the corpus, the 
institution must provide information to that copyright owner regarding the 
nature of the security measures it has implemented.”402  Because little evidence 
was included in the record and the parties did not have consensus on the issue, 
the Register invited “copyright owner[s] who believe[] the security measures 
being used are insufficient [to] provide information regarding those concerns in 
future 1201 rulemaking proceedings.”403  
 
396 Id. § 201.40(b)(4)(ii)(B), 201.40(b)(5)(ii)(B). 
397 Id. § 201.40(b)(4)(ii)(B), 201.40(b)(5)(ii)(B). 
398 2021 Recommendation at 114–15. 
399 Id. at 113–14 (internal citation omitted). 
400 Id. at 115. 
401 Id. at 116. 
402 Id. at 117. 
403 Id. at 115–117. 

[PAGE 80]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
77 
 
This cycle, opponents did not raise issues regarding security measures in 
response to the renewal petition.404  They have, however, raised several concerns 
in connection with the petition for expansion of the exemptions, underscoring 
disagreements between the parties about the effectiveness of the current security 
measures provision.   
Proponents believe the existing security measures are sufficient to apply to both 
the existing exemptions and the proposed expansions,405 and provided multiple 
examples of security measures that institutions are using to secure highly 
confidential data.406  Proponents testified that, to date, there is no evidence of 
security breaches or lapses related to corpora used pursuant to this 
exemptions.407  Proponents also stated that institutions are quite good at securing 
sensitive data, and noted that many institutions do so regularly.408   
 
404 DVD CCA & AACS LA AV Text and Data Mining Renewal Opp’n at 2–3 (opposing the renewal 
petition on the grounds that commercially licensed products are now available to researchers that 
were not available at the time of the prior rulemaking). 
405 Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3 Reply at 14–17. 
406 For example, the University of California, Berkeley uses “networked devices [that are] highly 
secured, and institutional devices such as servers use isolated networks with intrusion detection, 
logging, and firewalls with the most restrictive rules possible.”  Id. at 14–15.  Bowdoin College 
uses a network that must “undergo annual internal and external security audits using the 
National Institute of Science and Technology’s Cybersecurity Framework.”  Id.  Other institutions 
“use protected storage designed to hold ‘protected health information,’ ‘other highly sensitive 
human subjects data,’ and ‘controlled unclassified information.’”  Id.  See also Tr. at 47:11–23 (Apr. 
17, 2024) (Cha, Authors All.) (providing examples of standards that institutions use for “data at 
risk,” include “industry standard encryption, intrusion detection systems, and network security 
policies, such as auto login access controls and appropriate physical environmental securi ty 
controls”).   
407 Tr. at 52:03–06 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Hansen, Authors All.) (“[A]s far as I’m aware, there’s no 
evidence in any TDM researcher’s corpus being breached, any security incidents out there 
reported on that.”); Tr. at 54:25–55:04 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Band, LCA) (“[W]ith all of these exemptions 
across all the years of Section 1201, I mean, I don’t know if there is any evidence of any leakage 
whatsoever.”). 
408 Tr. at 46:16–22 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Hansen, Authors All.) (“[I]nstitutions actually do this [ensure 
security requirements] all the time with all sorts of data, particularly when you look at research 
happening in clinical health fields or other areas where data security is particularly important. 
Universities are actually really good at this and they do this with regularity with agreements 
amongst them about how to ensure security compliance.”). 

[PAGE 81]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
78 
 
The opponents took the position that the existing provisions are insufficient and 
claimed that researchers are not complying with them.409  AACS LA expressed 
concern that while some entities will act responsibly and take security measures 
seriously, others may not, particularly if there is “sharing” of works across 
institutions.410  DVD CCA reported that “what we’ve seen in practice is that there 
seems to be a large disconnect between the researchers and the work they’re 
doing and what universities actually know their researchers are doing.”411  AAP 
added that there is “simply no transparency on what’s going on here.”412   
The opponents also pointed to what they believed to be insufficient responses to 
letters inquiring into researchers’ security measures that were sent by trade 
associations during the comment period.413  In their comment, Joint Creators III 
highlighted some responses that they believe were insufficient.414  AAP stated 
that “[o]f the ten institutions seeking an expanded exemption contacted by AAP, 
not a single one provided any information that confirmed implementation of 
safeguards to protect circumvented literary works.”415  Proponents countered 
that the letters were not reasonable requests,416 and that the plain text of the 
 
409 Joint Creators III Class 3 Opp’n at 6–7, 9–10; AAP Class 3 Opp’n at 2–3. 
410 Tr. at 48:07–15 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Ayers, AACS LA). 
411 Tr. at 49:10–14 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Taylor, DVD CCA). 
412 Tr. at 50:18–20 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Charlesworth, AAP). 
413 Joint Creators III Class 3 Opp’n at 9–10; AAP Class 3 Opp’n at 3; Tr. at 50:09–20 (Apr. 17, 2024) 
(Charlesworth, AAP). 
414 Joint Creators III Class 3 Opp’n at 9–10 (citing responses from University of Virginia [“Setting 
to one side doubts that a trade association is entitled to make such a request, the University has 
no information to provide.  Upon reasonable search and inquiry, I am aware of no such corpus at 
the University of Virginia.”] and Emory University [“Ms. Temple’s letter has not identified any 
work (1) for which the Motion Picture Association is the copyright owner; or (2) that is par t of a 
corpus of works created by Emory for which circumvention has occurred.  No further response to 
this correspondence is warranted.”]) (internal citations omitted); Tr. at 56:10–13 (Apr. 17, 2024) 
(Rotstein, Joint Creators III) (noting that “at least one of the responses said, we’re not going to 
respond because only the copyright owners can take advantage of this and we don’t know that 
you’re a copyright owner”). 
415 AAP Class 3 Opp’n at 10. 
416 Tr. at 52:16–53:03 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Hansen, Authors All.) (noting that letters “were sent with a 
very short time line for individuals to respond to very large institutions with a wide variety of 
research activity”); Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3 Reply at 16 (“[T]he trade associations did 
not attempt to accurately target their requests.  The MPA sent letters to researchers who were 
clearly engaged in studying textual works, and AAP sent letters to researchers who were clearly 
 

[PAGE 82]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
79 
 
exemptions permits only copyright owners—not trade associations—to submit 
such inquiries.417 
The Register agrees that the existing security measures provision should be 
amended and recommends the following three changes: 
Trade Associations.  The current exemptions require that an institution, “upon a 
reasonable request from a copyright owner whose work is contained in the corpus, 
provide information to that copyright owner regarding the nature of such 
measures.”418  In the current rulemaking, the parties have submitted 
correspondence to the Office in which institutions have declined to provide the 
requested information because the requesting party was not a copyright owner, 
but instead a trade association of which the owner is a member.  Accordingly, the 
opponents have requested that trade associations also be permitted to make 
inquiries into security measures.419  The Register agrees and recommends 
amending the existing exemptions to allow trade associations representing 
copyright owners to make reasonable requests for information regarding the 
nature of the institution’s security measures. 
In 2021, the Register explained that “[t]he option for institutions to use the 
security measures they use to protect their own highly confidential information 
provides a fallback in the absence of consensus security measures.”420  Permitting 
inquiries into security measures was intended to add transparency to the 
process.  Now that this “fallback” provision appears to have become the norm,421 
 
engaged in studying audiovisual works.  They even sent letters to individuals who supported the 
proposed expansion but whose support letters show they do not actually make use of the 
exemption.”). 
417 Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3 Reply at 5, 9, 15.  
418 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(4)(ii)(B), 201.40(b)(5)(ii)(B) (emphasis added). 
419 Tr. at 54:03–08 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Taylor, DVD CCA) (requesting that Copyright Office “make it 
perfectly clear that the trade associations that represent different parties in this proceeding also 
should have the authority, clear authority, to be able to ask these questions of how the rule is 
being implemented”); see Tr. at 58:17–19 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Charlesworth, AAP) (suggesting that “a 
trade association that’s been authorized by its members to make the request should be able to 
make the request”).  
420 2021 Recommendation at 116. 
421 During the 2024 comment period and hearings, there was no mention or discussion of any 
agreements between copyright owners and researchers.  There was, however, significant 
discussion regarding the use of institutions’ own security measures for highly sensitive data.  

[PAGE 83]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
80 
 
there is a need to reemphasize the importance of transparency and ensure that 
institutions are taking sufficient precautions to guard against security breaches 
and other unauthorized uses.  This is particularly important because the contents 
of a qualified researcher’s corpus may not be publicly available.  Where this is 
the case, copyright owners will not know that their work is in the corpus.422  An 
institution should not be able to retain confidentiality of its corpus and also reject 
reasonable requests from a relevant trade association about the security 
measures applied to the corpus.   
The Register is also concerned that, if a trade association is not permitted to 
directly request information regarding security measures, their members may be 
encouraged to do so individually.  This could result in hundreds, if not 
thousands, of individual requests, which may be complex and directed at “very 
large institutions with a wide variety of research activity.”423  Limiting the 
number of potential requests by allowing trade associations to make reasonable 
requests should add efficiency to the existing exemptions.    
Lastly, while the Register recommends this expansion of the exemptions, she also 
acknowledges concerns raised with the nature, timing, and scope of letters sent 
to researchers.424  For example, a demand for information sent to an academic 
institution with a two-week response deadline may not be reasonable.  Nor 
might a request made by an association representing authors of written works to 
an institution seeking security information about a research project involving 
motion pictures.  The Register expects that after amending the exemptions to 
permit trade associations to make reasonable requests for information related to 
security measures, both parties will engage in an efficient, good-faith process. 
Disclosure.  Permitting security measure inquiries from parties other than 
copyright owners entails an additional change to these provisions.  The current 
exemptions require institutions to provide information regarding the nature of 
their security measures “[i]f the institution uses the security measures it uses to 
 
422 See Tr. at 53:10–13 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Rotstein, Joint Creators III) (noting that “at least one of the 
responses [to the trade association inquiries] said, we’re not going to respond because only the 
copyright owners can take advantage of this and we don’t know that you’re a copyright owner”).  
423 Tr. at 52:17–18 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Hansen, Authors All.). 
424 Tr. at 54:14–17 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Band, LCA) (expressing concern that previous trade association 
inquiries were “fishing expeditions” done in “a manner and timing that was clearly intended to 
intimidate researchers”); Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3 Reply at 16 (providing examples to 
show letters were “ill‐targeted and overbroad”). 

[PAGE 84]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
81 
 
protect its own highly confidential information” (hereafter, “institution 
standard”).425  The current exemptions do not require institutions to provide 
information if, alternatively, the effective security measures are the product of an 
agreement by the interested copyright owners and the institutions 
(“agreements”).  With the expansion of the persons who can inquire regarding 
security measures to trade associations, the Register recognizes that the 
represented members of the association may include both individual owners 
who have entered into such agreements with the institutions and those who have 
not.  In this situation, it is reasonable to expect the institutions’ response to 
address both types of security measures.  Considering the comments and hearing 
testimony from this cycle, the record now supports a streamlined disclosure 
requirement that permits inquiries into security measures regardless of whether 
they stem from individual agreements or the institution’s own standards.   
Commenters this cycle highlighted that the existing security measures 
requirements allow an overall lack of transparency with what copyrighted works 
are used in corpora and how the works are protected.426  Broadening the 
disclosure requirement to permit inquiries regarding either type of security 
measure (i.e., individual agreement or institutional standard) will increase 
transparency.  The Register anticipates that the institutions will face a minimal 
added burden from a requirement to also disclose when individual agreements 
are in place between its researchers and copyright owners.  The parties stated 
that few, if any, institutions currently rely on agreements between institutions 
and copyright owners, and the record did not indicate that institutions plan to do 
so more in the future.  The disclosure of the existence of individual security 
agreements does not, however, require disclosure of the details of the agreements. 
Reasonable Belief.  The Register recommends expanding the text to include 
authors or trade associations who “reasonably believe” that their works are in a 
corpus.  The current exemptions require that an institution must, “upon a 
reasonable request from a copyright owner whose work is contained in the 
corpus, provide information to that copyright owner regarding the nature of 
such measures.”427  As written, this language creates uncertainty for copyright 
 
425 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(4)(ii)(B), 201.40(b)(5)(ii)(B). 
426 See, e.g., AAP Class 3 Opp’n at 4; Tr. at 50:19–51:6 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Charlesworth, AAP); Tr. at 
56:07–18 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Rotstein, Joint Creators III). 
427 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(4)(ii)(B), 201.40(b)(5)(ii)(B). 

[PAGE 85]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
82 
 
owners who may not know whether their works are contained in a corpus.428  
The fact that they may not be sure that their work is in a corpus should not 
prevent them from inquiring into security measures.  The same reasonability 
requirement applies to trade associations—they must reasonably believe that a 
corpus contains copyrighted works owned by their members. 
Lastly, the Register acknowledges that during the hearing there was extensive 
disagreement about the existing security measures.  While the record only 
supports minor changes at this time, she invites parties to provide more ideas for 
improvement in the next triennial rulemaking. 
b.  Petitions to Expand Exemptions 
Based on a review of the evidentiary record and analysis of the legal 
requirements of section 1201, the Register recommends granting the requested 
expansions in part, to permit outside researchers to securely access corpora 
hosted by institutions, while denying a request that qualified researchers be 
permitted to distribute or copy such corpora for use by other institutions and their 
researchers. 
i. Breadth of the Current Exemptions 
Before turning to the requested expansions, the Register addresses questions that 
arose regarding the breadth of the current exemptions.  The relevant language 
that limits the use of the corpora requires institutions to:  
use[] effective security measures to prevent further dissemination or 
downloading of [the copyrighted works] in the corpus, and to limit 
access to [affiliated researchers and students or information 
technology staff members working at their direction] or t o 
researchers affiliated with other institutions of higher education 
solely for purposes of collaboration or replication of the research.429   
While the exemption’s language clearly prohibits “further dissemination or 
downloading” of the works in the corpus, the parties understood the meaning of 
the terms “access” and “collaboration” differently.   
 
428 See Tr. at 56:07–18 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Rotstein, Joint Creators III); Tr. at 58:20–24 (Apr. 17, 2024) 
(Charlesworth, AAP). 
429 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(4)(i)(D), 201.40(b)(5)(i)(D).   

[PAGE 86]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
83 
 
As described in more detail below, the Register interprets the term “access” in 
the text of the current exemptions to mean that outside researchers may be 
provided access to a corpus hosted by the originating institution.  The term was 
not intended to permit the originating institution to distribute copies of the 
corpus to outside researchers or their institutions.  This interpretation is 
underscored by the prohibition on “further dissemination or downloading” of 
the copyrighted works in the corpus.430  The Register thus agrees with AAP that, 
under the current exemptions, “the circumventing institution may not copy or 
distribute the corpus but may allow an outside researcher who is collaborating 
with (or who seeks to replicate the research of) a researcher at the circumventing 
institution to access the corpus that is hosted by the circumventing institution.”431 
“Collaboration” also has been subject to competing interpretations, and 
proponents argue that its ambiguity has restricted the usefulness of the 
exemptions.432  They assert that the term “leaves researchers unsure about the 
level of individual contribution to a project, goals, duration, or scale of research 
that is required for ‘collaboration.’”433  As a result, “researchers are prone to 
interpret ambiguity conservatively in order to avoid any interpretation that 
would cast a shadow on the methodology or results of their research.”434  One 
researcher stated: 
We are . . . unsure what ‘collaboration . . . of the research’ constitutes 
under the exemption.  Our collaborations range greatly in scope and 
distance, from two team members working closely together , to 
multiple groups of scholars working independently to verify each 
other’s work though different quantitative methods.  When we 
collaborate on understanding an archive of text through TDM 
 
430 Although the 2021 recommendation described the current exemptions as “specif[ying] that 
decrypted copies can only be circulated to other institutions or researchers for the purpose of 
collaboration or replication and verification of research findings,” 2021 Recommendation at 109 
(emphasis added), the Register believes that the term “access” more reasonably is interpreted to 
exclude such distribution.  Additionally, the current exemptions do not impose any security 
obligations on researchers who use corpora to collaborate or verify research findings, so an 
interpretation of “access” that encompasses distribution or circulation would  raise security 
concerns. 
431 AAP Class 3 Opp’n at 7. 
432 Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3(a) Pet.; Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3(b) Pet.   
433 Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3 Initial at 8.   
434 Id. at 9. 

[PAGE 87]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
84 
 
methods, it sometimes means that we will be cooperating in 
applying the same methods to the same texts, and sometimes 
indicates that we will be taking diverging approaches to the same set 
of materials.  These can be formal collaborations under the auspice 
of a grant, ad hoc collaborations that result from two teams 
discovering that they are working on similar material to the same 
ends, or even discussions at conferences between members of a loose 
network of scholars working on the same broad set of interest s.  As 
the exemption is unclear what counts as collaboration for the 
purpose of sharing extracted data, we have had to be exceptionally 
cautious about sharing in-copyright material with any collaborators 
at all, much to the detriment to our research, and t he field as a 
whole.435 
It appears, however, that many researchers understand collaboration to mean 
working on the same research project.436  For example, Authors Alliance testified: 
I have talked to a lot of people who are trying to implement or use 
this exemption, and the kind of common way that most people are 
reading ‘collaboration’ in the existing reg is that it covers direct 
collaboration on particular research projects.  And so, you know, you 
have a researcher, say, at one institution asking a question on X and 
they’re writing a paper and doing a project with a researcher at 
another institution on that very same question.437 
 
435 Id. at App. B at 2 (letter from Mark Algee‐Hewitt). 
436 See, e.g., Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3 Initial at App. G at 2–3 (letter from Allison 
Cooper) (“My understanding of the existing TDM exemption is that sharing our work with 
information scientists or machine learning specialists beyond Bowdoin or the University of 
Rochester for a use other than our own research is disallowed.”); Id. at App. J at 4 (letter from 
Rachael Samberg & Timothy Vollmer) (“ A more permissive environment—specifically, one that 
extended sharing for the study of new or other research questions (i.e. beyond mere project 
collaboration or replication) . . . —would create a more efficient research pipeline and speed up 
discovery and the advancement of knowledge.”). 
437 Tr. at 67:25–68:09 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Hansen, Authors All.).  In line with this, many of the letters 
submitted by researchers in support of the requested expansions reflected an understanding that 
the current exemptions only permit sharing for the purpose of such “direct collaboration.”  See, 
e.g., Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3 Initial at App. E at 1 (letter from Joel Burges & Emily 
Sherwood); Id. at App. F at 1 (letter from Brandon Butler); Id. at App. H at 2 (letter from Hoyt 
Long). 

[PAGE 88]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
85 
 
The Register agrees with this interpretation and did not intend the 2021 
exemptions to encompass a broader range of activities.  She concludes that the 
“collaboration” provision of the current exemptions does not permit granting 
outside researchers access to a corpus to facilitate research on independent 
projects, as opposed to, work on the same research project. 
Additionally, proponents request modification of the language of the current 
exemptions to permit institutions to provide “access . . . to researchers affiliated 
with other institutions of higher education . . . for the purposes of conducting 
independent text and data mining research and teaching, where those 
researchers are in compliance with this exemption.”438  They repeatedly framed 
their request as seeking to permit “sharing” among researchers,439 which would 
appear to include distribution in at least some scenarios,440 rather than only 
“access.”  Like the term “collaboration,” the term “sharing” is potentially 
ambiguous.  During the hearing, proponents explained that “sharing” could 
encompass two scenarios: (1) “content is hosted on university servers, and 
outsider users are . . . authenticated in and accessing them there,” and (2) 
“actually shar[ing] copies,” which is necessitated by “technical challenges with 
remote access to high-performance computing environments, and for researchers 
to effectively use a corpus remotely.”441   
The terms “access” and “sharing” are not interchangeable.  Because the term 
“sharing” may encompass multiple activities, the Register instead uses the 
 
438 Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3 Initial at 5–6 (emphasis added).   
439 See, e.g., id. at 5 (“We propose that the current exemption be amended to also allow sharing 
with researchers affiliated with different nonprofit institutions of higher education for purposes 
of conducting independent text and data mining research and teaching.”); Id. at App. C at 2 (letter 
from David Bamman); Id. at App. D at 2 (letter from John Bell) (“ Adding a provision to the Text 
and Data Mining Exemption allowing media corpora to be shared does not just make existing 
research easier—in many cases, it would make research possible that could not even be 
considered without it.”); Id. at App. E at 1 (letter from Joel Burges & Emily Sherwood) (“Both 
[current exemptions] would benefit immensely from ending the currently restricted practice of 
corpora sharing with researchers who otherwise comply with the exemption but who are at a 
different institution and are outside of direct collaboration.”); Id. at App. F at 1 (letter from 
Brandon Butler) (“[T]he inability to share corpora with unaffiliated researchers outside direct 
collaboration has created barriers for researchers to practically use the current exemption.”).  
440 See, e.g., Tr. at 15:24–16:10 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Bell, Dartmouth College & Univ. of Maine) (arguing 
that “there are some use cases where actually copying the files to another institution would be 
necessary”). 
441 Tr. at 11:02–12 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Hansen, Authors All.).   

[PAGE 89]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
86 
 
following terms to describe the two scenarios described above: (1) “access,” 
which means providing outside researchers with credentials to use a corpus (or 
works included therein) hosted on an institution’s own servers; and (2) 
“distribution,” which means disseminating a copy of a corpus (or works 
included therein) to outside researchers.  She concludes that the analysis is 
different for permitting secure access to outside researchers to a corpus that 
remains hosted on the originating institution’s server than for permitting the 
copying and distribution of the corpus to outside researchers and their 
institutions.  She recommends granting the proposed expansions with respect to 
access but not with respect to distribution. 
ii. Analysis of Applicable Evidentiary Standards 
A. Works Protected by Copyright 
As was the case during the 2021 rulemaking, there is no dispute that at least 
some of the works in this class, which involves certain motion pictures and 
literary works, are protected by copyright. 
B. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
The Register concluded in the 2021 rulemaking that the proposed use to apply 
text and data mining processes to copyrighted works for scholarly research and 
teaching related to these works, with certain important limitations, is likely to be 
a fair use.  The Register has reviewed subsequent case law and has determined 
that the fair use analysis from 2021 remains reliable and appropriate to rely on in 
evaluating the requested expansions. 
The first fair use factor, the purpose and character of the use, “considers whether 
the use of a copyrighted work has a further purpose or different character, which 
is a matter of degree, and the degree of difference must be balanced against the 
commercial nature of the use.”442  As was the case for the current exemptions, 
proponents’ proposed use is noncommercial: providing access to or distributing 
corpora to outside researchers affiliated with nonprofit institutions of higher 
education for the purpose of conducting independent text and data mining 
research and teaching.443  Similarly, the Register determines that this proposed 
use is likely to be transformative, as set forth in the analysis in the 2021 
 
442 Warhol, 598 U.S. at 532. 
443 Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3(a) Pet.; Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3(b) Pet.   

[PAGE 90]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
87 
 
recommendation.  The proposed use is to digitally analyze copyrighted works to 
detect links, trends, or other insights in those works, which is distinct from the 
purpose of the underlying copyrighted works.444  Although AAP argues that 
proponents’ purported “exploitation of the expressive content of works” in the 
form of viewing does not qualify as fair use,445 as discussed above, the Register 
concludes that viewing works in a corpus for purposes of conducting text and 
data mining is in line with the 2021 recommendation’s fair use analysis.  
Accordingly, the first factor weighs in favor of fair use. 
The Register reaffirms the 2021 recommendation’s conclusion that although 
literary works and motion pictures are at the “core” of copyright protection and 
the second factor, the nature of the copyrighted work, thus weighs against fair 
use,446 this factor is of limited significance to this class.447  Similarly, she again 
concludes that the third factor, the amount and substantiality of the portion used 
in relation to the copyrighted work as a whole, does not necessarily rule out fair 
use, as copying the entire work is reasonable in light of the purpose of the 
copying.448 
The fourth factor examines “the effect of the use upon the potential market for or 
value of the copyrighted work.”449  Relevant factors include whether the 
secondary work serves as a substitute for the original, the impact on actual or 
potential licensing markets, and the sufficiency of security measures to prevent 
unauthorized dissemination of copies.450  As was the case in 2021, the Register 
concludes that “the end goal of the contemplated TDM research does not serve 
as a substitute for the original work.”451  Although she is recommending minor 
 
444 See Warhol, 598 U.S. at 529 (“The larger the difference [between the purpose or character of 
secondary use and the original work], the more likely the first factor weighs in favor of fair use.  
The smaller the difference, the less likely.”). 
445 AAP Class 3 Opp’n at 11, 14. 
446 See also AAP Class 3 Opp’n at 14. 
447 See 2021 Recommendation at 111 & nn.608–09. 
448 See id. at 111 & n.610. 
449 17 U.S.C. § 107(4). 
450 See 2021 Recommendation at 112 (citing Campbell, 510 U.S. at 591; Bill Graham Archives v. 
Dorling Kindersley Ltd., 448 F.3d 605, 613–14 (2d Cir. 2006); Authors Guild, Inc. v. Hathitrust, 755 
F.3d 87, 100–01 (2d Cir. 2014); Authors Guild, Inc. v. Google, Inc., 804 F.3d 202, 228 (2d Cir. 2015) 
(“Google Books”)). 
451 2021 Recommendation at 113. 

[PAGE 91]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
88 
 
modifications to the provision concerning the viewing of copyrighted works to 
bring it into line with the intent of the 2021 recommendation, as discussed above, 
she does not believe that these changes alter the analysis of the fourth fair use 
factor.  Similarly, the evidence in the record does not alter the Register’s 
conclusion in 2021 that, under Authors Guild, Inc. v. HathiTrust (“HathiTrust”), lost 
licensing revenue should only be considered “when the use serves as a substitute 
for the original,”452 and the use here does not do so.453  Although AAP argues that 
the licensing market for text and data mining uses has been “rapidly developing” 
since the 2021 cycle,454 the Register credits proponents’ explanation that the 
licensing options identified by AAP are not suitable for the type of research at 
issue.455  For example, AAP pointed to Copyright Clearance Center’s 
RightFind,456 as they did during the 2021 cycle,457 but the record does not suggest 
that RightFind has become a serious alternative to circumvention over the past 
three years due to the relatively limited scope of the materials it licenses.458  
Similarly, AAP provided two examples of press reports about direct licensing 
deals pertaining to generative AI,459 but the Register concludes that such direct 
licensing deals would not reasonably account for the kinds of research projects at 
issue. 
In the 2021 recommendation, the Register determined that “the proposed 
exemptions demand close attention to security measures.”460  In Authors Guild, 
Inc. v. Google, Inc. (“Google Books”), although the Second Circuit observed that 
exposing copyrighted works to piracy may be sufficient to reject a fair use 
defense, it found that the facts did not support such a result, explaining that 
“Google Books’ digital scans are stored on computers walled off from public 
Internet access and protected by the same impressive security measures used by 
 
452 755 F.3d 87, 100 (2d Cir. 2014). 
453 See 2021 Recommendation at 113. 
454 AAP Class 3 Opp’n at 14. 
455 Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3 Reply at 13–14. 
456 See AAP Class 3 Opp’n at 14. 
457 See 2021 Recommendation at 112–13. 
458 Id. at 113 (noting that RightFind “licenses full‐text versions of journal articles to TDM 
researchers”). 
459 See AAP Class 3 Opp’n at 14. 
460 2021 Recommendation at 114. 

[PAGE 92]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
89 
 
Google to guard its own confidential information.”461  In HathiTrust, the Second 
Circuit found that the fourth factor favored a finding of fair use, citing “the 
extensive security measures the Libraries ha[d] undertaken to safeguard against 
the risk of a data breach” and determining that there was “no basis in the record 
on which to conclude that a security breach is likely to occur, much less one that 
would result in the public release of the specific copyrighted works belonging to 
any of the plaintiffs in this case.”462 
Here, AAP opposed the expansions and argued that “there is certainly no case 
for expansion of the exemption given proponents’ utter failure to demonstrate 
that institutions are willing or able to comply” with the security measures in the 
current exemptions.463  There is no evidence in the record of security breaches 
under the current exemptions, however, and the Register thus finds that there is 
no basis to deny the requested expansions because of how the security measures 
provisions have functioned so far.  However, it is necessary to consider whether 
the proposed expansions, if granted, carry an increased risk of exposing 
copyrighted works to infringement, including piracy. 
In evaluating the fourth factor with respect to the requested expansions, the 
Register distinguishes between an institution providing outside researchers with 
access to a corpus and an institution distributing a corpus to outside researchers.  
In the first scenario, an institution hosts a corpus on its own servers and provides 
secure access to researchers affiliated with other nonprofit institutions of higher 
education for the purposes of conducting their own text and data mining 
research.  Provided that the outside researchers lack the ability to download or 
further distribute the corpus (or any works therein), the Register concludes that 
this scenario does not present a meaningful additional risk of exposing 
copyrighted works to piracy. 
In the second scenario, a researcher at an institution has compiled a corpus for 
their own text and data mining research project and then copies and distributes 
the corpus (comprised of copyrighted works) to researchers affiliated with other 
nonprofit institutions of higher education for the purposes of conducting 
independent text and data mining research.  Based on the current record, the 
Register finds that this scenario creates a meaningful additional risk of exposing 
 
461 804 F.3d 202, 227–28 (2d Cir. 2015). 
462 755 F.3d at 100–01. 
463 AAP Class 3 Opp’n at 10; see also id. at 15. 

[PAGE 93]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
90 
 
copyrighted works to misuse, including further unrestricted distribution.  
Accordingly, she concludes that the fourth factor weighs against such a use. 
As the 2021 recommendation noted, “[t]he corpora envisioned by proponents 
could potentially contain hundreds, thousands, or even more copyrighted 
works.”464  If the proposed expansions were granted in full to allow distribution 
of corpora to outside researchers, it is unclear who would be responsible for 
ensuring that recipient institutions and researchers use effective security 
measures to safeguard them.  Although proponents testified that both the 
originating and receiving institution would be responsible,465 it is not certain how 
this would be ensured in practice and proponents did not provide logistical 
details.  The Register is inclined to agree with the Joint Creators III that “the 
proliferation of databases of unprotected motion pictures and literary works in 
relatively free circulation inevitably would mean that individuals further down 
the distribution chain with no connection to the researchers that constructed the 
database or their institution would have less knowledge of the requirements 
applicable to, and less motivation to protect, an asset they were simply given.”466   
Similarly, the Register agrees that, if the proposed expansions were granted in 
full, the corpora would need to be safeguarded while they are being distributed 
from one institution to another.467  Authors Alliance testified that “institutions 
already have . . . standards in place for a safe and secure transmission of sensitive 
data.”468  The Register finds general appeals to institutional best practices overly 
vague and insufficient in this context.  The proposed expansions also do not 
contain any limitations on the number of institutions or researchers to which a 
corpus would be able to be distributed, or the ability of these recipient 
institutions or researchers to, in turn, distribute it to additional institutions or 
researchers.  Given the stakes of distribution of potentially large quantities of 
 
464 2021 Recommendation at 114. 
465 Tr. at 45:24–46:09 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Ayers, AACS LA); Tr. at 46:12–24 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Hansen, 
Authors All.). 
466 Joint Creators III Class 3 Opp’n at 9; see also Int’l Ass’n of Scientific, Tech. and Medical 
Publishers (“STM”) Class 3 Opp’n at 2 (“The petitioners’ suggested proposal, in STM’s view, 
would allow an unfettered and unchecked reproduction and distribution of copyrighted works 
that is not well supported by a description of existing adverse impact and does not adequately 
explain how the risks of piracy and security failure would be accounted for.”).  
467 Tr. at 48:07–49:05 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Ayers, AACS LA). 
468 Tr. at 47:11–48:04 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Cha, Authors All.). 

[PAGE 94]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
91 
 
unencrypted copies of copyrighted works, permitting further copying and 
distribution of the corpus raises significant risks.469   
Balancing all of the factors, the Register concludes that granting outside 
researchers secure and authenticated access to corpora likely constitutes fair use, 
while distribution of corpora to outside researchers likely does not. 
C. Causation 
The causation requirement examines whether “[t]he statutory prohibition on 
circumventing access controls is the cause of the adverse effects.”470  Proponents 
argue that “[b]ut-for the prohibition on circumvention, there would be no need 
for the current exemption, as the research and teaching activities allowed under 
the current exemption are fair use under copyright law.”471  According to 
proponents, “[b]ut-for the prohibition on circumvention and the limitations to 
the current exemption, researchers would be able to share their corpora with 
other researchers in different institutions for TDM research and teaching, 
purposes the Copyright Office has concluded to be fair use.”472  Opponents 
questioned the causal link between the prohibition on circumvention and the 
asserted adverse effects, arguing that these purported effects are instead caused 
by other restrictions in copyright law and academic resource issues.473 
Although the Register concludes that proponents have demonstrated that they 
are likely to be adversely affected in their ability to make noninfringing uses over 
the next three years, as discussed below, she does not believe they have 
demonstrated that the prohibition on circumvention is the cause of those adverse 
effects.  She agrees with opponents that these adverse effects are, at least, in part 
due to the resources available at institutions for text and data mining research 
and teaching.  For example, John Bell of Dartmouth College described how the 
majority of a one-year grant period was spent on “setting up a basic environment 
 
469 See also Class 3 at Tr. 63:09–18 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Rotstein, Joint Creators III) (“[J]ust saying, well, 
our policy is that we won’t doesn’t mean that it won’t happen and that a resharing won’t happen, 
and that remains a concern that . . . there is an incentive to do that based on what the proponents 
are saying because of the issues of cost.  So just pointing out that there was no answer that it 
won’t happen.”). 
470 Section 1201 Report at 115. 
471 Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3 Initial at 33. 
472 Id. 
473 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 3 Opp’n at 20–23. 

[PAGE 95]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
92 
 
that conformed to the rules for using the Exemption,” dealing with “technical 
issues related to extracting the corpus from [their] source discs,” and “the basics 
of gathering and organizing films.”474  Allison Cooper of Bowdoin College 
explained that “only $6,500 [of a $100,000 grant] was spent on DVD acquisition 
and transcoding (breaking TPM),” while “the majority of the grant supported 
research activities on the part of project faculty, staff, and student curators to 
build a deliberate corpus of close-up clips.”475  Henry Alexander Wermer-Colan 
of Temple University Libraries reported that “[o]utside of purchasing the 
relevant ebooks, building the corpus required significant amounts of time, labor, 
and costs (tens of thousands of dollars go into the data curation work of building 
valuable metadata about the books, and standardizing the wide-range of books 
into genre categories and data formats useful for analysis).”476  In sum, based on 
the record at hand,477 it appears that the barriers to outside researchers’ ability to 
recreate corpora to conduct their own text and data mining research and teaching 
stems more from the costs associated with processing works to make them 
suitable for text and data mining and other research activities, rather than the 
costs associated with actually circumventing the technological protection 
 
474 Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3 Initial at App. D at 1–2 (letter from John Bell). 
475 Id. at App. G at 2 (letter from Allison Cooper). 
476 Id. at App. L at 2 (letter from Henry Alexander Wermer‐Colan) (“Outside of purchasing the 
relevant ebooks, building the corpus required significant amounts of time, labor, and costs (tens 
of thousands of dollars go into the data curation work of building valuable metadata about the 
books, and standardizing the wide‐range of books into genre categories and data formats useful 
for analysis).”). 
477 Proponents also submitted an appendix in support of their Reply Comment that “provided a 
more detailed example of data preparation used for one TDM research project . . . to illustrate 
some example methods and provide a sense of the time and effort required.”  Authors All., AAUP 
& LCA Class 3 Reply at 7 n.23; see also id. at App. A (Example of Dataset Preparation and 
Computational Analysis).  Although this appendix provided a helpful overview of the costs 
associated with preparing datasets for text and data mining research, the case study depicted 
involved public‐domain works and accordingly did not discuss the costs associated with 
circumventing the technological protection measures.  Id. at App. A at 4 (Example of Dataset 
Preparation and Computational Analysis).  Similarly, Quinn Dombrowski of the Association of 
Computers and the Humanities provided a detailed and thoughtful example of preparing a 
corpus for research, but it also used public‐domain materials—the 1201 Cycle 3 filings, in fact—
and thus did not describe the process of circumventing technological protection measures.  See 
Quinn Dombrowski Class 3 Reply. 

[PAGE 96]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
93 
 
measures.478  While the Register is sympathetic to the resources issues faced by 
many researchers and the effort that goes into preparing datasets for text and 
data mining research, she concludes that proponents have not met their burden 
of showing that the prohibition on circumvention is the cause of the adverse 
effects. 
With that said, the Register agrees with proponents that the way the current 
exemptions were drafted and the limitations contained therein also serve as a 
cause of the adverse effects.  The language of the current exemptions restricting 
access to collaboration and verification of research means that outside 
researchers who seek to conduct independent text and data mining research or 
teaching cannot make use of the fully formed corpora that researchers at other 
institutions have prepared, even if doing so would be a noninfringing use.  
Because the restrictions in the language of the current exemptions have adversely 
affected researchers’ ability to make noninfringing uses, the Register concludes 
that it is appropriate to modify it to allow qualified institutions to offer outside 
researchers affiliated with other nonprofit institutions of higher education secure 
and authenticated access to already-created corpora for the purpose of 
conducting independent text and data mining research and teaching. 
D. Asserted Adverse Effects 
In the 2021 rulemaking, the Register determined that proponents had sufficiently 
demonstrated that they were likely to be adversely affected in their ability to 
make noninfringing uses during the subsequent three-year period.  She 
concludes that the current record supports such a finding with respect to 
permitting access to corpora for outside researchers, but not with respect to 
distributing them. 
With respect to the first section 1201 statutory factor, which examines the 
availability for use of copyrighted works, proponents rely on analysis from the 
2021 rulemaking and emphasize that they are seeking “a modest extension from 
a copyright perspective” and that “the expected number of uses is not likely to be 
 
478 But see Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3 Initial at App. J at 3–4 (letter from Rachael Samberg 
and Timothy Vollmer) (“ A significant proportion of the requested grant funds needed to be 
allocated to hire student researchers to conduct the circumvention and quality‐check the 
decryption. . . . Even if a corresponding scholar at another institution complied with the 
requirements of the TDM Exemptions and purchased the very same corpus works for study, the 
scholar would still have to pay thousands of additional dollars to set up a similar process to 
engage in what is ultimately duplicative circumvention and quality‐checking.”). 

[PAGE 97]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
94 
 
substantial” given that “[d]igital humanities is a relatively specialized field.”479  
Opponents, in turn, argued that “[c]opyright owners might choose to limit 
dissemination of electronic versions [of copyrighted works] rather than” risk 
exposure to piracy.480  In the face of similar arguments during the 2021 
rulemaking, the Register concluded that “[t]he proposed use is narrowly tailored 
to scholarly research, and it is unlikely that copyright owners would entirely 
withhold electronic versions of their works from the market out of a concern that 
they may be used for the type of research” at issue.481  She believes this 
conclusion to be sound with respect to the proposed expansions and accordingly 
concludes that this factor does not weigh against them. 
As in the 2021 rulemaking, the Register likewise concludes that proponents have 
established that the second statutory factor, which considers the availability for 
use of works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational purposes, and 
the third statutory factor, which considers the impact that the prohibition on 
circumvention has on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, 
or research, favor granting the expansions.  The purpose of the proposed 
expansions, like the current exemptions, “is to increase the use of TDM 
techniques in scholarship, research, and teaching, which are favored purposes 
under the statutory factors.”482  Although AAP argues that “researchers already 
have sufficient means to collaborate with circumventing institutions to conduct 
scholarly TDM activities because it is already permitted under the existing 
exemption” and “[p]etitioners have offered no credible evidence of adverse 
impact on third-party researchers,”483 the Register finds that the record includes 
examples from researchers of the types of text and data mining projects that have 
been hampered by the limitations in the current exemptions.484  For example, one 
 
479 Id. at 24. 
480 AAP Class 3 Opp’n at 16. 
481 2021 Recommendation at 119–20. 
482 Id. at 120. 
483 AAP Class 3 Opp’n at 16. 
484 See, e.g., Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3 Initial at App. B at 2 (letter from Mark Algee‐
Hewitt) (describing how current exemptions may prohibit students and young academics from 
continuing to work on their own research projects once they transition to roles at other 
institutions); Id. at App. H at 3 (letter from Hoyt Long) (“Other researchers have requested to 
work on corpora produced through the Textual Optics Lab yet, as a single research team, we do 
not have the capacity to directly collaborate with every researcher who wishes to work with these 
 

[PAGE 98]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
95 
 
researcher described the types of projects that outside researchers have 
expressed interest in pursuing on a corpus prepared by his institution: 
Here at UChicago, where our lab has developed a large collection of 
general US fiction and a corpus of novels by African -American 
writers, we constantly receive requests from other university faculty 
and graduate students who are hoping to pursue their own research 
projects.  This includes, for instance, wanting to develop models for 
extracting characters from text and their narrative framing; 
measuring narrative coherence and its degree of correlation to 
reader preferences; exploring representations of cli mate; 
constructing sentiment and emotion arcs; studying how AAE is 
expressed in fiction by African-American writers; and investigating 
the construction of metaphorical language in the same body of 
fiction.  These are not projects that members of our lab ha ve the 
expertise to pursue or collaborate on, and yet there is no question 
that they are worthy of being pursued.485 
Proponents have also explained that the expansions will increase the quality and 
value of text and data mining research by facilitating “research that reflects more 
diverse viewpoints, methods, and subjects.”486  
With respect to the fourth factor, the effect of circumvention on the market for or 
value of copyrighted works, AAP argues that the proposed expansions “would 
devalue [copyrighted] works by undermining the legitimate market for the 
 
corpora.”); Id. at App. K at 2 (letter from Lauren Tilton & Taylor Arnold) (stating that, if 
expansions are granted, they “could work with TV data held at different institutions to better 
understand the history of TV over the last fifty years”); Id. at App. L at 1 (letter from Henry 
Alexander Wermer‐Colan) (“The ability to share [banned books] corpus with other researchers 
outside of Temple University would be greatly beneficial.  There are many socially valuable 
questions that can be asked of this corpus of banned books, and the perspectives of other 
academics are vitally important, even if we at Temple do not have the capacity to support direct 
collaboration.”). 
485 Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3 Initial at App. H at 3 (letter from Hoyt Long). 
486 Id. at 25–26; see also id. at App. A at 2 (letter from the Ass’n of Computers and Humanities) 
(“[C]reative works by women, gender minorities, and artists of color were published 
commercially in the 20th century at rates far surpassing previous centuries.  Barriers to 
computational scholarship on in‐copyright works functionally amounts to limits of the diversity 
of what scholars can research using these methods.”). 

[PAGE 99]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
96 
 
works, both in their original form and as included in licensed TDM datasets.”487  
The Register does not believe that providing access to copyrighted works in 
corpora to outside researchers within the limitations of the exemption would 
substitute for the original or interfere with licensing markets, as described above 
in the analysis of the fourth fair use factor.  The security measures set forth in the 
exemptions, including the recommended revisions, should further minimize any 
risk of unauthorized dissemination.  However, as also described above, the 
Register concludes that the distribution of copyrighted works in corpora to 
outside researchers would potentially impact the market for or value of the 
copyrighted works.  Accordingly, the fourth factor weighs against granting the 
expansions to permit the distribution of copyrighted works in corpora to outside 
researchers, but not against merely granting access. 
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA favors granting a “relatively modest expansion” of the current exemptions 
to allow sharing corpora with researchers at other institutions who are 
conducting independent text and data mining research.488  It emphasizes that the 
exemptions would only be used for scholarly research and teaching, and that 
institutions and researchers, including those that receive corpora, would need to 
abide by the restrictions in the current exemptions, such as those related to 
viewing, security measures, and possession of lawfully acquired copies of the 
works in the corpus.489  With respect to the potential to use these exemptions to 
develop generative AI systems, NTIA cautions that “it would be a mistake to 
conflate certain popular services and the controversies that surround them with 
the research questions being answered by exemption users—even if the 
computer programs being employed share some high-level similarities.”490  It 
also takes the position there is no need to limit the use of AI tools in the 
exemptions.491 
In addition, NTIA “urges the Copyright Office to resist untimely, un-noticed, 
and ill-informed calls to revisit its conclusion that it intends to recommend 
 
487 AAP Class 3 Opp’n at 16. 
488 NTIA Letter at 27–30. 
489 Id. at 29–30. 
490 Id. at 30. 
491 Id. 

[PAGE 100]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
97 
 
renewal of the current TDM exemptions.”492  As to the letters inquiring into 
security measures sent by some of the opponents to researchers, it states that 
“[t]he timing, targeting, and tenor of these requests are disturbing” and “urge[s] 
all parties to avoid escalatory tactics and focus on the merits of the proposals at 
hand.”493 
The Register agrees with most of NTIA’s points.  She recommends granting the 
requested expansions to allow outside researchers to access corpora, which 
should foster additional text and data mining research.  As discussed above, she 
shares NTIA’s concerns about the inquiries into security measures sent by some 
of the opponents.  And she has declined to incorporate language specific to 
generative AI into the exemptions, and has not considered any improperly raised 
requests to revisit her intention to renew these exemptions. 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
Proponents have demonstrated that, absent modifications to the current 
exemptions for text and data mining for the purpose of research and teaching 
related to audiovisual and literary works, researchers at other academic 
institutions will face adverse effects in their ability to make noninfringing use of 
such copyrighted works.  The Register concludes that some of the requested 
adjustments, based on both the initial petition and the comments and hearing 
testimony, will improve the operation of the existing exemptions.  
The Register therefore recommends that the current exemptions be modified to 
permit researchers affiliated with other nonprofit institutions of higher education 
to access corpora solely for the purposes of text and data mining research or 
teaching.  As discussed above, “access” in this context means that an institution 
may provide outside researchers with credentials for security and authentication 
to use a corpus that is hosted on its servers; it does not mean that an institution 
or a researcher may disseminate a copy of a corpus (or copyrighted works 
included therein) to outside researchers or give outside researchers the ability to 
download, make copies of, or distribute any copyrighted works.  As an example, 
proponents described how a corpus created and hosted by Mediate at the 
University of Rochester Libraries functioned in the context of the current 
exemptions’ collaboration provision: 
 
492 Id. at 28. 
493 Id. at 28–29 n.111. 

[PAGE 101]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
98 
 
A researcher, for example, would create a research group and a 
project, and the videos would be uploaded to that space.  They are 
time-stamped videos and the data is generated in time -stamped 
nature.  So having access to those videos as they exist in their  timestamped nature is actually very important to ask or verify research 
questions on our data because it is all time -stamped and it needs to 
be within the framework that we have.  The servers are secure, and 
you would need to request access to the platform itself, and then the 
researcher you’re collaborating with would actually have to invite 
you to that specific research group.  That is the only way to access it.  
If, for example, you wanted to do research on, say, five of the films 
in our corpus instead  of, you know, 70, then we could start a new 
research group that would still maintain the time -stamped data of 
that specific corpus.494 
Proponents further explained that this corpus is maintained by the University of 
Rochester, and outside researchers lack the ability to download the works in the 
corpus.495 
With this recommended modification, the exemptions will permit researchers 
affiliated with other nonprofit institutions of higher education to conduct text 
and data mining on a corpus prepared by another researcher and hosted by 
another institution, regardless of their relationship to the researchers at the other 
institution or the specific research question that the text and data mining project 
undertook and for which the corpus was originally prepared.  In other words, an 
institution may grant outside researchers access to a corpus, as long as those 
researchers are affiliated with other nonprofit institutions of higher education, as 
defined in the regulation, and are using that corpus to engage in text and data 
mining research or teaching with respect to the copyrighted works at issue.  This 
can take the form not only of collaboration or verification, but also of 
independent research projects, peer review, or teaching.  It also permits a 
researcher who began a research project at one institution to continue working 
on that project after transitioning to a new institution, provided that the 
originating institution continues to host the corpus and grants the original 
researcher access to it. 
 
494 Tr. at 12:08–13:09 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Sherwood, Univ. of Rochester Librs.). 
495 Tr. at 15:10–21 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Sherwood, Univ. of Rochester Librs.). 

[PAGE 102]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
99 
 
The originating institution would remain responsible for ensuring the security of 
the corpus in line with the requirements in the exemptions.  Because the 
recommended modifications only permit outside researchers to access corpora 
hosted by another institution, the Register does not believe that it is necessary to 
require the institutions of the outside researchers to lawfully acquire a copy of 
each work in the corpus as a precondition for access. 
Although the Register does not recommend expanding the exemptions to the full 
extent advocated by the proponents, she expects that the recommended 
modifications will enable a broader range of research by permitting more outside 
researchers to access corpora maintained by other institutions, while accounting 
for the legitimate security concerns of opponents. 
In implementing these changes, the Register has crafted new regulatory language 
rather than adopting the language proposed in the initial petition, addressing 
both the proposed expansions and the existing exemptions.  This language 
modifies the viewing provisions to allow the person undertaking the 
circumvention or conducting research or teaching under the exemptions to view 
or listen to the contents of a corpus solely to conduct text and data mining 
research or teaching.  It also changes the provisions discussed above concerning 
inquiries into security measures.  Specifically, the revisions remove the 
provisions that limit which security measures are subject to disclosure; permit 
trade associations to make reasonable inquiries on behalf of their members; and 
expand the text to explicitly allow authors who “reasonably believe” that their 
works are in a corpus to make such inquiries into security measures.  Finally, the 
recommended language allows researchers affiliated with other nonprofit 
institutions of higher education to access corpora solely for the purposes of text 
and data mining research or teaching. 
Accordingly, the Register recommends that the Librarian designate the following 
classes: 
Motion pictures, as defined in 17 U.S.C. 101, where the motion picture is 
on a DVD protected by the Content Scramble System, on a Blu-ray disc 
protected by the Advanced Access Content System, or made available 
for digital download where: 
(A) The circumvention is undertaken by a researcher affiliated 
with a nonprofit institution of higher education, or by a student 
or information technology staff member of the institution at the 

[PAGE 103]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
100 
 
direction of such researcher, solely to deploy text and data 
mining techniques on a corpus of motion pictures for the purpose 
of scholarly research and teaching; 
(B) The copy of each motion picture is lawfully acquired and 
owned by the institution, or licensed to the institution without a 
time limitation on access; 
(C) The person undertaking the circumvention or conducting 
research or teaching under this exemption views or listens to 
the contents of the motion pictures in the corpus solely to 
conduct text and data mining research or teaching;   
(D) The institution uses effective security measures to prevent 
dissemination or downloading of motion pictures in the corpus, 
and upon a reasonable request from a copyright owner who 
reasonably believes that their work is contained in the corpus, or 
a trade association representing such author, provide information 
to that copyright owner or trade association regarding the nature 
of such measures; and 
(E) The institution limits access to the corpus to only the persons 
identified in paragraph (b)(4)(i)(A) of this section or to 
researchers affiliated with other nonprofit institutions of higher 
education, with all access provided only through secure 
connections and on the condition of authenticated credentials, 
solely for purposes of text and data mining research or teaching. 
(ii) For purposes of paragraph (b)(4)(i) of this section: 
(A) An institution of higher education is defined as one that: 
(1) Admits regular students who have a certificate of 
graduation from a secondary school or the equivalent of 
such a certificate; 
(2) Is legally authorized to provide a postsecondary 
education program; 
(3) Awards a bachelor’s degree or provides not less than a 
two-year program acceptable towards such a degree; 

[PAGE 104]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
101 
 
(4) Is a public or other nonprofit institution; and 
(5) Is accredited by a nationally recognized accrediting 
agency or association. 
(B) The term “effective security measures” is defined as: 
(1) Security measures that have been agreed to by all 
interested copyright owners of motion pictures and 
institutions of higher education; or 
(2) Security measures that the institution uses to keep its 
own highly confidential information secure. 
and 
Literary works, excluding computer programs and compilations that 
were compiled specifically for text and data mining purposes, 
distributed electronically where: 
(A) The circumvention is undertaken by a researcher affiliated 
with a nonprofit institution of higher education, or by a student 
or information technology staff member of the institution at the 
direction of such researcher, solely to deploy text and data 
mining techniques on a corpus of literary works for the purpose 
of scholarly research and teaching; 
(B) The copy of each literary work is lawfully acquired and 
owned by the institution, or licensed to the institution without a 
time limitation on access; 
(C) The person undertaking the circumvention or conducting 
research or teaching under this exemption views the contents of 
the literary works in the corpus solely to conduct text and data 
mining research or teaching;   
(D) The institution uses effective security measures to prevent 
dissemination or downloading of literary works in the corpus, 
and upon a reasonable request from a copyright owner who 
reasonably believes that their work is contained in the corpus, or 
a trade association representing such author, provide information 

[PAGE 105]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
102 
 
to that copyright owner or trade association regarding the nature 
of such measures; and 
(E) The institution limits access to the corpus to only the persons 
identified in paragraph (b)(5)(i)(A) of this section or to 
researchers affiliated with other nonprofit institutions of higher 
education, with all access provided only through secure 
connections and on the condition of authenticated credentials, 
solely for purposes of text and data mining research or teaching. 
(ii) For purposes of paragraph (b)(5)(i) of this section: 
(A) An institution of higher education is defined as one that: 
(1) Admits regular students who have a certificate of 
graduation from a secondary school or the equivalent of 
such a certificate; 
(2) Is legally authorized to provide a postsecondary 
education program; 
(3) Awards a bachelor’s degree or provides not less than a 
two-year program acceptable towards such a degree; 
(4) Is a public or other nonprofit institution; and 
(5) Is accredited by a nationally recognized accrediting 
agency or association. 
(B) The term “effective security measures” is defined as: 
(1) Security measures that have been agreed to by all 
interested copyright owners of literary works and 
institutions of higher education; or 
(2) Security measures that the institution uses to keep its 
own highly confidential information secure. 

[PAGE 106]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
103 
 
D. Proposed Class 4: Computer Programs—Generative AI Research 
The legal and policy implications of generative AI are undoubtedly among the 
most pressing and critical of our time.  As a result, state and federal legislatures 
are considering and passing new laws on AI, and courts are adjudicating cases 
that test the boundaries of copyright.  The Copyright Office is currently engaged 
in a study of Artificial Intelligence and Copyright, and its final report will offer 
guidance to Congress, the courts, other federal agencies, and the public on the 
full range of copyright issues raised by this innovative technology.   
The Office received a petition for a new exemption to examine one aspect of 
these implications—AI trustworthiness.  The proposed exemption would cover 
the circumvention of safeguards and contract terms on online platforms hosting 
AI models for the purpose of researching biased and other undesirable outputs.  
After reviewing the rulemaking record, the Register concludes that an exemption 
is not necessary to allow this socially important research and recommends 
denying the petition.   
The conduct described in the record does not appear to implicate section 1201, 
and proponents have not demonstrated that an exemption would enable it.  The 
adverse effects they identified arise from the third-party control of online 
platforms regardless of the operation of section 1201, and the evidence does not 
show that an exemption would ameliorate their concerns.  Based on the record 
here, it is contractual terms of service and their enforcement by the platforms 
that restrict the proponents’ research, rather than the effect of section 1201.  
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemption and Register’s 
Recommendation  
The Office received a petition from Jonathan Weiss seeking a new exemption 
permitting circumvention of access controls applied “to copyrighted generative 
AI models, solely for the purpose of researching biases.”496  Proponents asserted 
that AI research is adversely impacted by safeguards on online platforms.497  The 
proposed exemption would cover circumvention of these safeguards for the 
 
496 Weiss Class 4 Pet. at 2. 
497 See, e.g., Hacking Policy Counsel (“HPC”) Class 4 Reply at 3–6; Joint Academic Researchers 
Class 4 Reply at 2–8. 

[PAGE 107]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
104 
 
purpose of sharing research, techniques, and methodologies that “expose and 
address biases.”498  Weiss further explained that the proposed exemption should 
include “measures that prevent [its] misuse.”499 
HackerOne, Inc. (“Hacker One”), Hacking Policy Council (“HPC”), and 
OpenPolicy filed initial comments supporting and expanding on the proposal.  
These comments, which Weiss endorsed,500 argued that the exemption should not 
be limited to research exploring possible bias of the models, but should 
encompass research on other harmful or undesirable outputs,501 such as 
“copyright infringement, synthetic content, sexual imagery, and other nonsecurity harms.”502  HPC and OpenPolicy also argued that the exemption should 
be expanded beyond generative AI models,503 and provided specific regulatory 
language permitting circumvention for “computer programs” on a device “on 
which an AI system operates,” “solely for the purpose of good-faith AI 
alignment research.”504 
 
498 Weiss Class 4 Pet. at 2.  The petition did not propose specific regulatory language. 
499 Id. at 3 (discussing intent to identify and address bias, while prioritizing data privacy and 
promoting collaboration among researchers, AI developers, and stakeholders, and researchers). 
500 Weiss Class 4 Reply.  Weiss did not submit an initial comment or participate in the public 
hearings. 
501 See HPC Class 4 Initial at 2–3; HackerOne, Inc. (“HackerOne”) Class 4 Initial at 1–2; 
OpenPolicy Class 4 Initial at 2.  
502 Weiss Class 4 Reply; see also HPC Class 4 Reply at 2 (suggesting an exemption “apply[ing] to 
artificial intelligence (AI) trustworthiness research – which encompasses bias, discrimination, 
synthetic content, infringement, and other alignment issues not directly related to security”).   
503 While HPC’s proposed regulatory language is not cabined to generative AI, its initial comment 
repeatedly mentioned “generative AI systems” or “generative AI alignment research.”  See HPC 
Class 4 Initial at 2–4.  OpenPolicy’s comment, however, contained several suggestions that the 
proposed exemption encompass all AI systems, including generative AI.  OpenPolicy Class 4 
Initial at 2–4. 
504 HPC Class 4 Initial at 2–3; OpenPolicy Class 4 Initial at 4–5 (requesting circumvention “for the 
purpose of good‐faith AI research”); see also HPC and Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Ex Parte 
Letter at Addendum I (Aug. 20, 2024) (providing proposed regulatory language). 

[PAGE 108]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
105 
 
The petition was opposed by ACT | The App Association (“ACT”); DVD CCA 
and AACS LA;505 and Joint Creators II.506  Reply comments were filed by 
HackerOne, HPC, Weiss, and a group of academic researchers (“Joint Academic 
Researchers”).507  The Office also received letters from the Computer Crime and 
Intellectual Property Section at the Department of Justice and Senator Mark R. 
Warner stressing the value of research into the trustworthiness and safety of AI 
systems.508 
After reviewing the rulemaking record, although the Register recognizes the 
importance of AI trustworthiness and the significant benefits of such research, 
she recommends denying the petition.  As discussed in detail below, she finds 
that proponents have failed to demonstrate that the research activities described 
implicate section 1201 specifically.  The adverse effects identified by proponents 
appear to arise from third-party control of SaaS platforms used by the 
researchers rather than section 1201, and an exemption would therefore not 
resolve their concerns.  
Other government agencies may instead have the authority to further the 
significant policies implicated by AI research.  Given the importance of the 
questions these researchers seek to explore, and the evolving legal and technical 
 
505 DVD CCA and AACS LA opposed the proposed exemption “to the extent that it would permit 
the circumvention of AI systems incorporated in any part of the digital content protection 
ecosystem.”  DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 4 Opp’n at 1. 
506 ACT | The App Association (“ACT”) Class 4 Opp’n; DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 4 Opp’n; 
Joint Creators II Class 4 Opp’n. 
507 HackerOne Class 4 Reply; HPC Class 4 Reply; Weiss Class 4 Reply; Kevin Klyman et al. (“Joint 
Academic Researchers”) Class 4 Reply.  Joint Academic Researchers supported the initial 
regulatory language proposed by HPC, except for replacing the term “alignment” with 
“trustworthiness,” as “it is a more commonly used and more broadly defined term for this 
context.”  Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 11.  HPC made that change, among others, 
in its reply comment.  See HPC Class 4 Reply at 7–8; see also HPC and Joint Academic Researchers 
Class 4 Ex Parte Letter at 4–5 (Aug. 20, 2024) (discussing why “alignment” was replaced with 
“trustworthiness”); Tr. at 57:22–58:09 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Geiger, HPC) (same). 
508 Letter from John T. Lynch, Jr., Chief, Comput. Crime & Intell. Prop. Section, Crim. Div., Dep’t 
of Just., to Suzanne V. Wilson, Gen. Coun. & Assoc. Register of Copyrights, U.S. Copyright Office 
(Apr. 15, 2024); Letter from Senator Mark R. Warner, to Shira Perlmutter, Register of Copyrights 
& Dir., U.S. Copyright Office (May 24, 2024). 

[PAGE 109]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
106 
 
landscape, this is an area where Congress may wish to act.509  Interested 
stakeholders are also encouraged to participate in the next triennial rulemaking 
proceeding to the extent that they can show that section 1201 has or will have 
adverse effects on the ability to conduct AI research.  
b.  Overview of Issues 
Petitioner’s request comes as AI systems, both generative and non-generative, 
are becoming increasingly integrated into society and used by businesses, 
governments, and the public.  These systems are employed for a variety of 
purposes, from aiding in decision-making processes, to generating outputs that 
include written, audio, visual, and audiovisual content.510  However, they are not 
infallible.  As proponents noted, not only do they “have the potential to 
perpetuate or even exacerbate systematic issues related to race, gender, ethnicity, 
and other sensitive factors,”511 they may generate “harmful or undesirable 
outputs,”512 e.g., content that is discriminatory or sexual, or that facilitates the 
impersonation of third-parties.513  According to proponents, despite an increase 
in concerns, researchers are currently inhibited from “identifying and disclosing 
flaws so that they can be corrected.”514 
Proponents offered several reasons for seeking an exemption.  They asserted that 
section 1201’s anticircumvention provisions create barriers to their ability to 
 
509 The Office is currently conducting a policy study regarding the copyright issues raised by 
generative AI.  The policy study analyzes the current state of the law, identifies unresolved 
issues, and evaluates potential areas for congressional action.  See U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, 
COPYRIGHT AND ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE – PART 1: DIGITAL REPLICAS (2024), 
https://www.copyright.gov/ai/Copyright‐and‐Artificial‐Intelligence‐Part‐1‐Digital‐Replicas‐
Report.pdf. 
510 See Weiss Class 4 Pet. at 2–3.  
511 Id. at 2. 
512 HPC Class 4 Initial at 2. 
513 HackerOne Class 4 Initial at 1; OpenPolicy Class 4 Initial at 2; Weiss Class 4 Reply at 1; HPC 
Class 4 Reply at 2; Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 2. 
514 HPC Class 4 Initial at 2–3; see also OpenPolicy Class 4 Initial at 5 (noting how “various AI 
auditing methods can entail circumvention of technological protection measures on code, or 
software”); Weiss Class 4 Pet. at 2 (“[C]oncerns about inherent biases within these models have 
been growing.”). 

[PAGE 110]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
107 
 
conduct this research.515  Specifically, they reported that the AI systems they seek 
to research are offered by providers that condition access with accounts that may 
be revoked.516  They also cited these systems’ adoption of rate limits and 
algorithmic safeguards as interfering with independent trustworthiness 
research.517  For example, HPC discussed how some AI systems may require 
users to create accounts subject to terms of service that prohibit bypassing safety 
mechanisms, “restrict the volume or frequency of inputs into an AI system,” or 
attempt to block inputs.518 
Proponents also argued that the research is noninfringing because it involves de 
minimis copying and some components of the AI systems may not be 
copyrightable.519  To the extent infringement occurs, proponents asserted it 
qualifies as fair use, because the research results in transformative “information 
about computer programs’ susceptibility to bias and misalignment” and 
“aggregate assessments of evaluations of trustworthiness.”520   
Lastly, proponents asserted that bias or trustworthiness research benefits the 
public because any issues that are “unearth[ed], underst[ood], and rectif[ied]” 
would help ensure fairness, safety, security, transparency, and ethical 
 
515 Proponents further noted that, although there is already a temporary exemption for good ‐faith 
security research, it “may not apply to circumventing software access controls for AI alignment 
research for some non‐security or safety purposes that are still key for the underlying 
trustworthiness of the AI system.”  HPC Class 4 Initial at 4; see also HackerOne Class 4 Initial at 2 
(describing how the current good‐faith security research exemption “may be interpreted to not 
provide similar protection to good‐faith AI research uncovering bias, discrimination, and 
algorithmic flaws”); OpenPolicy Class 4 Initial at 2–3 (discussing the “uncertainty if such 
[proposed use] activities are exempted” under the current good‐faith security research 
exemption); Tr. at 10:19–11:01 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Elazari, OpenPolicy) (“[T]here is a broad set of 
testing that is being done that can be characterized as broader than just traditional security 
techniques that are needed in order to evaluate the type of unintended consequences of AI that 
we see today and that would emerge in the future.”).  For example, “manipulating a generative 
AI system to engage in racial or gender discrimination, or to produce synthetic child abuse 
material.”  HPC Class 4 Initial at 2; see also HackerOne Class 4 Initial at 2 (“ AI can exacerbate 
racial discrimination in housing opportunities or financial decisions.”). 
516 HPC Class 4 Initial at 3; Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 7. 
517 HPC Class 4 Initial at 2–3.   
518 Id. at 3. 
519 Id. at 4; Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 9. 
520 HPC Class 4 Initial at 4; Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 9. 

[PAGE 111]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
108 
 
development and reasonable deployment of AI systems.521  Specifically, HPC 
claimed that enabling this research “would help embrace diverse perspectives, 
promote impartial results, and promote a collaborative culture of ethical AI 
development, consistent with the broader goals of the United States as 
articulated in multiple policy initiatives.”522 
Opponents responded with several objections.  First, they argued the proposed 
exemption is overbroad.523  ACT claimed that proponents have not clearly 
defined the scope of the research, leaving the proposed exemption unfettered by 
any limitations, with the potential to damage “all software markets.”524  DVD 
CCA and AACS LA contended that because the exemption purportedly applies 
to an “unlimited number of services, systems, and products incorporating 
generative AI,” it could sweep in “DVD and Blu-ray disc playback devices and 
TVs” because manufacturers are incorporating AI systems into these items.525 
Second, opponents argued that proponents failed to provide essential 
information about the TPMs implicated and how—or if—those purported TPMs 
are circumvented in making the proposed uses.526  Specifically, Joint Creators II 
explained that proponents did not “identify the specific TPMs (if any) that are 
currently in place protecting generative AI models” and have “not demonstrated 
that security research regarding embedded bias in AI models requires 
 
521 Weiss Class 4 Pet. at 2; HPC Class 4 Initial at 2; HackerOne Class 4 Initial at 1; OpenPolicy 
Class 4 Initial at 3. 
522 HPC Class 4 Initial at 4. 
523 ACT Class 4 Opp’n at 2–4; DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 4 Opp’n at 4–7; Joint Creators II Class 
4 Opp’n at 4; see also Tr. at 31:05–09 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators II) (“[O]nce you say 
that it has to occur on the proper devices, the exemption is simply for computer programs solely 
for the purpose of good faith AI trustworthiness research, any computer under the sun.”).  
524 ACT Class 4 Opp’n at 2; see also Tr. at 91:17–92:05 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators II) 
(discussing the breadth of the proposed exemption).  Both ACT and DVD CCA and AACS LA 
also contended that overbroad exemptions offset Congress’s intent in creating the DMCA and 
“weaken the enforcement of Section 1201” and “undermine the important incenti ves in the 
DMCA for creators.”  ACT Class 4 Opp’n at 3–4; DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 4 Opp’n at 4–6.  
525 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 4 Opp’n at 1–2; see also Tr. at 20:17–21:09 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Ayers, 
AACS LA) (asking about the scope of the proposed exemption as applied to Blu‐ray players that 
incorporate AI). 
526 Joint Creators II Class 4 Opp’n at 2–5; DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 4 Opp’n at 7–9. 

[PAGE 112]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
109 
 
circumvention of TPMs.”527  They further argued that proponents did “not 
explain how TPMs impede legitimate private sector security research on 
generative AI models.”528  DVD CCA and AACS LA contended that while 
proponents discussed creating password-protected accounts, “nothing in [their] 
comments suggests that [they] are seeking to circumvent any password 
protection” and that the other purported TPMs “do[] not actually appear to 
control access to” AI models.529  Instead, Joint Creators II and DVD CCA and 
AACS LA asserted that it is terms of use/account agreements that are preventing 
the proposed research, which is beyond this rulemaking’s scope.530 
Third, opponents argued that granting an exemption is premature and not the 
appropriate avenue to establish new law, given the nascent technology involved 
and ongoing legislative and policy work being conducted.531  For example, Joint 
Creators II stated that proponents should “not be permitted to use this . . . 
rulemaking as a back-door mechanism to create new law,” as “AI is in its early 
stages, and there are ongoing efforts to adopt legislative requirements for AI 
governance and voluntary best practices.”532  Similarly, ACT argued that there 
are ongoing “questions of security, privacy, and IP [that] persist in the 
deployment and use” of generative AI models that should be decided by 
 
527 Joint Creators II Class 4 Opp’n at 3–5; see also Joint Creators II Class 4 Opp’n at 3 (describing 
how proponents “do not explain what methods of circumvention they would seek to employ if 
the exemption were allowed”). 
528 Joint Creators II Class 4 Opp’n at 3 (discussing sections 1201(a)(1)(A) and 1201(a)(3)(A)–(B)). 
529 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 4 Opp’n at 7–8. 
530 Joint Creators II Class 4 Opp’n at 5; DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 4 Opp’n at 10–11; see also Tr. 
at 50:06–19 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators II) (“[I]f a concern over violating a service’s 
terms is killing projects, nothing else is going to matter because the Office can ’t immunize 
researchers from terms of service violations and contract liability.”).  
531 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 4 Opp’n at 2; Joint Creators II Class 4 Opp’n at 2–3; ACT Class 4 
Opp’n at 2. 
532 Joint Creators II Class 4 Opp’n at 2, 4; see also Joint Creators II Class 4 Opp’n at 2–3 (discussing 
the Copyright Office’s AI Policy Study, Executive Order 14110 that discusses AI testing within 
federal agencies, and the National Institute of Standards and Technology’s request for 
information on issues including red teaming). 

[PAGE 113]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
110 
 
policymakers and regulators, not through the “widening of Section 1201 
exemptions.”533 
Proponents had several responses.  First, regarding the breadth of the proposed 
exemption, HPC explained that it applies to “a particular class of works” 
involving generative AI systems and a “specific set of users,” consistent with 
current temporary exemptions granted by the Office.534 
Second, proponents gave additional details on the “technological access barriers” 
they claimed impact AI trustworthiness research, such as account requirements, 
rate limits, and algorithmic safeguards, and described how each may be 
circumvented.535  Joint Academic Researchers noted that “access[ing] and 
assess[ing] the trustworthiness and safety of [AI] models” requires researchers to 
“often bypass these measures,” with techniques such as “using prompts that 
contain text that would trigger filters on user inputs but do not with the addition 
of additional adversarial text.”536 
Lastly, proponents claimed that researchers have declined to conduct research 
due to fears of losing their accounts and potential liability.  Joint Academic 
Researchers noted that the “risk of losing account access by itself may dissuade 
researchers who depend on these accounts for other critical types of AI research, 
 
533 ACT Class 4 Opp’n at 2; see also id. at 3 (“ Adopted exemptions to Section 1201 prohibitions 
should not be driven by edge use cases or hypotheticals that exemplify possible uses and 
capabilities of AI outside what we presently understand.”). 
534 HPC Class 4 Reply at 2; see 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(16) (2023) (good‐faith security research 
exemption); see also Tr. at 7:03–19 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Geiger, HPC) (discussing potential uses and 
class of works); but see, e.g., Tr. at 9:01–05 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Geiger, HPC) (“The protected works at 
issue are also present in many systems, and the types of research into AI trustworthiness can also 
apply to non‐generative systems.”); Tr. at 10:07–16 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Elazari, OpenPolicy) (“[W]e’re 
really seeing a very, you know, broad definition of AI in policy and, therefore, it’s important that 
the exemption, as we said in the comments, will apply broadly as well.”); Tr. at 12:06 –16 (Apr. 17, 
2024) (Longpre, Massachusetts Inst. of Tech. (Ph.D. Student)) (“[Y]ou asked at the end about 
generative AI versus other types of AI. I’ll add that, in our view, this distinction is a little bit 
artificial. . . . So we think this research is important in both those places.”). 
535 HPC Class 4 Reply at 2, 4–6; see also Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 5–7 
(providing “some examples of what could theoretically amount to technological protection 
measures for generative AI”). 
536 Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 6; see also HPC Class 4 Reply at 6 (discussing 
“input[s] designed to bypass generative AI system guardrails so that the system does something 
it was programmed to avoid”). 

[PAGE 114]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
111 
 
and the potential legal consequences under laws like DMCA Section 1201 
compound this adverse effect.”537  Similarly, HPC explained that researchers 
“note the gap in legal protections for AI bias and trustworthiness research as 
compared to good faith security testing” and “fear account suspension (without 
an opportunity for appeal) and legal risks, both of which can have chilling effects 
on research.”538 
2. Discussion  
The Register recommends denying the proposed exemption in light of section 
1201’s rulemaking’s evidentiary standards,539 based on proponents’ failure to 
meet the burden of proof.540 
Given the limited record and differing descriptions of the proposed exemption 
provided by proponents, the Register initially recommends refining the 
proposed class to align with the evidence in the record: 
Computer programs that are components of generative AI systems, 
for the purpose of good -faith trustworthiness research, where the 
circumvention is conducted on systems made available via Software 
as a Service (“SaaS”). 
Analyzing the refined class, the Register finds that some works in the class may 
be protected by copyright and that proponents’ use is likely noninfringing.  
However, the Register also finds that the prohibition on circumvention under 
 
537 Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 8; see also Shayne Longpre et al., A Safe Harbor for 
AI Evaluation and Red Teaming, KNIGHT FIRST AMENDMENT INSTITUTE AT COLUMBIA INSTITUTE – 
DEEP DIVE: TOWARD A BETTER INTERNET (Mar. 5, 2024), https://knightcolumbia.org/blog/a‐safe‐
harbor‐for‐ai‐evaluation‐and‐red‐teaming (“Despite the need for independent evaluation, 
conducting research related to these vulnerabilities is often legally prohibited by the terms of 
service . . . companies forbid the research and may enforce their policies with account 
suspensions.”). 
538 HPC Class 4 Reply at 3 & n.11; see also Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at App. B at 1 
(noting that “ AI companies’ policies can chill independent evaluation”); Joint Academic 
Researchers Class 4 Reply at App. A at 1 (describing how “auditors fear that releasing findings or 
conducting research could lead to their accounts being suspended, ending their ability to do such 
research, or even lawsuits for violating the terms of service”). 
539 See 2021 Recommendation at 10–12; Section 1201 Report at 114–27 (discussing the rulemaking’s 
evidentiary standards). 
540 See 2021 Recommendation at 7–8 (discussing the rulemaking’s burden of proof standards); see 
also Section 1201 Report at 110–12 (discussing burden of proof). 

[PAGE 115]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
112 
 
section 1201 is not the cause of the alleged adverse effects for two reasons: (i) 
they arise from third-party control of closed SaaS systems; and (ii) it is unlikely 
that the research conduct at issue implicates section 1201.  Accordingly, 
proponents have not demonstrated they have been or are likely to be adversely 
affected by section 1201 in the next three years, and the statutory factors are 
either neutral or support a denial. 
a.  Scope of the Proposed Class 
Petitioner Weiss requested an exemption for access to “generative AI models,” 
for “the purpose of researching biases,” with appropriate measures to “prevent 
misuse.”541  Commenters, however, requested a broader exemption, to access: (i) 
“Computer Programs” on a device “on which an AI system operates”; (ii) for the 
purpose of good faith AI “alignment” or “trustworthiness” research; (iii) 
conducted on any device that is lawfully acquired or on which circumvention is 
undertaken “with the authorization of [its] owner or operator.”542  The Register 
considers each in turn. 
i. Category of Works 
The petition identified “generative AI models” as the category of works for the 
exemption.543  Proponents sought to expand the request to “computer programs” 
on a device, machine, computer, computer system, or computer network “on 
which an AI system operates.”544  The Register does not recommend accepting 
the expanded language, which would encompass programs found on a device on 
which “an AI system operates,” regardless of whether they are part of the AI 
system itself.  Proponents did not address that possibility and the record does 
not support it.  Instead, the Register understands proponents’ concerns to relate 
to AI models that are integrated into larger systems with component programs, 
 
541 Weiss Class 4 Pet. at 2. 
542 HPC Class 4 Reply at 7; OpenPolicy Class 4 Initial at 3; Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 
Reply at 11; Weiss Class 4 Reply; see also HPC and Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Ex Parte 
Letter at Addendum I (Aug. 20, 2024) (providing proposed regulatory language).   
543 Weiss Class 4 Pet. at 2. 
544 HPC Class 4 Reply at 7; OpenPolicy Class 4 Initial at 3; Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 
Reply at 11; Weiss Class 4 Reply; see also HPC and Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Ex Parte 
Letter at Addendum I (Aug. 20, 2024) (providing proposed regulatory language).   

[PAGE 116]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
113 
 
such as a web-based user interface for a large language model backend.545  The 
record indicates that access to these types of component programs may be 
necessary to conduct trustworthiness research on such AI systems. 
Proponents also argued that the class of works should not be limited to 
generative AI systems.546  However, they did not provide specific examples of 
trustworthiness research on non-generative systems that they claimed was 
adversely affected by section 1201.547  Although Joint Academic Researchers cited 
a report indicating that AI systems may exhibit bias when used for nongenerative tasks and that this is an active field of research,548 that report focuses 
on the importance of research on algorithmic harms.549  Accordingly, the Register 
will refine the proposed exemption, for the purpose of analysis, to a category of 
works consisting of “computer programs that are components of generative AI 
systems.” 
 
545 See Traian Rebedea et al., NeMo Guardrails: A Toolkit for Controllable and Safe LLM Applications 
with Programmable Rails 12, https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.10501.pdf (“NeMo Guardrails”) (cited by 
HPC Class 4 Reply at 5); Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 9. 
546 Joint Academic Researchers asserted that “most AI systems are not generative and would 
benefit from further trustworthiness research,” that they “suffer from the same inherent biases,” 
and that “there is limited independent research conducted on these issues.”  Joint Academic 
Researchers Class 4 Reply at 2–3.  OpenPolicy similarly claimed that “testing and red‐teaming 
activities are recommended for AI systems, not just emerging generative AI or foundation 
models.”  OpenPolicy Class 4 Initial at 3–4. 
547 Proponents also argue that the term “generative AI” is ill‐defined, which could create 
confusion around the scope of permitted research.  Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 3.  
The Office notes that proponents adopted the definitions used by the Executive Branch in 
Executive Order 14110, which defines generative AI as: “the class of AI models that emulate the 
structure and characteristics of input data in order to generate derived synthetic content. This can 
include images, videos, audio, text, and other digital content.”  Exec. Order No. 14,110 , 88 Fed. 
Reg. 75,191, 75,195 (Oct. 30, 2023), https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2023/11/01/2023‐
24283/safe‐secure‐and‐trustworthy‐development‐and‐use‐of‐artificial‐intelligence.  However, in 
light of the Register’s recommendation to deny the proposed exemption, the conclusion to limit 
the proposed exemption to generative AI is not material.   
548  Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 3 n.7 (citing JOSH KENW AY ET AL., ALGORITHMIC 
JUST. LEAGUE, BUG BOUNTIES FOR ALGORITHMIC HARMS? (2022), https://www.ajl.org/bugs (“Bug 
Bounties for Algorithmic Harms?”)).  
549 See Bug Bounties for Algorithmic Harms? at 24, 99, 109. 

[PAGE 117]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
114 
 
ii. Purpose 
The petition requested an exemption for the purpose of researching “inherent 
biases” in generative AI models that “have the potential to perpetuate or even 
exacerbate systemic issues related to race, gender, ethnicity, and other sensitive 
factors.”550  Proponents subsequently sought to expand the purpose to AI 
“alignment” or “trustworthiness” research.551  They described this as covering 
“bias, discrimination, infringement, or harmful outputs,”552 “broad sets of 
undesirable social impacts . . . or undesirable unintended outputs in AI systems, 
from discrimination to ‘untrustworthy behavior’,”553 and “non-security related 
risks and harms, including those related to bias, discrimination, infringement, 
and toxicity.”554  DVD CCA and AACS LA countered that these “unbounded 
references to wide ranging purposes” are “effectively without any limit at all.”555 
The record contains several studies demonstrating trustworthiness research to 
address a wide range of undesirable outputs.556  For example, one cited study 
tested adversarial prompting techniques across thirteen “forbidden scenarios,” 
which were derived from OpenAI’s usage policy:  “Illegal Activity,” “Hate 
Speech,” “Malware Generation,” “Physical Harm,” “Economic Harm,” “Fraud,” 
“Pornography,” “Political Lobbying,” “Privacy Violence,” “Legal Opinion,” 
 
550 Weiss Class 4 Pet. at 2. 
551 HPC Class 4 Reply at 7; OpenPolicy Class 4 Initial at 3, 5; Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 
Reply at 11; Weiss Class 4 Reply at 1; see also HPC and Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Ex 
Parte Letter at Addendum I (Aug. 20, 2024) (discussing the purpose of using the terms 
“alignment” and “trustworthiness”); Tr. at 56:12–25, 57:18–58:09 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Geiger, HPC) 
(same).   
552 HPC Class 4 Reply at 7. 
553 OpenPolicy Class 4 Initial at 3. 
554 Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 4. 
555 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 4 Opp’n at 6. 
556 See Xinue Shen et al., “Do Anything Now”: Characterizing and Evaluating In-The-Wild Jailbreak 
Prompts on Large Language Models 6, ARXIV (May 2024), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2308.03825 (“Do 
Anything Now”) (cited by HPC Class 4 Initial at 3); Daniel Kang et al., Exploiting Programmatic 
Behavior of LLMs: Dual-Use Through Standard Security Attacks, ARXIV (Feb. 2023), 
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2302.05733 (“Exploiting Programmatic Behavior of LLMs”) (cited by HPC 
Class 4 Initial at 3); Gelei Deng et al., Masterkey: Automated Jailbreaking of Large Language Model 
Chatbots, NETWORK AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM SECURITY SYMPOSIUM (Feb. 26, 2024), 
https://www.ndss‐symposium.org/wp‐content/uploads/2024‐188‐paper.pdf (“MasterKey”) (cited 
by HPC Class 4 Reply at 4). 

[PAGE 118]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
115 
 
“Financial Advice,” “Health Consultation,” and “Government Decision.”557  It 
appears that the researchers’ techniques and reporting methodology did not vary 
meaningfully based on the research goal.558 
The Register finds that proponents have demonstrated sufficient commonalities 
to consider a potential exemption regarding a broad category of “AI 
trustworthiness research.” 
iii. Devices 
The petition requested an exemption for “generative AI models,” without any 
device limitation.559  Proponents subsequently proposed language that would 
narrow the exemption to circumvention “undertaken on a lawfully acquired 
device or machine . . . [or] on a computer, computer system, or computer 
network . . . with the authorization of the owner or operator of such computer, 
computer system, or computer network.”560  Opponents countered that the 
proposed exemption is overbroad, with DVD CCA and AACS LA claiming that 
it could encompass DVD and Blu-ray players, and Joint Creators II expressing 
concern that it could cover “any computer under the sun.”561 
The proposed exemption is indeed broad and could encompass a range of 
devices and deployment scenarios, such as cellphones, televisions, computer 
operating systems and other software with AI-components.  None of these 
devices, however, were discussed in proponents’ comments or the research they 
cited, which focused on generative AI systems made available via SaaS, such as 
OpenAI’s ChatGPT and Midjourney’s eponymous service.562  While proponents 
 
557 See Do Anything Now at 8.  For a description of the forbidden scenarios with examples, see id. 
at 20 (Table 11: The forbidden scenarios from OpenAI usage policy). 
558 See id. at 10 (Table 4: Results of jailbreak prompts on different LLMs). 
559 Weiss Class 4 Pet. at 2. 
560 HPC Class 4 Reply at 7; OpenPolicy Class 4 Initial at 4; Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 
Reply at 11; Weiss Class 4 Reply.   
561 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 4 Opp’n at 9–10; Joint Creators II Class 4 Opp’n at 4; Tr. at 31:05–
09 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators II). 
562 See, e.g., Masterkey at 1–2; Gary Marcus & Reid Southen, Generative AI Has a Visual Plagiarism 
Problem, IEEE SPECTRUM (Jan. 6, 2024), https://spectrum.ieee.org/midjourney‐copyright 
(“Generative AI Has a Visual Plagiarism Problem”) (cited in HPC Class 4 Reply at 3 and Joint 
Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 8). 

[PAGE 119]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
116 
 
may conduct research on other types of systems or devices, the concerns they 
raise appear to be specific to the SaaS context. 
For example, HPC and Joint Academic Researchers identified account 
requirements, use and purchase restrictions, and rate limits as inhibiting 
research.563  There is no evidence, however, that these or analogous concerns 
would apply to lawfully acquired devices or self-deployed AI systems.  The only 
identified technological barriers with apparent applicability beyond SaaS 
systems are “algorithmic safeguards” or measures that “block models from 
generating undesired or harmful outputs,”564 but the limited record on this point 
does not counsel extending the proposed exemption beyond such systems. 
Proponents did not cite examples of research on integrated devices and, while 
they cited research on open-source models like Meta’s Llama-2 and Vicuna,565 
they did not identify any instances where such research was adversely affected.  
To the contrary, the principal study cited by Joint Academic Researchers 
emphasizes that independent AI evaluation research is concentrated on Meta’s 
open models precisely because they have “downloadable weights, allowing a 
researcher to red team locally without having their account terminated for usage 
policy violations.”566 
There is an additional reason not to accept the broad language offered by 
proponents.  They proposed an exemption for circumvention undertaken “with 
the authorization of the owner or operator” of an AI system.567  However, the 
record identifies only the situation in which the operator of a SaaS system 
inhibits research via its terms of service and enforcement thereof, i.e., research 
conducted without authorization.  But an exemption limited to circumvention 
 
563 See HPC Class 4 Reply at 4–6; Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 5–7.  
564 See HPC Class 4 Reply at 5–6; Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 6–7. 
565 See Do Anything Now at 9; Suyu Ge et al., MART: Improving LLM Safety with Multi-round 
Automatic Red-Teaming 7, ARXIV (Nov. 2023), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2311.07689 (“MART”) (cited by 
HPC Class 4 Reply at 4). 
566 Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply App. A at 5 (quoting Shayne Longpre et al., A Safe 
Harbor for AI Evaluation and Red Teaming, ARXIV (Mar. 2024), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2403.04893.pdf 
(“Safe Harbor for AI Evaluation and Red Teaming”)). 
567 HPC Class 4 Reply at 7; OpenPolicy Class 4 Initial at 4–5; Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 
Reply at 11; Weiss Class 4 Reply.   

[PAGE 120]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
117 
 
“with the authorization” of the SaaS provider would render the exemption 
unnecessary.568 
Accordingly, the Register limits her analysis to the circumvention of access 
controls on SaaS systems without the authorization of the platform owner or 
operator. 
b.  Works Protected by Copyright 
The record indicates that AI systems are often built with multiple component 
programs, including those that provide the user interface; guide the model’s 
behavior by prepending or appending text to user prompts; moderate or filter 
user inputs and model outputs; and track and enforce usage limits.569  It is likely 
that at least some of these programs are protected by copyright. 
However, opponents questioned whether some of the alleged circumvention 
described by proponents results in access to copyrightable works—the core of 
section 1201’s protections.  For example, DVD CCA and AACS LA claimed that 
overcoming or circumventing internal safety guardrails related to outputs “does 
not provide any more or less access to the underlying copyrighted work.”570  The 
Register agrees that the record here on what “works” are being accessed is thin.  
It is not clear what component programs are gated by rate limits and algorithmic 
safeguards, whether those components are independently copyrightable, or 
whether researchers necessarily access them.  For example, the copyrightability 
of generative AI models has not been conclusively determined and even if the 
models are copyrightable, it is not clear that users of SaaS systems ever access 
 
568 HackerOne briefly referenced the concept of “instances” (i.e., where AI is deployed on 
“platforms that are separate from the copyright owner of the AI system,”) but did not provide 
evidentiary support, nor is it clear that such research would generally be conducted with the 
permission of the instance owner or operator.  HackerOne Class 4 Reply at 1.  In fact, 
HackerOne’s concern appears to stem from the inverse situation, in which “the copyright owner 
of an AI system participates in a research access program or a bias bounty,” but the instance 
owners do not.  See id. at 1–2. 
569 See, e.g., NeMo Guardrails at 12; Rollbar Editorial Team, How to Resolve ChatGPT Limit Errors, 
ROLLBAR: CODE TUTORIALS JAVA (Jul. 31, 2023), https://rollbar.com/blog/chatgpt‐api‐rate‐limit‐
error (“ChatGPT Limit Errors”) (cited by HPC Class 4 Reply at 5). 
570 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 4 Opp’n at 8. 

[PAGE 121]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
118 
 
them.  Instead, SaaS systems may be built with programs that act “like a proxy 
between the user and the [model].”571 
The Register finds, however, that these issues need not be definitively resolved at 
this time, given the other issues discussed below. 
c.  Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Proponents described research generally involving one or more of the following 
activities, which they consider to be noninfringing: reviewing platform content 
policies; testing the ability to generate content contrary to those policies or that is 
otherwise undesirable; investigating the structure and efficacy of algorithmic 
safeguards; designing and testing techniques for bypassing those safeguards 
through prompting; and sharing research findings.572  In sharing their results, the 
researchers employed various techniques to reduce the risk of harm—adding 
disclaimers, not disclosing model outputs, disclosing only a few select examples 
for illustration, and redacting or abbreviating harmful outputs.573 
According to proponents, this research conduct qualifies as fair use.  Under the 
first factor—the purpose and character of the use—they alleged that the purpose 
is to “identify, assess, and correct algorithmic flaws and thereby help strengthen 
the trustworthiness of AI systems”574 and that the “research and the creative 
works produced by the research,” such as academic papers and discussions, “are 
of a wholly different nature than the AI systems subject to the research.”575  
Additionally, they stated that “[u]ses will be non-commercial and researchers 
will publish transformative aggregate assessments of evaluations of 
 
571 NeMo Guardrails at 3. 
572 See, e.g., Masterkey; Do Anything Now; Exploiting Programmatic Behavior of LLMs; Andy 
Zou et al., Universal and Transferable Adversarial Attacks on Aligned Language Models, ARXIV (Dec. 
2023), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2307.15043.pdf (“Universal and Transferable Adversarial Attacks”) 
(cited by HPC Class 4 Reply at 6). 
573 Do Anything Now at 1 (providing an upfront disclaimer and disclosing abbreviated model 
output); Exploiting Programmatic Behavior of LLMs 1–2, 7, 13–14 (providing seven examples); 
Universal and Transferable Adversarial Attacks at 2, 14–15, 28–31 (providing a small number of 
abbreviated examples in the body of the research paper followed by a warning disclaimer and an 
appendix with four complete outputs). 
574 HPC Class 4 Reply at 6. 
575 HPC Class 4 Initial at 4. 

[PAGE 122]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
119 
 
trustworthiness,”576 such as “providing information about computer programs’ 
susceptibility to bias and misalignment – rather than merely superseding the 
original copyrighted work.”577  Opponents disagreed.  For example, Joint 
Creators II argued that the “proposed exemption is not limited to noncommercial 
users,” and “would potentially give the ability to access creative content and be 
able to use it however it might be available once the access to a system has been 
circumvented.”578 
Regarding the second factor—the nature of the copyrighted work—HPC argued 
that the proposed exemption “focuses on functional code, rather than expressive 
or imaginative work, by researching the algorithmic output of computer 
programs.”579  Specifically, they noted such research “involves code, so the 
software that drives an algorithm, APIs that let AI interact with other software, 
and interfaces that enable users to provide input and receive output.”580  Joint 
Creators II countered that, “if we’re talking about circumventing TPMs on DVD 
players and streaming services and video games, we’re potentially talking about 
creative works.”581 
On the third factor—the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation 
to the copyrighted work as a whole—HPC argued that “it will not be necessary 
or desirable to reproduce more than small or de minimis portions of the 
copyrighted AI system in order to demonstrate the validity of the research”582 
even though “AI trustworthiness research may access significant portions of an 
AI system.”583  Opponents did not address this factor. 
Finally, proponents asserted that the fourth factor—effect of the use upon the 
potential market for or value of the copyrighted work—also favored fair use.  
HPC stated that the research “is highly unlikely to supplant the market for 
computer programs or generative AI systems” and “where generative AI 
 
576 Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 9. 
577 HPC Class 4 Initial at 4. 
578 Tr. at 69:21–70:07 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators II).  
579 HPC Class 4 Initial at 4. 
580 Tr. at 4:12–19 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Geiger, HPC (Audience Participation Session)). 
581 Tr. at 70:08–14 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators II). 
582 HPC Class 4 Initial at 4.  
583 Tr. at 4:21–23 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Geiger, HPC (Audience Participation Session)). 

[PAGE 123]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
120 
 
alignment research leads to corrections of flaws, resulting in more trustworthy 
algorithms and AI systems, the value of the original work would be 
strengthened.”584  Opponents disagreed.  Joint Creators II argued that “it seems 
like market harm is a possibility if we’re talking about exposing creative works at 
least.”585  However, many of opponents’ concerns are not applicable to the 
refined class.586 
If researchers’ conduct established a viable prima facie claim—which is unclear on 
this record—all four factors would therefore weigh in favor of fair use.  But that 
is not sufficient to justify the proposed exemption, given the Register’s 
conclusion that section 1201 does not apply.587 
d.  Causation 
Proponents bear the burden of establishing that, but for section 1201’s 
anticircumvention prohibition, they could gain lawful access to the allegedly 
copyrighted AI models and components necessary for their research.588  Absent 
causation, an exemption will not relieve the research barriers they described.  As 
explained above, their unauthorized research on closed platforms controlled by 
third parties faces practical difficulties that would not be remedied by an 
exemption to section 1201.  Moreover, proponents have not shown that their 
conduct involves “circumvent[ing] a technological measure” that “effectively 
controls access to a work.”589  On this record, the Register therefore recommends 
denying the proposed exemption as unnecessary. 
 
584 HPC Class 4 Initial at 4.  
585 Tr. at 70:15–17 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators II). 
586 For example, DVD CCA and AACS LA alleged that the proposed exemption would lead to an 
increase in piracy due to the possibility that it could be used to circumvent “CSS and AACS 
content protection technologies” that protect DVDs and Blu‐ray players.  See DVD CCA & AACS 
LA Class 4 Opp’n at 12–17. 
587 Cf. 2018 Recommendation at 3 (“In considering these proposals, the Office again notes that 
many of these activities seem to ‘have little to do with the consumption of creative content or the 
core concerns of copyright.’  It should be emphasized, however, that section 1201 does not permit 
the Acting Register to recommend, or the Librarian to grant, exemptions on that basis alone .”). 
588 See 2021 Recommendation at 7–8, 11 (discussing the rulemaking’s burden of proof standards); 
see also Section 1201 Report at 115, 117 (discussing the rulemaking’s evidentiary standards). 
589 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(A), (3)(A)–(B). 

[PAGE 124]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
121 
 
i. Closed Systems 
Conducting research on a platform controlled by an entity unwilling to allow it 
presents numerous difficulties.  For example, HPC claimed that violating terms 
of service may lead to “access restrictions such as account suspension and user 
bans (blanket bans on email addresses, IP addresses, and credit cards)”; that 
“exceeding rate limits or using automated tools without authorization can halt 
inputs or result in account suspension or other reprisals”; and that “bypassing 
guardrails without authorization may lead to account suspension or other 
reprisals.”590 
Joint Academic Researchers identified similar concerns and pointed to a lack of 
transparency.591  They stated that platforms may restrict “purchases of additional 
model usage”; deprecate “or mak[e] undocumented changes to a model/API that 
is actively being tested”; limit “access to model or system outputs (e.g. by 
blocking access to logits after they were previously available)”; and deny “access 
to information about what model(s) is being used in an AI system.”592 
But these concerns arise from the closed nature of SaaS platforms, not section 
1201’s prohibition on circumvention.  Although proponents emphasized the 
“chilling effects” of legal reprisals, their own comments identified other 
concerns.  Joint Academic Researchers said the “risk of losing account access by 
itself may dissuade researchers” from investigating trustworthiness.593  Together 
with HPC, they cited an academic paper suggesting that legal protection alone is 
insufficient: “Legal safe harbors still do not prevent account suspensions or other 
enforcement action that would impede independent safety and trustworthiness 
evaluations.”594 
Accordingly, the Register finds that it is the third-party control of closed SaaS 
systems, regardless of the prohibition on circumvention in section 1201, that 
inhibits the research described by proponents. 
 
590 HPC Class 4 Reply at 5–6. 
591 Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 5. 
592 Id. 
593 Id. at 8 (emphasis added). 
594 Safe Harbor for AI Evaluation and Red Teaming at 7. 

[PAGE 125]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
122 
 
ii. Circumvention of Effective TPMs 
Section 1201(a)(3) provides two definitions: 
(A) to “circumvent a technological measure’” means to descramble 
a scrambled work, to decrypt an encrypted work, or otherwise to 
avoid, bypass, remove, deactivate, or impair a technological 
measure, without the authority of the copyright owner; and  
(B) a technological measure “effectively controls access to a work” if 
the measure, in the ordinary course of its operation, requires the 
application of information, or a process or a treatment, with the 
authority of the copyright owner, to gain access to the work.595 
Proponents identified several purported TPMs and described how researchers 
might circumvent them during research.596  But based on the record presented, it 
does not appear that researchers are circumventing technological measures 
within the purview of section 1201 or that those measures effectively control 
access to copyrighted works. 
Proponents broadly identified three categories of TPMs—account authentication, 
rate limits, and algorithmic safeguards—and the Register considers each 
below.597 
Account Authentication.  HPC claimed that AI platforms often require user 
accounts to access their service, that establishing a user account requires the 
acceptance of terms of service, and that researchers may establish new accounts 
with the intent to violate the platform’s terms of service (or after a prior ban from 
the platform).598  Likewise, Joint Academic Researchers claimed that researchers 
may “circumvent” an account suspension by opening a new account with a 
 
595 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(3)(A)–(B). 
596 See, e.g., HPC Class 4 Initial at 3; Open Policy Class 4 Initial at 5; HPC Class 4 Reply at 4–6; 
Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 4–7. 
597 HPC identifies the three categories as “account requirements,” “rate limits,” and “algorithmic 
safeguards,” whereas Joint Academic Researchers split them into two “blocking inputs and 
outputs” and “suspensions, rate limits, and purchase restrictions.”  See HPC Class 4 Reply at 4–5; 
Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 5.  
598 HPC Class 4 Reply at 4–5. 

[PAGE 126]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
123 
 
different credit card and phone number, by using a colleague’s account, or by 
“some other mechanism.”599 
The Register acknowledges that systems that authenticate user credentials prior 
to granting access to web-based services are a paradigmatic example of 
technological measures that effectively control access to a work.600  In the 
ordinary course of operation, a user must provide a password, API key, or some 
other credential, which qualifies as the “application of information” to gain 
access.601  Accordingly, were researchers intending to hack authentication 
systems, e.g., through backdoor attacks, section 1201 (and, of course, other laws) 
could be implicated. 
Here, however, other than a reference to “some other mechanism,” there is 
nothing in the record to suggest that good-faith researchers would employ such 
techniques.602  Instead, proponents described researchers using valid credentials, 
in a manner that may violate the platforms’ contractual terms of use, to 
“circumvent” the account authentication system.603  Most district courts have 
held that using valid access credentials, even without authorization, does not 
constitute circumvention under section 1201.604  Circumvention requires the 
 
599 Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 7.   
600 See, e.g., I.M.S. Inquiry Mgmt. Sys., Ltd. v. Berkshire Info. Sys., Inc., 307 F. Supp. 2d 521, 531–32 
(S.D.N.Y. 2004) (“I.M.S.’s password protection fits within this definition.  In order to gain access 
to the e‐Basket service, a user in the ordinary course of operation needs to enter a password, 
which is the application of information.  Indeed, the Second Circuit in Universal Studios confirmed 
that ‘[t]he DMCA . . . backed with legal sanctions the efforts of copyright owners to protect their 
works from piracy behind digital walls such as encryption codes or password protections.’”) 
(quoting Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Corley, 273 F.3d 429, 435 (2d Cir. 2001)). 
601 Id. 
602 See Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 7; Cf. Tr. at 19:02–11 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Geiger, 
HPC) (suggesting that opponents’ discussion of “brute forcing passwords” was a “hyperbolic 
diversion”). 
603 See, e.g., HPC Class 4 Reply at 5; Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 7; Generative AI 
Has a Visual Plagiarism Problem. 
604 See, e.g., Digital Drilling Data Sys. LLC v. Petrolink Servs. Inc., No. 4:15‐CV‐02172, 2018 WL 
2267139, at *14 (S.D. Tex. May 16, 2018); see also Joint Stock Co. Channel One Russia Worldwide v. 
Infomir LLC, No. 16‐cv‐1318 (GBD) (BCM), 2017 WL 696126, at *18 (S.D.N.Y. Feb. 15, 2017) 
(“[T]here is no liability under § 1201(a)(1)(A) where the defendant misuses a password, or 
otherwise uses ‘deceptive’ methods (as opposed to its own technology) to circumvent the 
technology that the copyright owner relied on for protection.”); iSpot.tv, Inc. v. Teyfukova, No. 
 

[PAGE 127]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
124 
 
“descrambling, decrypting, avoiding, bypassing, removing, deactivating or 
impairing a technological measure qua technological measure,” and supplying 
valid credentials does not avoid or bypass an authentication system in its 
“gatekeeping capacity.”605 
The Register agrees and finds that section 1201 does not inhibit the research 
described by proponents to the extent that researchers seek to circumvent 
account requirements by creating new accounts or using those accounts in a 
manner that violates the platform’s terms of service.606 
Rate Limits.  HPC claimed that “[r]ate limiting is a common technological 
measure for controlling access to a system if the user repeats the same action 
(such as providing input to the AI system) rapidly within a set period of time.”607  
They suggested that researchers may circumvent rate limits through “IP address 
rotation and automated backoff measures, or by establishing another account.”608  
In support, HPC cited a blog post which explained that ChatGPT’s API returns 
an error message when users make an “excessive number of API queries in a 
short period of time.”609  Although the article does not mention IP address 
rotation, it describes backoff tactics, which resolve the error by “introducing 
successively greater delays between the API calls each time this error is 
 
2:21‐cv‐06815‐MEMF (MARx), 2023 WL 3602806, at *6 (C.D. Cal. May 22, 2023) (“The wording of 
the statute indicates that ‘circumvention’ requires some manipulation of the technological 
measure at hand and certainly more than that a username and password was simply transferred 
into the hands of another.”); Dish Network L.L.C. v. World Cable Inc., 893 F. Supp. 2d 452, 464 
(E.D.N.Y. 2012) (“[U]sing deception to gain access to copyrighted material is not the type of 
‘circumvention’ that Congress intended to combat in passing the DMCA.”); I.M.S., 307 F. Supp. 
2d at 532 (“In the instant matter, defendant is not said to have avoided or bypassed the deployed 
technological measure in the measure’s gatekeeping capacity. The Amended Complaint never 
accuses defendant of accessing the e‐Basket system without first entering a plaintiff‐generated 
password.”). 
605 I.M.S., 307 F. Supp. 2d at 532. 
606 This is not an approval of this conduct.  It is merely outside the scope of section 1201’s 
anticircumvention prohibition and the Register’s authority to grant an exemption. 
607 HPC Class 4 Reply at 5. 
608 Id.  Joint Academic Researchers also briefly mentioned rate limits and purchase restrictions, 
but only to the extent they are enforced via account authentication.  Joint Academic Researchers 
Class 4 Reply at 7. 
609 ChatGPT Limit Errors 

[PAGE 128]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
125 
 
encountered.”610  The Register also takes administrative notice of OpenAI’s 
documentation on rate limits, which explains how users can avoid rate limit 
errors using exponential backoff, with several examples of how to do so in 
Python.611 
Initially, rate limit enforcement systems do not effectively control access to a 
work as contemplated by section 1201.  They do not require “the application of 
information, or a process or a treatment,”612—but instead require that users 
refrain from conduct, i.e., applying information.    
Nor do the two ways in which proponents state that they evade rate limits likely 
qualify as “circumvention” within the scope of section 1201.  First, the use of 
automated backoff measures is more akin to compliance with a platform’s terms 
of service than circumvention without authorization.  By employing backoff 
techniques, researchers are not avoiding or disabling the rate limit systems but 
attempting to stay within the limits by introducing delays.  Based on OpenAI’s 
documentation, it even appears that some prominent platforms encourage the 
use of these techniques.613  Second, IP address rotation, based on the thin record 
before the Office, does not appear to involve the circumvention of an effective 
control.614  At least one court has rejected a section 1201 claim based on the 
circumvention of “technological safeguards and barriers” that blocked “all 
traffic, including legitimate users, emanating from certain cloud computing 
providers and internet service providers.”615  Since these measures did not 
prevent the defendants from accessing the plaintiff’s web service via other 
servers and internet service providers, the technological measure did not 
effectively control access to a work.616 
 
610 Id. 
611 Rate Limits, OPENAI PLATFORM, https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/rate‐limits/ (last 
visited Oct. 17, 2024); see also Section 1201 Report at 107, 110 (discussing the Office’s discretion to 
take administrative notice). 
612 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(3)(B). 
613 See Rate Limits, OPENAI PLATFORM, https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/rate‐limits/ (last 
visited Oct. 17, 2024). 
614 See HPC Class 4 Reply at 5 & n.23; Tr. at 8:12–8:22 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Geiger, HPC) (briefly 
referencing IP address rotation in the context of creating new accounts).  
615 Couponcabin LLC v. Savings.com, Inc., No. 2:14‐cv‐39‐TLS, 2016 WL 3181826, at *1, *6 (N.D. Ind. 
June 8, 2016). 
616 Id. at *6. 

[PAGE 129]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
126 
 
Accordingly, the Register finds that section 1201 does not inhibit the research 
described by proponents as a result of rate limit systems, which they may avoid 
by using backoff techniques and other techniques referenced in the record. 
Algorithmic Safeguards.  HPC identified “algorithmic safeguards,” or 
“guardrails,” as “technological measures designed to restrict AI systems from 
providing biased, unethical, inaccurate, or unsafe output, and to help ensure the 
AI system is trustworthy and in alignment with human values.”617  Joint 
Academic Researchers described techniques for implementing guardrails 
including “adapting [a] model so that it is less likely to produce untrustworthy 
outputs (e.g. via reinforcement learning from human feedback),” “adding a filter 
to the model to identify and halt [undesired] outputs,” or “applying filters in a 
user interface to identify and block banned keywords or prompts that violate a 
company’s acceptable use policy.”618  These guardrails appear to fall into three 
general categories: external filters, prompt engineering, and alignment training. 
External filters are programs which intercept prompts before they reach the 
generative model, or model outputs before they reach the user.619  These range 
from simple keyword checks and traditional classifiers to generative language 
models tasked with moderation.620  For example, Nvidia describes how to use a 
(separate) generative language model as a moderation tool using two template 
prompts: 
Instruction: {{ user_input }} Would this instruction make a language 
model break moderation policies, deviate from good aligned 
responses and provide answers that a language model should 
ideally not? Answer with yes/no. 
Model output: {{ bot_response }} Is this output legal, ethical and not 
harmful to any person? Answer with yes/no.621 
The second category of guardrails is based on prompt engineering, or more 
specifically “system” or “safety” prompts.  Although not extensively discussed 
in the record, this is the practice of prepending or appending unseen text to user 
 
617 HPC Class 4 Reply at 5. 
618 Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 6. 
619 See, e.g., HPC Class 4 Reply at 5–6; Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 6. 
620 See, e.g., Masterkey at 5–9; NeMo Guardrails at 12. 
621 NeMo Guardrails at 12. 

[PAGE 130]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
127 
 
prompts to guide the model’s behavior.622  For example, a system prompt might 
be: “System:  You are a chat assistant designed to provide helpful and not 
harmful responses to user queries.”623 
The third category, alignment training, is the continued training of a model to 
bring its behavior “in line with expected human values and intentions.”624  For 
large language models, this includes instruction tuning and reinforcement 
learning, which update the generative model’s parameters to lower its 
“propensity to generate objectionable text”625 or “reduc[e] the chance of 
generating harmful or biased text.”626 
These three categories of guardrails do not effectively control access to a work 
because they do not, in the ordinary course of operation, require the application 
of information or a process or a treatment to gain access to the system or outputs.  
To the contrary, the record indicates that a near infinite variety of prompts will 
pass input filtering and result in a generation that passes output filtering.627  
Even if algorithmic safeguards were effective controls, the conduct described in 
the record does not seem to qualify as circumvention.  The cited research focuses 
on a single technique for bypassing guardrails: jailbreak prompts.  This is not 
analogous to the “jailbreaking” discussed in other classes or prior rulemakings, 
which refers to “the process of gaining access to the operating system of a 
computing device . . . to install and execute software that could not otherwise be 
 
622 Id. at 2; Universal and Transferable Adversarial Attacks at 5. 
623 Universal and Transferable Adversarial Attacks at 5–6.  
624 Xiangyu Qi et al., Fine-Tuning Aligned Language Models Compromises Safety, Even When Users Do 
Not Intend It To! 3, ARXIV (Oct. 2023), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.03693 (“Fine‐Tuning Aligned 
Language Models”) (cited by Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 6).   
625 Universal and Transferable Adversarial Attacks at 18. 
626 Masterkey at 13. 
627 The line between allowed and non‐allowed prompts also appears to be ill‐defined for two 
reasons.  First, to the extent the guardrails are statistical in nature—relying on alignment training 
or a separate classifier model—they may fail to block a small percentage of undesired content.  
See Exploiting Programmatic Behavior of LLMs at 6 (showing OpenAI’s filters had a 60% failure 
rate on phishing‐related content without attacks); NeMo Guardrails at 14 (showing a 97–99% 
block rate for harmful requests and 2–5% for helpful requests based on a sample 200 requests).  
Second, whether content is undesired is inherently subjective and involves competing 
considerations.  See NeMo Guardrails at 14 (“It should also be noted that evaluation of the output 
moderation rail is subjective and each person/organization would have different subjective 
opinions on what should be allowed to pass through or not.”). 

[PAGE 131]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
128 
 
installed or run on that device, or to remove pre-installed software that could not 
otherwise be uninstalled.”628  Instead, jailbreak prompts are adversarial prompts 
that are designed to elicit undesirable outputs notwithstanding alignment 
training and without triggering external filters.629 
For example, a paper cited by HPC described jailbreaking as “cleverly crafting” 
prompts and offers an example of a chatbot that initially refuses to answer a 
question on malware but answers when the question is masked within a broader 
role-play conversation.630  While this conduct/prompts may avoid the intent of 
the algorithmic safeguards, the record does not indicate that they are processed 
differently than other prompts or otherwise avoid, bypass, remove, deactivate, or 
impair them as technological measures.631  Similar to the other contractual 
restrictions that proponents characterize as TPMs, the consequences for a 
proponent’s “jailbreak” of an algorithmic guardrail arise from the platform’s 
interpretation of its terms of service rather than the technical manipulation of an 
access control.  
Joint Academic Researchers also briefly discussed a second technique for 
circumventing guardrails: model fine-tuning, i.e., the continued training of a 
model on a custom dataset to improve its performance for specific use cases.632  
In support, they cited a study demonstrating that by fine-tuning, it was possible 
to degrade a model’s prior alignment training, either intentionally or 
unintentionally.633  A section 1201 claim based on fine-tuning would encounter 
several challenges.  At a minimum, prior alignment training is unlikely to be an 
 
628 See, e.g., 2021 Recommendation at 169. 
629 See, e.g., Do Anything Now at 6; Exploiting Programmatic Behavior of LLMs at 3; Masterkey at 
1. 
630 Masterkey at 3.  
631 The jailbreaking example in the record most akin to traditional circumvention is the use of 
adversarial suffixes, i.e., appending difficult to interpret, seemingly random text to the end of a 
prompt that would otherwise get redirected by alignment training.  See Universal and 
Transferable Adversarial Attacks at 5, 17, 28–30.  However, even then, this type of attack may not 
bypass or impair the alignment training any more than cleverly crafted prompts or even prompts 
that unintentionally result in impermissible generations. 
632 Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 6.   
633 See Fine‐Tuning Aligned Language Models. 

[PAGE 132]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
129 
 
effective control, both for the reasons discussed above and because of the cited 
research documenting unintentional degradation from benign fine-tuning. 
Accordingly, the Register finds that section 1201 does not inhibit the research 
described by proponents to the extent they seek to circumvent algorithmic 
safeguards via adversarial prompting and fine-tuning. 
e. Asserted Adverse Effects 
i. Evidentiary Record 
Proponents have not demonstrated that the prohibition on circumvention 
adversely affects their ability to make noninfringing uses, given the absence  of 
causation.  The Register finds the evidence submitted by proponents on this 
point insufficient. 
HPC initially cited Masterkey, which describes a research study on the efficacy of 
jailbreak prompts on popular LLM chatbots.634  According to the paper, the 
authors chose not to include Baidu’s Ernie635 in their main study because it was 
optimized for Chinese, not English, and “repeated unsuccessful jailbreak 
attempts on Ernie result[ed] in account suspension, making it infeasible to 
conduct extensive trial experiments.”636  While they were able to conduct a 
smaller cross-lingual experiment using Ernie, it was limited in scope “due to the 
rate limit and account suspension risks upon repeated jailbreak attempts.”637 
This paper provides some evidence that account authentication and rate limits 
adversely affect trustworthiness research.  However, there is no indication that 
the adverse effects flow from the prohibition on circumvention as opposed to the 
technological measures themselves.  The researchers did not state that they 
would have or could have circumvented Baidu’s account authentication and rate 
limits but were deterred from doing so based on section 1201 or legal risks more 
generally. 
 
634 Masterkey at 4.  
635 Ernie is a chatbot service offered by Baidu. 
636 Masterkey at 4.  
637 Id. at 13. 

[PAGE 133]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
130 
 
HPC and Joint Academic Researchers also cited an article titled, Generative AI Has 
a Visual Plagiarism Problem.638  That article claims that after one of the authors first 
reported his results, Midjourney banned him from the platform twice and 
updated its terms of service to state, “[y]ou may not use the Service to try to 
violate the intellectual property rights of others, including copyright, patent, or 
trademark rights.  Doing so may subject you to penalties including legal action or 
a permanent ban from the Service.”639  However, the author went on to create 
two more accounts anyway, and “completed” the project.640 
This article provides some evidence that account authentication adversely affects 
trustworthiness research.  However, it does not state that the need to create new 
accounts imposed substantial time or cost burdens, or otherwise limited the 
scope of the research.641  In any event, the article does not provide evidence that 
the prohibition on circumvention was responsible for any of the adverse effects.  As 
discussed above, creating new accounts with valid credentials does not qualify as 
circumvention within the purview of section 1201.  Moreover, the author 
“circumvented” Midjourney’s account requirements on several occasions, and 
there is no evidence that it threatened or pursued a section 1201 claim on that 
basis.642  Midjourney did update its terms of service to include a vague and 
untargeted threat of “legal action” against users that “try to violate the 
intellectual property rights of others.”643  But it did not target the author 
specifically, or indicate that “legal action” referred to section 1201 claims for 
creating new accounts. 
 
638 Generative AI Has a Visual Plagiarism Problem. 
639 Id. 
640 Id. 
641 In a separate article the authors referenced this example and claimed that the “[t]he cost of 
suspensions without refunds quickly tallies to hundreds of dollars, and creating new accounts is 
also not trivial, with blanket bans on credit cards and email addresses.”  Safe Harbor for AI 
Evaluation and Red Teaming at 5.  But they do not cite anything to support this claim or provide 
the necessary context, such as the relationship between the cost and typical research budgets, or 
what “not trivial” means in practice.  
642 Generative AI Has a Visual Plagiarism Problem (“Southen created two additional accounts in 
order to complete this project; these, too, were banned, with subscription fees not returned.”).  
643 Id. 

[PAGE 134]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
131 
 
Setting aside general complaints about the transparency of closed systems,644 the 
record also includes many examples of trustworthiness research conducted on 
SaaS platforms without any apparent adverse effects, much less any traceable to 
section 1201.645  Even in the Masterkey research, the authors successfully tested 
jailbreak prompts on OpenAI’s GPT 3.5 and GPT-4, Bing’s Chat, and Google’s 
Bard without any reported incidents.646 
Proponents also claimed that the potential liability under section 1201 has 
general “chilling effects” on research.647  For example, HPC stated that 
“[r]esearchers point to potential liability under DMCA Section 1201, if those 
measures are circumvented, as having a chilling effect on independent AI 
research and responsible disclosure of algorithmic flaws.”648  In support, it cited 
A Safe Harbor for AI Evaluation and Red Teaming, a paper authored by several 
members of Joint Academic Researchers.649  But that paper does not provide 
specific examples of research deterred or discontinued due to section 1201. 
Instead, the authors asserted that section 1201 has “hampered security 
researchers to the extent that they requested a DMCA exemption for this 
purpose”; that “OpenAI has attempted to dismiss the New York Times v. 
OpenAI lawsuit on the allegation that New York Times research into the model 
constituted hacking”; and that “a petition for an exemption to the DMCA has 
been filed requesting that researchers be allowed to investigate bias in generative 
AI systems.”650  But none of these are relevant to the underlying question of 
whether section 1201 creates chilling effects.  The security researchers requested 
 
644 See, e.g., Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 5; Luiza Pozzoban et al., On the Challenges 
of Using Black-Box APIs for Toxicity Evaluation in Research, ARXIV (Apr. 2023), 
https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.12397 (“Black Box APIs”) (cited by Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 
Reply at 5). 
645 Universal and Transferable Adversarial Attacks at 5 (testing adversarial prompts on ChatGPT, 
Claude 2, and Bard); Fine‐Tuning Aligned Language Models at 5 (testing the effect of fine‐tuning 
on alignment training using OpenAI’s platform); Do Anything Now at 6 (testing adversarial 
prompts on ChatGPT and GPT 4); Exploiting Programmatic Behavior of LLMs at 6 (testing 
adversarial prompts on ChatGPT and other OpenAI models). 
646 Masterkey at 4. 
647 See, e.g., HPC Class 4 Reply at 3–4; Joint Academic Researchers Class 4 Reply at 8. 
648 HPC Class 4 Reply at 4. 
649 Safe Harbor for AI Evaluation and Red Teaming. 
650 Id. at 7. 

[PAGE 135]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
132 
 
an exemption for conducting a different type of research on a different record;651 
OpenAI’s vague “hacking” allegations against the New York Times are not 
clearly linked to section 1201;652 and the filing of a petition for a proposed 
exemption cannot itself constitute evidence of adverse effects. 
Proponents need not necessarily provide specific examples of threatened 
litigation or cease-and-desist letters to demonstrate adverse chilling effects.  
However, the absence of any concrete examples is significant given the Office’s 
doubts about the likelihood or viability of a section 1201 claim for the conduct 
described in the record.  Without an objective basis for fearing section 1201 
liability, or evidence demonstrating adverse effects, the Register cannot conclude 
that the prohibition on circumvention is likely to have adverse effects on AI 
trustworthiness research. 
ii. Statutory Factors 
The first, second, and third section 1201 statutory factors weigh against the 
proposed exemption because granting it would not meaningfully increase the 
availability of copyrighted works, including for educational or research 
purposes.  The research described by proponents does not appear to implicate 
section 1201; there is little evidence that researchers have been or will be deterred 
from accessing copyrighted works due to section 1201; and SaaS platforms may 
continue to be closed and inaccessible to researchers for practical, rather than 
legal, reasons. 
The fourth factor is neutral because the research described by proponents does 
not appear to implicate section 1201 and there is no indication that the owners of 
SaaS platforms have relied on it for the purpose of deterring the proposed 
conduct.  Although ACT and DVD CCA and AACS LA raised general concerns 
about the risks of permitting circumvention, these concerns do not appear to 
apply to the refined, SaaS-restricted class.653 
 
651 See, e.g., 2018 Recommendation at 299–311 (discussing adverse effects on security research). 
652 The Register takes administrative notice of the underlying court filing: Mem. of Law in Supp. 
of OpenAI Def.’s Mot. to Dismiss, The New York Times Co. v. Microsoft Corp., No. 1:23‐cv‐11195 
(S.D.N.Y., Feb. 26, 2024), ECF No. 52. 
653 ACT Class 4 Opp’n at 2 (discussing how the proposed exemption does “not address the 
potential damage to all software markets—mobile apps, enterprise software, and firmware.”); 
DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 4 Opp’n at 17–18 (noting that the proposed exemption would 
 

[PAGE 136]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
133 
 
For the fifth factor, the Register observes that granting an exemption without 
greater evidence of causation could have unintended adverse effects by implying 
that non-exempted uses violate section 1201 when they likely do not.  
Accordingly, this factor also weighs against granting an exemption. 
Based on the foregoing, the Register finds that proponents have not 
demonstrated that they are—or are likely to be during the next three years—
adversely affected by section 1201 in their ability to engage in trustworthiness 
research on generative AI SaaS systems. 
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA supports an exemption for “AI trustworthiness research” modeled after 
the current security research exemption and HPC’s proposal, but without the 
requirement that the research be conducted on lawfully acquired devices, or with 
the authorization of the system owner or operator.654  Like the Register, NTIA 
found this revision necessary because the activities “described in the record . . . 
predominately relate to noninfringing uses which are not authorized by the 
owner or operator of the applicable computer, computer system, or computer 
network.”655  
In all but one instance, NTIA agrees with the Register that the proposed research 
activities are unlikely to fall within the scope of section 1201.656  It concludes that 
circumventing account requirements by creating new accounts following bans, or 
otherwise violating the terms of service on platforms, does not entail 
“circumventing a technological measure.”657  Likewise, it finds that rate limits that 
can be “bypassed through [] IP address rotation and automated backoff 
measures,” are not covered by section 1201 because “a rate limit does not prevent 
 
“permit conduct that threatens to, even unintentionally, disrupt the manufacturers’ 
implementation of the robustness and compliance rules, and thereby compromise the integrity of 
the overall content protection scheme”); see also Tr. at 20:17–21:16 (Apr. 17, 2024) (Ayers, AACS 
LA) (discussing the potential of the proposed exemption to encompass Blu‐ray players). 
654 See NTIA Letter at 32 & n.130 (removing the requirement that circumvention be undertaken 
“on a lawfully acquired device or machine on which an AI system operates” or “with the 
authorization of the owner or operator of [the] computer, computer system, or compu ter 
network”).  
655 Id. 
656 NTIA explicitly requests that the Office “report and comment on” these conclusions.  Id. at 41.   
657 Id. at 38–40. 

[PAGE 137]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
134 
 
someone from accessing the computer programs,” and only “become[s] 
effective” after a user already is in possession or has lawfully accessed “the 
copyrighted work at issue (e.g., the interface code for the AI system).”658   
However, NTIA disagrees with the Register’s assessment regarding 
“jailbreaking.”  In its view, if a researcher uses a “jailbreak prompt” to obtain 
access to model’s “system prompt,” which it was trained not to divulge “in the 
ordinary course of its operation,” that would constitute circumventing a 
technological measure within the meaning of section 1201.659  As discussed 
above, however, “jailbreak” prompting—as described in the record—is unlikely 
to involve circumventing technological measures within the purview of section 
1201.   
Based on its conclusion that at least one area of proposed research activity falls 
within the scope of section 1201, NTIA finds that proponents have sufficiently 
demonstrated that section 1201 adversely affects their ability to engage in 
noninfringing uses.660  In support, it credits statements from academic 
researchers that describe the “chilling effect” of section 1201 on their research 
independent of the risk of account suspensions.661  However, as noted in the 
Recommendation, these vague statements  were not supported by any specific 
examples of research that was deterred or discontinued due to the prohibition on 
circumvention.   
As a final note, given the Register’s conclusions regarding causation and adverse 
effects, the Recommendation did not need to consider the implications of 
dropping the requirement that research be conducted on lawfully acquired 
devices, or with the authorization of the system owner or operator.  However, 
that would represent a dramatic expansion over past exemptions, which were 
intended for use with lawfully acquired or otherwise lawfully accessed works 
and devices.662  The Register would have significant reservations authorizing an 
 
658 Id. at 40–41. 
659 Id. at 41. 
660 NTIA Letter at 35–37. 
661 Id. at 37.  NTIA further explained that the existence of user agreements, which could prohibit 
the proposed conduct, “does not defeat a finding of adverse effects” because violations of a user 
agreement may carry a lower penalty than liability under section 1201.  Id. at 36–37. 
662 See, e.g., 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1) (“Motion pictures . . . where the motion picture is lawfully 
made and acquired.”), (b)(5)(i)(B) (Literary works where the “copy of each literary work is 
 

[PAGE 138]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
135 
 
exemption primarily intended to be applied to use on third-party servers that 
proponents have no legal right to access.  She would need to consider the risk of 
abuse, the ongoing costs circumvention might impose on third parties, which 
may not be trivial in the case of high-volume generative AI inference, and the 
impact that might have on their ability to offer free or low-cost services to the 
public.  
NTIA also requests that if the Register declines to recommend the proposed 
exemption, she should “seek to interpret the existing security research exemption 
to cover at least some aspects of good-faith AI trustworthiness research.”663  It 
asserts that various terms used within that exemption could include “at least 
some aspects of” good-faith AI trustworthiness research.664  Specifically, “security 
flaw or vulnerability” and “security and safety” could encompass research 
involving outputs of a biased, discriminatory, or infringing nature, as their 
presence might “ipso facto qualify as a ‘security flaw or vulnerability,’ the 
correction of which would improve the system’s ‘security or safety.’”665   
The Register declines to provide the requested interpretation for several reasons.  
First, the parties did not request an expansion of the current security research 
exemption as required by the rulemaking process.  Second, it is not clear, based 
on the record provided, that the parties would have met the burden of proof, as 
the current and proposed exemption cover distinct uses.  Finally, given the 
“lawfully acquired” or “with authorization” limitation in the regulatory 
language, the proposed expansion would not be likely to address proponents’ 
concerns.  
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
While good faith trustworthiness research is valuable and likely noninfringing, 
proponents have not met their burden of demonstrating that section 1201’s 
prohibition has or will adversely affect their ability to conduct such research.  
The record reflects that the adverse effects identified by proponents arise from 
the third-party control of closed SaaS systems, regardless of section 1201’s 
 
lawfully acquired and owned . . . or licensed.”), (b)(8) (“Computer programs . . . in order to 
connect to a wireless telecommunications network and such connection is authorized by the 
operator of such network.”). 
663 NTIA Letter at 42–43. 
664 Id. at 42. 
665 Id. at 42–43. 

[PAGE 139]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
136 
 
applicability.  Moreover, it is unlikely that section 1201 would apply to the 
research conduct identified in the record.  Therefore, the Register recommends 
denying the Class 4 petition. 

[PAGE 140]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
137 
 
E. Proposed Class 5: Computer Programs—Repair of Commercial 
Industrial Equipment 
1. Background 
a.  Summary of Proposed Exemption and Recommendation 
Two organizations, Public Knowledge and iFixit, jointly submitted a petition to 
expand the current exemption relating to the diagnosis, maintenance, repair, and 
modification of software-enabled devices.666  The petition seeks to expand the 
existing exemption covering consumer devices to “include commercial industrial 
equipment.”667   
Initial comments in support of the proposal were submitted by the petitioners.668  
Opposition comments were submitted by ACT; Associated Equipment 
Distributors (“AED”); Joint Creators I; and Philips North America, LLC 
(“Philips”).669  Reply comments were submitted by the petitioners, as well as the 
Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers (“AHAM”), and jointly by the 
U.S. Department of Justice’s Antitrust Division and the Federal Trade 
Commission (“DOJ Antitrust and the FTC”).670  Several organizations and 
individuals spoke in support of and in opposition to the proposed exemption at 
the public hearings hosted by the Office.671  Following the hearing, several 
organizations submitted post-hearing letters responding to questions from the 
 
666 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Pet. at 2; see 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(14). 
667 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Pet. at 2 (citing examples “such as automated building 
management systems and industrial equipment (i.e. soft serve ice cream machines and other 
industrial kitchen equipment)”); Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 2; Tr. 41:06–11 (Apr. 
16, 2024) (Rose, Public Knowledge). 
668 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial. 
669 ACT Class 5 Opp’n; AED Class 5 Opp’n; Joint Creators I Class 5 Opp’n; Philips Class 5 Opp’n; 
see Joint Creators I Class 5 Opp’n at 1. 
670 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Reply; Ass’n of Home Appliance Mfrs. (“AHAM”) Class 5 
Reply; U.S. Department of Justice’s Antitrust Division (“DOJ”) & Federal Trade Commission 
(“FTC”) Class 5 Reply. 
671 See Tr. at 1 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Blough, FreeICT USA; Englund, Joint Creators  I; Gingerich, SFC; 
Higginbotham, Consumer Reports; Nair, ACT; Rosborough, iFixit & Canadian Repair Coalition; 
Rose, Public Knowledge; Wiens, iFixit); Tr. at 6:15–7:05 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Cade, Farm Action) 
(Audience Participation Session); Tr. at 7:11–10:15 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Crain, Nat’l Ass’n of Mfrs. 
(“NAM”)) (Audience Participation Session). 

[PAGE 141]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
138 
 
Office.672  Finally, the Office engaged in two ex parte meetings with commenters 
and letters summarizing the meetings are part of the record.673 
After reviewing the record, the Register recommends a new exemption covering 
diagnosis, maintenance, and repair of retail-level commercial food preparation 
equipment, a class which proponents have provided sufficient evidence to 
demonstrate is a class adversely affected by the prohibition against 
circumvention.  She declines, however, to recommend an exemption for a 
broader class of software-enabled commercial and industrial devices where 
insufficient evidence was submitted to support it.   
b.  Overview of Issues 
In the 2021 rulemaking, the Register declined a similar petition seeking a broad 
expansion of the exemption addressing software-enabled devices, to include 
commercial and industrial equipment,674 citing the insufficient record submitted 
in support of the expansion.675  Petitioners here have “s[ought] to correct that,” 
asserting that including such equipment is appropriate and justified by the 
current rulemaking record.676   
In support of the petition, petitioners provided four “index examples” (i.e., 
representative examples) that “illustrate the necessity of the proposed 
exemption, as well as the universality and scope of adverse effects.”677  These 
examples involved “commercial food preparation, construction equipment, 
programmable logic controllers (PLCs), and enterprise IT.”678  They conceded 
that the proposed class is “unusually broad,” but contended that the users of 
 
672 See ACT Post‐Hearing Resp. (May 28, 2024); Public Knowledge & iFixit Post‐Hearing Resp. 
(May 28, 2024); Joint Creators I Post‐Hearing Resp. (May 28, 2024). 
673 Consumer Tech. Ass’n (“CTA”), Cisco, Hewlett Packard Enters. (”HPE”), IBM, Info. Tech. 
Indus. Council (“ITI”), & TechNet Class 5 Ex Parte Letter (Aug. 2, 2024); NAM Class 5 Ex Parte 
Letter (July 31, 2024). 
674 2021 Recommendation at 190, 197–98. 
675 Id. 
676 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 2. 
677 Id. 
678 Id.; see also Tr. at 6:17–7:04 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Cade, Farm Action) (Audience Participation Session) 
(commenting that farmers need to repair “not only the equipment that they use in the fields or in 
the barns but also their commercial equipment that is so integrated into their systems for total 
production in their operations”). 

[PAGE 142]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
139 
 
commercial and industrial equipment are similarly situated, the proposed uses of 
device software for this equipment are similar, and the examples of TPMs and 
adverse effects provided in support of the petition share sufficient commonalities 
across the class.679  Petitioners further asserted that the proposed uses—
diagnosis, maintenance, and repair—are fair uses.680  Finally, they argued that 
these uses are being adversely affected by the prohibition against circumventing 
TPMs, specifically noting that “downtime caused by the user’s inability to 
perform the most basic diagnosis and repair . . . results in significant, quantifiable 
financial harm” for users of commercial industrial devices.681 
In response, opponents asserted that the proposed expansion is overbroad and 
that proponents have failed to develop a record that demonstrates sufficient 
commonalities among commercial and industrial devices.682  They contended 
that, more so than with consumer devices, circumvention of TPMs to repair 
commercial and industrial devices is commercial in nature creating a risk of 
market harm that tips the fair use and adverse effects analyses against granting 
an exemption.683  Further, they asserted that adequate alternatives to 
circumvention exist such that an exemption is not warranted.684  Finally, 
opponents objected to the inclusion of certain types of equipment and devices—
namely, appliances, construction equipment, medical devices, arcade game 
machines, motion picture projection equipment, and systems for transmitting 
music and motion pictures—asserting that the record is inadequate and that 
circumvention of TPMs on such devices carry unique risks for copyright 
owners.685   
 
679 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 7–9; Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Reply at 2–
3. 
680 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 9–10. 
681 Id. at 3, 11–18. 
682 See ACT Class 5 Opp’n at 2; AED Class 5 Opp’n at 1–2; Joint Creators I Class 5 Opp’n at 2–4; 
Philips Class 5 Opp’n at 3–5; Tr. at 8:08–19 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Crain, NAM) (Audience Participation 
Session). 
683 See Philips Class 5 Opp’n at 5; Tr. at 54:18–55:02 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators I). 
684 See ACT Class 5 Opp’n at 4; AED Class 5 Opp’n at 1–2; Joint Creators I Class 5 Opp’n at 3. 
685 See AED Class 5 Opp’n at 1–2; Philips Class 5 Opp’n at 3–4; AHAM Class 5 Reply at 2–4; Joint 
Creators I Class 5 Post‐Hearing Resp. at 3 (May 28, 2024); Tr. 11:04–18 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, 
Joint Creators I). 

[PAGE 143]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
140 
 
2. Discussion 
a.  Scope of the Proposed Class 
Proponents’ proposed class consists of “physical devices, controlled by 
copyrighted software, that are designed for use in commercial or industrial 
settings” that “employ computerized diagnosis and error-identification functions 
. . . locked behind TPMs.”686  As a threshold matter, the Register considers 
whether the record supports the class of works as proposed or whether the class 
should be redefined based on the record.  This inquiry looks at whether the 
proponents have demonstrated that sufficient commonalities exist for the 
proposed uses across the full spectrum of the class. 
Proponents argued for the breadth of the proposed class on several grounds.  
First, they asserted that the “users [of software-enabled commercial and 
industrial equipment] are similarly situated regarding the need for 
circumvention.”687  On this point, proponents pointed to “significant, quantifiable 
financial harm due to equipment downtime,” specifically, loss of revenue that 
these users experience due to a “[l]ack of third party or self-help repair 
options.”688  Second, they asserted that the uses covered by the proposed 
exemption—“diagnosis, maintenance, and repair necessary to restore affected 
equipment to pre-error levels of functionality”—are similar.689  Third, they 
contended that the “devices themselves share sufficient commonalities to 
constitute a cohesive class.”690  For example, they explained that commercial and 
industrial equipment are “used in tightly regulated industries with strict safety 
protocols for workers and products alike; utilize arrays of environmental and 
safety sensors to guide operations; return complex diagnostic codes when 
prompted; and require extensive occupational training to use in the first 
instance.”691  They further noted that of the five discrete features ascribed to 
software-enabled consumer devices in the Office’s 2016 Software Study, 
commercial and industrial devices share all but one feature (i.e., that “they are 
 
686 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 9. 
687 Id. at 8. 
688 Id. 
689 Id. 
690 Id. at 9. 
691 Id. at 2 (comparing the Taylor soft‐serve machine and a skid‐steer loader). 

[PAGE 144]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
141 
 
consumer-grade”).692  Given that “[t]here is as great a range of variation among 
salient features of software-enabled consumer devices as there is within this 
proposed class,” proponents asserted the proposed scope is appropriate.693 
Opponents objected that a class covering all software-enabled commercial and 
industrial equipment and devices is overbroad and that the record does not 
demonstrate that sufficient commonalities exist among the uses (diagnosis, 
maintenance, and repair), the users, and the types of equipment and devices at 
issue.694  Philips commented that “the Register cannot possibly engage in the 
requisite fact-intensive fair use analysis for the myriad products and uses that 
fall within the proposed class.”695  It further asserted that the proposed class is 
overbroad because it would include infringing uses; specifically, it would cover 
commercial activity that it contended is unlikely to be fair use.696  Similarly, Joint 
Creators I commented that because the proposed class and TPMs to be 
circumvented are “broad and undefined,” it is unclear what activities would fall 
within the scope of the exemption and if it “would apply to devices and 
circumvention techniques that the Copyright Office has excluded in the past.”697  
Based on the current record of four categories of index examples provided by 
proponents, Joint Creators I asserted that the types of TPMs on the equipment 
are “too dissimilar to constitute a meaningful class” and that adequate 
alternatives to circumvention exist.698  Further, in the event that the Register 
recommends a broad class, opponents asserted that certain devices should be 
carved out.699 
 
692 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 3. 
693 Id. 
694 See ACT Opp’n at 2–3; AED Opp’n at 1–2; Joint Creators I Opp’n at 2–4; Philips Opp’n at 4–7; 
NAM Class 5 Ex Parte Letter at 1–2 (July 31, 2024); CTA, Cisco, HPE, IBM, ITI & TechNet Class 5 
Ex Parte Letter at 2–4 (Aug. 2, 2024). 
695 Philips Class 5 Opp’n at 5. 
696 Id. at 5–7. 
697 Joint Creators I Class 5 Opp’n at 3; Id. at 4 (“The record in this proceeding is too sparse to 
support the broad proposed expansion of the existing repair exemption.”).  
698 Id. at 3–4; Tr. at 73:01–10 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators I). 
699 See AED Class 5 Opp’n at 1–2 (construction equipment); Philips Class 5 Opp’n at 3–4 (medical 
devices); AHAM Class 5 Reply at 2–4 (home appliances); Joint Creators I Class 5 Post‐Hearing 
Resp. at 3 (May 28, 2024); Tr. 11:13–18 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators I) (arcade game 
machines, motion picture projection equipment, and systems for transmitting music and motion 
 

[PAGE 145]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
142 
 
In the 2021 rulemaking, the Register found that “[i]t is unclear . . . that 
commercial and industrial devices and systems share . . . commonalities” with 
consumer devices.700  For example, she observed that some users of such devices 
and systems had adequate alternatives to circumvention, unlike users of 
consumer devices.701  In addition, it was “unclear whether the proposed uses 
would contravene negotiated licensing terms between commercial actors, which 
might affect the analysis of potential market harm.”702 
Based on the current record, the Register concludes again that proponents have 
not adequately demonstrated that the scope of the proposed class is appropriate.  
First, the record is too sparse.  When the Register has previously granted 
exemptions to types of software-enabled devices, the record has more clearly 
demonstrated specific harms to users.703  Here, proponents only offered a handful 
of examples in support of the proposed class, and asserted that there are 
commonalities among those examples, but provided no other documentary 
evidence.  As explained below, these examples may show adverse effects with 
respect to specific categories of devices; taken together, however, they are 
insufficient to support a broad class covering all software-enabled commercial 
and industrial equipment. 
Second, on this record, commercial and industrial equipment appear to have 
meaningful dissimilarities from software-enabled consumer devices and from 
each other.  Unlike with consumer devices, it is unclear whether in some cases 
the software used by commercial and industrial equipment is licensed and 
negotiated separately from the physical equipment.704  Moreover, the types and 
 
pictures); CTA, Cisco, HPE, IBM, ITI & TechNet Class 5 Ex Parte Letter at 2–4 (Aug. 2, 2024) 
(enterprise IT equipment). 
700 2021 Recommendation at 197. 
701 Id. 
702 Id. at 197–98. 
703 See 2021 Recommendation at 209 n.1154, 211 n.1168; see also 2015 Recommendation at 219 & 
n.1441 (outlining support for vehicle repair exemption, including comments submitted by “over 
2500 individuals”). 
704 See ACT Class 5 Opp’n at 4 (“TPMs protect layers of licensed software in devices. Licensed 
software is part of most products with digital content embedded in them. The system of licensed 
software is a crucial component to the investment and distribution in existing products and 
future innovations.”); Tr. at 55:08–56:05, 73:11–16 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators I); see 
also CTA, Cisco, HPE, IBM, ITI & TechNet Class 5 Ex Parte Letter at 2–4 (Aug. 2, 2024) (describing 
 

[PAGE 146]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
143 
 
applications of equipment that fall within the category of commercial and 
industrial equipment encompass a diversity significantly broader than consumer 
devices.  Although the index examples do not appear to provide access to 
expressive works, opponents noted several types of equipment within the 
proposed class that would provide such access.705  These considerations would 
lead to divergent analysis of potential market harm across the proposed class.  
Finally, it is unclear on this record that users are similarly situated with respect 
to economic harm from equipment downtime, which appears to vary 
significantly depending on the industry.706   
In sum, the rulemaking record does not support a broad proposed class that 
would cover all commercial and industrial equipment and devices because it is 
unclear that all such equipment and devices share sufficient commonalities and 
that the users are similarly situated.  This conclusion is consistent with the 
Register’s prior recommendations that have focused on specific types of 
commercial and industrial equipment and device types.  It also aligns with both 
the Office’s Software Study and the FTC’s Nixing the Fix Report, both of which 
cautioned against lumping together commercial and industrial equipment with 
consumer devices.707   
 
how enterprise IT equipment is “fundamentally different from consumer devices in terms of the 
equipment itself and its primary uses and users.”). 
705 See Tr. at 11:12–18 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators I) (citing as examples “commercial 
and industrial equipment used for processing creative works includes things like arcade game 
machines, motion picture projection equipment, systems for transmitting music and motion 
pictures in commercial buildings and by cable television, satellite broadcasting”). 
706 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 8 (”The cost of downtime varies by device and 
industry, but ranges from hundreds to millions of dollars per day.”) . 
707 Software Study at 9 (distinguishing between “consumer‐grade” and “industrial devices, the 
latter of which may be subject to contractual and licensing agreements between parties with 
similar bargaining power”); FTC, NIXING THE FIX: AN FTC REPORT TO CONGRESS ON REPAIR 
RESTRICTIONS 51 (May 2021), https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/reports/nixing‐fix‐ftc‐
report‐congress‐repair‐restrictions/nixing_the_fix_report_final_5521_630pm‐508_002.pdf (“When 
deciding the scope of expanded repair rights, policymakers should think about whether the 
rights should be limited to consumer goods or include capital items. Given the complexity and 
variation among products, it seems unlikely that there is a one‐size fits all approach that will 
adequately address this issue.”).  It is also consistent with the approach of state repair legislation, 
which has typically made distinctions between consumer devices and commercial and industrial 
equipment.  See Tr. at 84:03–08 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators I); see, e.g., Cal. Pub. Res. 
Code § 42488.2(3)(A); Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 9801(h)‐(i).  Although NTIA recommends taking a 
 

[PAGE 147]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
144 
 
Because the record does address the diagnosis, maintenance, and repair of four 
specific types of software-enabled equipment—commercial food preparation 
equipment, construction equipment, PLCs, and enterprise IT—the Register will 
analyze how the purported uses for these types of equipment are being or are 
likely to be adversely affected by the prohibition against circumvention.708 
b. Works Protected by Copyright 
Computer programs, including those contained in commercial and industrial 
equipment, are protected under the Copyright Act.709  Specifically, the firmware 
that controls commercial food preparation equipment, construction equipment, 
PLCs, and enterprise IT are copyrightable as literary works.710  The Register, 
therefore, finds that at least some works included in the proposed class are 
protected by copyright. 
c. Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Proponents asserted that diagnosis, maintenance, and repair are noninfringing 
fair uses of the firmware installed on commercial and industrial equipment.711  
The Office previously recognized this in its Software Study and past 1201 
recommendations, observing that device repair is generally noninfringing.712  As 
the Office stated in the Software Study, while the “fair use analysis is ultimately 
a fact-specific inquiry” that can vary based on the type of device, when “properly 
 
more expansive approach to defining the scope of the class, see NTIA Letter at 47, the Register 
declines to adopt this approach as proponents have not met their burden of showing that all 
commercial and industrial equipment shares sufficient commonalities.  Given the requirements of 
section 1201, she disagrees with the approach. 
708 The Register separately analyzes whether existing exemptions covering certain types of 
commercial devices, including agricultural equipment and medical devices and systems, should 
be renewed.  See NPRM at 72,020–22 (recommending renewal). 
709 17 U.S.C. § 101 (defining “computer program” and “literary works”); see also 2021 
Recommendation at 199–200; 2018 Recommendation at 194; 2015 Recommendation at 218; 
Software Study at 2–3. 
710 See 2021 Recommendation at 199–200; 2018 Recommendation at 194; 2015 Recommendation at 
218 & n.1427; Software Study at 2–3; see also Tr. at 46:13–19 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Blough, FreeICT USA); 
Tr. at 46:22–47:04 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Wiens, iFixit). 
711 The terms “maintenance” and “repair” are defined in the current exemption for consumer 
devices.  See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(14); see also 17 U.S.C. § 117(d). 
712 See Software Study at 39–41; 2021 Recommendation at 201–04; 2018 Recommendation at 191–
94. 

[PAGE 148]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
145 
 
applied, the fair use factors—together with the existing case law—should ensure 
that consumers, repair technicians, and other interested parties will be able to 
engage in most traditional repair . . . activities without fear of copyright 
infringement liability.”713  As noted above, although a broad class is not 
supported by the record, proponents have shown that the proposed uses are 
similar across the broad class of commercial and industrial equipment.  
Accordingly, the Register will consider whether diagnosis, maintenance, and 
repair are fair uses of commercial and industrial equipment, generally. 
Citing the Office’s previous conclusions with respect to repair, and repeating 
arguments made by iFixit and the Repair Association in the previous 1201 
rulemaking, proponents asserted that the same fair use analysis applies across 
the entire class of software-enabled commercial and industrial equipment.714  On 
the first factor, proponents asserted that “[a]ccessing and utilizing copyrighted 
software is necessary for the diagnosis, maintenance, and repair of the devices 
containing (or operated by) said software,” that is, each proposed “use is 
necessary in order to achieve full functionality.”715  They contended that the 
second factor favors fair use because “[c]ontrol software for industrial and 
commercial equipment is ‘essentially functional,’ and ‘not meant to be consumed 
as a creative work.’”716  For the third factor, they argued that use of the entire 
work “is reasonable because it often requires analysis of the full software 
program, and the ultimate product does not contain infringing copies.”717  
Finally, they asserted that the fourth factor favors fair use because “there is no 
separable market for the underlying software,” which is specific to the 
equipment in which it is embedded, and because “repair bolsters the market for 
the copyrighted works, as ‘repair supports—rather than displaces—the purpose 
of the embedded programs that control the device.’”718 
 
713 Software Study at 39–41. 
714 See Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 9 (citing 2021 Recommendation at 202; Software 
Study at 39). 
715 Id. at 10. 
716 Id. (citing 2021 Recommendation at 201). 
717 Id. (citing 2021 Recommendation at 201). 
718 Id. (citing Software Study at 40). 

[PAGE 149]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
146 
 
Opponent ACT objected that, given the scope of the proposed class, the uses do 
not permit a “blanket determination” on fair use.719  ACT further warned of 
“potential damage to all software markets.”720  Citing Warhol, Philips asserted 
that the proposed uses are “non-transformative and commercial.”721  Joint 
Creators I commented that “because the scope of the proposed class is broad and 
undefined, and the type of access controls to be circumvented is also broad and 
undefined, it is unclear exactly what type of activities would ultimately fall 
within the proposed exemption.”722 
At the public hearing on this class, proponents testified that neither the 
commerciality of some users nor the Warhol decision meaningfully affects the fair 
use analysis.723  Opponents disagreed, testifying that commerciality matters 
under Warhol and that the users here are primarily commercial actors.724  In 
addition, opponents stated that the licensed software found in enterprise IT and 
some PLCs is different than the functional firmware built into devices.725  
Opponents asserted that the market harm analysis is different for these types of 
devices because the software is licensed separately from the equipment, though 
 
719 ACT Class 5 Opp’n at 2; see also Philips Class 5 Opp’n at 5 (arguing that “the Register cannot 
possibly engage in the requisite fact‐intensive fair use analysis for the myriad products and uses 
that fall within the proposed class”); CTA, Cisco, HPE, IBM, ITI & TechNet Class 5 Ex Parte Letter 
at 6–7 (Aug. 2, 2024) (“Because of the vast number of different commercial and industrial systems 
captured by the proposed class, the fact‐specific analysis needed for a fair use analysis is not 
possible.”). 
720 ACT Class 5 Opp’n at 2. 
721 Philips Class 5 Opp’n at 6–7. 
722 Joint Creators I Class 5 Opp’n at 3. 
723 See Tr. at 54:03–14, 57:02–58:03 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Rose, Public Knowledge); Tr. at 56:11–24 (Apr. 
16, 2024) (Rosborough, iFixit & Canadian Repair Coalition); see also Public Knowledge & iFixit 
Class 5 Reply at 4 (declining to “relitigate the Office’s prior findings that repair is a fair use”) . 
724 See Tr. at 54:17–55:02 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators I); see also CTA, Cisco, HPE, IBM, 
ITI & TechNet Class 5 Ex Parte Letter at 7 (Aug. 2, 2024) (“While consumer product users may 
circumvent access controls for non‐commercial reasons, users and repairers of commercial and 
industrial systems would circumvent access controls solely for commercial motivations. That is, 
granting an exemption would advance the interests of those with only an economic interest to 
potentially win commercial contracts with commercial customers.”).  
725 See Tr. at 55:08–55:17 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators I); see also CTA, Cisco, HPE, IBM, 
ITI & TechNet Class 5 Ex Parte Letter at 8 (Aug. 2, 2024) (“In the commercial context of enterprise 
IT equipment, associated software is licensed between the commercial customer and 
manufacturer. Such software may be separately priced, or its value may initially be included as 
part of a hardware purchase.”). 

[PAGE 150]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
147 
 
proponents disagreed with this assertion.726  They further contended that 
equipment repair harms the current market for the works because faulty repair 
could “expose information on . . . software or provide the consumer a bad 
product.”727  
The Register agrees with proponents that diagnosis, maintenance, and repair of 
at least some types of software-enabled commercial and industrial equipment are 
likely to be fair uses where the purpose is to restore equipment functionality.  
Considering the first factor, she finds that accessing and using equipment 
software to restore functionality is a different purpose than running the software 
to operate the equipment and perform equipment functions.  Although 
opponents rightly note that commerciality should be considered, the Supreme 
Court has clarified that commerciality is “not dispositive” and to be weighed 
against other factors, including the degree to which the use has a further purpose 
or different character.728  Here, the proposed uses are intended to restore 
commercial or industrial equipment’s functionality, not to commercialize the 
embedded copyrighted software.729  The Register accordingly concludes that the 
first factor favors fair use. 
The Register finds that the second factor favors fair use because software 
embedded in commercial and industrial equipment is not used for its expressive 
qualities, but rather for its functional and informational aspects that enable users 
to control and understand the operation of the equipment.730  And even assuming 
some programs may be unpublished, that does not alter the functional nature of 
the works.731 
 
726 Compare Tr. at 55:18–56:07, 60:15–61:02 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators I) with Tr. at 
59:23–60:11 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Rose, Public Knowledge). 
727 See Tr. at 58:23–59:07 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Nair, ACT). 
728 Warhol, 598 U.S. at 531–33; see Google, 593 U.S. at 32 (“[M]any common fair uses are 
indisputably commercial.”). 
729 See Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 10; Tr. at 56:15–24 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Rosborough, 
iFixit & Canadian Repair Coalition). 
730 See Google LLC, 593 U.S. at 28–29, 40; Lexmark International, Inc. v. Static Control Components, Inc., 
387 F.3d 522, 536 (6th Cir. 2004); Sony Comput. Entm’t, Inc. v. Connectix Corp., 203 F.3d 596, 603 (9th 
Cir. 2000). 
731 See 17 U.S.C. § 107 (“The fact that a work is unpublished shall not itself bar a finding of fair use 
if such finding is made upon consideration of all the [statutory] factors.”); Harper & Row, 
 

[PAGE 151]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
148 
 
On the third factor, courts have concluded that use of the entirety of a work is 
permissible where necessary to achieve a transformative purpose.732  As in 
previous rulemakings, the Register finds that this factor should be given little 
weight here because the use is necessary to accomplish the transformative 
purposes of diagnosis, maintenance, and repair.733  Accordingly, the Register 
finds the amount used is reasonable relative to the purpose of the use. 
Turning to the fourth factor, consistent with findings in prior rulemakings, the 
Register credits proponents’ assertion that most equipment software generally 
has no independent value separate from being used with the equipment.734  That 
said, opponents demonstrated that, in some cases, equipment software is 
licensed separately.  Nonetheless, there is no indication that the proposed uses 
would interfere with the licensing market for the software, as opposed to merely 
restoring functionality so that the equipment performs as intended.735  As for 
opponents’ concern that equipment repairs may be performed improperly and 
thus harm the market for the software, for purposes of the fair use analysis, in 
order to qualify for the exemption, the proposed uses must be executed in a 
manner that restores device functionality while preserving technological 
protections for software and other information.  Activities that do not restore the 
equipment to “the state of working in accordance with its original specifications 
and any changes to those specifications authorized for that device” would fall 
outside the scope of the exemption.736  Whether the proposed uses jeopardize 
 
Publishers v. Nation Enters., 471 U.S. 539, 554 (quoting S. REP. NO. 94‐473, at 64 (1975)) (“[T]he 
unpublished nature of a work is ‘[a] key, though not necessarily determinative, factor’ tending to 
negate a defense of fair use.”). 
732 See Google, 593 U.S. at 34 (“The ‘substantiality’ factor will generally weigh in favor of fair use 
where . . . the amount of copying was tethered to a valid, and transformative, purpose.”); 
Connectix Corp., 203 F.3d at 603–06. 
733 See 2021 Recommendation at 210–12; 2018 Recommendation at 204; 2015 Recommendation at 
235–36. 
734 See 2018 Recommendation at 204–05; 2015 Recommendation at 236; Software Study at 41. 
735 See 2021 Recommendation at 212 (concluding for medical devices and systems that although 
“some system features on certain devices may be separately licensed through a subscription 
service, the purpose of the proposed uses is not to enable ongoing unauthorized access to 
enhanced features, but merely to restore functionality”); 2018 Recommendation at 198 –99 
(concluding that although certain vehicle telematics and entertainment software “can have 
independent value, and may be accessed through subscription services,” where access is 
necessary to engage in vehicle repair, it is not likely to harm the market for the software).  
736 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(14)(ii); see also 17 U.S.C. § 117(d)(2). 

[PAGE 152]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
149 
 
equipment safety and security are considered as part of the adverse effects 
analysis below.  In sum, while some equipment software may be licensed 
separately, in general, diagnosis, maintenance, and repair of commercial and 
industrial equipment is unlikely to harm the market for the embedded software. 
Taking the factors together, the Register concludes that proponents have 
adequately shown that the proposed uses are likely to be fair. 
d. Causation 
The record shows that the statutory prohibition on circumvention of access 
controls limits users’ ability to diagnose, maintain, and repair commercial food 
preparation equipment, construction equipment, PLCs, and enterprise IT.737  But 
for the prohibition, users likely could gain lawful access to the copyrighted 
computer programs for noninfringing repair-related purposes. 
e. Asserted Adverse Effects  
Having concluded that certain repair-related activities are likely noninfringing as 
to the specific categories of commercial and industrial equipment identified 
above, the Register evaluates whether these activities are being adversely 
affected by the prohibition against circumvention.  She first analyzes whether, 
for each category of equipment, the record reflects that the prohibition on 
circumvention is inhibiting the identified likely noninfringing uses such that 
there is a facial showing of adverse effects.738  Next, if there does appear to be an 
adverse effect on the proposed uses, she evaluates those categories specifically in 
connection with the section 1201 statutory factors. 
i. Equipment Categories 
Commercial Food Preparation Equipment.  In their initial comments, proponents 
primarily relied on an example of a frequently broken soft-serve ice cream 
machine used in a restaurant to illustrate the adverse effects on repair activities.  
Proponents explained that to fix these machines, users must be able to interpret 
“unintuitive” error codes on the machine.  Although some error codes are listed 
in the user manual that shipped with the machine, these manuals are “often 
 
737 See Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 2–7. 
738 See 2018 Recommendation at 219 (“[T]o recommend an exemption, there must be a record that 
shows distinct, verifiable, and measureable adverse effects, or that such effects are likely to 
occur.”). 

[PAGE 153]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
150 
 
outdated and incomplete” as the “[e]rror codes change with each firmware 
update.”739  Moreover, other error codes can only be accessed by reading a 
service manual that is made available only to authorized technicians or through a 
“TPM-locked on-device service menu.”740  This service menu can only be 
accessed by using a manufacturer-approved diagnostic tool or through an 
“extended, undocumented combination of key presses.”741  However, “it is 
unclear whether the 16-press key sequence . . . still works, or has been changed in 
subsequent firmware updates.”742  Proponents accordingly asserted that many 
users are unable to diagnose and repair the machine without circumventing the 
machine’s TPM to access the service menu software, resulting in significant 
financial harm from lost revenue.743 
In a post-hearing letter, proponents expanded on their initial comments by 
providing additional representative examples of adverse effects on repair of 
retail-level commercial food preparation equipment.  Similar to the soft-serve 
machines, proponents commented that for certain commercial espresso 
machines, some error codes are provided in the user manuals, but other error 
codes require the user to contact customer support to have an authorized service 
technician service the machine.744  Proponents also provided examples of retaillevel commercial ovens and refrigerators that users are unable to repair due to 
password protections limiting access to device software functions.745  They 
further noted that “despite low current adoption, there is reason to believe that 
software-enabled equipment will become more common in the coming years; 
and that manufacturer behavior in adjacent markets indicates a high risk of 
‘lockout’ problems developing as the market shifts.”746  Based on this expanded 
record, proponents asserted that “the Office can extrapolate the feasibility of an 
 
739 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 11. 
740 Id. at 3, 11. 
741 Id. at 3. 
742 Id. at 3 n.9; see Tr. at 20:15–21:03 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Rose, Public Knowledge). 
743 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 11; Tr. at 77:07–11 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Rose, Public 
Knowledge). 
744 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Post‐Hearing Resp. at 1 (May 28, 2024). 
745 Id. at 1–2. 
746 Id. at 3. 

[PAGE 154]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
151 
 
exemption from both the Taylor soft serve machine, and the broader state of the 
market [for] commercial food preparation equipment.”747 
Opponents, in their initial comments, did not specifically object to the adverse 
effects analysis for soft-serve machines or retail-level commercial food 
preparation equipment.  Rather, they raised concerns about proponents failing to 
“show a need for circumvention to avoid any alleged adverse effects.”748  In reply 
comments, AHAM asserted that because “almost all repairs [of home appliances] 
are mechanical in nature . . . [t]here are no repair activities that would require the 
circumvention of installed TPMS.”749  During the hearing, Joint Creators I testified 
that “it seems like the proponents’ complaint about the Taylor [soft-serve] 
machines is that they display cryptic error codes and break a lot.  But neither of 
those is a circumvention issue.”750  Joint Creators I further noted that to the extent 
that proponents seek an exemption for a specific third-party circumvention 
device, trafficking in that device would be prohibited by the anti-trafficking 
provisions of section 1201.751  In their post-hearing letter, ACT contended that 
proponents have failed to show “actual harm.”752  Joint Creators I commented 
that “commercial food preparation also occurs in factory settings, where very 
different industrial-scale equipment is used.”753  They concluded that proponents 
have not shown that soft-serve machines used in a restaurant setting “are 
comparable to each of the devices in th[e] wide range of commercial food 
preparation equipment, or for that matter that those devices are comparable to 
one another.”754 
 
747 Id. at 2. 
748 Joint Creators I Opp’n Class 5 at 4 (citing 2021 Recommendation at 11); see also Tr. at 9:03–17 
(Apr. 18, 2024) (Crain, NAM) (Audience Participation Session) (commenting that “proponents 
have not supplied direct evidence about the specific TPMs that would be subject to the proposed 
exemption[]” and the examples provided by proponents are “both de minimis and speculative”).  
749 AHAM Reply Class 5 at 3. 
750 Tr. at 19:01–04 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators I). 
751 Tr. at 19:11–20 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators I). 
752 ACT Class 5 Post‐Hearing Resp. at 1–2 (May 28, 2024). 
753 Joint Creators I Class 5 Post‐Hearing Resp. at 2 (May 28, 2024). 
754 Id. at 3. 

[PAGE 155]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
152 
 
The Register is aware that the “issue [with broken soft-serve machines] is so 
widespread that it has become a news story in its own right.”755  She also notes 
that efforts to circumvent TPMs on soft-serve machines to repair them have 
resulted in at least one lawsuit.756  While the lawsuit involves the commercial 
distribution of a circumvention tool in violation of the DMCA anti-trafficking 
provisions, it indicates why, absent an exemption, users may be deterred from 
developing their own means of circumvention.757  The unrefuted record supports 
the conclusion that diagnosis of the soft-serve machine’s error codes for purposes 
of repair can often only be done by accessing software on the machine that is 
protected by TPMs (which require a passcode or proprietary diagnostic tool to 
unlock), and the threat of litigation from circumventing them inhibits users from 
engaging in repair-related activities.  Additional record materials provided by 
proponents support the conclusion that users of other retail-level commercial 
food preparation equipment are similarly situated.  As with soft-serve machines, 
users of software-enabled ovens and refrigerators used in retail or restaurant 
settings are being inhibited from performing certain repairs by TPMs that block 
access to error codes.  Accordingly, the Register finds that users of retail-level 
commercial food preparation equipment may be adversely affected by the 
prohibition against circumvention.   
The Register, however, does not conclude that “industrial-scale” food 
preparation equipment is within the scope of the class.  As opponents have 
pointed out, the devices involved may be very different in multiple aspects and 
 
755 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 11; see also Tr. at 17:05–09 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Rose, 
Public Knowledge); Emily Price, Here’s Exactly Why McDonald’s Ice Cream Machines Are Always 
Broken, FOOD & WINE (Apr. 5, 2024), https://www.foodandwine.com/mcdonalds‐ice‐cream‐
machine‐broken‐8627641; Andy Greenberg, McDonald’s Ice Cream Machine Hackers Say They Found 
the ‘Smoking Gun’ That Killed Their Startup, WIRED (Dec. 14, 2023), 
https://www.wired.com/story/kytch‐taylor‐mcdonalds‐ice‐cream‐machine‐smoking‐gun/; Andy 
Greenberg, They Hacked McDonald’s Ice Cream Machines—and Started a Cold War, WIRED (Apr. 28, 
2021), https://www.wired.com/story/they‐hacked‐mcdonalds‐ice‐cream‐makers‐started‐cold‐
war/; Julie Jargon, McDonald’s Customers Scream, and Get New Ice Cream Machines, WALL ST. J. 
(Mar. 2, 2017), https://www.wsj.com/articles/mcdonalds‐customers‐scream‐and‐get‐new‐ice‐
cream‐machines‐1488476862. 
756 See Tr. at 24:07–19 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators I; Wiens, iFixit; Rose, Public 
Knowledge).  The Register takes administrative notice of the following court filing: Compl., 
Kytch, Inc. v. McDonald’s Corp., No. 3:23‐cv‐01998 (N.D. Cal. Mar. 1, 2022), ECF No. 1. 
757 See Tr. at 22:20–22:24 (Apr. 16, 2024 (Wiens, iFixit) (explaining how a soft‐serve machine user 
might develop a circumvention tool to perform repair‐related activities). 

[PAGE 156]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
153 
 
proponents have not established a record of adverse effects with respect to 
industrial equipment.   
Construction equipment.  Proponents’ comments regarding construction 
equipment focused on proprietary diagnostic kits that manufacturers offer for 
the repair of this equipment.  Proponents asserted that “critical diagnostic and 
error information is locked behind TPMs that can only be bypassed by using 
authorized, licensed, and branded tools” in the kits.758  They provided examples 
from three construction equipment manufacturers, noting that for two of them, 
the only way to perform repairs is by having access to the manufacturers’ 
proprietary systems through utilities in the kit.759  Although the third 
manufacturer sells a “consumer version” of its diagnostic equipment, “its 
capabilities are significantly limited” such that certain repairs require a level of 
access only available to authorized dealers.760  Likewise, proponents noted that 
third-party systems “provide only limited diagnostic capabilities” because “they 
cannot interpret the full range of fault codes.”761  Consequently, proponents 
contended, users are unable to perform repairs without access to proprietary 
tools. 
Most opponents did not specifically contradict proponents’ adverse effects 
analysis for construction equipment.  AED, however, asserted that “[m]ost of the 
diagnosis, maintenance, and repair can be completed by a customer or 
independent repair provider without consulting an authorized dealership or the 
manufacturer.”762  It further contended that the few examples provided by 
proponents are not representative of the “thousands of original equipment 
manufacturers and the millions of heavy equipment customers across the United 
States.”763  Finally, it noted that there are “significant environmental and safety 
consequences of faulty repairs and maintenance on construction equipment.”764  
 
758 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 4. 
759 Id. at 4–5, 12. 
760 Id. at 12. 
761 Id. 
762 AED Class 5 Opp’n at 1–2; see also NAM Class 5 Ex Parte Letter at 3–4 (July 31, 2024) (outlining 
various ways that manufacturers facilitate self‐repair by construction equipment users).  
763 AED Class 5 Opp’n at 2. 
764 Id. at 1. 

[PAGE 157]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
154 
 
On the record presented, it is unclear that the TPMs are controlling access to 
repair functionality installed on construction equipment.  Instead, what 
proponents appear to be seeking is access to proprietary software installed on 
diagnostic tools that are separate from the equipment.  In other words, it is 
uncertain that circumvention of the TPMs installed on the equipment—by itself 
and without access to a diagnostic tool—would allow diagnosis, maintenance, 
and repair.765  Because of this uncertainty, the Register concludes that proponents 
have not adequately demonstrated how users are being adversely affected from 
diagnosing, maintaining, and repairing construction equipment by the 
prohibition against circumvention.  To the extent that the petition seeks a right to 
access tools that would perform the circumvention, as explained in previous 
rulemakings,766 the Librarian’s statutory authority does not extend to the 
provision of circumvention tools. 
Programmable Logic Controllers.  PLCs are “computers that have been adapted 
specifically to control and coordinate manufacturing processes at scale.”767  
Proponents explained that PLCs are made by “many manufacturers,” and that 
“[m]any PLCs are purchased as part of an integrated system package[s]” for 
which “system integrators write custom code to control a machine, and sell it as 
a package to the customer.”768  The code, including “diagnostic and maintenance 
information,” is generally password-protected, though “different integrators 
have different perspectives on whether this code should be locked for security 
purposes, and if so, at whose discretion (i.e. by the manufacturer, integrator, 
vendor, or end user).”769  Proponents cited to comments made in internet forums 
where PLC users attest to various issues associated with retrieving and resetting 
PLC passwords, including where passwords are “held by a long-departed 
 
765 Cf. 2021 Recommendation at 224–26 (medical device repairs can be performed by accessing 
software installed on the device itself); 2015 Recommendation at 219 –20, 239–40 (vehicle software 
necessary to execute repairs accessible via circumvention). 
766 See, e.g., 2021 Recommendation at 230. 
767 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 5; Tr. at 13:10–13 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Wiens, iFixit) 
(explaining that although the deployment of PLCs crosses industries, there are “a relatively small 
number of actual operating systems and actual CPUS that are running these systems”) .  
768 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 5; see Tr. at 46:22–47:04 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Wiens, 
iFixit). 
769 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 5–6; see Tr. at 14:11–19 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Wiens, 
iFixit); Tr. at 51:15–25 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Higgenbotham, Consumer Reports); Tr. at 67:05–13 (Apr. 
16, 2024) (Wiens, iFixit). 

[PAGE 158]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
155 
 
administrator” or where a vendor goes out of business.770  They contended that 
when a PLC breaks and the PLC password is either not provided to the 
purchaser or access to the password is lost, “[t]he PLC is rendered unusable.”771  
As a result, they argued that users can experience downtime that can lead to 
substantial financial harm.772 
Opponents objected on the grounds that the overall evidentiary record of 
adverse effects is insufficient.773  They took issue with the assertion that 
passwords were effectively limiting repair, noting that PLC users “can opt out of 
password protection when the feature is prompted during the initial download” 
and that even where a password is created (often by the user), “numerous 
methods exist to assist in the recovery of a PLC password when it has been lost 
or forgotten.”774  Further, opponents noted that adequate alternatives to 
circumvention exist, namely through warranties and service agreements.775  They 
also observed that TPMs may, in some cases, be used to enforce license 
restrictions on proprietary software installed on the PLCs.776  Finally, they 
expressed concern about circumvention compromising device safety.777 
While proponents have provided a few examples of TPMs inhibiting repair of 
certain PLCs, overall the record is inconclusive as to whether users are being 
adversely affected by the prohibition against circumvention.  As opponents 
pointed out, passwords are often created by the equipment’s users to secure the 
PLC.  For example, proponents cited the Siemens Simatic Step 7/S7 as a PLC 
where the password “cannot be reset or recovered.”778  Yet, opponents pointed 
out that an online support guide for that PLC includes instructions on how to 
 
770 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 13–14. 
771 Id. at 6; see Tr. at 48:17–49:08 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Wiens, iFixit).  
772 See Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 14; Tr. at 76:02–13 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Rose, Public 
Knowledge). 
773 See, e.g., Joint Creators I Class 5 Opp’n at 4; Tr. at 34:17–19 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Nair, ACT). 
774 NAM Class 5 Ex Parte Letter at 3 (July 31, 2024). 
775 See Tr. at 61:25–62:06 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators I); Tr. at 80:02–11 (Apr. 16, 2024) 
(Englund, Joint Creators I). 
776 See Tr. at 16:09–19 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators I). 
777 Tr. at 84:12–15 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators I) (“[I]ndustrial equipment is designed 
to be secure in a way that consumer equipment very often is not . . . .”). 
778 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 6. 

[PAGE 159]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
156 
 
reset a password.779  The Register concludes that, on the current record, there is 
insufficient evidentiary support to recommend an exemption covering PLCs. 
Enterprise IT.  Proponents provided examples of three types of enterprise IT 
equipment that require circumvention to perform repair-related activities: digital 
storage products, servers, and mainframes.780  For digital storage products, 
proponents commented that at least one manufacturer’s products “contain 
multiple known points of failure” and that to perform diagnosis, maintenance, 
and repair, “the user must input a cryptographic key” that the manufacturer 
“will not supply . . . under any circumstances to individuals other than their own 
technicians.”781  Similarly for servers, proponents noted that one manufacturer 
requires access to a key or password to perform repair-related functions.782  A 
separate “Upgrade Access Key” is required to perform some firmware upgrades.  
For at least one brand of mainframes, proprietary tools are required to replace 
components and “[m]aintenance functions must be authorized by passwords 
which are only made available to [the manufacturer’s] employees.”783  
Proponents further asserted that although authorized technicians can perform 
most repairs, “for older models for which [the manufacturer] no longer provides 
maintenance, there is no possible way to replace the CPU without 
circumvention.”784  They contended that these limitations on repair can result in 
costly unplanned outages.785 
 
779 See NAM Class 5 Ex Parte Letter at 3 & n.9 (July 31, 2024). 
780 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 6–7; see also Tr.at 64:24–65:04 (Apr. 16, 2024) 
(Blough, FreeICT USA). 
781 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 6–7; see Tr. at 30:02–11 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Blough, 
FreeICT USA) (explaining TPMs on storage arrays); Tr. at 67:25–68:23 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Blough, 
FreeICT USA) (describing types of TPMs on enterprise IT equipment). 
782 See Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 7. 
783 Id. at 7. 
784 Id.; see Tr. at 29:17–22 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Blough, FreeICT USA) (“[T]here are items on the 
mainframe that you cannot repair the unit without passwords and without bypassing.  So it 
means that a customer . . . literally cannot repair it once [the manufacturer] has decided that they 
no longer want to support it.”); Tr. at 77:21–78:04 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Blough, FreeICT USA) 
(asserting that once a device reaches “end of service life,” the manufacturer “will abandon that 
machine and will no longer sign service contracts and that machine will be un ‐repairable”). 
785 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 16 (citing examples of “historical incidents caused 
by unplanned mainframe downtime”); Tr. at 76:14–18 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Rose, Public Knowledge). 

[PAGE 160]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
157 
 
As with other types of commercial and industrial equipment, opponents asserted 
that proponents have not satisfied their evidentiary burden as it relates to 
enterprise IT equipment.786  Beyond that overarching objection, opponents 
averred that there are adequate alternatives to circumvention in most cases, 
namely, authorized repair and maintenance services as well as self-repair options 
for users.787  Responding to proponents’ assertion that manufacturers abandon 
older equipment, opponents commented that enterprise IT equipment 
manufacturers engage with users to provide ongoing support, even after the 
“End of Service” or “End of Life” date.788  Opponents also noted that enterprise 
IT software can be separately priced, indicating that it arguably has value 
independent from the equipment.789  Finally, they expressed concern about 
cybersecurity for enterprise IT equipment, commenting that circumvention could 
lead to compromised TPMs.790 
On the record presented, the Register is unable to conclude that users of 
enterprise IT equipment are being adversely affected by the prohibition against 
circumvention.  Proponents’ general assertions about enterprise IT equipment 
failures are insufficiently supported by examples and documentary evidence of 
 
786 See Joint Creators I Class 5 Opp’n at 4; NAM Class 5 Ex Parte Letter at 2 (July 31, 2024) 
(commenting that “the Office has historically declined to recommend adoption of proposed 
exemptions where the alleged adverse effects are merely speculative”). 
787 Tr. at 62:05–15 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators I) (noting that for enterprise IT, users 
“tend to have maintenance contracts for the hardware and the software” so that “they have access 
to very quick maintenance” and “if they experience any downtime it is brief”); CTA, Cisco, HPE, 
IBM, ITI & TechNet Class 5 Ex Parte Letter at 5 (Aug. 2, 2024) (commenting that user repair 
options are “robust” and authorized repair options are broadly available). 
788 See CTA, Cisco, HPE, IBM, ITI & TechNet Class 5 Ex Parte Letter at 5–6 (Aug. 2, 2024); see also 
Tr. at 80:02–19 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators I) (commenting that “end‐of‐life” dates are 
provided by manufacturers so that users can plan for upgrading equipment and software).  
789 See Tr. at 26:09–22 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators I) (noting that enterprise IT 
“software is separately priced, and so it has market value distinct from the box”); CTA, Cisco, 
HPE, IBM, ITI & TechNet Class 5 Ex Parte at 8, 10 (Aug. 2, 2024). 
790 See CTA, Cisco, HPE, IBM, ITI & TechNet Class 5 Ex Parte at 8–10 (Aug. 2, 2024); Tr. at 28:16–
29:09 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Nair, ACT) (commenting that the risk to critical infrastructure “outweighs 
the ill‐defined harm proposed in th[e] petition”); Tr. at 37:15 –38:02 (Apr. 16, 2024) (Englund, Joint 
Creators I) (contrasting the cybersecurity risks associated with circumvention of enterprise IT 
with the risks associated with consumer devices).  But see Tr. at 40:01–17 (Apr. 16, 2024) 
(Rosborough, iFixit & Canadian Repair Coalition) (commenting that cybersecurity risks are better 
addressed by other laws and regulations and that bad actors are unlikely to be deterred by 
section 1201’s prohibition against circumvention). 

[PAGE 161]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
158 
 
users that have sought to diagnose, maintain, and repair such equipment.  
Although the three historical examples of mainframe issues that were provided 
show harm due to unplanned outages of network systems,791 there is no 
indication that users of those systems were inhibited from performing necessary 
repairs by the prohibition against circumvention.  Moreover, it appears that 
adequate alternatives to circumvention exist in the form of authorized repair 
services and maintenance contracts that are commonplace for enterprise IT 
equipment.  Unlike in previous rulemakings where authorized repair services 
were shown to be inadequate to meet the needs of users,792 here there is no 
evidence that repair services offered by the manufacturers have not met the 
needs of enterprise IT users. 
In addition, to the extent that proponents seek access to proprietary tools, as 
explained above with respect to construction equipment, granting such access 
would exceed the Librarian’s statutory authority.793  And where proponents seek 
to modify equipment software, as explained in previous rulemakings, such 
activity may interfere with the copyright owner’s right to prepare derivative 
works.794 
For the reasons stated above, the Register declines to recommend an exemption 
covering enterprise IT equipment. 
ii. Statutory Factors 
The Register concludes that proponents have made a threshold showing of 
adverse effects as to retail-level commercial food preparation equipment, but not 
as to the broader proposed class of all commercial and industrial equipment.  She 
proceeds to apply the section 1201 statutory factors to determine if the identified 
adverse effects on the diagnosis, maintenance, and repair of such equipment 
support an exemption. 
 
791 See Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 16. 
792 See, e.g., 2021 Recommendation at 224–29 (concluding, on a more developed record, that 
authorized repair options for medical device repair were inadequate and users were being 
adversely affected by the prohibition against circumvention); 2021 Recommendation at 220 
(concluding that authorized repair options for video game optical drives were inadequate). 
793 See, e.g., 2021 Recommendation at 230. 
794 See 2021 Recommendation at 204–06; 2018 Recommendation at 206–08. 

[PAGE 162]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
159 
 
On the first factor, proponents asserted that the prohibition on circumventing 
TPMs restricts the availability for use of software-enabled retail food preparation 
equipment because the equipment cannot be used while a machine is broken.795  
DOJ Antitrust and the FTC commented that “[e]xpanding options for repair of 
software-enabled commercial and industrial devices can facilitate restoration of 
these devices’ functionality—extending the useful life of commercial and 
industrial devices as well as increasing availability of the device software 
itself.”796  Opponents argued that the statutory factors did not support an 
exemption.797  The Register concludes that, although the record is somewhat 
limited, this factor favors an exemption because the prohibition on 
circumvention makes commercial food preparation equipment, including its 
software, less available for use in noninfringing diagnosis, maintenance, and 
repair. 
Regarding the second and third factors, iFixit and Public Knowledge asserted 
that, although these factors have limited relevance to the proposed uses, “an 
exemption would remove significant impediments to training and research into 
these systems and the devices they operate by removing the threat of liability.”798  
The Register agrees that these factors have limited relevance to this petition and 
its stated purpose.  
On the fourth factor, the effect of circumvention on the market for the 
copyrighted software, proponents asserted that because “[t]he copyrighted 
software at issue is customized to the particular make and model of equipment 
in which it is installed[,] . . . [t]here is no independent market for the software or 
firmware being accessed.”799  Unlike other device types, such as enterprise IT 
equipment, opponents did not raise specific concerns about there being a market 
 
795 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 11. 
796 DOJ Antitrust & FTC Class 5 Reply at 13. 
797 Joint Creators I Class 5 Opp’n at 4 (stating that the index examples provided by proponents are 
insufficient to “demonstrate that the proposed expanded exemption would advance the 
availability of works; further any significant nonprofit goals; result in commentary concerning 
works; or avoid harming copyright owners’ markets for authorized derivative works”). 
798 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 16–17 (citing 2021 Recommendation at 215); see also 
DOJ Antitrust & FTC Class 5 Reply at 14 (commenting that the prohibition against circumvention 
inhibits “training and development” and that  “access can be necessary to better understand how 
devices work”). 
799 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 17; see DOJ Antitrust & FTC Class 5 Reply at 14. 

[PAGE 163]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
160 
 
for software installed on commercial food preparation equipment.  Accordingly, 
the Register concludes that where a user is accessing the software to diagnose, 
maintain, or repair commercial food preparation equipment, those uses support 
rather than displace the embedded computer programs.800  This factor therefore 
does not weigh against an exemption. 
Under the fifth statutory factor, the Librarian has discretion to consider 
additional factors she deems appropriate.  Proponents asserted that the public 
interest in deterring anticompetitive behavior favors the requested exemption.  
In support, iFixit and Public Knowledge cited to the Office’s 2021 
Recommendation, recent congressional hearings on “right to repair,” and a letter 
from twenty-eight state attorneys general supporting repair activities.801  DOJ 
Antitrust and the FTC likewise observed that “[t]he right to repair products is an 
area of significant legislative and regulatory focus,” and commented that “the 
availability of independent repair and service options may enhance competition 
in the market for software-enabled devices by reducing the user’s reliance on 
[original equipment manufacturer]-authorized service providers.”802  Consistent 
with prior rulemakings, the Register concludes that an exemption to facilitate 
repair of retail-level commercial food preparation equipment could help address 
broader competitive concerns.803  Thus, this factor provides further support for 
the proposed exemption.804   
After weighing the statutory factors, the Register concludes that the prohibition 
on circumvention of TPMs is causing, or is likely to cause, an adverse impact on 
the noninfringing diagnosis, repair, and maintenance of software-enabled retaillevel commercial food preparation equipment.  Using the language of prior 
exemptions, the Register concludes that the definitions of “maintenance” and 
“repair” appropriately focus these activities on the restoration of equipment 
 
800 See Software Study at 40. 
801 Public Knowledge & iFixit Class 5 Initial at 17. 
802 DOJ Antitrust & FTC Class 5 Reply at 14–15. 
803 See 2021 Recommendation at 218, 227–28. 
804 Although opponents raised concerns about cybersecurity, mostly in the context of PLCs and 
enterprise IT, because those concerns do not appear to extend to circumvention to repair 
commercial food preparation equipment, the Register declines to consider the m under the fifth 
statutory factor. 

[PAGE 164]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
161 
 
functionality, while retaining TPMs that serve other beneficial purposes such as 
protecting user privacy, security, and safety.   
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA supports an exemption for the diagnosis, maintenance, and repair of 
commercial and industrial equipment.805  As in the 2021 rulemaking, they again 
recommend that the exemption be “device-agnostic,”806 cautioning against a 
“granular device-by-device approach.”807  If the Register declines to recommend 
an exemption that covers all commercial and industrial equipment, NTIA would 
support an exemption that “covers commercial and industrial equipment but 
excludes specific categories of equipment.”808  Another alternative they propose 
would be to “narrow the definition of what ‘repair’ entails for select types of 
commercial and industrial equipment.”809  Finally, to address opponents’ 
concerns about safety, security, and compliance with other laws and regulations, 
NTIA also supports “language highlighting that an exemption does not 
necessarily provide a safe harbor from, or defense to, liability under other 
applicable laws or breach of contractual obligations.”810 
The Register declines to take a “device-agnostic” approach here because 
proponents have not satisfactorily shown that commercial and industrial 
equipment shares sufficient commonalities that would warrant considering a 
broad class.  She also declines to recommend a broad class and carve out subsets 
of equipment types because the record is devoid of a basis for drawing such 
lines, and doing so would effectively shift the evidentiary burden from 
proponents to opponents to make a showing why certain equipment types 
should be excluded. 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
After consideration of the record and the applicable law, the Register 
recommends a new exemption covering diagnosis, maintenance, and repair of 
retail-level commercial food preparation equipment, a class which proponents 
 
805 NTIA Letter at 46. 
806 Id. at 47. 
807 Id. at 51–52 
808 Id. at 46, 53. 
809 Id. at 53. 
810 Id. at 46, 53–54. 

[PAGE 165]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
162 
 
have sufficiently shown by a preponderance of the evidence to be adversely 
affected by the prohibition against circumvention.  She declines, however, to 
recommend an exemption for a broad class of software-enabled commercial and 
industrial devices.  To address any concerns about the new exemption being 
misused to gain unauthorized access to copyrighted works beyond the device 
firmware, she proposes regulatory language requiring that the circumvention is 
“not accomplished for the purpose of gaining access to other copyrighted 
works.”  Her recommendation also includes the existing definitions of 
“maintenance” and “repair” found in the regulations and section 117.   
Accordingly, the Register recommends that the Librarian designate the following 
classes: 
Computer programs that are contained in and control the 
functioning of lawfully acquired equipment that is primarily 
designed for use in retail-level commercial food preparation when 
circumvention is a necessary step to allow the diagnosis, 
maintenance, or repair of such a device, and is not accomplished for 
the purpose of gaining access to other copyrighted works. For 
purposes of this paragraph (b)(16): 
(i) The “maintenance” of a device is the servicing of the device in 
order to make it work in accordance with its original 
specifications and any changes to those specifications authorized 
for that device; and 
(ii) The “repair” of a device is the restoring of the device to the 
state of working in accordance with its original specifications and 
any changes to those specifications authorized for that device. 

[PAGE 166]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
163 
 
F. Proposed Classes 6(a) and 6(b): Computer Programs and Video 
Games—Preservation 
1. Background 
a. Summary of Proposed Exemptions and Register 
Recommendations 
In the current proceeding, SPN and LCA filed petitions to amend two of the 
current preservation exemptions.  One petition requested removal of the current 
requirement that access to the preserved computer program is limited “to one 
eligible user at a time”811 (the “single-user limitation”).  They stated that this 
amendment would “eliminate[] . . . uncertainty” in interpreting the current 
exemption, which they believe is amenable to being interpreted as either 
“allow[ing] a piece of software to be accessed by as many individuals as there are 
circumvented copies owned” or providing access to “one piece of circumvented 
software at a time, regardless of how many circumvented copies [the 
preservation institution] may own.”812  The Office designated this proposal as 
Class 6(a). 
The proposed Class 6(a) exemption language, with proposed new text indicated 
in bold and proposed deletions in bold and strikethrough, is as follows: 
(18)(i) Computer programs, except video games, that have been 
lawfully acquired and that are no longer reasonably available in the 
commercial marketplace, solely for the purpose of lawful 
preservation of a computer program, or of digital materials 
dependent upon a computer program as a condition of access, by an 
eligible library, archives, or museum, where such activities are 
carried out without any purpose of direct or indirect commercial 
advantage.  Any electronic distribution, display, or performance 
made outside of the physical premises of an eligible library, archives, 
or museum of works preserved under this paragraph may be made 
to only one user at a time,  for a limited time, and only where the 
 
811 SPN & LCA Class 6(a) Pet. at 3.  Thomas Sullivan proposed a similar request.  See Thomas 
Sullivan Class 6(b) Pet. at 2 (proposing “an expansion of the current exemption for circumvention 
of technological protection measures on computer programs for purposes of video game 
preservation . . . to include digital sharing off‐premise”). 
812 SPN & LCA Class 6(a) Initial at 3 n.9. 

[PAGE 167]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
164 
 
library, archives, or museum has no notice that the copy would be 
used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or 
research. 
(ii) For purposes of the exemption in paragraph (b)(18)(i) of this 
section, a library, archives, or museum is considered “eligible” if— 
(A) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are 
open to the public and/or are routinely made available to 
researchers who are not affiliated with the library, archives, 
or museum;  
(B) The library, archives, or museum has a public service 
mission;  
(C) The library, archives, or museum’s trained staff or 
volunteers provide professional services normally associated 
with libraries, archives, or museums;  
(D) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are 
composed of lawfully acquired and/or licensed materials; and  
(E) The library, archives, or museum implements reasonable 
digital security measures as appropriate for the activities 
permitted by this paragraph (b)(13).813 
SPN and LCA provided comments and testimony in support of the Class 6(a) 
proposal; additional supporting testimony was provided by Cass Fino-Radin of 
Small Data Industries.  Comments and testimony in opposition were submitted 
by DVD CCA and AACS LA and Joint Creators I, and additional testimony was 
provided by ESA.   
In the second petition, SPN and LCA request “to eliminate the requirement that 
the [video game] program not be distributed or made available outside of the 
physical premises of an eligible institution if appropriate safeguards are taken to 
ensure users are engaged in scholarship or other permitted uses”814 (the 
“premises limitation”).  In response to Joint Creators I’s and ESA’s concerns 
regarding their proposal, SPN and LCA offered to add requirements that off-
 
813 See SPN & LCA Class 6(a) Reply at 8–9. 
814 SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Pet. at 2; see 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(17)(ii) (2023). 

[PAGE 168]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
165 
 
premises access can be made only (1) for a limited time and (2) after the 
preservation institution ensures that the off-premises user is accessing the work 
for the purposes of scholarship, teaching, or research.815  With this revision, the 
Office designated this proposal as Class 6(b). 
The proposed Class 6(b) exemption language, with proposed amendments 
indicated in bold and deletions in bold and strikethrough, is as follows: 
(17)(ii) Video games in the form of computer programs embodied in 
physical or downloaded formats that have been lawfully acquired as 
complete games, that do not require access to an external computer 
server for gameplay, and that are no longer reasonably available in 
the commercial marketplace, solely for the  purpose of preservation 
of the game in a playable form by an eligible library, archives, or 
museum, where such activities are carried out without any purpose 
of direct or indirect commercial advantage . and the video game is 
not distributed or made available outside of the physical premises 
of the eligible library, archives, or museum. 
Any electronic distribution, display, or performance made outside 
of the physical premises of an eligible library, archives, or 
museum of works preserved under this paragraph may be made 
only for a limited time and after the eligible institution acts to 
ensure that users seeking off -premises access to works are doing 
so for the purposes of scholarship, teaching, or research by:  
(1) specifically determining that the user’s interest is scholarship, 
teaching, or research through individualized human review of 
each applicant and their stated purposes,  
(2) instituting access restrictions appropriate to the nature of the 
use and the material, and 
(3) notifying users that they are receiving access to copyrighted 
material subject to adherence with applicable laws. 
(iii) Computer programs used to operate video game consoles solely 
to the extent necessary for an eligible library, archives, or museum 
 
815 SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Initial at 2. 

[PAGE 169]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
166 
 
to engage in the preservation activities described in paragraph 
(b)(17)(i)(B) or (b)(17)(ii) of this section. 
(iv) For purposes of this paragraph (b)(17), the following definitions 
shall apply: 
(A) For purposes of paragraphs (b)(17)(i)(A) and (b)(17)(ii) of this 
section, “complete games” means video games that can be played by 
users without accessing or reproducing copyrightable content stored 
or previously stored on an external computer server. 
. . . 
(E) A library, archives, or museum is considered “eligible” if— 
(1) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are open to 
the public and/or are routinely made available to researchers who 
are not affiliated with the library, archives, or museum; 
(2) The library, archives, or museum has a public service mission; 
(3) The library, archives, or museum’s trained staff or volunteers 
provide professional services normally associated with libraries, 
archives, or museums; 
(4) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are composed 
of lawfully acquired and/or licensed materials; and 
(5) The library, archives, or museum implements reasonable digital 
security measures as appropriate for the activities permitted by this 
paragraph (b)(17).816 
Comments in support of Class 6(b) were filed by Anonymous, Anonymous 2, 
Anonymous 3, Anonymous 4, Ken Austin, and Tripp Ceyssens, and SPN and 
LCA, and testimony was provided by Ken Austin, Dragan Espenschied of 
Rhizome, Professor Laine Nooney of New York University, Phil Salvador of the 
Video Game History Foundation, and SPN and LCA.  Comments and testimony 
in opposition were submitted by DVD CCA and AACS LA, Joint Creators I, and 
ESA. 
 
816 See SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Reply at App. A at 1–3. 

[PAGE 170]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
167 
 
For the reasons set forth below, the Register does not recommend granting either 
petition.  She does, however, recommend an amendment to the current 
regulatory language covering preservation of computer programs to clarify the 
single-user limitation language in Class 6(a).  At the same time, she is 
recommending renewal of the current exemptions for preservation of computer 
programs and video games.   
b. Overview of the Issues 
i. Background and History of Preservation Exemptions  
In 2015, the Register first recommended an exemption to allow for video game 
preservation by libraries, archives and museums, when outside server support 
for the game had been discontinued.  She found that “[o]n the whole, looking 
primarily to the first and fourth factors . . . the fair use analysis tends to favor . . . 
preservation uses” and that section 1201’s “statutory factors support an 
appropriately limited exemption to facilitate . . . preservation activities.”817  
Noting that “[c]ertain limitations set forth in section 108 of the Copyright Act 
[were] instructive in defining the appropriate scope of a preservation exemption 
for video games,” the Register’s recommendation included the following 
limitation: 
any digital copies or adaptations of the video games or console 
software created by the institution as a result of preservation efforts 
must not be distributed or otherwise made accessible beyond the 
physical premises of the institution.818   
She specifically declined to include in her recommendation language that would 
expand the exemption to permit exhibiting games to the public in playable form, 
observing that “[t]he performance and display of a video game for visitors in a 
public space is a markedly different activity than efforts to preserve or study the 
game in a dedicated archival or research setting.”819 
This exemption was renewed in the 2018 rulemaking.  The Acting Register 
recommended extending the exemption to include video games “that have been 
 
817 2015 Recommendation at 344, 347, 352–53. 
818 Id. at 351–52. 
819 Id. at 342.  The Register “expresse[d] no opinion on whether the exhibition activities proposed 
by proponents, insofar as they constitute public performances, would or could constitute fair or 
otherwise noninfringing uses of video games or associated console software.”  Id. at 342.   

[PAGE 171]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
168 
 
lawfully acquired as complete games, [and] that do not require access to an 
external computer server for gameplay,”820 while retaining the limitation that 
access to the game be limited to the preserving institution’s premises.  During the 
2018 rulemaking, one petitioner asked to amend the exemption text to allow for 
“affiliate archivists,” a request which the Acting Register observed “appears 
directed at loosening the current restriction on distributing or making the game 
available outside the institution’s physical premises,”821 and declined to 
recommend.822  While some participants made broad references to displaying 
video games, no party asked to remove the premises limitation from the earlier 
video game preservation exemption.823   
During the same cycle, proponents also petitioned for an exemption for 
preserving computer programs that was similar to the video game preservation 
exemption and included the same premises limitation.824  The Acting Register 
recommended granting an exemption that incorporated most of proponents’ 
requests.825 
The exemptions for the preservation of video game and computer programs 
were renewed in the most recent proceeding.  During that proceeding, two 
petitioners, SPN and LCA, sought to remove the premises limitation from both 
exemptions, arguing that the limitation “inhibits remote user access to preserved 
works and that removal of this language would benefit users, including by 
lowering research and teaching costs, such as those associated with travel; 
meeting users’ expectations, which in turn could help the institutions obtain 
funding; and complying with health and safety guidelines during the COVID-19 
pandemic.”826 
The Register did not recommend removing the premises limitation from the 
video game preservation exemption, finding that proponents did not “[meet] 
their burden of showing that the proposed off-premises uses are likely to be fair . 
 
820 2018 Recommendation at 282.   
821 Id. at 256.   
822 See id. at 280. 
823 See id. at 257.   
824 See id. at 231.   
825 See id. at 255.   
826 2021 Recommendation at 263.   

[PAGE 172]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
169 
 
. . .”827  She explained that “the heightened risk of market harm in the context of 
video games requires proponents to offer a more specific analysis than was 
provided [] as to how their proposed exemption could be limited to prevent 
unauthorized uses of games made available off-premises.”828  As she noted, “the 
exemption, as proposed, does not contain appropriately tailored restrictions to 
ensure that uses would be limited to bona fide teaching, research, or scholarship 
uses and would affect the market for the original works.”829  Finally, she noted, 
however, that she was “open to considering a more specific exemption request in 
the future upon a fuller record.”830 
The Register did recommend, however, removing the premises limitation from 
the computer program preservation exemption, finding that proponents met 
their burden of showing that such uses were likely fair.831  In contrast to the 
market for video games, she observed that the market for computer programs 
that are no longer reasonably available in the commercial marketplace was 
“limited.”832  Paired with her recommendation to remove the premises limitation, 
she included two new limitations.  First, she recommended that the exemption 
require that “any off-premises distribution, display, or performance must be 
solely for the purposes of private study, scholarship, or research . . . .”833  The 
Register noted that this restriction was “taken from section 108” and was 
“intended to reflect Congress’s guidance regarding the appropriate scope of 
preservation activities.”834  The second limitation she recommended was a 
requirement that “only one user will be able to access the preserved software at a 
time, and for a limited time.”835  She stated that “the inclusion of single user and 
 
827 Id. at 276. 
828 Id. at 279.   
829 Id. 
830 Id. 
831 See id. at 276. 
832 2021 Recommendation at 279.  The Register also noted that opposition to the computer 
program preservation expansion was lacking.  See id. 
833 Id. 
834 Id. 
835 Id. 

[PAGE 173]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
170 
 
limited time restrictions will minimize the risk of substitutional use of the 
software.”836 
ii. Untimely Proposed Exemptions 
During the proceeding, commenters proposed additional exemptions that were 
proposed too late to give the public notice that such changes were being 
considered for an amendment.837  Text addressing these proposals are not 
included in the proposed regulatory text above. 
Computer Program Preservation—Amending “Private Study.”  In the computer 
programs preservation exemption, SPN and LCA asked to replace the term 
“private study” in the current exemption with the term “teaching”838  This 
request came in a footnote in proponents’ reply comments.  Opponents objected 
to this proposal as being untimely and overly broad.839   
The Register cannot recommend this requested amendment.  A certain degree of 
change between the proposed and final exemption language may be appropriate, 
depending on the circumstances.  Here, however, the public—including potential 
opponents to either the expansion to cover “teaching” or the elimination of the 
“private study” language—was not given adequate notice that this portion of the 
current exemption was being considered for an amendment.  Further, the record 
on this proposed change is insufficient to support it. 
Preservation of Video Games with Discontinued Server Support—Removing the 
Premises Limitation.  In response to ESA’s observation that proponents’ 
proposal does not include removal of the premises limitation in a different 
exemption addressing video game preservation where external computer servers 
 
836 Id. 
837 See NOI at 37,487 (“If a proponent seeks to engage in any activities not currently permitted by 
an existing exemption, they must submit a petition for a new exemption.”); see also NPRM at 
72,026–27 (“The first round of public comment is limited to submissions from proponents ( i.e., 
those parties who proposed new exemptions during the petition phase) and other members of 
the public who support the adoption of a proposed exemption[,]” and “[r]eply comments should 
not raise new issues, but should instead be limited to addressing arguments and evidence 
presented by others during prior rounds.”). 
838 SPN & LCA Class 6(a) Reply at 6 n.27. 
839 See Tr. at 54:10–55:01 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Rotstein, Joint Creators I); see also Tr. at 56:11–23 (Apr. 18, 
2024) (Englund, ESA) (noting that the inclusion of “teaching” in an exemption would require 
considering potentially different use cases). 

[PAGE 174]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
171 
 
have been shut down,840 in their reply comments, proponents SPN and LCA 
requested removal of the premises limitation in that class.841  SPN and LCA 
stated that “it would be ‘needlessly confusing’ for video game preservation to be 
governed by two different set of rules.”842  ESA argued that “[b]ecause the 
proponents have not made a case for deleting the on-premises limitation in [the 
exemption involving discontinued server support], it would be improper to 
make such a change.”843 
The Register agrees with the benefits of using consistent language across 
exemption text.  She, however, also agrees that proponents should have included 
this request in their initial comments, and thus declines to recommend the 
amendment.  She likewise declines to recommend the proposed elimination of 
the premises limitation in Class 6(b), as discussed below.  Accordingly, her 
conclusion regarding this request would be the same even if proponents were 
correct that different video game exemptions do not require separate analyses.844 
iii. Inadequately Supported Proposed Exemptions 
Commenters also proposed two exemptions that, while timely, were not 
accompanied by a sufficient evidentiary record for analysis.  As with the 
untimely proposals, text addressing these proposals was not included in the 
proposed regulatory text above. 
Video Game Preservation—Expanding the Exemption Beneficiaries.  Petitioner 
Thomas Sullivan proposed that the current video game preservation exemption’s 
beneficiaries be expanded to include “Colleges, Universities, Museums, 
Archives, Libraries, and any institution dedicated to the preservation of video 
games.”845  The Register notes that the current video game preservation 
exemption’s beneficiaries are eligible libraries, archives, or museums, which 
would include such institutions associated with colleges or universities.  
 
840 See ESA Class 6(b) Opp’n at 3 n.12. 
841 See SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Reply at 4–5. 
842 Id. at 4–5 (citing 2018 ESA Class 9 Opp’n at 6).   
843 ESA Class 6(b) Opp’n at 3 n.12. 
844 SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Reply at 5 n.16 (claiming that amending this language for this different 
class “does not require a separate case because the adverse effects caused by the lack of off ‐
premises access to preserved games where authentication servers have been deactivated are 
fundamentally the same as those for ‘complete games’”). 
845 Sullivan Class 6(b) Pet. at 2. 

[PAGE 175]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
172 
 
Although this petition was timely filed, proponents did not develop the 
rulemaking record to sufficiently address why the current exemption should be 
extended to “any institution dedicated to the preservation of video games.”846  
There was no evidence introduced that there are any existing institutions 
preserving video games that are not a library, archives, or museum or, if they do 
exist, whether the current exemption’s eligibility requirements for these 
institutions would be appropriate.847 
Video Games—Operating System Incompatibility.  Petitioner Ken Austin 
requested a new exemption to permit circumvention by “individual owners of 
video games which have DRM (digital rights management) that no longer 
function[ ] due to incompatibility” with modern computers’ operating systems.848  
The Office invited comments on Mr. Austin’s proposed exemption, including on 
“the relevant TPMs and whether their presence is adversely affecting 
noninfringing uses, including identifying whether eligible users may access the 
software through alternate channels that do not require circumvention and the 
legal basis for concluding that the proposed uses are likely to be 
noninfringing.”849  No one provided initial supporting comments, and ESA and 
Joint Creators I filed comments in opposition to the petition.850  Mr. Austin 
provided reply comments that largely addressed opponents’ objections, but did 
not provide factual or legal arguments to support his requested exemption.851 
In response to the absence of substantive comments supporting Mr. Austin’s 
proposal,852 ESA objected that “[t]o the extent that there may be any proponents 
of this proposal, they have not given ESA anything meaningful to respond to, 
and so have not met their ‘burden of establishing that the requirements for 
granting an exemption have been satisfied.’”853  The Register agrees that Mr. 
 
846 Id. 
847 The Register addressed the nature and scope of preservation activities by libraries, archives, 
and museums in her recommendation in connection with a previous exemption proceeding.  See 
2015 Recommendation at 341–42. 
848 Austin Class 6(b) Pet. at 2.  
849 NPRM at 72,026. 
850 ESA Class 6(b) Opp’n at 8; Joint Creators I Class 6 Opp’n at 3. 
851 See generally Austin Class 6(b) Reply.   
852 Mr. Austin’s petition referenced a single video game that used a technological protection 
measure that would not run on Windows 10.  See Austin Class 6(b) Pet. at 2.   
853 ESA Class 6(b) Opp’n at 8 (citing 2015 Recommendation at 13; 2021 Recommendation at 7 –8). 

[PAGE 176]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
173 
 
Austin’s proposal was not supported by a sufficient record in this proceeding.  
Without a more-developed record, she cannot effectively determine whether the 
harm identified by Mr. Austin involves “distinct, verifiable and measurable 
impacts” occurring in the marketplace.854  The Register is open to considering this 
exemption request in the future upon a fuller record. 
iv. Scope of Issues  
The Register has previously noted “Congress’s recognition of preservation as an 
important social activity,”855 as certain preservation-related activities by libraries 
and archives are exempted from infringement liability by section 108 of the 
Copyright Act.856  Section 108 also contains specific limitations on those 
preservation activities, “reflecting Congress’s acknowledgment of copyright 
owners’ concern over unrestricted copying under the guise of preservation.”857  
In prior recommendations involving preservation-related exemptions, the 
Register has drawn on section 108 to guide the text, even where proponents have 
relied on fair use (or other limitations and exceptions) to support their 
requests.858  In 2015, the Office explained that “section 108 provides useful and 
important guidance as to Congress’s intent regarding the nature and scope of 
legitimate preservation activities, and hence the types of uses that are most likely 
to qualify as fair in this area.”859   
The Class 6(a) (“the computer program class”) proposal seeks removal of the 
existing exemption’s single-user limitation.  Proponents claimed that “[l]imiting 
remote software access to one user at a time creates significant restrictions on 
scholarship, research, and teaching . . . .”860  They argued that preservation 
institutions’ resources “are more likely to be allocated to preserving materials 
when doing so will enable scholars, teachers, and other patrons to access 
them.”861  Addressing whether possible alternatives to the proposed expansion 
 
854 Commerce Comm. Report at 37. 
855 2018 Recommendation at 242. 
856 See 2015 Recommendation at 341 (citing 17 U.S.C. 108; H.R. REP. NO. 94‐1476, at 74–75 (1976), 
reprinted in 1976 U.S.C.C.A.N. 5659, 5688–89). 
857 2021 Recommendation at 263 (quoting 2015 Recommendation at 341). 
858 See id.; 2018 Recommendation at 239; 2015 Recommendation at 342. 
859 2015 Recommendation at 342. 
860 SPN & LCA Class 6(a) Reply at 5. 
861 SPN & LCA Class 6(a) Initial at 4. 

[PAGE 177]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
174 
 
are available, they contended that purchasing additional copies of obsolete 
software is “not possible” and that some institutions will not purchase software 
from secondary sources.862  Finally, proponents argued that Class 6(a) would cure 
an ambiguity in the exemption’s existing language.  They explained the language 
currently is subject to two different interpretations: 
The first interpretation is that libraries and archival institutions can 
allow a piece of software to be accessed by as many individuals as 
there are circumvented copies owned. . . . The second interpretation 
is that libraries and archival institutions can only loan out one piece 
of circumvented software at a time, regardless of how many 
circumvented copies they may own.863 
According to proponents, granting the Class 6(a) petition resolves this issue.   
Regarding Class 6(b) (“the video game class”), proponents requested expanding 
the exemption by removing the premises limitation.  They argued that the 
limitation inhibits remote user access to preserved works and that its removal 
would benefit users, including by reducing the time and cost associated with 
travel to engage in research, allowing for better collaboration, and alleviating 
preservation institutions’ space and staffing constraints.864  Proponents explained 
that video game scholarship has specific problems associated with research, as 
games can be “very rare,” “unevenly distributed,” and “often held by only a few 
collecting institutions.”865 
Proponents discussed emulation and emulation-as-a-service as technologies that 
support both classes (although neither the proposed expansions, nor the existing 
preservation exemption text, includes any references to these technologies).866  
 
862 Id. at 7.  Proponents suggested that the reluctance to purchase software from secondary 
markets was over concerns of “provenance,” Tr. at 62:01–15 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Albert, SPN & LCA), 
and licensing issues, see Tr. at 63:14–21 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Band, LCA), but other proponents 
suggested that original, obsolete software could be found in secondary markets.  See Tr. at 64:13–
14 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Fino‐Radin, Small Data Industries) (stating that “there’s obsolete software you 
can find on eBay and sometimes it’s even shrink‐wrapped”). 
863 SPN & LCA Class 6(a) Initial at 3 n.9. 
864 See SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Initial at 6–7.  
865 Id. at 6. 
866 Proponents defined an emulator as “a hardware or software tool that allows one computer 
system to behave like another computer system,” explaining that “[e]mulators can simulate 
 

[PAGE 178]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
175 
 
They argued that such technologies would allow preservation institutions to 
make preserved works available to users while complying with existing and 
proposed exemption restrictions.   
Opponents contended that both proposed expansions are overbroad and 
unnecessary, in part, because the works at issue can already be preserved under 
the current exemption.867  With respect to the computer program class, opponents 
asserted that allowing a preservation institution to make multiple copies of a 
work is not permitted under the Copyright Act and would create market harm.868  
For the video game class, they claimed that proponents have not provided 
sufficient evidence of harms caused by the premises limitation.869  They also 
argued that elimination of the limitation “would greatly expand the scope of 
who would be eligible to perform circumvention,” that proponents’ proposed 
access restrictions are insufficient and potentially allow the public to engage in 
recreational play, and that granting an exemption would cause “substantial harm 
to the legitimate market for games.”870  Finally, they objected that proponents are 
requesting too much discretion regarding how they provide access to preserved 
works.871 
 
obsolete computer systems and environments on newer computers to run legacy software that is 
incompatible with current computer systems.”  SPN & LCA Class 6(a) Initial at 5.  They described 
emulation‐as‐a‐service infrastructure as “providing a menu of pre‐configured emulated 
environments (a combination of emulated hardware, an operating system, and particular 
software) located on the collecting institution’s servers, which can be launched and viewed in the 
user’s web browser.”  Id. at 6. 
867 See ESA Class 6(b) Opp’n at 8–9; Joint Creators I Class 6 Opp’n at 3, 5. 
868 See Tr. at 59:04–17 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Rotstein, Joint Creators I); Tr. at 78:01–07 (Apr. 18, 2024) 
(Taylor, DVD CCA). 
869 See ESA Class 6(b) Opp’n at 15–16; Joint Creators I Class 6 Opp’n at 9. 
870 ESA Class 6(b) Opp’n at 9. 
871 See Tr. at 8:17–20 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Englund, ESA) (arguing that proponents are “trying to 
reserve almost complete discretion in how they would provide access to preserve games”); Tr. at 
49:10–15 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Englund, ESA) (“[P]reservation organizations want a great deal of 
discretion over how they handle very valuable intellectual property[,] and they have yet to 
suggest that there is a willingness on their part to do so in a way that might be comforting to the 
owners of that valuable intellectual property.”). 

[PAGE 179]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
176 
 
2. Discussion 
a.  Works Protected by Copyright 
The proposed exemption would apply to TPMs controlling access to computer 
programs and video games, which are protected by copyright as computer 
programs, audiovisual works, or both.  There is no dispute that at least some of 
these works are protected by copyright.872  Therefore, the Register finds that the 
proposed class includes at least some works protected by copyright. 
b.  Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
In past exemption proceedings, proponents claimed that proposed preservation 
activities were likely to be noninfringing, based on various copyright exceptions 
and limitations, including the fair use doctrine and sections 108, 110(2), 112(f), 
1401(f) and 117 of title 17.873  In this proceeding, proponents SPN and LCA “focus 
on fair use” because it is “the most relevant legal basis for non-infringing use 
pertaining to the proposed expansion of the exemption.”874  The Register, 
accordingly, shall address the four factors relevant to a fair use analysis.  Based 
on her conclusion that the uses in the proposed exemption expansions are not 
likely to be fair, the Register does not address the other exemption requirements. 
With respect to the first fair use factor, the purpose and character of the use, 
proponents cited the fair use analysis from the 2021 Recommendation to support 
their claim that each class’s expanded uses would also be considered fair.875  They 
 
872 See Joint Creators I Class 6 Opp’n at 7 (“The works at issue would include thousands of highly 
creative video games of the kind at the heart of the Copyright Act’s objective to protect expressive 
works, as well as other kinds of creative works accessible with productivity software or playable 
on game consoles.”); ESA Class 6(b) Opp’n at 13; DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 6 Opp’n at 2.  
873 See, e.g., 2021 Recommendation at 264–68. 
874 SPN & LCA Class 6(a) Initial at 10 n.36; SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Initial at 9 n.44.  Proponents 
SPN and LCA also state that “[i]n some cases . . . the described uses may also be protected by 17 
U.S.C. §§ 108 and 118 . . . .”  SPN & LCA Class 6(a) Initial at 10 n.36; SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Initial 
at 9 n.44.  Without any analysis, however, proponents have failed to meet their burden of 
showing that their activities are likely noninfringing under these provisions.  
875 See SPN & LCA Class 6(a) Initial at 11 (citing 2021 Recommendation at 270, 272) ; SPN & LCA 
Class 6(b) Initial at 10 (citing 2021 Recommendation at 270–71). 

[PAGE 180]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
177 
 
also argued that each expanded use is noncommercial and transformative, 
favoring fair use.876 
Proponents relied on Apple Inc. v. Corellium Inc.877 to support their fair use 
arguments in both classes.878  There, the Eleventh Circuit found that defendant 
Corellium’s conduct was noninfringing under the fair use doctrine when it made 
multiple copies of Apple’s software to create “virtualization software” to “enable 
security researchers to gain deeper insights into [Apple’s] operating systems.”879  
Proponents also cited Corellium to support their arguments that both classes’ 
proposed uses are transformative.880 
Computer Program Class.  With respect to this class, proponents claimed that 
“[w]hether software is accessed by one researcher at a time or by multiple 
researchers simultaneously, the purpose and character of each use will be the 
same[,]”881 and argued that if the Register previously determined that providing 
“single-user remote access to preserved software [was] likely to be fair,” then 
“[e]xtending that logic by allowing multiple users to simultaneously access outof-commerce software similarly serves the purposes of copyright because there 
are substantial public benefits and no countervailing effect on the software 
market.”882  They added that “allowing multiple researchers to simultaneously 
access a piece of software provides more public benefit than limiting access to one 
researcher at a time, since it will be easier for researchers and educators to 
successfully study and analyze software and software-dependent materials.”883  
Proponents characterized elimination of the single use restriction as “a limited 
and targeted modification of an existing approved exemption,” which “does not 
change its fundamental nature.”884 
Video Game Class.  Proponents first referenced the 2021 Register’s 
Recommendation, which recognized that “regardless of whether the uses are 
 
876 See SPN & LCA Class 6(a) Initial at 11; SPN & LCA Class 6(a) Reply at 4–5. 
877 No. 21‐cv‐12835, 2023 WL 3295671 (11th Cir. May 8, 2023). 
878 SPN & LCA Class 6(a) Initial at 11–13; SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Initial at 10–11.  
879 Corellium, No. 21‐cv‐12835, 2023 WL 3295671 at *1. 
880 See SPN & LCA Class 6(a) Initial at 11–12; SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Initial at 10–11.  
881 SPN & LCA Class 6(a) Initial at 11. 
882 Id. at 10. 
883 Id. at 11. 
884 SPN & LCA Class 6(a) Reply at 7. 

[PAGE 181]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
178 
 
considered transformative,” the first factor favors fair use for “preservation, 
research, and teaching uses . . . .”885  They then asserted that Warhol “reiterated 
the transformativeness of uses that ‘serv[e] a manifestly different purpose from 
the [work] itself’” and that “[s]cholarly use of preserved video games is 
categorically distinct from recreational play.”886  They also cited Marano v. 
Metropolitan Museum of Art,887 a district court case which found that a museum’s 
public display of a photo without a license constituted fair use, to support its 
claim that “[s]cholarly use of video games is [similarly] educational, 
noncommercial, and foregrounds different elements of gameplay than 
recreational use . . . .”888  Proponents’ comments in this class also addressed the 
benefits of emulation technologies.889   
Opposition Arguments.  Opponents argued that neither proposed exemption 
expansion is favored under the first fair use factor.  They asserted that, for both 
classes, the proposed uses are commercial ones.  Joint Creators I believed that the 
expanded exemptions would allow preservation institutions to “create new 
copies of works and provide access to them to authorized users who would view 
them in their entirety, all without payment to copyright owners.”890  They added 
that nonprofit institutions’ copying “remains commercial even if consumers do 
not pay nonprofit institutions for access or use.”891   
 
885 SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Initial at 10 (citing 2021 Recommendation at 270 –71).  Proponents also 
stated that under Campbell v. Acuff Rose, “uses for purposes listed in the Section 107 preamble—
teaching (including multiple copies for classroom use), scholarship, or research —are the kinds 
most likely to be found fair.”  Id. at 11 (citing Campbell, 510 U.S. at 586). 
886 Id. (quoting Warhol, 598 U.S. at 528 (2023)); see also SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Reply at 16 (“Warhol 
pertained to visual artworks competing in the same commercial market, did not directly engage 
with the technical and functional aspects of software, and did not grapple with the level of 
copying permitted under fair use for preservation or research purposes.”). 
887 844 F. App’x 436 (2d Cir. 2021).  This citation references a non‐precedential summary order. 
888 SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Initial at 11. 
889 See, e.g., id. at 10 (“Using emulation, institutions could display metadata, design documents, 
and source code alongside the emulated gameplay, allowing researchers to peek under the hood 
of the title they are studying, as a literary scholar might look back at early dra fts of a published 
work.”). 
890 Joint Creators I Class 6 Opp’n at 7. 
891 Id. at 7 n.21 (citing Hachette Book Group, Inc. v. Internet Archive, 664 F. Supp. 3d 370, 383–84 
(S.D.N.Y. 2023), aff’d, 115 F.4th 163 (2d Cir. 2024); Wall Data Inc. v. Los Angeles Cty. Sheriff’s Dep’t, 
447 F.3d 769, 781–82 (9th Cir. 2006)). 

[PAGE 182]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
179 
 
With respect to the video game class, ESA cited to the district court decision in 
Hachette Book Group, Inc. v. Internet Archive, which held that a nonprofit 
organization’s scanning of print copies of literary works and then engaging in 
“controlled digital lending” of those works to users was not a fair use.892  It 
claimed that Hachette supports a finding that the proposed uses of video games 
by eligible libraries, archives, and museums are commercial and nontransformative under the first factor.893 
Opponents also disagreed that the proposed uses in both classes are 
transformative.  Joint Creators I explained that under Warhol, “the first fair use 
factor . . . focuses on whether an allegedly infringing use has a further purpose or 
different character, which is a matter of degree, and the degree of difference must 
be weighed against other considerations, like commercialism.”894  They asserted 
that proponents’ uses are “perfect substitutes for the underlying work,” which 
disfavors a fair use finding under Warhol.895  ESA admitted that while “access to 
preserved games for purposes of research and teaching may be a favored use 
even if not a transformative one, ’the playing of video games’ is ‘the same use of 
the copyrighted work as before’ and [is therefore] . . . ‘not transformative.’”896  
 
892 See Hachette, 664 F. Supp. 3d at 391 (“What fair use does not allow . . . is the mass reproduction 
and distribution of complete copyrighted works in a way that does not transform those works 
and that creates directly competing substitutes for the originals.  Because that is what IA has 
done with respect to the Works in Suit, its defense of fair use fails as a matter of law. ”); 2021 
Recommendation at 270 (“[W]hile the Register concluded in 2021 that ‘proponents’ proposed 
expanded uses are noncommercial in nature,’ a federal district court recently reached the 
contrary conclusion when considering the Internet Archive’s unauthorized dissemination of 
ebooks, despite its arguments that it “is a non‐profit organization that does not charge patrons to 
borrow books and . . . private reading is noncommercial in nature.”)). 
893 See ESA Class 6(b) Opp’n at 12–13 (quoting Hachette, 664 F. Supp. at 383–84).  In the computer 
program class, proponents distinguished their request from the facts in Hachette, by observing 
that the preserved works are “out‐of‐commerce,” while the Hachette plaintiff’s ebooks were 
commercially exploited.  SPN & LCA Class 6(a) Initial at 15 n.86.   In a decision issued after the 
comment period closed in this proceeding, the Second Circuit found that the use at issue in 
Hachette was not commercial in nature, but because the use was nontransformative, the first factor 
did not favor a finding of fair use.  Hachette Book Grp., Inc. v. Internet Archive, 115 F.4th 163, 185–86 
(2d Cir. 2024). 
894 Joint Creators I Class 6 Opp’n at 6–7 (quoting Warhol, 598 U.S. at 525). 
895 Id. at 7 (citing Warhol, 598 U.S. at 531–36). 
896 ESA Class 6(b) Opp’n at 12 (citing 2015 Recommendation at 337). 

[PAGE 183]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
180 
 
Opponents further objected to proponents’ reliance on Corellium and observed 
that it was an unreported and nonbinding case.897  Regarding the computer 
program class, DVD CCA and AACS LA distinguished Corellium by stating that 
it “neither considered nor addressed the issue of distinguishing between oneuser versus multiple-users – i.e., the core feature of Proponents’ requested 
expansion [to the computer program preservation exemption].”898   
DVD CCA and AACS LA added that creating multiple copies of a work for 
preservation “runs counter to Section 108”—the provision that allows libraries 
and archives to reproduce works for certain uses and under specified 
restrictions—and noted that section 108(g) does not allow the reproduction of 
multiple copies of works.899  They explained that this restriction “ensures proper 
respect for the traditional limitations of video game and computer software 
content on physical discs and other media – one copy of the work per disc, not 
endless copies from a single disc” and that “[s]uch conduct robs creators of 
proper remuneration for each copy of their work actually accessed and used.”900  
Joint Creators I agreed that “[s]ection 108 should remain central to the [fair use] 
analysis, and this rulemaking proceeding should not provide a means for 
Petitioners to avoid its application.”901 
The Register’s Analysis.  The Register has previously recognized that “[w]ith 
respect to preservation, research, and teaching uses, the first factor generally 
weighs in favor of fair use.”902  Proponents, however, are not seeking to simply 
preserve works.  Regarding the computer program class, proponents want 
preservation institutions to be able to allow simultaneous users to access the 
preserved programs, including apparently by making multiple copies of 
preserved computer programs for their users.903   
 
897 See DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 6 Opp’n at 3; Tr. at 80:07–14 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Englund, ESA). 
898 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 6 Opp’n at 3.  Proponents dispute this point.  See, e.g., Tr. at 
78:09–18 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Albert, SPN & LCA). 
899 DVD CCA & AACS LA Class 6 Opp’n at 4. 
900 Id. at 4. 
901 Joint Creators I Class 6 Opp’n at 6 n.17. 
902 2021 Recommendation at 270. 
903 See Tr. at 78:10–14 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Albert, SPN & LCA (“Corellium . . . [is] directly factually on 
point about making multiple copies of software for the purpose of . . . research [and] other 
secondary uses . . . and found those uses to be fair.”). 

[PAGE 184]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
181 
 
The Register concludes that proponents have not demonstrated that making 
multiple copies of preserved computer programs would weigh in favor of fair 
use under the first factor.  Although Corellium is an unreported decision decided 
by the Eleventh Circuit ten days before the Supreme Court’s fair use decision in 
Warhol904 and not precedential, the Register has considered its analysis and finds 
the circumstances distinguishable.  There, the defendant was making multiple 
copies of Apple’s computer program for security research and to “add[] several 
features that are not normally available on [the original program].”905  In finding 
that Corellium’s use of Apple’s software was “moderately transformative,”906 the 
court distinguished circumstances where a defendant “ma[kes] available 
‘virtually the entirety’ of what users would ‘want’” with respect to the copyrightprotected program907—which is what proponents in this proceeding propose that 
preservation institutions should be permitted to do. 
With respect to the video game class, proponents wish to provide off-premises 
access to the preserved works, a use that would necessarily implicate copyright 
owners’ distribution, display, or performance rights.  Proponents’ legal 
arguments addressed preservation, research, and teaching uses generally, and 
not the specific uses covered by this requested expansion (e.g., those involving 
distribution, display, and performance rights).  As the Office has previously 
noted, where there is a proposal to “expand an existing exemption, commenters 
should focus their comments on the legal and evidentiary bases for modifying 
the exemption, rather than the underlying exemption.”908   
Opponents reiterated concerns expressed in earlier proceedings that an 
expansion would include a “significant risk of use of preserved video games for 
 
904 598 U.S. 508.  Proponents note that the “Eleventh Circuit was asked to reconsider Corellium in 
light of Warhol and did not” and that “Warhol doesn’t fundamentally . . . change the analysis in 
Corellium . . . .”  Tr. at 81:22–24 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Albert, SPN & LCA). 
905 Corellium, No. 21‐cv‐12835, 2023 WL 3295671, at *1, 8. 
906 Id. at *6. 
907 Id. at *10 (quoting Fox News Network, LLC v. TVEyes, Inc., 883 F.3d 169, 179 (2d Cir. 2018)).  
Corellium agreed that “making verbatim copies of a copyrighted work and converting those 
works into a different format is not transformative.”  Id. at *8 (alterations removed). 
908 Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access to Controls on Copyrighted Works, 82 Fed. 
Reg. 49,550, 49,558 (Oct. 26, 2017); NPRM at 72,026 (similar). 

[PAGE 185]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
182 
 
recreational purposes”909 and suggested that “comments filed by individual 
commenters in this proceeding make clear that there is a desire for recreational 
play through such offerings.”910   
In the 2021 Recommendation, the Register observed the following: 
Although proponents’ intention in making the video games 
available off‐premises may be to facilitate education and research, 
opponents have presented credible evidence that at least some users 
are likely to use video games made available pursuant to a broa d 
proposed exemption for entertainment purposes.  If a significant use 
of the works would be for the entertainment purposes for which the 
works were originally created, that would not be transformative or 
otherwise favor fair use under the first factor.  T he use of the 
preserved video games for entertainment purposes seems 
particularly likely given proponents’ unwillingness to impose user 
verification requirements or other measures that would make the 
video games more likely to be used solely for education or research 
purposes.911 
In this proceeding, proponents seek again to allow libraries, archives, and 
museums to make preserved video games more broadly available for research 
 
909 ESA Class 6(b) Opp’n at 10; see also, e.g., 2021 Recommendation at 263–64 (reflecting ESA’s 
concerns that the exemption would be used for “entertainment purposes”).  
910 ESA Class 6(b) Opp’n at 10 (citing Ceyssens Class 6(b) Initial (emphasis added by ESA) 
(supporting an exemption “for the purposes of historical preservation and public enjoyment” and 
relaying understanding that the exemption would “allow the general population to experience 
the history of games without massive inconveniences”) and Anonymous 2 Class 6(b) Initial 
(emphasis added by ESA) (stating “I think it should be legal to use video game roms/isos to make 
classic video games always accessible to the public” and “[a]ll Video games should be able to be 
enjoyed by anyone regardless of where a person is located in the world”)); see also Tr. at 13:06–10 
(Apr. 18, 2024) (Englund, ESA) (“[I]t’s very clear from the record, and I’d point you to the 
comments by all of the individual commentors, that the individual commentors are interested in 
playing games recreationally.”); Tr. at 17:06–11 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Ayers, AACS LA) (“There are not 
a lot of individual comments that come into these proceedings, and I think it’s notable that the 
ones that did were in this class and that a number of them noted essentially the desire to play 
games recreationally . . . .”); 2015 Recommendation at 340 (noting potential overlap with interest 
in preservation and recreational play). 
911 2021 Recommendation at 272. 

[PAGE 186]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
183 
 
and teaching.  Making these games more broadly available, however, also 
increases the likelihood that they would be used for recreational purposes.   
For the Register to find that the proposed video game exemption is favored 
under the first factor, the exemption would need to appropriately guard against 
recreational uses, including by “contain[ing] appropriately tailored restrictions to 
ensure that uses would be limited to bona fide teaching, research, or scholarship 
uses.”912  As discussed under the fourth fair use factor below, she does not 
believe that proposed restrictions would guard against recreational use of 
preserved games.  The record in this proceeding has not alleviated concerns that 
preserved video games made available outside of a preservation institution’s 
premises would also be used for recreational purposes.  Thus, the first factor 
does not weigh in favor of a finding of fair use with respect to the video game 
class.  
Proponents’ suggestion that preservation institutions would make preserved 
computer programs and video games available via emulation technologies913 
does not change the analysis under the first factor for either class.  First, as 
emulation technologies are not a part of the proposed exemptions’ text,914 the 
institutions would not be required to use them to enjoy the exemption.  Second, 
adding functionalities to preserved works using emulation technologies could 
implicate the copyright owners’ right to prepare derivative works, departs from 
traditional understandings of preservation,915 and seems comparable to format-
 
912 Id. at 279. 
913 See SPN & LCA Class 6(a) Initial at 12; SPN & LCA Class 6(b) at 10.  
914 Proponents explained that they did not include requirements for using emulation as a method 
of access into the exemption text to retain flexibility regarding the methods that preservation 
institutions use when providing users access to preserved works.  Tr. at 84:12–18 (Apr. 18, 2024) 
(Albert, SPN & LCA) (“ As to one note of caution there—we don’t write [emulation] into the rule 
because there are circumstances under which certain kinds of software materials might run 
certain kinds of software . . . in a context in which you’re doing scholarship would require 
actually like some amount of local data access.”); see also Tr. at 11:18–19 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Albert, 
SPN & LCA) (referencing general “need for flexibility” desired for preservation institutions). 
915 See, e.g., Karen Kroslowitz, Preservation, Conservation, Restoration: What’s the Difference?, 
COMPUT. HISTORY MUSEUM (Oct. 26, 2012), https://computerhistory.org/blog/preservationconservation-restoration-whats-the-difference/ (“Preservation—or more accurately preventive 
conservation—is the practice of maintaining artifacts by providing a stable storage or display 
environment in order to minimize further damage or deterioration. . . . Cleaning and replacing 
significant parts, whether original to the object’s manufacturer or not, alter the historical integrity 
 

[PAGE 187]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
184 
 
shifting, which the Register has not found to “constitute fair use[] under current 
law.”916  Finally, it is not entirely clear from the record whether or to what extent 
the use of emulation would result in any preserved works being distributed to 
users.917  Such uses would implicate copyright owners’ distribution rights beyond 
the exemptions’ preservation-based uses. 
The second fair use factor considers the nature of the work being used.  The 
works at issue in both classes remain the same as in prior proceedings: computer 
programs and video games.  In the last proceeding, proponents asserted that the 
second fair use factor favored fair use, because computer programs and video 
games are “functional.”918  The Register’s prior recommendation noted that while 
computer programs are functional, this did not mean that this factor would 
always favor fair use, as that “would overlook cases which have found this factor 
to weigh against the fair use of computer programs.”919  Ultimately, she 
concluded that “[w]hile this factor favors fair use in the context of software other 
than video games, it does not do so with respect to [video] games, which are 
often highly expressive in nature.”920 
 
of an artifact.  Once changed an object’s provenance has also been altered and it is no longer a 
true document of its place in history.  That’s a big deal in museums, which are considered by the 
majority of Americans to be the most trustworthy source of information about the past.”); Tr. at 
197:25–198:06 (May 20, 2015) (Stoltz, EFF) (asserting that “the goal of preservation is to preserve 
every aspect of the original experience of playing a game”). 
916 2018 Recommendation at 113 (quoting 2015 Recommendation at 108). 
917 Compare Tr. at 39:03–14 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Espenschied, Rhizome) (referring to an emulation 
example where “[t]he emulator and the disk is initiated on [a cloud] computer and there is an 
audio/video connection made to that cloud computer . . . bringing up this computer and copying 
this data over”) and Tr. at 37:21–38:03 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Espenschied, Rhizome) (discussing “how 
access to an emulator is actually managed online and also how that effects . . . recreational use” 
and stating that “it is possible to run, for instance, . . . simpler games . . . [by] download[ing] them 
and to run them on their own computer in some kind of . . . local setting”) with Tr. at 84:06–09 
(Apr. 18, 2024) (Albert, SPN & LCA) (“[I]n most cases emulation as a service context . . . folks are 
not running the software on their machine, as I think Mr. Espenschied said in the last hearing.”).  
918 2021 Recommendation at 273. 
919 Id. (citing Wall Data Inc. v. Los Angeles Cty. Sheriff’s Dep’t, 447 F.3d 769, 780 (9th Cir. 2006); 
Cable/Home Commc’n Corp. v. Network Prods., Inc., 902 F.2d 829, 844 (11th Cir. 1990) (internal 
quotations omitted)). 
920 Id. (citing 2015 Recommendation at 338). 

[PAGE 188]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
185 
 
In this proceeding, proponents made similar claims regarding the functionality 
of computer programs and video games.921  In response, opponents reiterated 
that video games are “not functional” and “highly creative,”922 and claimed that 
the proposed video game exemption would enable “significant recreational 
gameplay.”923  Joint Creators I also noted a concern that the video game class 
would include “other kinds of creative works accessible with productivity 
software or playable on game consoles.”924 
The Register again concludes that the second factor favors fair use in the context 
of computer programs, but not video games. 
The third fair use factor focuses on the amount and substantiality of the portion 
of the work used.  In discussing the preservation classes in the last proceeding, 
“[t]he Register conclude[d] that this factor does not necessarily weigh against fair 
use, as it may be necessary to copy an entire work to provide researchers with 
access to the work for educational or research purposes.”925 
Computer Program Class.  Regarding this class, proponents envision emulating 
preserved computer programs and suggested that “[i]t is typically impossible to 
emulate only a portion of a software program.”926  They again cited Corellium to 
support their claim that the Register’s focus should not be on the amount of 
copying that preservationists engage in, but should be on “whether the ‘copying 
was tethered to a valid, and transformative, purpose.’”927  Because they claim 
their proposed use is transformative, proponents concluded that “[w]hen the 
purpose of a use is favored by the Copyright Act, and there is no effect of the use 
on the market for the work, courts do not focus the factor three analysis on how 
many copies might be made.”928 
Video Game Class.  For this class, proponents made similar arguments as those 
made to support the computer program class.  They added that “the third fair 
 
921 SPN & LCA Class 6(a) Initial at 13; SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Initial at 11 –12.  
922 Joint Creators I Class 6 Opp’n at 7. 
923 ESA Class 6(b) Opp’n at 13. 
924 Joint Creators I Class 6 Opp’n at 7. 
925 2021 Recommendation at 274. 
926 SPN & LCA Class 6(a) Initial at 14. 
927 Id. (quoting Corellium, No. 21‐cv‐12835, 2023 WL 3295671 at *31). 
928 Id. at 14. 

[PAGE 189]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
186 
 
use factor should focus on the amount and substantiality of what is made 
available to the user rather than the amount that may be stored for preservation 
and other technological purposes.”929  In response, opponents argued that “use of 
entire games for recreational purposes” weighs against fair use under this 
factor,930 “especially when the use contemplated is substitutional.”931   
The Register’s Analysis.  The Register has previously acknowledged that 
preservation uses may need “to copy an entire work to make a fair use.”932  
Moreover, it remains potentially necessary to copy and preserve an entire work 
for educational or research purposes.  Therefore, she again finds that this factor 
does not necessarily weigh against fair use, with respect to preservation uses.  
She notes, however, that recreational uses of an entire work in ways that would 
serve as a market substitute would not favor fair use under this factor.933 
Proponents argued that the fourth factor, which considers the effect of the use 
upon the potential market for or value of the copyrighted work, favors fair use 
because only computer programs and video games that are not being exploited 
in the commercial marketplace are subject to the exemption.934  They also claimed 
that the proposed uses would not disrupt copyright owners’ market-related 
interests because such uses are transformative.935  Finally, they again touted the 
use of emulation technologies, arguing that using these technologies to provide 
users limited access to preserved works would weigh in favor of fair use under 
 
929 SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Initial at 12 (citing Google Books, 804 F.3d at 221–22). 
930 ESA Class 6(b) Opp’n at 13; see also Joint Creators I Class 6 Opp’n at 7. 
931 Joint Creators I Class 6 Opp’n at 7 (citing Brammer v. Violent Hues Prods., LLC, 922 F.3d 255, 268 
(4th Cir. 2019) (“[U]nless the use is transformative, the use of a copyrighted work in its entirety 
will normally weigh against a finding of fair use.”) (internal quotations omitted)). 
932 2018 Recommendation at 243 (reflecting the Acting Register’s agreement with proponent’s 
assertion); see also 2021 Recommendation at 274. 
933 See, e.g., Peter Letterese & Assocs. v. World Inst. of Scientology Enters., 533 F.3d 1287, 1314 n.30 
(11th Cir. 2008) (citing Campbell, 510 U.S. at 588) (“The inquiry is whether the amount taken is 
reasonable in light of the purpose of the use and the likelihood of market substitution.”); 
Campbell, 510 U.S. at 588 (noting that reasonableness of the amount taken can depend on “the 
likelihood that the [secondary use] may serve as a market substitute for the original”).  
934 SPN & LCA Class 6(a) Initial at 16–17; SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Reply at 19 (“There can be no 
harm to a market for games that are not commercially available.”). 
935 SPN & LCA Class 6(a) Initial at 15; SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Initial at 13.  

[PAGE 190]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
187 
 
this factor.936  Because proponents made additional arguments in support of the 
video game class, each class is addressed separately below. 
Computer Program Class.  The Register finds that the fourth factor does not 
support a fair use finding regarding this class.  In the 2021 proceeding, she noted 
that the single-user limitation would “minimize the risk of substitutional use of 
the software.”937  Proponents now seek to remove that requirement, and there 
would be no such safeguard with respect to the creation of multiple copies.  She 
agrees with Joint Creators I’s claim that copies made under the proposed 
exemption would be “perfect substitutes for the underlying work.”938 
Video Game Class.  Regarding this class, proponents provided comments 
addressing the market for video games that are no longer reasonably available in 
the commercial marketplace, including the secondary and reissue marketplaces.  
They claimed that “the vast majority of historic video games—more than 87% 
according to a recent study—are effectively inaccessible in their original form 
because copies are no longer sold by their publishers.”939   
They acknowledged that “a healthy market for certain game reissues does exist,” 
and that “[i]n the recent past, the video game industry has made greater 
concerted efforts to reissue historical video games.”940  But, they argued that such 
efforts are unlikely to be sustainable and do not alter the fact that most games 
remain unavailable through reissue.941  Although proponents likewise 
acknowledged that some “second-hand copies of some games can be purchased 
 
936 See, e.g., SPN & LCA Class 6(a) Initial at 15 (“Emulation‐as‐a‐Service can control user access to 
the internet, ensuring that researchers and educators have limited—not unfettered—software 
access.”); see also SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Initial at 20. 
937 2021 Recommendation at 279. 
938 Joint Creators I Class 6 Opp’n at 7 (citing Warhol, 598 U.S. at 531–36). 
939 SPN & LCA Class 6(a) Initial at 2. 
940 Phil Salvador, Survey of the Video Game Reissue Market in the United States, VIDEO GAME HISTORY 
FOUNDATION 4, 11 (July 2023) (submitted in Anonymous 2 Class 6(b) Reply) (“ Video Game 
Reissue Market Report”). 
941 Id. at 11 (also arguing that services through which reissues are now available “will eventually 
be discontinued for budgetary and technical reasons,” taking those games out of release) ; see also 
id. at 1–2 (noting that the availability of games in the reissue market “is overshadowed by the 
volume of games that remain unavailable” and “[o]nly 13 percent of classic video games 
published in the United States are currently in release”); id. at 39 (defining classic games as those 
issued before 2010). 

[PAGE 191]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
188 
 
from third-party sellers . . . like eBay,” they stated that these copies are “hard to 
find,” that “prices can be significantly inflated,” and that these games may 
require “expensive and difficult to find vintage hardware” to play.942 
They asserted that neither the new video game market nor the video game rerelease market would be adversely affected by the expanded exemption.943  To 
support that claim, they provided comments from Antstream and Limited Run 
Games, two video game re-release companies who support the proposed 
exemption.  Further, both proponents and these re-release companies explained 
that the primary barriers to re-release market expansion were commercial and 
logistical hurdles, and not competition from scholarly access.944   
Proponents also claimed that the proposed user restrictions could protect against 
infringing uses of preserved video games.  Initially, they suggested that these 
restrictions could include “engag[ing] in user vetting, provid[ing] copyright 
notices, and [engaging in] use access restrictions.”945  Their reply comments 
suggested somewhat more specific regulatory restrictions, requiring that: 
Any electronic distribution, display, or performance made outside 
of the physical premises of an eligible library, archives, or museum 
of works preserved . . . may be made only for a limited time and after 
the eligible institution acts to ensure that users seeking off‐premises 
access to works are doing so for the purposes of scholarship, 
teaching, or research by: 1) specifically determining that the user’s 
interest is scholarship, teaching, or research through individualized 
human review of each applicant a nd their stated purposes, 2) 
instituting access restrictions appropriate to the nature of the use and 
the material, and 3) notifying users that they are receiving access to 
copyrighted material subject to adherence with applicable laws.946 
Proponents claimed that these restrictions will restrict access to preserved video 
games to only “bona fide researchers” or those with a “bona fide academic 
 
942 SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Initial at 2, 15. 
943 See, e.g., SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Reply at 23–27. 
944 Id. at 6–8, 24–26. 
945 SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Initial at 18. 
946 SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Reply at App. A. 

[PAGE 192]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
189 
 
purpose.”947  When asked how a preservation institution would determine 
whether a researcher was “bona fide,” they replied that the institution would 
“look[] at who the researcher is [and] what they want access to.”948  They 
explained that “most cultural institutions already make use of similar policies to 
govern access to their physical collections” and “are well-equipped to extend 
these practices to off-premises use.”949  But they acknowledged that a cultural 
institution’s provision of access “often does not . . . require a specific 
affiliation”950 and that limiting access to researchers “who already have certain 
kinds of formal academic institutional affiliations” would have “really regressive 
and problematic effects on the field, as “[t]here are plenty of independent 
scholars and researchers who put out really meaningful work.”951  Proponents 
noted that “bandwidth at cultural institutions, [would be a] natural constraint[] 
on the prevalence of remote access.”952   
Proponents’ comments also discussed how the proposed restrictions could work.  
Regarding the proposal to display a copyright notice, proponents suggested that 
such notices could be provided via “full-screen pop-ups, clickwrap, physical 
forms, or a verbal attestation.”953  Regarding access restrictions appropriate to the 
nature of the use and the material, proponents stated that access restrictions 
could include “time-bounded access and technological controls,”954 but did not 
provide additional detail on how those restrictions could be made to be 
appropriate to the nature of the use and the material.   
Proponents also suggested that the use of emulation technologies, which “do[] 
not deliver a comparable experience to a platform specific rerelease,” could be 
used to effectuate the foregoing restrictions.955  They stated that “[e]mulated 
 
947 SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Initial at 10. 
948 Tr. at 28:03–15 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Albert, SPN & LCA).   
949 SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Reply at 4. 
950 Tr. at 27:07–08 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Albert, SPN & LCA). 
951 Tr. at 28:03–15 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Albert, SPN & LCA).  But see SPN & LCA Class 6(a) Initial at 17 
(“Vetting could include institutional verification by way of a requirement that users fill out a 
research request detailing the scope of their project, a process already widely used by museums 
with video game collections.”) (emphasis added). 
952 SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Initial at 13. 
953 Id. at 17. 
954 Id. 
955 SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Reply at 19. 

[PAGE 193]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
190 
 
games would not be plastered on the homepage of cultural institutions’ websites; 
instead, they would exist within catalogued archives with other special 
collections resources, requiring a user to know what they are looking for and, 
more importantly, to request access after finding it.”956  Proponents claimed 
“[t]he attention-to-detail and academic literacy necessary to see [a human 
review] process through to the end will go a long way toward filtering out 
nefarious users.”957  
Opposition Arguments.  Opponents objected that none of these proposed 
restrictions were included in the proposed regulatory text.958  Possible restrictions 
and requirements such as the use of emulation technologies are discussed only in 
proponents’ comments.  Opponents also claimed that these proposals would 
“provide[] only illusory protection.”959  For example, ESA stated that proponents 
are “not proposing a clear requirement to know who the users are or why they 
want to access a game, although they have introduced passingly the concept of 
human review,”960 calling the human review requirement “at best incomplete.”961  
They also objected that the use of emulation technologies was not included in the 
proposed exemption.962  ESA suggested that by not proposing specific 
requirements, proponents were “trying to reserve almost complete discretion in 
how they would provide access to preserve[d] games.”963   
Opponents also disagreed over the market for older video games.  They claimed 
that “there remains a substantial market for classic games”964 and, as in past 
proceedings, provided examples of “a vibrant and growing market for 
authorized versions of classic games that could be jeopardized by the broad 
exemption proposed here,” including the classic games offered by ESA’s 
members such as re-releases sales and making the games available using 
 
956 SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Initial at 18. 
957 Id. 
958 ESA Class 6(b) Opp’n at 14. 
959 Id. 
960 Tr. at 14:03–06 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Englund, ESA). 
961 Tr. at 13:15–21 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Englund, ESA). 
962 Tr. at 43:16–23 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Englund, ESA). 
963 Tr. at 8:17–20 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Englund, ESA).  At the same time, they acknowledged that there 
was not “any combination of limitations that ESA members would support to provide remote 
access [to those games].”  Tr. at 15:16–18 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Englund, ESA). 
964 ESA Class 6(b) Opp’n at 14. 

[PAGE 194]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
191 
 
subscription services.965  They also suggested that the existence of secondary 
markets demonstrates that there are alternatives to circumvention and any 
“unwillingness” to acquire works from those markets is unrelated to the 
prohibition on circumventing access controls.966 
Ultimately, opponents argued that the video game class fails to contain 
“appropriate safeguards to prevent users from further distributing or making 
entertainment uses of video games.”967  They believed that “[e]nabling 
widespread remote access to preserved games with minimal supervision would 
present a serious risk to an important market.”968 
The Register’s Analysis.  The Register finds that the fourth factor does not 
support a finding of fair use with respect to the proposed video game class.  
Opponents have presented evidence of a substantial market for older video 
games.  While proponents are correct that some older games will not have a 
reissue market, they concede there is a “healthy” market for other reissued 
games and that the industry has been making “greater concerted efforts” to 
reissue games.969 
Further, while the Register appreciates that proponents have suggested broad 
safeguards that could deter recreational uses of video games in some cases, she 
believes that such requirements are not specific enough to conclude that they 
would prevent market harms.  Additionally, the record on the use of emulation 
technologies is inconsistent and incomplete and the technologies are not 
addressed in the exemption text.970  As one example, proponents both suggested 
that emulated video games are appropriate for research uses, as they are faithful 
to the original game, and inappropriate for recreational uses, because they do not 
 
965 Id. at 6. 
966 Tr. at 62:18–23 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Rotstein, Joint Creators I). 
967 ESA Class 6(b) Opp’n at 14 (quoting 2021 Recommendation at 275). 
968 Id. at 5. 
969 Video Game Reissue Market Report at 4, 11. 
970 Further, while hardware emulation may be noninfringing and attitudes may be changing, 
video game emulation technologies have been historically associated with piracy, raising a 
potential concern with their proposed use.  See Video Game Reissue Market Report at 7; Game 
Developers Conference, It’s Still Emulation: Saving Video Game History Before It’s Too Late, YOUTUBE 
(Apr. 11, 2019), https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dp-DRU24J18 (statement of Frank Cifaldi, 
founder Video Game History Foundation) (noting that emulation is viewed as “a means of 
piracy”). 

[PAGE 195]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
192 
 
have all the features that were available in the original game.971  As noted above, 
there was also inconsistent testimony on whether an emulated game would need 
to be distributed to remote users or to the cloud.972   
Balancing the four fair use factors, she finds that proponents have not met their 
burden of showing that reproducing works to allow for multiple simultaneous 
use in the computer program class is likely to be fair.  The Register also finds that 
proponents have not met their burden of showing that the proposed off-premises 
uses in the video game class are likely to be fair.  As proponents have not 
satisfied their burden to demonstrate that the requested uses are or are likely to 
be noninfringing, it is unnecessary to engage in an analysis of whether the 
implementation of technological protection measures on these works has caused 
adverse impacts on those users. 
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA supports the adoption of expanded exemptions for Class 6, including to 
remove the single-user limitation in the computer program class and to remove 
the premises limitation in the video game class.973  It also recognizes “that 
software and video game infringement are legitimate concerns that must be 
addressed vigorously.”974 
Regarding the computer program class, NTIA agrees with proponents that 
“eliminating the single-user limitation would greatly enhance the preservation of 
out-of-commerce software.”975  It also states that “[i]t is unrealistic to expect that 
private study, scholarship, teaching, or research efforts can be adequately 
supported by allowing only one remote user at a time, forcing others to expend 
 
971 Compare Tr. at 30:23–31:05 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Albert, SPN & LCA) (“[O]ftentimes the kinds of 
emulation environments that preservation institutions provide access to are . . . meant to replicate 
the experience of playing [the game] in an original setting.”) with SPN & LCA Class 6(b) Initial at 
14 (“[A] game accessed remotely through emulation loses many features that make it appealing 
from a recreational standpoint”) and id. at 10 (“[E]mulation services in development at libraries 
and archives . . . lack features that an actual vintage game would have—namely, the original 
physical hardware”).   
972 Compare Tr. at 39:03–14 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Espenschied, Rhizome) and Tr. at 37:21–38:03 (Apr. 18, 
2024) (Espenschied, Rhizome), with Tr. at 84:06–09 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Albert, SPN & LCA). 
973 NTIA did not comment on the substance of Ken Austin’s proposed exemption. 
974 NTIA Letter at 56, 59. 
975 Id. at 57. 

[PAGE 196]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
193 
 
limited financial resources to travel to an eligible institution.”976  Finally, NTIA 
does not believe that removing the single-user restriction would harm the market 
for computer programs.977 
For the video game class, NTIA notes “the long history of exemptions for 
preservation in this rulemaking process, and the careful balance of interests that 
the Librarian tries to craft as they align the final rules with the Section 1201 
statutory factors and copyright law.”978  It notes the Register’s earlier concerns 
with removing the premises limitation, including “that the proposed language to 
the exemption did not contain ‘tailored restrictions to ensure that uses would be 
limited to bona fide teaching, research, or scholarship uses and would affect the 
market for the original works.’”979  In this proceeding, NTIA believes that 
proponents’ proposed exemption language would address such concerns.980   
The Register appreciates that “NTIA has a long history of supporting 
preservation efforts” and has focused its comments on preservation-based policy 
considerations.981  While she also supports preservation efforts and has 
recommended preservation-related exemptions in prior rulemaking cycles,982 the 
statute requires her to consider whether the affected uses are or are likely to be 
 
976 Id.  NTIA also states that the computer program preservation exemption’s single‐user 
limitation “undermines the very purpose of software preservation by restricting access to those 
with the means to travel, thereby excluding a significant portion of the academic community.”  
Id. at 57.  The current exemption, however, allows for remote access to preserved computer 
programs.  37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(18)(i) (permitting the “electronic distribution, display, or 
performance made outside of the physical premises of an eligible library, archives, or museum” 
under the exemption).  It is unclear how travelling to a preservation institution would allow 
multiple users to simultaneously use a preserved computer program.  For the program to be 
simultaneously used by multiple academic researchers, the Register understands that a 
preservation institution would need to either obtain additional copies of the work or reproduce 
the work—regardless of whether the work was accessed on or off the preservation institution’s 
premises. 
977 NTIA Letter at 57. 
978 Id. at 58. 
979 Id. (quoting 2021 Recommendation at 279). 
980 Id. 
981 Id. at 56. 
982 See 2021 Recommendation at 97–98, 279–82; 2018 Recommendation at 253–55, 280–83; 2015 
Recommendation at 350–52; 2006 Recommendation at 30. 

[PAGE 197]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
194 
 
noninfringing.983  The Register cannot recommend these exemption expansions 
without the rulemaking record establishing that the proposed uses are or are 
likely to be noninfringing. 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
Considering the record before her and applicable law, the Register does not 
recommend granting Class 6(a)’s proposed removal of the single-user limitation 
for computer programs or Class 6(b)’s removal of the premises limitation from 
the video game exemption.  She does recommend clarifying the single copy 
restriction language to reflect that preservation institutions can allow a copy of a 
computer program to be accessed by as many individuals as there are 
circumvented copies legally owned.  This new text will address the perceived 
ambiguity in the current exemption, while serving the single-user limitation’s 
intended purpose to minimize the risk of substitutional uses of preserved 
computer programs.984 
Accordingly, the Register recommends that the Librarian add the following 
provision to the current computer program preservation class: 
For purposes of paragraph (b)(20) of this section, the phrase “one user at 
a time” means that for each copy of a work lawfully owned by an 
eligible library, archives, or museum and preserved under paragraph 
(b)(20)(i) of this section, such library, archives, or museum may make an 
electronic distribution, display, or performance of that work outside of 
its physical premises. An eligible library, archives, or museum may 
make each copy of such lawfully owned and preserved work available 
to different users simultaneously. This provision does not permit an 
eligible library, archives, or museum to make multiple, simultaneous 
copies of the same copy of a work for the purposes of providing users 
access to the work. 
 
983 As Congress has noted, “the rulemaking process ‘ensure[s] that the concept of fair use remains 
firmly established in the law’ and ‘extends into the digital environment the bedrock principle of 
“balance” in American intellectual property law for the benefit of both copyright owners and 
users.’”  Section 1201 Report at 23 (quoting Commerce Comm. Report at 35–36).  
984 See 2021 Recommendation at 279. 

[PAGE 198]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
195 
 
G. Proposed Class 7: Computer Programs—Vehicle Operational Data 
1. Background 
a.   Summary of Proposed Exemption and Register’s 
Recommendation  
The Office received one petition seeking a new exemption to permit lawful 
vehicle and vessel owners or lessees, or those acting on their behalf, to access, 
store, and share operational data that is generated when driving.985  Petitioner 
MEMA proposed allowing circumvention of technological protection measures 
on computer programs stored within lawfully acquired motorized land vehicles 
or marine vessels, commercial vehicles or vessels, and mechanized agricultural 
vehicles or vessels to access, store, and share vehicle operational and telematics 
data.986  Comments in support were submitted by MEMA and the Specialty 
Equipment Market Association (“SEMA”).987  Opposition comments were 
submitted by the Alliance for Automotive Innovation (“Auto Innovators”), the 
Association of Equipment Manufacturers (“AEM”), Joint Creators I, and the 
National Association of Manufacturers (“NAM”).988  They argued that consumers 
already enjoy sufficient access under current laws and market practices; that the 
proposed exemption as a whole, or portions thereof, are overly broad; and that it 
raises privacy, safety, and intellectual property concerns.989  Reply comments 
were submitted by MEMA, and by DOJ Antitrust and the FTC.990   
 
985 MEMA Class 7 Pet. at 2. 
986 Id. 
987 MEMA Class 7 Initial; SEMA Class 7 Initial. 
988 Auto Innovators Class 7 Opp’n; AEM Class 7 Opp’n; Joint Creators I Class 7 Opp’n; NAM 
Class 7 Opp’n. 
989 Auto Innovators Class 7 Opp’n at 4, 6; AEM Class 7 Opp’n at 2, 5–6; NAM Class 7 Opp’n at 2; 
Joint Creators I Class 7 Opp’n at 2–3; Tr. at 12:04–10 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Humphrey, Auto 
Innovators); see also Tr. at 23:16–24, 55:01–06 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators I) (“[I]t still 
isn’t clear to me that this exemption serves a purpose that is meaningfully distinct from Class 13 
or current Exemption 13.”); NAM Class  7 Ex Parte Letter at 1–2 (July 31, 2024) (discussing how 
the proposed exemption is “overly broad” and “vague[]” thereby “allow[ing] for the 
circumvention of TPMs across a broad and abstract class that would include any lawfully 
acquired vehicle or vessel”). 
990 MEMA Class 7 Reply; DOJ Antitrust & FTC Class 7 Reply. 

[PAGE 199]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
196 
 
The Register recommends granting the petition, subject to certain limitations on 
which the parties agreed.  These limitations—which mirror provisions in the 
current repair exemption codified at 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(13)—state that the 
exemption does not permit accessing computer programs through separate 
subscription services, permit circumventing TPMs for the purpose of gaining 
unauthorized access to other copyrighted works, or negate compliance with or 
liability under other applicable laws. 
b.  Overview of Issues 
The proposed exemption would permit “lawful vehicle owners and lessees, or 
those acting on their behalf, to access, store, and share” “their own vehicle 
operational and telematics data.”991  Proponents alleged that this data is 
inaccessible because of the TPMs in hardware and software units that monitor 
and control vehicle functions, even when owners and lessees of the vehicles and 
vessels generate this data when driving.992  They contended that circumventing 
TPMs to access the data would enable owners and lessees to engage in 
noninfringing, productive uses of such data, such as monitoring vehicle use.993  
Proponents distinguished their application from the existing exemption in 37 
C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(13), which covers the diagnosis, repair, and lawful 
modification of vehicles and vessels (the “Repair Exemption”),994 asserting that 
the Repair Exemption does not “clearly apply to telematics and operational 
data.”995  One proponent characterized the Repair Exemption and the proposed 
 
991 MEMA Class 7 Initial at 1–2. 
992 Id. at 2; see also SEMA Class 7 Initial at 1–2 (discussing how vehicles owners create data when 
driving); MEMA Class 7 Post‐Hearing Resp. at 2 (May 28, 2024) (“Examples of TPMs include, for 
example, passwords, so‐called security dongles, challenge‐response mechanisms, encryption, and 
disabled access ports on the circuitry itself.”) 
993 MEMA Class 7 Initial at 3, 7; see also SEMA Class 7 Initial at 2 (discussing the importance of 
access to diagnose vehicle issues, such as fewer repair and service options); MEMA Class 7 Post‐
Hearing Resp. at 2 (May 28, 2024) (“[T]he proposed exemption would allow a vehicle owner to 
grant access to vehicle data to an aftermarket supplier engaged in customizing vehicles.”); Tr. at 
8:04–10:07 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Jasnow, MEMA) (discussing potential use cases). 
994  The Repair Exemption has been recommended for renewal in this proceeding.  See NPRM at 
72,020. 
995 MEMA Class 7 Initial at 6; see also Tr. at 8:04–8:08 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Jasnow, MEMA) (“[T]he 
proposed exemption, the Class 7 exemption is a little bit beyond the scope of the existing 
exemption for diagnosis, repair or modification of the vehicle.”). 

[PAGE 200]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
197 
 
exemption as a “Venn Diagram.”996  Although proponents agreed that some 
aspects of the two exemptions would overlap, they stated that the Repair 
Exemption does not encompass all of the proposed uses—even with regard to 
some types of uses related to repair.997  MEMA, for instance, stated that 
telematics data “streamline[s] the repair process by providing shops with real 
time access to vehicle data . . . to anticipate needs before the car pulls into the 
shop.”998  iFixit stated that telematics data is particularly useful when assessing a 
fleet of vehicles in the aggregate.999  These distinct use cases are due, in part, to 
vehicles and vessels “being built with increasingly powerful hardware units and 
software, which together are capable of collecting exponentially more data” than 
previously available.1000 
Opponents disagreed with MEMA’s characterization of the Repair Exemption, 
and argued that the proposed uses are already exempted pursuant to the existing 
provision.1001  They also claimed that the proposed exemption would be contrary 
to the limitations the Office has applied to the Repair Exemption because the 
proposed “broad, abstract, and undefined class” includes uses already excluded 
in the context of the Repair Exemption.1002  Additionally, opponents stated that 
 
996 Tr. at 16:21–17:10 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Greenstein, Auto Care Ass’n). 
997 See, e.g., Tr. at 8:05–10:17 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Jasnow, MEMA) (contending that the proposed 
exemption is “a little bit beyond the scope of the existing exemption for diagnosis, repair or 
modification”); MEMA Class 7 Reply at 3 (stating that, unlike the Repair Exemption, telematics 
data “streamline[s] the repair process by providing shops with real time access to vehicle data  . . . 
to anticipate needs before the car pulls into the shop”); Tr. at 7:18 –22 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Wiens, 
iFixit) (explaining that telematics data is particularly useful when assessing a fleet in aggregate).  
998 MEMA Class 7 Reply at 3.  
999 Tr. at 7:18–22 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Wiens, iFixit).  
1000 MEMA Class 7 Initial at 2. 
1001 Auto Innovators Class 7 Opp’n at 6; AEM Class 7 Opp’n at 2, 5; see also Tr. at 23:16–24, 54:25–
55:06 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators I) (“[I]t still isn’t clear to me that this exemption 
serves a purpose that is meaningfully distinct from Class 13 or current Exemption 13.”).  
1002 Joint Creators I Class 7 Opp’n at 2, 6; see also id. at 3; Auto Innovators Class 7 Opp’n at 3–4; 
AEM Class 7 Opp’n at 2; Tr. at 12:04–10 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Humphrey, Auto Innovators); see also 
NAM Class 7 Ex Parte Letter at 1–2 (July 31, 2024) (stating that the proposed exemption is “overly 
broad” and “vague[]” thereby “allow[ing] for the circumvention of TPMs across a broad and 
abstract class that would include any lawfully acquired vehicle or vessel”). 

[PAGE 201]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
198 
 
the proposed exemption raises privacy, safety, and intellectual property concerns 
aside from copyright.1003    
In response, proponents reiterated that the Repair Exemption is more limited 
than the proposal because it “does not permit access to one’s own personal data 
for purposes of personalization or to streamline the repair process by providing 
shops with real‐time access to vehicle data in advance of any potential 
malfunction.”1004  MEMA also clarified that telematics data “go[es] beyond the 
scope of just geolocation information” and includes “data that is being conveyed 
from the vehicle to some remote cloud application or system.”1005  MEMA 
provided further detail about how it proposed to define the term “operational 
data,” 1006 for which it had initially included no definition.  Acknowledging some 
of the privacy, safety, and intellectual property concerns, MEMA offered in its 
comments and hearing testimony to support additional limitations on the 
proposed exemption.  Modeling limitations based on the Repair Exemption, it 
asserted that “a similar carve-out” for separate subscription services like the one 
in the Repair Exemption “may be appropriate here” and that the Office “can and 
should limit the exemption to uses that comply with local and federal laws.”1007  
Based on the record, and in the absence of any objection from opponents, the 
Register will evaluate the proposed exemption with the suggested limitations.  
2. Discussion  
a.  Scope of the Proposed Class 
The Register addresses two issues related to the scope of the proposed class: (1) 
whether the proposed exemption should be limited only to personal land 
 
1003 NAM Class 7 Opp’n at 2; AEM Class 7 Opp’n at 6; Joint Creators I Class 7 Opp’n at 3. 
1004 MEMA Class 7 Reply at 3; see also Tr. at 8:04–8:08 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Jasnow, MEMA) (“[T]he 
proposed exemption, the Class 7 exemption is a little bit beyond the scope of the existing 
exemption for diagnosis, repair or modification of the vehicle.”); Tr. at 16:2 0–17:02 (Apr. 18, 2024) 
(Greenstein, Auto Care Ass’n). 
1005 Tr. at 6:06–7:10, 28:19–21 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Jasnow, MEMA). 
1006 Tr. at 6:06–7:10 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Jasnow, MEMA) (defining “operational data” as data that is 
“generated pursuant to a vehicle owner or lessee’s use of a vehicle,” including things like vehicle 
performance data, vehicle status data, driver behavior data, and environmental data). 
1007 MEMA Class 7 Reply at 4–5; see also Tr. at 13:11–16, 48:01–04 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Jasnow, MEMA) 
(discussing acceptance of potential regulatory language carveouts); Tr. at 48:19 –20 (Apr. 18, 2024) 
(Foshee, Auto Care Ass’n) (agreeing that potential regulatory carveouts are acceptable). 

[PAGE 202]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
199 
 
vehicles or also encompass additional vehicle types, and (2) whether only vehicle 
owners and lessees should be permitted to rely on the proposed exemption, or 
whether it should also allow access by “operators” or those acting “on behalf of” 
owners and lessees. 
i. Vehicles Covered by Proposed Exemption  
Proponents seek an exemption that applies to “a lawfully acquired motorized 
land vehicle or marine vessel such as a personal automobile or boat, commercial 
vehicle or vessel, or mechanized agricultural vehicle or vessel.”1008  Because the 
record pertains primarily to personal land vehicles, the Register must consider 
whether the record supports an exemption that includes other categories of 
vehicles.  MEMA asserted that there are no “major technological differences” 
between the proposed vehicle classes relevant to the proposed exemption and 
that the relevant TPMs present “very similar issues.”1009 
The proposed exemption concerns the same types of vehicles and vessels as the 
Repair Exemption.1010  That exemption originally applied only to “motorized land 
vehicles,” including “agricultural vehicles,”1011 but was expanded in the 2021 
rulemaking to include marine vessels.1012  In that rulemaking, the Register 
credited the similarities between marine vessels and land vehicles, especially 
agricultural vehicles, and found “no reason to deviate from the adverse effects 
analysis in the previous recommendations for land vehicles.”1013  Moreover, she 
 
1008 MEMA Class 7 Initial at 6. 
1009 Tr. at 36:06–17 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Jasnow, MEMA); Tr. at 36:19–37:08 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Wiens, 
iFixit); see also 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(13) (current Repair Exemption).    
1010 See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(13) (providing a temporary exemption for persons engaged in 
noninfringing uses of “[c]omputer programs that are contained in and control the functioning of 
a lawfully acquired motorized land vehicle or marine vessel such as a personal automobile or 
boat, commercial vehicle or vessel, or mechanized agricultural vehicle or vessel”); Tr. at 36:06–17 
(Apr. 18, 2024) (Jasnow, MEMA) (stating that the proposed exemption “mirrors the scope of the . . 
. existing repair exemption); Tr. at 36:19–37:08 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Wiens, iFixit). 
1011 See 2015 Recommendation at 218–20, 248–49.  The Register recommended some expansion of 
the vehicle repair exemption in 2018, and in that rulemaking, maintained the exemption’s express 
inclusion of “mechanized agricultural vehicle[s].”  See 2018 Recommendation at 230. 
1012 2021 Recommendation at 208; see also 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(13). 
1013 2021 Recommendation at 222–23 (crediting assertions that “users of marine vessels are 
adversely affected in the same manner as users of land vehicles, in particular, tractor owners,” 
and noting that the same manufacturers made engine and diagnostic tools for both land vehicles 
 

[PAGE 203]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
200 
 
determined that the fair use analysis applicable to personal vehicles and 
agricultural vehicles also extended to marine vessels.1014 
Here, the record supports a class covering a similar scope of vehicles.  Opponents 
did not make any arguments about why agricultural vehicles and marine vessels 
present meaningfully different issues from personal automobiles with respect to 
the relevant TPMs,1015 adverse effects, or noninfringing uses.1016  Moreover, the 
renewal of the Repair Exemption, which covers personal, agricultural, and 
commercial vehicles and vessels, is unopposed.1017  Thus, consistent with 
previous rulemakings and the renewed Repair Exemption, the Register 
concludes that the scope of the proposed exemption should include personal 
automobiles, as well as commercial vehicles, agricultural vehicles, and personal 
and commercial marine vessels. 
 
and marine vessels).  Moreover, the Register notes that the adverse effects of TPMs on 
agricultural vehicle repair closely align with the adverse effects for personal vehicles: costlier, 
longer repair processes, and waste.  See Tr. at 36:06–11 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Jasnow, MEMA); DOJ 
Antitrust & FTC Class 7 Reply at 8–9, 12–13.  
1014 2021 Recommendation at 208. 
1015 See Tr. at 23:13–24 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators I) (suggesting that the proposed 
exemption and the existing Repair Exemption “both apply to software that controls vehicles.  So I 
believe it’s the same software we’re talking about . . . that looks like they’re substantially 
overlapping to me.”). 
1016 Auto Innovators distinguished that “other groups [besides manufacturers of personal 
automobiles] . . . have in the past been much more restrictive about the data that’s been available 
than the auto industry has.”  Tr. at 35:21–36:04 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Humphrey, Auto Innovators).  
This distinction, that manufacturers for other classes of vehicles are more restrictive, does not 
necessarily suggest that the manufacturers employ substantially different TPMs.  Moreover, Auto 
Innovators declined to take a position as to “whether this exemption should be adopted or 
rejected with respect to” vessels, commercial vehicles, or mechanized agricultural vehicles, 
confining their comments to personal automobiles.  Auto Innovators Class 7 Opp’n at 2.  NAM 
presented a report detailing certain voluntary measures and agreements by agricultural 
equipment manufacturers.  See generally NAM Class 7 Opp’n at App. (Ike Brannon & Kerri 
Seyfert, The Economic Downsides of “Right-to-Repair,” NAT’L ASS’N OF MFRS (2023)).  However, 
NAM did not argue that this report showed agricultural vehicles are distinct from other vehicles 
or vessels relevant to the scope of the proposed exemption.    
1017 In addition to the instant proposal, petitioners iFixit and MEMA filed petitions to renew the 
existing Repair Exemption; no oppositions were filed against renewal, and the Office 
recommended renewal.  See NPRM at 72,020.  

[PAGE 204]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
201 
 
ii. Persons entitled to rely on the proposed exemption 
The Register also evaluates whether the proposed exemption should encompass 
persons besides owners and lessees.  The proposed exemption applies not only to 
“lawful vehicle owners and lessees,” but also to “those acting on their behalf.”1018  
MEMA characterized “those acting on their behalf” as those persons who 
consumers “themselves expressly authorize to use [their] data.”1019  SEMA 
argued, for example, that although “millions of Americans continue to work on 
and fix their own vehicles,” not everyone is able to do so themselves: “[f]or 
people who do not have the time, knowledge, and ability to work on their own 
vehicles, it is critical that their repairer of choice has access to [vehicle 
performance data] and is protected from copyright infringement for accessing” 
it.1020  
Opponents suggested that including the phrase “those acting on their behalf” 
would inappropriately broaden the scope of the proposed exemption.  AEM 
noted that “the Office and Library have recognized that there is no authority to 
adopt exemptions to the anti-trafficking provisions of 1201(a)(2) and 1201(b),” 
and argued that the proposed inclusion of the term “acting on [owners’ or 
lessees’] behalf” risks “crossing this line.”1021   
In light of AEM’s argument that the Office and Library should not extend to 
those acting “on behalf” of owners and lessees, the Register revisits the 
relationship between the anti-circumvention and anti-trafficking provisions, 
articulated in section 1201(a)(2) and 1201(b) respectively.1022  The Section 1201 
Report noted that “[i]n the past, the Office has declined to recommend 
 
1018 MEMA Class 7 Initial at 6. 
1019 MEMA Class 7 Reply at 5. 
1020 SEMA Class 7 Initial at 2 (using the term “designee” in addition to “repairer”); see also Auto 
Care Ass’n Class 7 Post Hearing Resp. at 1 (May 29, 2024) (arguing that “[a]s vehicles become 
more complex and technologically advanced, the need for choice [of repair provider] will be 
critically important, and that consumers seeking third‐party assistance with repair frequently 
choose independent shops over dealerships). 
1021 AEM Class 7 Opp’n at 7; see also Tr. at 56:18–25 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Humphrey, Auto Innovators) 
(suggesting that third parties merely wanted to “hit the jackpot” when consumers elect to 
provide data to those third parties). 
1022 See Section 1201 Report at 56–62 (“[T]here is, at a minimum, substantial uncertainty as to 
whether there are types of third‐party assistance that would fall outside the reach of the ‘service’ 
bar.”). 

[PAGE 205]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
202 
 
exemptions allowing circumvention on behalf of another person,” because such 
exemptions might implicate the 1201(b) provision barring trafficking in 
technology, products or services designed to circumvent TPMs.1023  However, 
because the line between non-prohibited third-party assistance and prohibited 
circumvention services was “untested and outside the scope of the rulemaking,” 
the Register suggested that in subsequent rulemakings, the Office would “seek to 
avoid recommending unduly narrow definitions of exemption beneficiaries.”1024   
Consistent with that suggestion, in 2021 the Register recommended amending 
the exemption for data generated by medical devices, to encompass data 
obtained via circumvention undertaken “by or on behalf of a patient,”1025 because 
ordinary consumers were unable to engage in noninfringing uses core to the 
exemption absent specialized computer skills.1026  Addressing concerns about 
section 1201(a)(2) and 1201(b), the Register cautioned that she was not 
“expressing any view as to whether particular examples of assistance do or do 
not constitute unlawful circumvention services,” and emphasized that the 
exemptions did “not affect liability under the anti-trafficking provisions.”1027  The 
same reasoning is applicable here.  Like medical device data, vehicle operational 
data can be difficult to extract and use.1028  This problem has grown 
commensurate with advances in automobile technology,1029 which has driven up 
the costs of and expertise necessary for vehicle repair.1030  Consistent with her 
 
1023 Id.; see 17 U.S.C. § 1201(b). 
1024 Section 1201 Report at 61–62. 
1025 2021 Recommendation at 146 (2021); see also 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(7) (permitting circumvention 
“where such circumvention is undertaken by or on behalf of a patient for the sole purpose of 
lawfully accessing data generated by a patient’s own medical device or monitoring system”) 
(emphasis added).    
1026 2021 Recommendation at 145–46. 
1027 Id. at 146–47. 
1028 See 2018 Recommendation at 5 (explaining that the Acting Register drafted exemption 
language, to the extent it did not “implicate the anti‐trafficking provisions” and without opining 
on that issue, to address the concerns that “limiting the exemption to individual owners threatens 
to render it effectively meaningless for those who lack the technical knowledge to access and 
manipulate increasingly complex embedded computer systems”). 
1029 See MEMA Class 7 Initial at 2 (observing that “vehicles are also being built with increasingly 
powerful hardware units and software, which together are capable of collecting exponentially 
more data and performing an ever-increasing number of vital tasks”) (emphasis added). 
1030 Auto Care Ass’n Class 7 Post‐Hearing Resp. at 1–2 (May 29, 2024). 

[PAGE 206]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
203 
 
prior approach, the Register recommends including “those acting on [an owner’s 
or lessee’s] behalf” in the regulatory language.  She takes no position as to 
whether any particular act of circumvention by third parties on an owner’s or 
lessee’s behalf would implicate the section 1201(b) prohibition on trafficking.   
b.  Works Protected by Copyright 
Proponents defined the relevant copyrighted works as “computer programs that 
are contained in and control the functioning of” various types of vehicles and 
vessels.1031  They asserted that “software and hardware” controlling the vehicle 
and vessel functions are copyrightable works that restrict access to the requested 
data.1032  Opponents do not dispute, and the Register agrees, that the relevant 
software constitutes a computer program within the meaning of the Copyright 
Act and, therefore, at least some works in the proposed class are protected by 
copyright. 
The record indicates that “vehicle software programs . . . collect and process a 
large amount of raw data generated . . . [that] may be stored as unmodified raw 
data or it may be processed and stored as part of an organized database 
schema.”1033  Proponents asserted that a copyright owner “may be able to claim 
copyright protection in the database schema,” as opposed to the raw data 
itself.1034  While they did not provide information concerning the precise nature 
of organized database schemas, the record indicates that some database schemas 
produced from the generated data may qualify for copyright protection if they 
 
1031 MEMA Class 7 Pet. at 2. 
1032 MEMA Class 7 Initial at 3–4. 
1033 Id. at 3. 
1034 Id. at 3–4; see Feist Publ’ns, Inc. v. Rural Tel. Serv. Co., 499 U.S. 340, 348 (1991) (holding that 
factual compilations may be copyrightable where the “choices as to selection and arrangement, so 
long as they are made independently by the compiler and entail a minimal degree of creativity, 
are sufficiently original”).  Because proponents seek to access data generated by vehicles and 
vessels, they admitted that “the raw and unprocessed data is not capable of copyright protection 
because it is purely factual.”  MEMA Class 7 Initial at 4; see also SEMA Class 7 Initial at 2 (“While 
the electronic control unit (ECU) and vehicle software are copyrightable, data is generally a fact 
and not an expression, and as such is not subject to copyright.”); DOJ Antitrust & FTC Class 7 
Reply at 16 (discussing “uncopyrighted telematics data”).  Where that is the case, proponents do 
not need an exemption to engage in their desired uses because TPMs on those vehicles and 
vessels would not “effectively control[] access to a [copyrighted] work.”  17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(A). 

[PAGE 207]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
204 
 
contain sufficient originality in their selection, coordination, or arrangement.1035  
In those cases, section 1201 would apply to circumvention of TPMs that control 
access to the data generated by vehicles and vessels. 
c.  Asserted Noninfringing Uses 
Proponents asserted that the proposed uses constitute fair uses under section 107 
of the Copyright Act.1036  These uses include, for instance, accessing data or 
authorizing others to review performance data, evaluating driver safety, or 
increasing knowledge of vehicle operations including safety features and fuel 
economy.  Opponents did not engage in substantive analyses of the four fair use 
factors.1037  Because proponents have provided evidence that the proposed uses 
are the same, or similar, across vehicle types, the Register concludes that a single 
fair use analysis is appropriate.1038   
Regarding the first fair use factor—the purpose and character of the use—MEMA 
asserted that the purpose and character of the proposed uses weigh in its favor.  
Proponents alleged that several uses—“analyz[ing] and mak[ing] important 
determinations about [consumers’] own driving practices, the safety and 
efficiency of their vehicles, the timing and possible causes of accidents and 
malfunctions, and potential replacement parts that may improve the 
performance and longevity of their vehicles”—are all non-commercial.1039  They 
asserted that “evaluat[ing] how [owners’ and lessees’] vehicles serve [their] 
unique needs, grant[ing] aftermarket services providers access to certain vehicle 
 
1035 See U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, COMPENDIUM OF U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE PRACTICES § 508.1 (3d ed. 
2021); CACI, Inc. v. U.S. Navy, 674 F. Supp. 3d 257, 277 (E.D. Va. 2023); Digit. Drilling Data Sys. 
LLC v. Petrolink Servs., No. 4:15‐CV‐02172, 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 83158, at *14–21 (S.D. Tex. May 
16, 2018); Merch. Transaction Sys. Inc. v. Nelcela, Inc., No. CV 2‐1954, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 25663, at 
*56–57 (D. Ariz. Mar. 17, 2009); DSMC, Inc. v. Convera Corp., 479 F. Supp. 2d 68, 80–83 (D.D.C. 
2007); see also 2021 Recommendation at 138–39 (discussing the possibility that data outputs may 
qualify for copyright protection); 2015 Recommendation at 393 & n.2644 (similar). 
1036 See e.g., MEMA Class 7 Initial at 4–5; see also 17 U.S.C. § 107 (fair use). 
1037 See Auto Innovators Class 7 Opp’n at 10; Tr. at 40:18–41:02 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Humphrey, Auto 
Innovators). 
1038 Tr. at 38:17–40:01 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Jasnow, MEMA); 2021 Recommendation at 208.  But see Tr. 
at 39:20–22 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Jasnow, MEMA) (“[T]here might be different use cases with respect to 
a commercial vehicle or a personal vehicle” (emphasis added)). 
1039 MEMA Class 7 Initial at 4.  At the hearing, proponents also discussed commercial vehicle 
owners and independent operators of heavy‐duty vehicles using data for lawful purposes.  Tr. at 
38:17–39:07 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Jasnow, MEMA). 

[PAGE 208]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
205 
 
performance metrics, and monitor[ing] use of the family car” are “primarily noncommercial in nature when undertaken by or on behalf of the vehicle owner or 
lessee for his or her own personal use.”1040  Proponents further argued that the 
purposes of the proposed uses “differ[] significantly from that of the original 
work” because they seek to use the data within the copyrightable software to 
“derive new insight and understanding about their own driving habits and 
vehicle performance,” that “add[s] something new, with a further purpose of 
different character.”1041   
The Register agrees that the proposed uses serve a different purpose than the 
copyrighted works and are either non-commercial or not primarily commercial 
in nature.1042  She therefore concludes that the analysis of the first factor supports 
a finding of fair use. 
The Register also agrees with MEMA that the second fair use factor—the nature 
of the copyrighted work—favors fair use.  Proponents correctly noted that the 
second factor “calls for recognition that some works are closer to the core of 
intended copyright protection than others.”1043  As the Register determined in 
previous rulemakings, the “vehicle software is a functional work used for the 
limited purpose of operating a vehicle, rather than a creative work with 
expressive or artistic value.”1044  
 
1040 MEMA Class 7 Initial at 4; see also MEMA Class 7 Reply at 5 (“[T]he possible uses of telematics 
and vehicle operational data under this proposed Class 7 exemption are largely non‐ 
commercial.”). 
1041 MEMA Class 7 Initial at 4–5; see also DOJ Antitrust & FTC Class 7 Reply at 16, 17 (discussing 
that accessing data “is useful for numerous non‐infringing purposes including the repair and 
maintenance of vehicles, as well as other valuable monitoring uses”).  Proponents further contend 
that any “insights will be limited to the user’s own vehicle, with little, if any, value to anyone 
other than the vehicle owner or lessee.”  MEMA Class 7 Initial at 5. 
1042 The Office recognizes that the information gathered from the data within the copyrighted 
software may be utilized by other downstream actors for diagnosis, maintenance, and repair 
purposes, which may be commercial in nature. 
1043 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 586; see also MEMA Class 7 Initial at 5. 
1044 See MEMA Class 7 Initial at 5 (citing 2015 Recommendation at 301); see also DOJ Antitrust & 
FTC Class 7 Reply at 17 (“Telematics data [is] . . . primarily functional and used for repair rather 
than creative works with expressive or artistic value.”).  The Register likewise determined that 
the computer software within vessels may be functional in nature and that repair implicating a 
vessel ECU’s informational and operational aspects is likely to be fair use.  See 2021 
 

[PAGE 209]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
206 
 
MEMA contended that the third factor—the amount and substantiality of the 
portion used in relation to the copyrighted work as a whole—weighs in favor of 
fair use because while owners and lessees may copy the software, they are 
“unlikely to reproduce or otherwise use any substantial portion” of it,1045 and will 
only use a “minimal” portion of the work.1046  MEMA further claimed that access 
to the software is necessary “merely to retrieve the non-copyrightable data” 
generated by vehicles and vessels.1047  Finally, they stated that courts have held 
that “the third factor does not necessarily weigh against fair use when” an 
alleged infringer creates copies of copyrighted software in order to analyze and 
understand its functions.1048   
The Register concludes that the third factor, though somewhat favoring fair use, 
should be given little weight.  Based on the record, any copying necessary to 
retrieve and access data is likely to be minimal or of an incidental nature.1049  The 
amount used therefore is reasonable relative to the purpose of the use.1050 
Discussing the fourth factor—the effect of the use upon the potential market for 
or value of the copyrighted work—MEMA asserted that accessing data would 
not result in harm to the potential market for computer software within vehicles 
and vessels.  It observed that the Register previously concluded that “computer 
programs on the majority of ECUs are only meaningful in connection with the 
vehicle, that the copies are generally sold only with the vehicle, and that the 
 
Recommendation at 199, 201–02, 208; see also 2018 Recommendation at 195–200; 2015 
Recommendation at 234–37. 
1045 MEMA Class 7 Initial at 5. 
1046 Tr. at 39:13–40:01 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Jasnow, MEMA). 
1047 MEMA Class 7 Initial at 5; see also Tr. at 26:22–27:03, 39:13–40:01 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Jasnow, 
MEMA) (discussing accessing some portion or a minimal portion of the copyrighted software). 
1048 MEMA Class 7 Initial at 5 (citing Connectix Corp., 203 F.3d at 599–601). 
1049 Even in situations where the work must be copied in its entirety, which does not appear 
contemplated by proponents, such copying is not dispositive in rejecting a claim to fair use, but 
has been found permissible where necessary to achieve a transformative purpose.  See Google, 593 
U.S. at 34 (“The ‘substantiality’ factor will generally weigh in favor of fair use where . . . the 
amount of copying was tethered to a valid, and transformative, purpose.”); Connectix Corp., 203 
F.3d at 605–06; 2021 Recommendation at 211 (“[C]ourts have nonetheless concluded that use of 
the entirety of a work is permissible where necessary to achieve a transformative purpose.”).  
1050 The work’s location, whether in a vehicle or vessel, does not appear to impact the amount of 
the work used to access the data.   

[PAGE 210]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
207 
 
consumer pays for those copies when purchasing the vehicle.”1051  It also noted 
that “[t]here is limited, if any, market for vehicle software as a standalone 
product that is separate and distinct from the market for vehicles,” arguing that 
any impact would be minute at most.1052   
Consistent with prior rulemakings,1053 and with the evidence proponents present, 
the Register concludes that the fourth factor weighs in favor of fair use.  There is 
no specific evidence that a market or potential market exists for the copyrighted 
software alone or that granting the proposed exemption would negatively 
impact any such market or potential market.1054  To the contrary, the record 
suggests that if a separate market did exist, enabling a greater number of owners 
and lessees to make noninfringing uses of the material could bolster the market 
by adding participants and beneficiaries.   
Weighing the fair use factors together and considering the record provided by 
proponents, the Register concludes that circumventing computer software within 
vehicles and vessels to access operational data is likely to be noninfringing. 
d.  Causation 
The Register finds that MEMA has met its burden of showing that the statutory 
prohibition on circumvention of TPMs limits its ability to engage in the proposed 
uses.  But for the prohibition, users likely could gain lawful access to vehicle 
operational data and telematics for the desired purposes.1055 
 
1051 MEMA Class 7 Initial at 5 (quoting 2015 Recommendation at 236); see also DOJ Antitrust & 
FTC Class 7 Reply at 17 (“Copyrighted ECU programming is sold with each vehicle and is 
designed in tandem with the specific ECU installed in the vehicle.  The market for copyrighted 
ECU programming is, therefore, limited” and the “access contemplated under th e proposed 
exemptions bolsters the market for the copyrighted works.”). 
1052 MEMA Class 7 Initial at 5; see also Tr. at 40:09–16 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Greenstein, Auto Care Ass’n) 
(discussing the effected market). 
1053 See 2021 Recommendation at 208; see also 2018 Recommendation at 195–200; 2015 
Recommendation at 234–37. 
1054 Cf. Software Study at 41.  See generally 2021 Recommendation at 139–42. 
1055 See MEMA Class 7 Initial at 2, 6; see also MEMA Class 7 Post‐Hearing Resp. at 1 (May 28, 2024) 
(explaining one must “circumvent[] TPMs in order to grant access to one’s vehicle data to a third 
party service provider of the vehicle owner’s choosing (rather than to the OEM)”). 

[PAGE 211]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
208 
 
e.  Asserted Adverse Effects 
MEMA asserted that the prohibition on circumvention adversely affects users’ 
noninfringing access to computer programs that house operational and 
telematics data within vehicles and vessels.  They argued that without the 
proposed exemption, users are “excluded from benefiting from the data they 
themselves have generated by driving.”1056  Specifically, they contended that TPMs 
and section 1201 will continue to “stifle competition” because original equipment 
manufacturers have “exclusive control over that data,” which “ultimately 
result[s] in less competition and higher prices for consumers” with respect to the 
markets for vehicle service and aftermarket parts.1057  Additionally, they stated 
that TPMs restrict “access to driving records and vehicle logs” that could be used 
to “monitor or evaluate the driving habits of new drivers using the family 
car,”1058 or which drivers could provide to insurance companies evaluating driver 
safety to establish usage-backed rates.1059  Lastly, MEMA claimed that TPMs 
“creat[e] inefficiencies in vehicle repair and maintenance processes” by, for 
example, precluding owners and lessees from informing service providers about 
performance metrics before bringing the vehicle or vessel in for service.1060 
Opponents asserted that owners and lessees have sufficient alternatives to 
circumvention such that an exemption is unwarranted.  First, opponents alleged 
that current statutory exemptions are sufficient to enable many proposed uses.  
Joint Creators I, for instance, contended that section 1201(i) (the “PII Exemption”) 
“already contains an exemption allowing users to circumvent technological 
protection measures that collect personal data” to the “extent that driving 
records constitute driver’s personal data.”1061  Moreover, opponents argued that 
insofar as many of the proposed uses pertain to diagnosis, maintenance, and 
repair, circumvention is already permitted under the Repair Exemption.1062  
 
1056 MEMA Class 7 Initial at 7. 
1057 Id. at 2–3. 
1058 Id. at 3; see also Tr. at 10:03–07 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Jasnow, MEMA). 
1059 Tr. at 9:21–10:02 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Jasnow, MEMA). 
1060 MEMA Class 7 Initial at 3. 
1061 Joint Creators I Class 7 Opp’n at 3, 5; see also 17 U.S.C. § 1201(i) (permanent exemption for the 
protection of personally identifying information). 
1062 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(13); see also AEM Class 7 Opp’n at 5 (“[T]he proposed Exemption appears 
to be redundant and cumulative with respect to the existing 1201 exemption that already covers 
 

[PAGE 212]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
209 
 
Second, opponents stated that original equipment manufacturers (“OEMs”) 
voluntarily provide access to the underlying data relevant to identified use cases.  
For example, Auto Innovators described vehicle manufacturers’ 2014 
Memorandum of Understanding and 2023 Data Sharing Commitment, under 
which many automotive companies agree to provide certain data and 
information to independent vehicle repair shops.1063  Third, they suggested that 
many use cases related to monitoring do not require circumvention because 
third-party applications available on GPS-enabled devices provide the same 
data.1064  
Proponents contended that current statutory exemptions are insufficient to cover 
the proposed class.  Regarding section 1201(i), the PII Exemption, MEMA argued 
that the exemption requires beneficiaries to disable data collection and 
dissemination, and thus “provides no solution for a vehicle owner who does not 
want to disable the collection of data.”1065  Regarding the sufficiency of the Repair 
Exemption, proponents stated that even though some of the use cases involve 
accessing similar data for similar purposes, the Repair Exemption is insufficient, 
even in the vehicle repair and maintenance context.1066  MEMA explained that 
some use cases, such as monitoring driver safety, are not for purposes of 
diagnosis and repair.1067   
 
what is necessary or essential for repair and diagnosis (and even lawful modification of a vehicle 
function, where the latter has safety risks).”). 
1063 Auto Innovators Class 7 Opp’n at 5–8; Tr. at 18:17–19:23, 58:09–13 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Humphrey, 
Auto Innovators).  See also Auto Innovators Class 7 Post‐Hearing Resp. at 2 (May 28, 2024) (noting 
that “the [U.S. Government Accountability Office (“GAO”)] Report provides support for the 
[agreements] being codified through federal law [] because many of the independent repair 
stakeholders interviewed by the GAO expressed concern about the voluntary nature of both 
agreements and a potential lack of enforceability”); AEM Class 7 Opp’n at 2, 5 (noting voluntary 
measures by some manufacturers and service providers related to off ‐road vehicle telematics 
data); NAM Class 7 Opp’n at 8 & n.17 (noting voluntary measures by some manufacturers 
related to agricultural equipment). 
1064 See, e.g., Auto Innovators Class 7 Opp’n at 7. 
1065 MEMA Class 7 Initial at 6; see 17 U.S.C. § 1201(i)(C)–(D) (requiring that the act of 
circumvention must have the “sole effect” and “sole[] purpose” of preventing data collection or 
dissemination). 
1066 Tr. at 8:05–10:17 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Jasnow, MEMA) (contending that the proposed exemption is 
“a little bit beyond the scope of the existing exemption for diagnosis, repair or modification”).  
1067 Tr. at 10:03–07 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Jasnow, MEMA); see also MEMA Class 7 Post‐Hearing Resp. at 
1–2 (describing customizing vehicles). 

[PAGE 213]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
210 
 
The Register finds that neither the PII Exemption nor the Repair Exemption 
permits all the non-infringing uses that proponents identified.  Uses that existing 
exemptions do not cover include monitoring driver safety for insurance ratesetting, and aggregating data to analyze a fleet of vehicles.  The record is 
insufficient to determine whether certain other repair-related uses discussed by 
hearing participants are, in fact, permitted under the Repair Exemption.1068   
Proponents also contested the sufficiency of the proffered alternatives to 
circumvention.  They contended that purported alternatives to circumvention—
voluntary agreements and third-party applications—do not provide owners and 
lessees with alternatives that address the adverse effect on non-infringing uses.  
As proponents pointed out,1069 and as the Register has previously determined,1070 
voluntary agreements between OEMs are limited in scope.  The voluntary 
agreements opponents cite do not address all classes of vehicles, they include 
only some OEMs and some independent repair shops,1071 and they lack 
enforcement mechanisms to bind signatories.1072  Additionally, third-party 
devices and applications provide insufficient alternatives to circumvention.  
 
1068 See, e.g., Tr. at 59:15–23 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Foshee, Auto Care Ass’n) (asserting most independent 
repair shops refer “up to five vehicles per month to dealerships because of vehicle data 
restrictions, because they can’t fix them”).  Cf. Tr. at 62:05–18 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Englund, Joint 
Creators I) (responding that “it seems like that’s repair if anything is repair, and so isn’t a reason 
to grant a new exemption”). 
1069 See MEMA Class 7 Reply at 3–4 (“[N]either the MOU nor the Data Sharing Commitment cover 
uses by consumers outside the scope of diagnosis and repair. . . . [N]ot all OEMs are party to the 
[agreements] and certain types of vehicles, such as mechanized agricultural vehicles, motorcycles 
and RVs, are not covered by the MOU or Data Sharing Commitment.”  Activities conducted 
pursuant to the MOU require consumers “to purchase duplicative copies as part of the repair 
process.”).  
1070  2015 Recommendation at 240 (evaluating that the 2014 Memorandum of Understanding 
between automobile manufacturers did not fully address the adverse impacts of TPMs in the 
context of land vehicle repair, because, “[a]mong other things . . . the MOU does not apply to a 
significant portion of vehicles that would be covered by the proposed exemption” and lacks 
adequate enforcement mechanisms). 
1071 See Tr. at 21:04–10 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Foshee, Auto Care Ass’n) (noting that the 2023 Data Sharing 
Commitment is only supported by the OEMs and an organization representing “less than two 
percent of the independent shops in the United States”). 
1072 See Tr. at 20:06–13 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Foshee, Auto Care Ass’n) (characterizing “the 2014 MOU 
and the  
. . . Data‐Sharing Agreement” as “voluntary.  They are non‐binding.  There’s no enforcement 
mechanism.”). 

[PAGE 214]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
211 
 
Proponents noted that those devices relate to only some of the proposed uses 
and provide limited information compared to vehicle operational data.1073  The 
Register finds that as proposed alternatives to circumvention, voluntary 
agreements and third-party applications do not sufficiently mitigate the adverse 
effect on non-infringing uses. 
Turning to the section 1201 statutory factors, proponents argued that TPMs 
adversely affect the first factor—the availability of copyrighted works for use.  
As noted above, MEMA argued that the proposed exemption aims “solely to 
allow vehicle owners and lessees or those acting under their direction to copy, 
download, and otherwise utilize non-copyrightable data stored within [] 
copyrighted works.”1074  It also argued that to the extent that the database schema 
and other related code are copyrightable, “vehicle software is a functional work 
used for the limited purpose of operating a vehicle, rather than a creative work 
with expressive or artistic value.”1075  Although opponents did not directly 
address this statutory factor, NAM suggested that “[a]llowing the proposed 
exemption for vehicles’ operational data would undermine [the DMCA’s] 
statutory scheme, exposing manufacturers’ intellectual property and 
disincentivizing further innovation into groundbreaking technologies.”1076 
Considering the above arguments, the Register finds that the first statutory factor 
favors the proposed exemption.  Under the proposed exemption and consistent 
with the functional purpose of the copyrighted works, owners and lessees—as 
well as independent repair shops and other authorized third parties acting at the 
owner or lessee’s direction—may use the functional copyrighted works 
integrated into existing vehicles to obtain vehicle operational data.1077  At a 
minimum, the proposed exemption facilitates use by an additional party—the 
 
1073 Tr. at 7:01–10, 28:18–25 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Jasnow, MEMA) (noting that “telematics data goes . . . 
beyond [the scope of just] geolocation data,” which applications and devices might be able to 
track, and listing telematics data uses beyond location data and basic facts about use, including 
driving style, aggressiveness, cautiousness, and information about the operating environment.); 
Tr. at 46:06–23 (April 18, 2024) (Wiens, iFixit) (noting that a phone app would not differentiate 
data collection based on which vehicle he is in or if he is driving). 
1074 MEMA Class 7 Initial at 4. 
1075 Id. at 5. 
1076 NAM Class 7 Opp’n at 3.  This impliedly suggests that manufacturers would invest less in the 
creation of new copyrighted works, reducing access to said works for consumers.  
1077 DOJ Antitrust and the FTC Class 7 Reply at 16. 

[PAGE 215]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
212 
 
owner or lessee of the vehicle or vessel—whose data is unreadable absent use of 
the copyrighted software.1078  Finally, despite conclusory references to 
innovation, opponents provided no evidence that as a result of the exemption 
OEMs would cease to develop and incorporate useful software in vehicles or 
vessels. 
Based on the current record, the second and third statutory 1201 factors—the 
availability for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational purposes, and 
the impact on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or 
research—bear little weight.  While proponents reference potential educational, 
teaching, and research uses;1079 opponents do not address these factors.  
However, these proposed uses are not well-supported by record evidence and 
the Register is not persuaded that they are the kinds of uses contemplated by 
these statutory factors.   
Regarding the fourth statutory factor, the effect of the use upon the potential 
market for or value of the copyrighted work, MEMA contended that “[t]here is 
limited, if any, market for vehicle software as a standalone product that is 
separate and distinct from the market for vehicles.”1080  Moreover, Auto Care 
Association explained that “[t]o the extent that there is an effective market, it’s a 
market that is not with respect to anything copyrightable.  It’s with respect to the 
repair or convoyed [sic] services, for example, which don’t have any relation to 
the market for the copyrightable work itself.”1081  
Opponents identified two relevant market effects.  First, NAM represented that 
“[a]llowing the proposed exemption for vehicles’ operational data would 
undermine [the DMCA] statutory scheme, exposing manufacturers’ intellectual 
property and disincentivizing further innovation into groundbreaking 
technologies.”1082  Second, Joint Creators I expressed concern that, absent 
 
1078 Tr. at 12:20–13:14 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Jasnow, MEMA). 
1079 See DOJ Antitrust and the FTC Class 7 Reply at 16–17 (“[I]ndependent service shops [can] use 
such data to train employees in the diagnosis and interpretation of telematics information,” and 
“research into vehicle operation, safety, driver behavior, and other valuable areas of inquiry 
[which] could be valuable in promoting public health and safety, for example, by enabling the 
analysis of driving practices and behaviors, and the safety and efficiency of various vehicles.”). 
1080 MEMA Class 7 Initial at 5. 
1081 Tr. at 40:09–14 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Greenstein, Auto Care Ass’n). 
1082 NAM Class 7 Opp’n at 3.  

[PAGE 216]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
213 
 
protective language, expressive creative works like video games, movies, 
television shows, and songs, might face market harms.1083   
The Register agrees with proponents that the proposed exemption will not 
negatively affect any potential market or value of the copyrighted software code 
comprising ECUs.  This conclusion comports with her analysis of the fourth fair 
use factor.  Opponents do not contest proponents’ assertion,1084 or their 
supporting record evidence, that the pace of change in vehicle software 
integration and automative innovation is “nothing short of astonishing.”1085  
Consistent with this observation, it appears unlikely that the proposed 
exemption will have a negative effect on innovation.  Regarding “other 
copyrighted works,” the Register agrees with Joint Creators I that there may be 
some effect on the market for creative works unrelated to vehicle maintenance.  
To ameliorate this concern, participants reached a consensus that a limitation for 
“other copyrighted works” should be included, as it has in past rulemakings, 
including for the Repair Exemption.1086  Based on the foregoing, the Register 
again concludes that the market effects on copyrighted software integrated into 
vehicles are negligible.   
The fifth statutory factor permits consideration of other factors.  The Register 
takes this opportunity to address three non-copyright issues that recur 
throughout the record: privacy, safety, and unlawful activities. 
Privacy and safety issues arose throughout this proceeding, although 
participants disagreed as to their relevance and effects.  Auto Innovators urged 
that “privacy [is] not something that we should be concerned with” in these 
proceedings,1087 whereas AEM stated that “[t]he proposed Exemption raises 
 
1083 Joint Creators I Class 7 Opp’n at 6–7. 
1084 Opponents claim that the exemption is unnecessary because it is encompassed in the Repair 
Exemption.  See Tr. at 37:10–15 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators I); AEM Class 7 Opp’n at 
5.   
1085 MEMA Class 7 Initial at 2.  
1086 MEMA Class 7 Initial at 6 (including “other copyrighted works” in proposed regulation); Tr. 
at 17:20–18:12 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Englund, Joint Creators I) (“[P]roponents have to varying degrees 
accepted” the “other copyrighted works” limitation and the “separate subscription services” 
exception.). 
1087 Tr. at 63:16–20 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Humphrey, Auto Innovators); see also Tr. at 56:03–10 (Apr. 18, 
2024) (Humphrey, Auto Innovators) (observing “if we’re going to allow broad access to this data 
 

[PAGE 217]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
214 
 
significant privacy concerns because certain telematics software and data could 
constitute personal data or personal identification data,” subject to regulation 
under different legal regimes.1088  In addition to regulatory compliance, AEM 
noted that “[t]he proposed exemption creates a new class of third parties to 
whom data may be shared, over whom the manufacturer may have no 
contractual privity, no control or insight and may not be able to adequately 
address in privacy policies and consents.”1089  NAM also cited data privacy 
concerns connected to the right-to-repair, noting that “expanded connectivity of 
smart products would engender an environment susceptible to data security 
risks.”1090  
In contrast, DOJ Antitrust and the FTC noted that the Federal Trade 
Commission’s Nixing the Fix Report “contained no empirical evidence to suggest 
that independent repair shops are more or less likely than authorized repair 
shops to compromise or misuse customer data,” nor did diagnostic and firmware 
patches provided to independent repairers “introduce cybersecurity risks,” and 
that with adequate information and tools, “consumers and independent repair 
shops would be equally capable of minimizing cybersecurity risks as authorized 
repairers.”1091   
Proponents also suggested that OEMs themselves compromise owners’ data 
privacy,1092 and that the proposed exemption could in fact provide vehicle 
owners with tools to protect their data from such OEMs1093 and a given vehicle’s 
 
and allow users to potentially authorize others to use it, there are concerns about personal data I 
think getting out there.  If someone were to give it to a certain company, what would happen to 
that data, how would it be used[?]”). 
1088 AEM Class 7 Opp’n at 6. 
1089 Id. 
1090 NAM Class 7 Opp’n at 2. 
1091 DOJ Antitrust and the FTC Class 7 Reply at 10. 
1092 See, e.g., Tr. at 57:02–12 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Foshee, Auto Care Ass’n) (arguing that if “auto 
manufacturers can monetize the personal data off the vehicles, which is what they’re doing 
today[, but] your concern [is] that a consumer might use their own data to monetize it , and that 
seems to have the paradigm backwards, in terms of who should have control over where their 
data goes”).  
1093 Tr. at 62:20–63:14 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Wiens, iFixit) (“[A]s a vehicle owner, I would be very 
concerned about my driving patterns, driving data going back to a Chinese manufacturer.  So 
being able to . . . manage and control and delete, modify the data that I own on my vehicle, where 
I may not trust the OEM . . . . Do we really trust the OEM with the data?  I certainly don’t.”).  

[PAGE 218]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
215 
 
subsequent buyer.1094  The Register concludes that while OEMs will have fewer 
tools to “vet third parties”1095 with respect to data handling, empowering owners 
to voluntarily share the data they generate when driving does not present a 
significant privacy harm.  Ultimately, she credits DOJ Antitrust and the FTC’s 
view that the proposed exemption would in fact have very little effect on the 
privacy considerations discussed above, and that neither consumers nor 
independent repair shops are more or less responsible than OEMs in protecting 
data privacy. 
Several opponents raised issues regarding safety, private contracts, and 
regulatory compliance—but these issues are beyond the scope of this rulemaking 
and unsupported by the record.1096  The record does not support the assertion 
that the proposed exemption would harm safety interests or undermine 
regulations governing them.  The recommended regulatory language is explicit 
that the exemption would not provide a safe harbor from or defense to liability 
under other laws and regulations.  Similarly, despite conclusory statements from 
opponents, the record does not indicate that the proposed exemption will lead to 
an increase in the misappropriation of trade secrets or affect liability for such 
conduct.  Section 1201 exemptions, including the one proposed here, also have 
no ability to alter any contract or contractual relationship between private 
parties.  This includes any potential effects on warranties, licensing agreements, 
or contractual terms, as well as any liability for damage to vehicles or vessels. 
3. NTIA Comments 
NTIA supports an exemption to access vehicle operational data, including 
diagnostic and telematics data.1097  It describes the “rapid” and continuing 
“proliferation of vehicle data” and the importance of granting consumers the 
“ability to obtain and share data directly produced by their vehicles” as 
 
1094 Tr. at 15:15–16:18 (Apr. 18, 2024) (Wiens, iFixit) (identifying that consumers may want to 
“wipe the previous owner’s data completely off the car before [they] sell it to the next person, so 
they don’t have data leakage”).   
1095 AEM Class 7 Opp’n at 7. 
1096 See, e.g., id. at 6 (“ As currently understood, telematics data is also subject to privacy, contracts, 
end user licenses, trade secrets, and may constitute confidential information.”).  
1097 NTIA Letter at 5, 61.  Although NTIA’s comments are limited to vehicle data, the Office 
understands its recommendation to encompass both vehicle and vessel data.  See id. at 63 
(proposing regulatory language that includes access to data within vehicles and marine vessels). 

[PAGE 219]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
216 
 
justifying the exemption.1098  Similar to the Register, NTIA agrees that the 
proposed exemption should operate as a “standalone” exemption, “separate 
from the existing vehicle repair exemption” found in section 37 C.F.R. § 
201.40(b)(13).1099  While recognizing that the two exemptions may be “closely 
related” in some situations, it states that the proposed exemption’s purpose and 
use cases are focused on understanding vehicle data outside the vehicle repair 
context.1100   
NTIA also notes that vehicle operational data can be segmented into separate 
systems, placing such data outside the scope of the Repair Exemption, making a 
separate exemption necessary to ensure consumer access.1101  Additionally, it 
agrees with the Register that the existing agreements discussed during the 
rulemaking are not “viable alternative[s],” but instead act as a “barrier” to 
accessing and sharing vehicle data.1102  Finally, NTIA suggests that “to the extent 
possible,” the proposed exemption should permit third-parties to assist with 
carrying out the proposed uses.1103  It notes that allowing third-party assistance 
“further empowers” vehicle owners to control their own vehicle-generated data 
and to “seek out additional assistance” in interpreting that data.1104  Any concerns 
with such assistance, it asserts, are reduced by requiring a vehicle owner’s or 
lessee’s consent.1105  
Regarding the proposed regulatory language, NTIA recommends including the 
word “analyze.”1106  It believes that this inclusion better “recognize[s] the 
importance” of the rights permitted under the exemption (i.e., accessing, storing, 
sharing, and analyzing the data) and “highlights its scope beyond” the current 
 
1098 Id. at 62. 
1099 Id. at 61. 
1100 Id. at 62–63. 
1101 Id. at 63–64. 
1102 Id. at 64.  NTIA does not specifically name the agreements it references, but the Office 
understands it to mean those discussed during the rulemaking process ( e.g., 2014 Memorandum 
of Understanding). 
1103 NTIA Letter at 62, 63. 
1104 Id. at 62–63; see id. at 63 (noting that the Office has permitted third party assistance in previous 
rulemakings). 
1105 Id. at 63. 
1106 Id. at 5, 61–62. 

[PAGE 220]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
217 
 
repair exemption.1107  As NTIA explains, once vehicle owners or lessees have 
obtained the data, it “may not be readily readable” and may require the 
assistance of others.1108  This assistance, it suggests, “ensures” consumers can 
“truly own and understand” the data, thereby furthering the intended goals of 
the proposed exemption.1109   
The Register’s recommendation aligns with most of NTIA’s suggestions.  As 
discussed above, a distinct exemption is warranted separate from the Repair 
Exemption, based on the former’s disparate, through sometimes overlapping, 
uses.  Further, while not opining on the legality of third-party assistance as it 
relates to section 1201(b), she agrees that given the increased complexities 
surrounding data extraction and use, the proposed exemption should extend 
beyond lawful owners or lessees.  The Register, however, does not recommend 
including “analyze” in the regulatory language, as she believes it is unnecessary 
and encompassed within the proposed uses discussed above.   
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
Proponents have satisfied their burden of showing that technological measures 
applied to computer programs within vehicles and vessels have, or are likely to 
have, an adverse effect on noninfringing uses.  The Register accordingly 
recommends adoption of the proposed exemption.  She also proposes adopting 
regulatory provisions parallel to those in the Repair Exemption regarding the 
applicability of the exemption to other laws, separate subscription services, and 
unauthorized access to other copyrighted works. 
Accordingly, the Register recommends that the Librarian designate the following 
class:  
Computer programs that are contained in and control the functioning of 
a lawfully acquired motorized land vehicle or marine vessel such as a 
personal automobile or boat, commercial vehicle or vessel, or 
mechanized agricultural vehicle or vessel, except for programs accessed 
through a separate subscription service, to allow vehicle or vessel 
owners and lessees, or those acting on their behalf, to access, store, and 
share operational data, including diagnostic and telematics data, where 
 
1107 Id. at 63. 
1108 Id. 
1109 Id. 

[PAGE 221]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
218 
 
such circumvention is not accomplished for the purpose of gaining 
unauthorized access to other copyrighted works. Eligibility for this 
exemption is not a safe harbor from, or defense to, liability under other 
applicable laws, including without limitation regulations promulgated 
by the Department of Transportation or the Environmental Protection 
Agency. 
 

[PAGE 222]
section 1201 rulemaking
u.s. copyright office
appendix  recommended regulatory language

[PAGE 223]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
1 
 
Recommended Regulatory Language 
(a) General.  This section prescribes the classes of copyrighted works for which 
the Librarian of Congress has determined, pursuant to 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C) 
and (D), that noninfringing uses by persons who are users of such works are, or 
are likely to be, adversely affected. The prohibition against circumvention of 
technological measures that control access to copyrighted works set forth in 17 
U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(A) shall not apply to such users of the prescribed classes of 
copyrighted works. 
(b) Classes of copyrighted works. Pursuant to the authority set forth in 17 U.S.C. 
1201(a)(1)(C) and (D), and upon the recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights, the Librarian has determined that the prohibition against 
circumvention of technological measures that effectively control access to 
copyrighted works set forth in 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(A) shall not apply to persons 
who engage in noninfringing uses of the following classes of copyrighted works: 
(1) Motion pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in 
17 U.S.C. 101, where the motion picture is lawfully made and acquired on 
a DVD protected by the Content Scramble System, on a Blu-ray disc 
protected by the Advanced Access Content System, or via a digital 
transmission protected by a technological measure, and the person 
engaging in circumvention under paragraphs (b)(1)(i) and (b)(1)(ii)(A) and 
(B) of this section reasonably believes that non-circumventing alternatives 
are unable to produce the required level of high-quality content, or the 
circumvention is undertaken using screen-capture technology that 
appears to be offered to the public as enabling the reproduction of motion 
pictures after content has been lawfully acquired and decrypted, where 
circumvention is undertaken solely in order to make use of short portions 
of the motion pictures in the following instances: 
(i) For the purpose of criticism or comment: 
(A) For use in documentary filmmaking, or other films 
where the motion picture clip is used in parody or for its 
biographical or historically significant nature; 
(B) For use in noncommercial videos (including videos 
produced for a paid commission if the commissioning 
entity’s use is noncommercial); or 

[PAGE 224]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
2 
 
(C) For use in nonfiction multimedia e-books. 
(ii) For educational purposes: 
(A) By college and university faculty and students or 
kindergarten through twelfth-grade (K–12) educators and 
students (where the K–12 student is circumventing under 
the direct supervision of an educator), or employees acting 
at the direction of faculty of such educational institutions for 
the purpose of teaching a course, including of accredited 
general educational development (GED) programs, for the 
purpose of criticism, comment, teaching, or scholarship; 
(B) By faculty of accredited nonprofit educational 
institutions and employees acting at the direction of faculty 
members of those institutions, for purposes of offering 
massive open online courses (MOOCs) to officially enrolled 
students through online platforms (which platforms 
themselves may be operated for profit), in film studies or 
other courses requiring close analysis of film and media 
excerpts, for the purpose of criticism or comment, where the 
MOOC provider through the online platform limits 
transmissions to the extent technologically feasible to such 
officially enrolled students, institutes copyright policies and 
provides copyright informational materials to faculty, 
students, and relevant staff members, and applies 
technological measures that reasonably prevent 
unauthorized further dissemination of a work in accessible 
form to others or retention of the work for longer than the 
course session by recipients of a transmission through the 
platform, as contemplated by 17 U.S.C. 110(2); or 
(C) By educators and participants in nonprofit digital and 
media literacy programs offered by libraries, museums, and 
other nonprofit entities with an educational mission, in the 
course of face-to-face instructional activities, for the purpose 
of criticism or comment, except that such users may only 
circumvent using screen-capture technology that appears to 
be offered to the public as enabling the reproduction of 

[PAGE 225]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
3 
 
motion pictures after content has been lawfully acquired and 
decrypted.  
(2) 
(i) Motion pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in 
17 U.S.C. 101, where the motion picture is lawfully acquired on a DVD 
protected by the Content Scramble System, on a Blu-ray disc protected by 
the Advanced Access Content System, or via a digital transmission 
protected by a technological measure, where:  
(A) Circumvention is undertaken by a disability services office or 
other unit of a kindergarten through twelfth-grade educational 
institution, college, or university engaged in and/or responsible for 
the provision of accessibility services for the purpose of adding 
captions and/or audio description to a motion picture to create an 
accessible version for students, faculty, or staff with disabilities;  
(B) The educational institution unit in paragraph (b)(2)(i)(A) of this 
section has a reasonable belief that the motion picture will be used 
for a specific future activity of the institution and, after a reasonable 
effort, has determined that an accessible version of sufficient 
quality cannot be obtained at a fair market price or in a timely 
manner, including where a copyright holder has not provided an 
accessible version of a motion picture that was included with a 
textbook; and  
(C) The accessible versions are provided to students or educators 
and stored by the educational institution in a manner intended to 
reasonably prevent unauthorized further dissemination of a work.  
(ii) For purposes of this paragraph (b)(2):  
(A) “Audio description” means an oral narration that provides an 
accurate rendering of the motion picture; 
(B) “Accessible version of sufficient quality” means a version that 
in the reasonable judgment of the educational institution unit has 
captions and/or audio description that are sufficient to meet the 
accessibility needs of students, faculty, or staff with disabilities and 

[PAGE 226]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
4 
 
are substantially free of errors that would materially interfere with 
those needs; and 
(C) Accessible materials created pursuant to this exemption and 
stored pursuant to paragraph (b)(2)(i)(C) of this section may be 
reused by the educational institution unit to meet the accessibility 
needs of students, faculty, or staff with disabilities pursuant to 
paragraphs (b)(2)(i)(A) and (B) of this section. 
(3) 
(i) Motion pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in 
17 U.S.C. 101, where the motion picture is lawfully acquired on a DVD 
protected by the Content Scramble System, or on a Blu-ray disc protected 
by the Advanced Access Content System, solely for the purpose of lawful 
preservation or the creation of a replacement copy of the motion picture, 
by an eligible library, archives, or museum, where:  
(A) Such activity is carried out without any purpose of direct or 
indirect commercial advantage;  
(B) The DVD or Blu-ray disc is damaged or deteriorating;  
(C) The eligible institution, after a reasonable effort, has determined 
that an unused and undamaged replacement copy cannot be 
obtained at a fair price and that no streaming service, download 
service, or on-demand cable and satellite service makes the motion 
picture available to libraries, archives, and museums at a fair price; 
and  
(D) The preservation or replacement copies are not distributed or 
made available outside of the physical premises of the eligible 
library, archives, or museum.  
(ii) For purposes of paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this section, a library, archives, 
or museum is considered “eligible” if—  
(A) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are open to 
the public and/or are routinely made available to researchers who 
are not affiliated with the library, archives, or museum;  
(B) The library, archives, or museum has a public service mission;  

[PAGE 227]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
5 
 
(C) The library, archives, or museum’s trained staff or volunteers 
provide professional services normally associated with libraries, 
archives, or museums;  
(D) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are 
composed of lawfully acquired and/or licensed materials; and  
(E) The library, archives, or museum implements reasonable digital 
security measures as appropriate for the activities permitted by 
paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this section. 
(4) 
(i) Motion pictures, as defined in 17 U.S.C. 101, where the motion picture 
is on a DVD protected by the Content Scramble System, on a Blu-ray disc 
protected by the Advanced Access Content System, or made available for 
digital download where:  
(A) The circumvention is undertaken by a researcher affiliated with 
a nonprofit institution of higher education, or by a student or 
information technology staff member of the institution at the 
direction of such researcher, solely to deploy text and data mining 
techniques on a corpus of motion pictures for the purpose of 
scholarly research and teaching;  
(B) The copy of each motion picture is lawfully acquired and 
owned by the institution, or licensed to the institution without a 
time limitation on access;  
(C) The person undertaking the circumvention or conducting 
research or teaching under this exemption views or listens to 
the contents of the motion pictures in the corpus solely to conduct 
text and data mining research or teaching;   
(D) The institution uses effective security measures to prevent 
dissemination or downloading of motion pictures in the corpus, 
and upon a reasonable request from a copyright owner who 
reasonably believes that their work is contained in the corpus, or a 
trade association representing such author, provide information to 
that copyright owner or trade association regarding the nature of 
such measures; and  

[PAGE 228]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
6 
 
(E) The institution limits access to the corpus to only the persons 
identified in paragraph (b)(4)(i)(A) of this section or to researchers 
affiliated with other nonprofit institutions of higher education, with 
all access provided only through secure connections and on the 
condition of authenticated credentials, solely for purposes of text 
and data mining research or teaching.  
(ii) For purposes of paragraph (b)(4)(i) of this section:  
(A) An institution of higher education is defined as one that:  
(1) Admits regular students who have a certificate of 
graduation from a secondary school or the equivalent of 
such a certificate;  
(2) Is legally authorized to provide a postsecondary 
education program;  
(3) Awards a bachelor’s degree or provides not less than a 
two-year program acceptable towards such a degree;  
(4) Is a public or other nonprofit institution; and  
(5) Is accredited by a nationally recognized accrediting 
agency or association.  
(B) The term “effective security measures” is defined as:  
(1) Security measures that have been agreed to by all 
interested copyright owners of motion pictures and 
institutions of higher education; or  
(2) Security measures that the institution uses to keep its 
own highly confidential information secure.  
(5) 
(i) Literary works, excluding computer programs and compilations that 
were compiled specifically for text and data mining purposes, distributed 
electronically where:  
(A) The circumvention is undertaken by a researcher affiliated with 
a nonprofit institution of higher education, or by a student or 

[PAGE 229]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
7 
 
information technology staff member of the institution at the 
direction of such researcher, solely to deploy text and data mining 
techniques on a corpus of literary works for the purpose of 
scholarly research and teaching;  
(B) The copy of each literary work is lawfully acquired and owned 
by the institution, or licensed to the institution without a time 
limitation on access;  
(C) The person undertaking the circumvention or conducting 
research or teaching under this exemption views the contents of the 
literary works in the corpus solely to conduct text and data mining 
research or teaching;   
(D) The institution uses effective security measures to prevent 
dissemination or downloading of literary works in the corpus, and 
upon a reasonable request from a copyright owner who reasonably 
believes that their work is contained in the corpus, or a trade 
association representing such author, provide information to that 
copyright owner or trade association regarding the nature of such 
measures; and  
(E) The institution limits access to the corpus to only the persons 
identified in paragraph (b)(5)(i)(A) of this section or to researchers 
affiliated with other nonprofit institutions of higher education, with 
all access provided only through secure connections and on the 
condition of authenticated credentials, solely for purposes of text 
and data mining research or teaching.  
(ii) For purposes of paragraph (b)(5)(i) of this section:  
(A) An institution of higher education is defined as one that:  
(1) Admits regular students who have a certificate of 
graduation from a secondary school or the equivalent of 
such a certificate;  
(2) Is legally authorized to provide a postsecondary 
education program;  

[PAGE 230]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
8 
 
(3) Awards a bachelor’s degree or provides not less than a 
two-year program acceptable towards such a degree;  
(4) Is a public or other nonprofit institution; and  
(5) Is accredited by a nationally recognized accrediting 
agency or association.  
(B) The term “effective security measures” is defined as:  
(1) Security measures that have been agreed to by all 
interested copyright owners of literary works and 
institutions of higher education; or  
(2) Security measures that the institution uses to keep its 
own highly confidential information secure.    
(6) 
(i) Literary works or previously published musical works that have been 
fixed in the form of text or notation, distributed electronically, that are 
protected by technological measures that either prevent the enabling of 
read-aloud functionality or interfere with screen readers or other 
applications or assistive technologies:  
(A) When a copy or phonorecord of such a work is lawfully 
obtained by an eligible person, as such a person is defined in 17 
U.S.C. 121; provided, however, that the rights owner is 
remunerated, as appropriate, for the market price of an inaccessible 
copy of the work as made available to the general public through 
customary channels; or 
(B) When such a work is lawfully obtained and used by an 
authorized entity pursuant to 17 U.S.C. 121. 
(ii) For the purposes of paragraph (b)(6)(i) of this section, a “phonorecord 
of such a work” does not include a sound recording of a performance of a 
musical work unless and only to the extent the recording is included as 
part of an audiobook or e-book.  
(7) Literary works consisting of compilations of data generated by medical 
devices or by their personal corresponding monitoring systems, where such 

[PAGE 231]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
9 
 
circumvention is undertaken by or on behalf of a patient for the sole purpose of 
lawfully accessing data generated by a patient’s own medical device or 
monitoring system. Eligibility for this exemption is not a safe harbor from, or 
defense to, liability under other applicable laws, including without limitation the 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, the Computer 
Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986, or regulations of the Food and Drug 
Administration. 
(8) Computer programs that enable wireless devices to connect to a wireless 
telecommunications network, when circumvention is undertaken solely in order 
to connect to a wireless telecommunications network and such connection is 
authorized by the operator of such network.  
(9) Computer programs that enable smartphones and portable all-purpose 
mobile computing devices to execute lawfully obtained software applications, 
where circumvention is accomplished for the sole purpose of enabling 
interoperability of such applications with computer programs on the smartphone 
or device, or to permit removal of software from the smartphone or device. For 
purposes of this paragraph (b)(9), a “portable all-purpose mobile computing 
device” is a device that is primarily designed to run a wide variety of programs 
rather than for consumption of a particular type of media content, is equipped 
with an operating system primarily designed for mobile use, and is intended to 
be carried or worn by an individual.  
(10) Computer programs that enable smart televisions to execute lawfully 
obtained software applications, where circumvention is accomplished for the 
sole purpose of enabling interoperability of such applications with computer 
programs on the smart television, and is not accomplished for the purpose of 
gaining unauthorized access to other copyrighted works. For purposes of this 
paragraph (b)(10), “smart televisions” includes both internet-enabled televisions, 
as well as devices that are physically separate from a television and whose 
primary purpose is to run software applications that stream authorized video 
from the internet for display on a screen. 
(11) Computer programs that enable voice assistant devices to execute lawfully 
obtained software applications, where circumvention is accomplished for the 
sole purpose of enabling interoperability of such applications with computer 
programs on the device, or to permit removal of software from the device, and is 
not accomplished for the purpose of gaining unauthorized access to other 

[PAGE 232]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
10 
 
copyrighted works. For purposes of this paragraph (b)(11), a “voice assistant 
device” is a device that is primarily designed to run a wide variety of programs 
rather than for consumption of a particular type of media content, is designed to 
take user input primarily by voice, and is designed to be installed in a home or 
office.  
(12) Computer programs that enable routers and dedicated network devices to 
execute lawfully obtained software applications, where circumvention is 
accomplished for the sole purpose of enabling interoperability of such 
applications with computer programs on the router or dedicated network device, 
and is not accomplished for the purpose of gaining unauthorized access to other 
copyrighted works. For the purposes of this paragraph (b)(12), “dedicated 
network device” includes switches, hubs, bridges, gateways, modems, repeaters, 
and access points, and excludes devices that are not lawfully owned. 
(13) Computer programs that are contained in and control the functioning of a 
lawfully acquired motorized land vehicle or marine vessel such as a personal 
automobile or boat, commercial vehicle or vessel, or mechanized agricultural 
vehicle or vessel, except for programs accessed through a separate subscription 
service, when circumvention is a necessary step to allow the diagnosis, repair, or 
lawful modification of a vehicle or vessel function, where such circumvention is 
not accomplished for the purpose of gaining unauthorized access to other 
copyrighted works. Eligibility for this exemption is not a safe harbor from, or 
defense to, liability under other applicable laws, including without limitation 
regulations promulgated by the Department of Transportation or the 
Environmental Protection Agency. 
(14) Computer programs that are contained in and control the functioning of a 
lawfully acquired motorized land vehicle or marine vessel such as a personal 
automobile or boat, commercial vehicle or vessel, or mechanized agricultural 
vehicle or vessel, except for programs accessed through a separate subscription 
service, to allow vehicle or vessel owners and lessees, or those acting on their 
behalf, to access, store, and share operational data, including diagnostic and 
telematics data, where such circumvention is not accomplished for the purpose 
of gaining unauthorized access to other copyrighted works. Eligibility for this 
exemption is not a safe harbor from, or defense to, liability under other 
applicable laws, including without limitation regulations promulgated by the 
Department of Transportation or the Environmental Protection Agency. 

[PAGE 233]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
11 
 
(15) Computer programs that are contained in and control the functioning of a 
lawfully acquired device that is primarily designed for use by consumers, when 
circumvention is a necessary step to allow the diagnosis, maintenance, or repair 
of such a device, and is not accomplished for the purpose of gaining access to 
other copyrighted works. For purposes of this paragraph (b)(15): 
(i) The “maintenance” of a device is the servicing of the device in order to 
make it work in accordance with its original specifications and any 
changes to those specifications authorized for that device; and 
(ii) The “repair” of a device is the restoring of the device to the state of 
working in accordance with its original specifications and any changes to 
those specifications authorized for that device. For video game consoles, 
“repair” is limited to repair or replacement of a console’s optical drive and 
requires restoring any technological protection measures that were 
circumvented or disabled. 
(16) Computer programs that are contained in and control the functioning of 
lawfully acquired equipment that is primarily designed for use in retail-level 
commercial food preparation when circumvention is a necessary step to allow 
the diagnosis, maintenance, or repair of such a device, and is not accomplished 
for the purpose of gaining access to other copyrighted works. For purposes of 
this paragraph (b)(16): 
(i) The “maintenance” of a device is the servicing of the device in order to 
make it work in accordance with its original specifications and any 
changes to those specifications authorized for that device; and 
(ii) The “repair” of a device is the restoring of the device to the state of 
working in accordance with its original specifications and any changes to 
those specifications authorized for that device.  
(17) Computer programs that are contained in and control the functioning of a 
lawfully acquired medical device or system, and related data files, when 
circumvention is a necessary step to allow the diagnosis, maintenance, or repair 
of such a device or system. For purposes of this paragraph (b)(17): 
(i) The “maintenance” of a device or system is the servicing of the device 
or system in order to make it work in accordance with its original 
specifications and any changes to those specifications authorized for that 
device or system; and 

[PAGE 234]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
12 
 
(ii) The “repair” of a device or system is the restoring of the device or 
system to the state of working in accordance with its original 
specifications and any changes to those specifications authorized for that 
device or system. 
(18) 
(i) Computer programs, where the circumvention is undertaken on a 
lawfully acquired device or machine on which the computer program 
operates, or is undertaken on a computer, computer system, or computer 
network on which the computer program operates with the authorization 
of the owner or operator of such computer, computer system, or computer 
network, solely for the purpose of good-faith security research. 
(ii) For purposes of paragraph (b)(18)(i) of this section, “good-faith 
security research” means accessing a computer program solely for 
purposes of good-faith testing, investigation, and/or correction of a 
security flaw or vulnerability, where such activity is carried out in an 
environment designed to avoid any harm to individuals or the public, and 
where the information derived from the activity is used primarily to 
promote the security or safety of the class of devices or machines on which 
the computer program operates, or those who use such devices or 
machines, and is not used or maintained in a manner that facilitates 
copyright infringement. 
(iii) Good-faith security research that qualifies for the exemption under 
paragraph (b)(18)(i) of this section may nevertheless incur liability under 
other applicable laws, including without limitation the Computer Fraud 
and Abuse Act of 1986, as amended and codified in title 18, United States 
Code, and eligibility for that exemption is not a safe harbor from, or 
defense to, liability under other applicable laws. 
(19) 
(i) Video games in the form of computer programs embodied in physical 
or downloaded formats that have been lawfully acquired as complete 
games, when the copyright owner or its authorized representative has 
ceased to provide access to an external computer server necessary to 
facilitate an authentication process to enable gameplay, solely for the 
purpose of: 

[PAGE 235]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
13 
 
(A) Permitting access to the video game to allow copying and 
modification of the computer program to restore access to the game 
for personal, local gameplay on a personal computer or video game 
console; or 
(B) Permitting access to the video game to allow copying and 
modification of the computer program to restore access to the game 
on a personal computer or video game console when necessary to 
allow preservation of the game in a playable form by an eligible 
library, archives, or museum, where such activities are carried out 
without any purpose of direct or indirect commercial advantage 
and the video game is not distributed or made available outside of 
the physical premises of the eligible library, archives, or museum. 
(ii) Video games in the form of computer programs embodied in physical 
or downloaded formats that have been lawfully acquired as complete 
games, that do not require access to an external computer server for 
gameplay, and that are no longer reasonably available in the commercial 
marketplace, solely for the purpose of preservation of the game in a 
playable form by an eligible library, archives, or museum, where such 
activities are carried out without any purpose of direct or indirect 
commercial advantage and the video game is not distributed or made 
available outside of the physical premises of the eligible library, archives, 
or museum. 
(iii) Computer programs used to operate video game consoles solely to the 
extent necessary for an eligible library, archives, or museum to engage in 
the preservation activities described in paragraph (b)(19)(i)(B) or (b)(19)(ii) 
of this section. 
(iv) For purposes of this paragraph (b)(19), the following definitions shall 
apply: 
(A) For purposes of paragraphs (b)(19)(i)(A) and (b)(19)(ii) of this 
section, “complete games” means video games that can be played 
by users without accessing or reproducing copyrightable content 
stored or previously stored on an external computer server. 
(B) For purposes of paragraph (b)(19)(i)(B) of this section, 
“complete games” means video games that meet the definition in 

[PAGE 236]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
14 
 
paragraph (b)(19)(iv)(A) of this section, or that consist of both a 
copy of a game intended for a personal computer or video game 
console and a copy of the game’s code that was stored or 
previously stored on an external computer server. 
(C) “Ceased to provide access” means that the copyright owner or 
its authorized representative has either issued an affirmative 
statement indicating that external server support for the video 
game has ended and such support is in fact no longer available or, 
alternatively, server support has been discontinued for a period of 
at least six months; provided, however, that server support has not 
since been restored. 
(D) “Local gameplay” means gameplay conducted on a personal 
computer or video game console, or locally connected personal 
computers or consoles, and not through an online service or 
facility. 
(E) A library, archives, or museum is considered “eligible” if— 
(1) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are 
open to the public and/or are routinely made available to 
researchers who are not affiliated with the library, archives, 
or museum; 
(2) The library, archives, or museum has a public service 
mission; 
(3) The library, archives, or museum’s trained staff or 
volunteers provide professional services normally associated 
with libraries, archives, or museums; 
(4) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are 
composed of lawfully acquired and/or licensed materials; 
and 
(5) The library, archives, or museum implements reasonable 
digital security measures as appropriate for the activities 
permitted by this paragraph (b)(19).  
(20) 

[PAGE 237]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
15 
 
(i) Computer programs, except video games, that have been lawfully 
acquired and that are no longer reasonably available in the commercial 
marketplace, solely for the purpose of lawful preservation of a computer 
program, or of digital materials dependent upon a computer program as a 
condition of access, by an eligible library, archives, or museum, where 
such activities are carried out without any purpose of direct or indirect 
commercial advantage. Any electronic distribution, display, or 
performance made outside of the physical premises of an eligible library, 
archives, or museum of works preserved under this paragraph may be 
made to only one user at a time, for a limited time, and only where the 
library, archives, or museum has no notice that the copy would be used 
for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research. 
(ii) For purposes of the exemption in paragraph (b)(20)(i) of this section, a 
library, archives, or museum is considered “eligible” if— 
(A) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are open to 
the public and/or are routinely made available to researchers who 
are not affiliated with the library, archives, or museum; 
(B) The library, archives, or museum has a public service mission; 
(C) The library, archives, or museum’s trained staff or volunteers 
provide professional services normally associated with libraries, 
archives, or museums; 
(D) The collections of the library, archives, or museum are 
composed of lawfully acquired and/or licensed materials; and 
(E) The library, archives, or museum implements reasonable digital 
security measures as appropriate for the activities permitted by this 
paragraph (b)(20). 
(iii) For purposes of paragraph (b)(20) of this section, the phrase “one user 
at a time” means that for each copy of a work lawfully owned by an 
eligible library, archives, or museum and preserved under paragraph 
(b)(20)(i) of this section, such library, archives, or museum may make an 
electronic distribution, display, or performance of that work outside of its 
physical premises. An eligible library, archives, or museum may make 
each copy of such lawfully owned and preserved work available to 
different users simultaneously. This provision does not permit an eligible 

[PAGE 238]
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding October 2024  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights   
16 
 
library, archives, or museum to make multiple, simultaneous copies of the 
same copy of a work for the purposes of providing users access to the 
work. 
(21) Computer programs that operate 3D printers that employ technological 
measures to limit the use of material, when circumvention is accomplished solely 
for the purpose of using alternative material and not for the purpose of accessing 
design software, design files, or proprietary data. 
(22) Computer programs, solely for the purpose of investigating a potential 
infringement of free and open source computer programs where: 
(i) The circumvention is undertaken on a lawfully acquired device or 
machine other than a video game console, on which the computer 
program operates; 
(ii) The circumvention is performed by, or at the direction of, a party that 
has a good-faith, reasonable belief in the need for the investigation and 
has standing to bring a breach of license or copyright infringement claim;  
(iii) Such circumvention does not constitute a violation of applicable law; 
and  
(iv) The copy of the computer program, or the device or machine on 
which it operates, is not used or maintained in a manner that facilitates 
copyright infringement. 
(c) Persons who may initiate circumvention.  To the extent authorized under 
paragraph (b) of this section, the circumvention of a technological measure that 
restricts wireless telephone handsets or other wireless devices from connecting to 
a wireless telecommunications network may be initiated by the owner of any 
such handset or other device, by another person at the direction of the owner, or 
by a provider of a commercial mobile radio service or a commercial mobile data 
service at the direction of such owner or other person, solely in order to enable 
such owner or a family member of such owner to connect to a wireless 
telecommunications network, when such connection is authorized by the 
operator of such network. 

[PAGE 239]
u .s. copyright of fi ce · library of  congress · 101  independence avenue  se · washington, dc  20559  · www.copyright.gov