[PAGE 1]
62011Federal Register / Vol. 68, No. 211 / Friday, October 31, 2003 / Rules and Regulations 
1 A copy of the Register’s memorandum may be 
found at http://www.copyright.gov/1201.
§ 165.T17–020 Port Valdez and Valdez 
Narrows, Valdez, Alaska-security zones. 
(a) The following areas are security 
zones — 
(1) Trans-Alaska Pipeline (TAPS) 
Valdez Terminal complex (Terminal), 
Valdez, Alaska and TAPS Tank Vessels. 
All waters enclosed within a line 
beginning on the southern shoreline of 
Port Valdez at 61°04′25″ N, 146°26′18″ 
W; thence northerly to 61°06′25″ N, 
146°26′18″ W; thence east to 61°06′25″ 
N, 146°21′20″ W; thence south to 
61°04′25″ N, 146°21′20″ W; thence west 
along the shoreline and including the 
area 2000 yards inland along the 
shoreline to the beginning point. This 
security zone encompasses all waters 
approximately 1 mile north, east and 
west of the TAPS Terminal between 
Allison Creek (61°05′08″ N, 146°21′15″ 
W) and Sawmill Spit (61°05′08″ N, 
146°26′19″ W). 
(2) Tank Vessel Moving Security 
Zone. All waters within 200 yards of 
any TAPS tank vessel maneuvering to 
approach, moor, unmoor or depart the 
TAPS Terminal or transiting, 
maneuvering, laying to or anchored 
within the boundaries of the Captain of 
the Port, Prince William Sound Zone 
described in 33 CFR 3.85(b). 
(3) Valdez Narrows, Port Valdez, 
Valdez, Alaska. All waters within 200 
yards of the Valdez Narrows Tanker 
Optimum Track line bounded by a line 
beginning at 61°05′15″ N, 146°37′18″ W; 
thence south west to 61°04′00″ N, 
146°39′52″ W; thence southerly to 
61°02′32.5″ N, 146°41′25″ W; thence 
north west to 61°02′40.5″ N, 146°41′47″ 
W; thence north east to 61°04′07.5″ N, 
146°40′15″ W; thence north east to 
61°05′22″ N, 146°37′38″ W; thence south 
east back to the starting point at 
61°05′15″ N, 146°37′18″ W. 
(i) The Valdez Narrows Tanker 
Optimum Track line is a line 
commencing at 61°05′23″ N, 
146°37′22.5″ W; thence south westerly 
to 61°04′03.2″ N, 146°40′03.2″ W; thence 
southerly to 61°03′00″ N, 146°41′12″ W. 
(ii) This security zone encompasses 
all waters approximately 200 yards 
either side of the Valdez Narrows 
Optimum Track line. 
(b) Effective period. This section is 
effective from September 12, 2003, 
through March 12, 2004. 
(c) Authority. In addition to 33 U.S.C. 
1231, the authority for this section 
includes 33 U.S.C. 1226. 
(d) Regulations. (1) The general 
regulations governing security zones 
contained in 33 CFR 165.33 apply. 
(2) Tank vessels transiting directly to 
the TAPS terminal complex, engaged in 
the movement of oil from the terminal 
or fuel to the terminal, and vessels used 
to provide assistance or support to the 
tank vessels directly transiting to the 
terminal, or to the terminal itself, and 
that have reported their movements to 
the Vessel Traffic Service may operate 
as necessary to ensure safe passage of 
tank vessels to and from the terminal. 
(3) All persons and vessels must 
comply with the instructions of the 
Coast Guard Captain of the Port and the 
designated on-scene patrol personnel. 
These personnel comprise 
commissioned, warrant, and petty 
officers of the Coast Guard. Upon being 
hailed by a vessel displaying a U.S. 
Coast Guard ensign by siren, radio, 
flashing light, or other means, the 
operator of the vessel shall proceed as 
directed. Coast Guard Auxiliary and 
local or state agencies may be present to 
inform vessel operators of the 
requirements of this section and other 
applicable laws.
Dated: September 12, 2003. 
M.A. Swanson, 
Commander, United States Coast Guard, 
Captain of the Port, Prince William Sound, 
Alaska.
[FR Doc. 03–27465 Filed 10–30–03; 8:45 am] 
BILLING CODE 4910 –15–P
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS
37 CFR Part 201 
[Docket No. RM 2002–4E] 
Copyright Office; Exemption to 
Prohibition on Circumvention of 
Copyright Protection Systems for 
Access Control Technologies
AGENCY: Copyright Office, Library of 
Congress.
ACTION: Final rule.
SUMMARY: This rule provides that during 
the period from October 28, 2003, 
through October 27, 2006, the 
prohibition against circumvention of 
technological measures that effectively 
control access to copyrighted works 
shall not apply to persons who engage 
in noninfringing uses of four classes of 
copyrighted works.
EFFECTIVE DATE: October 28, 2003.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT : 
Robert Kasunic, Office of the General 
Counsel, Copyright GC/I&R, P.O. Box 
70400, Southwest Station, Washington, 
DC 20024–0400. Telephone: (202) 707–
8380; telefax: (202) 707–8366.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 
In this document, the Librarian of 
Congress, upon the recommendation of 
the Register of Copyrights, announces 
that during the period from October 28, 
2003, through October 27, 2006, the 
prohibition against circumvention of 
technological measures that effectively 
control access to copyrighted works 
shall not apply to persons who engage 
in noninfringing uses of four classes of 
copyrighted works. This announcement 
is the culmination of a year-long 
rulemaking proceeding conducted by 
the Register. A more comprehensive 
statement of the background and legal 
requirements of the rulemaking, a 
discussion of the record and the 
Register’s analysis may be found in the 
Register’s memorandum of October 27, 
2003 to the Librarian, which contains 
the full explanation of the Register’s 
recommendation.
1 This notice 
summarizes the Register’s 
recommendation and publishes the 
regulatory text codifying the four 
exempted classes of works.
I. Background 
A. Legislative Requirements for 
Rulemaking Proceeding 
Section 1201 of title 17, United States 
Code, prohibits circumvention of 
technological measures employed by or 
on behalf of copyright owners to protect 
their works (hereinafter ‘‘access 
controls’’). In order to ensure that the 
public will have continued ability to 
engage in noninfringing uses of 
copyrighted works, such as fair use, 
subparagraph (B) limits this prohibition, 
exempting noninfringing uses of any 
‘‘particular class of works’’ when users 
are (or in the next 3 years are likely to 
be) adversely affected by the prohibition 
in their ability to make noninfringing 
uses of that class of works. 
Identification of such classes of works is 
made in a rulemaking proceeding 
conducted by the Register of Copyrights, 
who is to provide notice of the 
rulemaking, seek comments from the 
public, consult with the Assistant 
Secretary for Communications and 
Information of the Department of 
Commerce, and recommend final 
regulations to the Librarian of Congress. 
The regulations, to be issued by the 
Librarian of Congress, announce ‘‘any 
class of copyrighted works for which the 
Librarian has determined, pursuant to 
the rulemaking conducted under 
subparagraph (C), that noninfringing 
uses by persons who are users of a 
copyrighted work are, or are likely to be, 
adversely affected, and the prohibition 
contained in subparagraph (A) shall not 
apply to such users with respect to such 
VerDate jul<14>2003 15:08 Oct 30, 2003 Jkt 203001 PO 00000 Frm 00025 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\31OCR1.SGM 31OCR1

[PAGE 2]
62012 Federal Register / Vol. 68, No. 211 / Friday, October 31, 2003 / Rules and Regulations 
2 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(D).
3 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of 
Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, 65 FR 64556 (October 27, 2000); 
http://www.copyright.gov/fedreg/2000/
65fr64555.pdf. The Federal Register notice 
contained the recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights and the determination of the Librarian.
class of works for the ensuing 3-year 
period.’’ 2
The first section 1201 rulemaking 
took place three years ago, and on 
October 27, 2000, the Librarian 
announced that noninfringing users of 
two classes of works would not be 
subject to the prohibition on 
circumvention of access controls.
3 
Exemptions to the prohibition on 
circumvention remain in force for a 
three-year period and expire at the end 
of that period. The Librarian is required 
to make a determination on potential 
new exemptions every three years.
B. Responsibilities of Register of 
Copyrights and Librarian of Congress 
The purpose of the rulemaking 
proceeding conducted by the Register is 
to determine whether users of particular 
classes of copyrighted works are, or in 
the next three years are likely to be, 
adversely affected by the prohibition in 
their ability to make noninfringing uses 
of copyrighted works. In making her 
recommendation to the Librarian, the 
Register must carefully balance the 
availability of works for use, the effect 
of the prohibition on particular uses and 
the effect of circumvention on 
copyrighted works. 
C. The Purpose and Focus of the 
Rulemaking 
1. Purpose of the Rulemaking. As 
originally drafted, section 1201(a)(1) 
provided simply that ‘‘No person shall 
circumvent a technological measure that 
effectively controls access to a work 
protected under this title.’’ However, in 
response to concerns that section 1201, 
in its original form, might undermine 
Congress’ commitment to fair use if 
developments in the marketplace 
relating to use of access controls result 
in less access to copyrighted materials 
that are important to education, 
scholarship, and other socially vital 
endeavors, it was determined that a 
triennial rulemaking proceeding should 
take place to monitor the use of access 
controls. If the rulemaking record 
revealed that access was being unduly 
restricted, e.g., by elimination of print or 
other hard-copy versions, permanent 
encryption of all electronic copies or 
adoption of business models that restrict 
distribution and availability of works, 
then users of particular classes of works 
who are engaging in noninfringing uses 
of those works would be allowed to 
circumvent access controls without 
running afoul of the prohibition in 
section 1201(a)(1). The rulemaking 
proceeding, to be conducted by the 
Register of Copyrights, was considered a 
‘‘fail-safe’’ mechanism, monitoring 
developments in the marketplace for 
copyrighted materials, and would allow 
the enforceability of the prohibition 
against the act of circumvention to be 
selectively waived, for limited time 
periods, if necessary to prevent a 
diminution in the availability to 
individual users of a particular category 
of copyrighted materials. 
2. The Necessary Showing. 
Proponents of an exemption have the 
burden of proof. In order to make a 
prima facie case for an exemption, 
proponents must show by a 
preponderance of the evidence that 
there has been or is likely to be a 
substantial adverse effect on 
noninfringing uses by users of 
copyrighted works. De minimis 
problems, isolated harm or mere 
inconveniences are insufficient to 
provide the necessary showing. 
Similarly, for proof of ‘‘likely’’ adverse 
effects on noninfringing uses, a 
proponent must prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that the 
harm alleged is more likely than not; a 
proponent may not rely on speculation 
alone to sustain a prima facie case of 
likely adverse effects on noninfringing 
uses. It is also necessary to show a 
causal nexus between the prohibition on 
circumvention and the alleged harm.
Proposed exemptions are reviewed de 
novo. The existence of a previous 
exemption creates no presumption for 
consideration of a new exemption, but 
rather the proponent of such an 
exemption must make a prima facie case 
in each three-year period. 
3. Determination of ‘‘Class of Works’’. 
A ‘‘particular class of works’’ to be 
exempted from the prohibition on 
circumvention must be based upon 
attributes of the works themselves, and 
not by reference to some external 
criteria such as the intended use or 
users of the works. The starting point for 
any definition of a ‘‘particular class’’ of 
works in this rulemaking must be one of 
the categories of works set forth in 
section 102 of the Copyright Act, but 
those categories are only a starting point 
and a ‘‘class’’ will generally constitute 
some subset of a section 102 category. 
The determination of the appropriate 
scope of a ‘‘class of works’’ 
recommended for exemption will also 
take into account the likely adverse 
effects on noninfringing uses and the 
adverse effects an exemption may have 
on the market for or value of 
copyrighted works. 
While starting with a section 102 
category of works, or a subcategory 
thereof, the description of a ‘‘particular 
class’’ of works ordinarily should be 
further refined by reference to other 
factors that assist in ensuring that the 
scope of the class addresses the scope of 
the harm to noninfringing uses. For 
example, the class might be defined in 
part by reference to the medium on 
which the works are distributed, or even 
to the access control measures applied 
to them. But classifying a work solely by 
reference to the medium on which the 
work appears, or the access control 
measures applied to the work, would be 
beyond the scope of what ‘‘particular 
class of work’’ is intended to be. And it 
is not permissible to classify a work by 
reference to the type of user or use (e.g., 
libraries, or scholarly research). 
D. Consultation With the Assistant 
Secretary for Communications and 
Information 
As required by section 1201(a)(1)(C), 
the Register consulted with the 
Assistant Secretary for Communications 
and Information of the Department of 
Commerce, meeting with her at the 
outset of the rulemaking proceeding and 
after the record had been compiled, and 
keeping her and her staff apprised of 
developments throughout the 
proceeding. The Assistant Secretary 
shared her views with the Register 
orally in July, 2003, and in a letter dated 
August 11, 2003. Rather than address 
any particular proposals for exemptions, 
the Assistant Secretary commented on 
the rulemaking process itself, focusing 
exclusively on the Notice of Inquiry 
(‘‘NOI’’) published October 15, 2002. 
The Assistant Secretary expressed 
general agreement with the discussion 
in the NOI regarding the definition of a 
‘‘class of works,’’ but added that the 
intended use of the work or the 
attributes of the user will sometimes be 
critical to that determination. She also 
agreed with the Register that proponents 
of exemptions have the burden of proof 
and that and that the assessment of 
adverse impacts is to be determined de 
novo. However, she expressed some 
concern that the NOI may have 
described the proponents’ burden of 
proof as higher than required by the 
statute. 
The Assistant Secretary appears to 
have misread the NOI, which stated the 
burden of proof using verbatim 
quotations from the legislative history of 
section 1201. In particular, the Assistant 
Secretary appears to have 
misunderstood the meaning of the 
requirement that proponents show that 
VerDate jul<14>2003 15:08 Oct 30, 2003 Jkt 203001 PO 00000 Frm 00026 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\31OCR1.SGM 31OCR1

[PAGE 3]
62013Federal Register / Vol. 68, No. 211 / Friday, October 31, 2003 / Rules and Regulations 
4 67 FR 63578; http://www.copyright.gov/fedreg/
2002/67fr63578.html.
5 http://www.copyright.gov/1201/index.html.
the prohibition on circumvention has 
had a ‘‘substantial’’ adverse effect on 
noninfringing uses of a particular class 
of work. Use of the term ‘‘substantial’’ 
does not impose a ‘‘heightened’’ 
requirement; it imposes the requirement 
found throughout the legislative history, 
which is variously stated as ‘‘substantial 
adverse impact,’’ ‘‘distinct, verifiable, 
and measurable impacts,’’ and more 
than ‘‘de minimis impacts.’’ As is 
apparent from the dictionary definition 
of ‘‘substantial’’ and the Supreme 
Court’s treatment of the term (e.g., in its 
articulation of the substantial evidence 
rule), requiring that one’s proof be 
‘‘substantial’’ simply means that it must 
have substance. The Assistant 
Secretary’s fear that the Register has 
imposed a heightened burden is 
misplaced. When all is said and done, 
the Register believes that she and the 
Assistant Secretary view the burden on 
proponents in much the same way. 
II. Solicitation of Public Comments and 
Hearings 
On October 15, 2002, the Librarian 
and the Register initiated the second 
rulemaking proceeding pursuant to 
section 1201(a)(1)(C) with publication of 
a NOI.
4 The Copyright Office received 
51 written comments proposing a class 
or classes of works for exemption. 
Supporters and opponents of these 
proposals filed 338 reply comments. Six 
days of public hearings were conducted 
in Spring 2003 in Washington, D.C., and 
Los Angeles, California. Following the 
hearings, the Office sent follow-up 
questions to some of the hearing 
witnesses, and responses were received 
during the summer. The entire record in 
this and the previous section 
1201(a)(1)(C) rulemaking are available 
on the Office’s Web site.
5
The Register has now carefully 
reviewed and analyzed the entire record 
in this rulemaking proceeding to 
determine whether any class of 
copyrighted works should be exempt 
from the prohibition against 
circumvention during the next three 
years. The Register recommends that 
noninfringing users of four classes of 
works be exempt from the prohibition 
on circumvention of access controls.
III. Discussion 
A. The Four Exempted Classes 
Based on the Register’s review of the 
record, the case has been made for 
exemptions of the following four classes 
of copyrighted works.
1. Compilations consisting of lists of 
Internet locations blocked by commercially 
marketed filtering software applications that 
are intended to prevent access to domains, 
websites or portions of websites, but not 
including lists of Internet locations blocked 
by software applications that operate 
exclusively to protect against damage to a 
computer or computer network or lists of 
Internet locations blocked by software 
applications that operate exclusively to 
prevent receipt of e-mail. For purposes of this 
exemption, ‘‘Internet locations’’ are defined 
to include ‘‘domains, uniform resource 
locators (URLs), numeric IP addresses or any 
combination thereof.’’
This is similar to an exemption made 
in the previous rulemaking, but with 
some modifications. The class consists 
of lists of blocked Web sites that are 
used in various filtering software 
programs sometimes referred to as 
‘‘censorware.’’ These programs are 
intended to prevent children and other 
Internet users from viewing 
objectionable material while online. It 
was alleged that although the software 
is intended to serve a useful societal 
purpose, the emphasis of the programs 
is on blocking rather than accuracy. 
Critics contend that the result of this 
focus is that filtering software used to 
prevent access to objectionable material 
tends to over-block, thereby preventing 
access to legitimate information 
resources. In order to comment on this 
software and expose what they claim is 
the excessive blocking of Web sites, 
critics claim they need to gain access to 
the lists of blocked Web sites, which 
typically are protected by access 
controls. 
Opponents argued that filtering 
software companies serve a critical 
societal purpose and that an exemption 
would undermine the integrity of 
filtering software. They also argued that 
filtering software companies provide 
reasonable means for ascertaining the 
material or sites that a particular 
filtering software blocks. They also 
stated that even if the Register found 
that an exemption was warranted, the 
particular class articulated in the 
previous rulemaking was overly broad 
and that repeating an exemption for that 
class could create adverse consequences 
for other types of software, such as 
antivirus and spam software. 
Although a similar class was 
exempted in the first rulemaking, 
proponents are required to make their 
case anew every three years. The record 
in the current rulemaking warrants a 
new exemption. While providers of 
filtering software offer some information 
about the Web sites their software 
blocks, it is too limited to permit 
comprehensive or meaningful analysis. 
Persons wishing to review, comment on 
and criticize this software as part of an 
ongoing debate on a matter of public 
interest should be permitted to gain 
access to the complete lists of blocked 
Web sites. 
The particular class of works 
designated in this rulemaking covers the 
lists of websites blocked by 
commercially marketed filtering 
software applications that are intended 
to prevent access to domains, websites 
or portions of Web sites. However, the 
exempted class specifically excludes 
lists of Internet locations blocked by 
software designed to protect against 
damage to computers, such as firewalls 
and antivirus software, or software 
designed to prevent receipt of unwanted 
e-mail, such as anti-spam software.
2. Computer programs protected by 
dongles that prevent access due to 
malfunction or damage and which are 
obsolete.
The second exempted class is also 
similar to a class exempted in 2000, but 
again the class exempted in this 
proceeding is somewhat more limited. 
Many commenters supported a renewal 
of the previous exemption for ‘‘literary 
works, including computer programs 
and databases, protected by access 
control mechanisms that fail to permit 
access because of malfunction, damage 
or obsoleteness.’’ Few commenters, 
however, provided any factual support 
for such an exemption. The facts that 
were presented related to a narrower 
class of works: computer programs 
using ‘‘dongles,’’ or hardware locks, 
which control access to the programs. 
Accordingly, the exempted class is 
limited to such computer programs. 
When a dongle is damaged or 
malfunctions in such as way that the 
authorized user of the software cannot 
gain access to the software, the 
authorized user should be given a 
means to make the software work. The 
exempted class includes only that 
software that actually cannot be 
accessed due to a damaged or 
malfunctioning dongle, and only when 
the dongle cannot be replaced or 
repaired. The class is formulated as 
including ‘‘computer programs 
protected by dongles that prevent access 
due to malfunction or damage and 
which are obsolete.’’ Copyright law 
already provides a definition of 
obsolete, found in section 108(c) of the 
Copyright Act, which captures the 
circumstances under which an 
exemption is justified: ‘‘a [dongle] shall 
be considered obsolete if [it] is no longer 
manufactured or is no longer reasonably 
available in the commercial 
marketplace.’’ For purposes of this 
exemption, a dongle would be 
VerDate jul<14>2003 15:08 Oct 30, 2003 Jkt 203001 PO 00000 Frm 00027 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\31OCR1.SGM 31OCR1

[PAGE 4]
62014 Federal Register / Vol. 68, No. 211 / Friday, October 31, 2003 / Rules and Regulations 
considered ‘‘obsolete’’ if replacement or 
repair are not reasonably available in 
the marketplace. In addition to 
encouraging reasonable support to be 
made available to users, the exemption 
will allow users who are denied access 
as a result of a damaged or 
malfunctioning dongle to circumvent 
when repair or a replacement are 
unavailable. This exemption minimizes 
the adverse effects on noninfringing 
uses by users of software protected by 
these access control measures while also 
minimizing the adverse effects on 
copyright owners.
3. Computer programs and video games 
distributed in formats that have become 
obsolete and which require the original 
media or hardware as a condition of access.
This is a new exemption, in response 
to a proposal by The Internet Archive 
for ‘‘[l]iterary and audiovisual works 
embodied in software whose access 
control systems prohibit access to 
replicas of the works.’’ The Internet 
Archive, a non-profit library that 
maintains a collection of websites, 
software and other works in digital 
formats in a digital archive, migrates 
such works to modern storage systems 
(e.g., by transferring a computer 
program from a floppy diskette to a hard 
drive) that are more stable and that will 
ensure continuing access to the works. 
The Internet Archive stated that 
works distributed in digital formats on 
physical media (such as floppy 
diskettes, CD–ROMs, etc.) have 
sometimes been accompanied by 
‘‘original only’’ access controls, 
technological measures that, while 
technically permitting copies to be 
made, prevent those copies from 
functioning (so that, for example, a copy 
of a computer program made from the 
original floppy diskette will not run, or 
a copy of an audiovisual game made 
from the original CD–ROM cannot be 
played). This prevents the Internet 
Archive from migrating those works to 
its modern storage system. 
The problem is particularly 
compelling when the physical format in 
which the copy was originally marketed 
has become obsolete. If the Internet 
Archive is given computer software that 
was marketed on 5
1⁄4-inch floppy 
diskettes, it will not even be able to 
access the work in its original format on 
the typical computer sold in the 
marketplace today, because computers 
sold today are not equipped with 5
1⁄4-
inch floppy drives. However, Internet 
Archive also desires an exemption that 
addresses the ‘‘original only’’ problem 
even when the medium on which the 
original copy was marketed (e.g., CD–
ROM) is not yet obsolete, noting that it 
is crucial to archive digital works before 
they become inaccessible and before the 
information on the medium has 
degraded. 
The Register has concluded that to the 
extent that libraries and archives wish 
to make preservation copies of 
published software and video games 
that were distributed in formats that are 
(either because the physical medium on 
which they were distributed is no longer 
in use or because the use of an obsolete 
operating system is required), such 
activity is a noninfringing use covered 
by section 108(c) of the Copyright Act. 
The exempted class is therefore limited 
to works distributed in such nowobsolete formats. Again, ‘‘obsolete’’ has 
the same meaning that is set forth in 
section 108(c). A format shall be 
considered obsolete if the machine or 
system necessary to render perceptible a 
work stored in that format is no longer 
manufactured or is no longer reasonably 
available in the commercial 
marketplace. The class is also limited to 
computer programs and video games 
because the evidence in the record of 
this rulemaking does not support a 
broader class of works.
4. Literary works distributed in ebook 
format when all existing ebook editions of 
the work (including digital text editions 
made available by authorized entities) 
contain access controls that prevent the 
enabling of the ebook’s read-aloud function 
and that prevent the enabling of screen 
readers to render the text into a ‘‘specialized 
format.’’ For purposes of this exemption, 
‘‘specialized format,’’ ‘‘digital text’’ and 
‘‘authorized entities’’ shall have the same 
meaning as in 17 U.S.C. 121.
The final exempted class is based 
upon proposals by the American 
Foundation for the Blind and five major 
library associations. It is in response to 
problems experienced by the blind and 
visually impaired in gaining meaningful 
access to literary works distributed as 
ebooks. Ebooks can offer accessibility to 
the blind and the visually impaired that 
is otherwise not available from a print 
version. Ebooks may allow the user to 
activate a ‘‘read-aloud’’ function offered 
by certain ebook readers. Ebooks may 
also permit accessibility to the work by 
means of screen reader software, a 
separate program for the blind and 
visually impaired that interacts with an 
ebook reader and that is capable of 
converting the text into either 
synthesized speech or braille. 
By using digital rights management 
tools that implicate access controls, 
publishers of ebooks can disable the 
read-aloud function of an ebook and 
may prevent access to a work in ebook 
form by means of screen reader 
software. The record indicates that 
many ebooks are distributed with these 
two functions disabled. The disabling of 
these functions is alleged to prevent the 
blind and visually impaired from 
engaging in particular noninfringing 
uses such as private performance, and to 
prevent access to these works by blind 
and visually impaired users altogether. 
The uses that such persons make by 
using the ‘‘read-aloud’’ function and 
screen readers are noninfringing, and 
are likely to be the most reasonable 
means of meaningful access for such 
persons to works that are published in 
ebook format. 
To be included in the exempted class, 
a literary work must exist in ebook 
format. Moreover, the exemption is not 
available if any existing edition of the 
work permits the ‘‘read-aloud’’ function 
or is screen reader-enabled. Thus, a 
publisher may avoid subjecting any of 
its works to this exemption simply by 
ensuring that for each of its works 
published in ebook form, an edition 
exists which is accessible to the blind 
and visually impaired in at least one of 
these two ways. 
B. Other Exemptions Considered, But 
Not Recommended 
A number of other proposed 
exemptions were considered, but 
rejected. They are briefly discussed 
below. Similar proposed exemptions are 
discussed together.
1. Proposed class: All works should be 
exempt for noninfringing uses, e.g., fair use 
and private uses, and other use-based 
proposals.
Many comments declined to specify a 
‘‘class of works’’ and instead designated 
the ‘‘class’’ to be exempted as ‘‘all 
works.’’ Because the proponents of an 
exemption for ‘‘all works’’ have utterly 
failed to propose ‘‘a particular class of 
copyrighted works,’’ but have simply 
asked, in effect, for a blanket exemption 
for all works—in effect, an 
administrative abrogation of section 
1201(a)(1)—these proposals must be 
rejected.
2. Proposed classes: Several, including 
‘‘Per se Educational Fair Use Works’’ and 
‘‘Fair Use Works.’’
Another group of proposals defined 
the class of works primarily by reference 
to the type of use of works or the nature 
of the users, e.g., fair use works. A ‘‘usebased’’ or ‘‘user-based’’ classification is 
not permitted. The statutory exemptions 
in section 1201 contain carefully 
crafted, use-based and user-based 
exemptions. Congress considered and 
declined to enact certain use-based 
exemptions similar to some of the 
proposals raised in this rulemaking. The 
statutory text and the legislative history 
VerDate jul<14>2003 15:08 Oct 30, 2003 Jkt 203001 PO 00000 Frm 00028 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\31OCR1.SGM 31OCR1

[PAGE 5]
62015Federal Register / Vol. 68, No. 211 / Friday, October 31, 2003 / Rules and Regulations 
provide no evidence that Congress 
intended this rulemaking to secondguess congressional determinations. 
Rather, Congress created this 
rulemaking as a ‘‘fail-safe’’ mechanism 
to focus on evidence of adverse effects 
in particular sub-categories of works 
that could be ameliorated by 
appropriately crafted, short-term 
exemptions.
3. Proposed classes: (1) Musical recordings 
and audiovisual works protected by access 
control mechanisms whose circumvention is 
reasonably necessary to carry out a legitimate 
research project where the granted exemption 
applies only to acts of circumvention whose 
primary purpose is to further a legitimate 
research project; and (2) Musical recordings 
and audiovisual works protected by access 
control mechanisms whose circumvention is 
reasonably necessary to carry out a legitimate 
research project.
These two related classes were 
proposed by one commenter. Each 
proposed class consists of ‘‘musical 
recordings and audiovisual works,’’ 
apparently occupying virtually the 
entire field of works in the category of 
audiovisual works (section 102(6)) and 
a substantial part of the categories of 
sound recordings (section 102(7)) and 
musical works (section 102(2)). The 
proposed class is further narrowed only 
by reference to the necessary or 
intended use by persons wishing to 
circumvent the access controls. Because 
each of these proposed classes is 
defined largely in terms of the purpose 
of the circumvention, they cannot be 
considered. They are simply variants of 
the type of use-based class that is 
beyond the scope of this proceeding.
4. Proposed class: Any work to which the 
user had lawful initial access (and 
variations).
This proposal also failed to propose 
‘‘a particular class of copyrighted 
works.’’ Moreover, commenters 
proposed this class without providing 
any factual support whatsoever. 
Proponents failed to specify particular 
access controls that have caused adverse 
effects on noninfringing uses, and have 
failed to describe what noninfringing 
uses have been adversely affected.
5. Proposed class: Copies of audiovisual 
works, including motion pictures, and 
phonorecords of musical sound recordings 
that have been previously licensed for 
reproduction but can no longer be 
reproduced for private performance after the 
lawful conditions for prior reproduction have 
been met.
This class was proposed by a 
commenter seeking an exemption to 
permit persons who have obtained 
digital copies of motion pictures or 
sound recordings, under agreements 
that limit the circumstances (typically, a 
time limitation) under which they may 
view or hear them, to circumvent access 
controls that enforce those agreements. 
The examples cited by the commenter 
relate primarily to online services that 
deliver music or movies to subscribers 
under an agreement that permits the 
subscriber to obtain access to the work 
only so long as the subscriber continues 
to subscribe to the service. The 
commenter seeks to exempt such works 
from the prohibition on circumvention 
so that users of such works would be 
able to continue to play them even 
when the agreed-on conditions for their 
use no longer apply. 
A consumer who enters into an 
agreement to pay a particular sum for 
the right to listen to or view a 
copyrighted work for a limited period of 
time can have no reasonable expectation 
of continued access once that time has 
expired. Especially when the works that 
are the subject of this proposed 
exemption—motion pictures and sound 
recordings—are widely available for 
purchase in formats that have no time 
restrictions on use, the case for an 
exemption has not been made. In fact, 
the DMCA was intended to encourage 
such use-facilitating services that give 
consumers the option to pay lower 
prices for more limited uses of 
copyrighted works.
6. Proposed class: ‘‘Thin copyright’’ works.
The proposed exemption for ‘‘thin 
copyright works’’ suffers from the same 
flaws as the proposals to exempt classes 
such as ‘‘fair use works.’’ Although it 
was stated that these ‘‘thin copyright’’ 
works contain ‘‘limited copyrighted 
subject material,’’ there was no showing 
of any present or likely harm to users 
wishing to engage in noninfringing uses. 
There was no showing that any such 
works were unavailable in an 
alternative, unprotected format. Without 
any demonstration of an adverse effect, 
any specific allegation of any particular 
technological measure protecting access 
to works, or any discussion of the 
unavailability of the material cited in 
unprotected formats, there is little basis 
for consideration.
7. Proposed class: Public domain works or 
works distributed without restriction.
Several comments sought an 
exemption for works that are either 
public domain, open source or ‘‘open 
access,’’ but to which access controls are 
applied. The commenters addressing 
open source and open access works 
provided absolutely no information in 
support of their requests. Aside from a 
proposal relating to public domain 
material on DVDs, there was a paucity 
of information relating to other public 
domain works. These commenters have 
overlooked that if a work that is entirely 
in the public domain is protected by an 
access control measure, the prohibition 
on circumvention will not be 
applicable. Therefore, no exemption is 
needed. 
In the DVD context, a proponent 
provided a series of lists of audiovisual 
works that it contended are in the 
public domain, some of which it alleged 
are distributed bundled with 
copyrighted material. However, 
opponents of the proposed exception 
indicated that many if not all the works 
named by the proponent are available in 
unencrypted (VHS) format, are not 
bundled with copyrighted material, are 
themselves still subject to copyright 
protection, or are not encrypted by the 
Content Scrambling System (‘‘CSS’’) or 
otherwise subject to an access control, 
effectively rebutting the proponent’s 
showing.
8. Proposed class: Musical works, sound 
recordings, and audiovisual works embodied 
in media that are or may become inaccessible 
by possessors of lawfully-made copies due to 
malfunction, damage, or obsoleteness.
Supporters of this proposed class 
wanted to be able to transfer sound 
recordings and musical works from one 
medium to another. Some commenters 
also believe that they should be able to 
convert these works to new or different 
formats or to back up the works for 
archival purposes, e.g., to ‘‘refresh’’ the 
media from time to time to ensure that 
the works are available both for their 
use and for future generations. However, 
these proponents have not clearly stated 
or demonstrated that access controls are 
preventing these activities. 
In the case of audiovisual works on 
DVDs, the proponents desire to make 
backup copies of their DVDs for a 
variety of purposes: They claim that 
DVDs are inherently fragile and subject 
to damage; they are concerned about 
loss or theft of the original during travel; 
they wish to duplicate collections to 
avoid the burdens and risks of 
transporting DVDs; they assert that some 
titles are out of print and cannot be 
replaced in case of damage; and they 
claim that the duration of a DVD’s 
lifespan is limited. The Register 
concludes that the proponents have not 
made the case with respect to fragility 
of DVDs, nor have they shown that the 
making of backup copies of DVDs is a 
noninfringing use.
9. Proposed class: Audiovisual works 
released on DVD that contain access control 
measures that interfere with the ability to 
defeat technology that prevents users from 
skipping promotional materials.
VerDate jul<14>2003 15:08 Oct 30, 2003 Jkt 203001 PO 00000 Frm 00029 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\31OCR1.SGM 31OCR1

[PAGE 6]
62016 Federal Register / Vol. 68, No. 211 / Friday, October 31, 2003 / Rules and Regulations 
As the proponent of this proposed 
class states the problem, ‘‘[m]ovie 
studios are able to make certain DVD 
content ‘‘unskippable’’ during playback. 
Some studios have abused this feature 
by preventing the skipping of 
advertising shown prior to the start of 
the feature presentation.’’ The 
technology which deactivates the fastforward function of DVD players (UOP 
blocking) does not appear to be an 
access control. Nor does the record 
show that the ‘‘CSS, an access control 
used on motion pictures on DVDs, 
prevents the deactivation of UOP 
blocking. Therefore, an exemption does 
not appear warranted since it does not 
appear that access controls are 
preventing users from fast-forwarding 
on DVDs. Moreover, although the 
objections to DVDs which have the fast 
forwarding feature disabled with respect 
to advertising are understandable, the 
problem appears to be no more than de 
minimis and a mere inconvenience 
experienced with an unknown—but 
apparently small—quantity of available 
DVD titles.
10. Proposed class: Ancillary audiovisual 
works distributed on DVDs encrypted by 
CSS.
It is virtually uncontested that there 
are ancillary works on DVDs that are not 
available in another, unprotected 
format. Such ancillary material includes 
matter that is available along with the 
motion picture in DVD format but not 
available in videotape format, such as 
outtakes, interviews with actors and 
directors, additional language features, 
etc. The proponent of an ‘‘ancillary 
works’’ exemption asserts that the use of 
CSS on DVDs prevents ‘‘quotation [i.e., 
reproduction], for purposes of 
commentary and criticism, of ancillary 
audiovisual works.’’
While there is little doubt that the 
desired use for comment and criticism 
by weblog critics can be within the fair 
use exception, such critics have a 
number of options available for such 
‘‘quotation.’’ Because users have means 
of making analog copies of the material 
on DVDs without circumventing access 
controls (and of redigitizing those 
analog copies), there is no need to 
permit them to circumvent. The desire 
to make a digital-to-digital copy, while 
understandable, does not support an 
exemption in this case. Existing case 
law is clear that fair use does not 
guarantee copying by the optimum 
method or in the identical format of the 
original. On balance, an exemption, 
which would permit circumvention of 
CSS, could have an adverse effect on the 
availability of such works on DVDs to 
the public, since the motion picture 
industry’s willingness to make 
audiovisual works available in digital 
form on DVDs is based in part on the 
confidence it has that CSS will protect 
it against massive infringement.
11. Proposed class: Audiovisual works 
stored on DVDs that are not available in 
Region 1 DVD format and access to which is 
prevented by technological measures.
Many motion pictures distributed on 
DVDs are ‘‘region coded.’’ A region 
coded DVD may only be played on a 
DVD player that is set to play DVDs 
bearing the code for a particular region 
of the world. Proponents of an 
exemption included individuals who 
had acquired DVDs from a region 
outside the U.S. and then encountered 
difficulty in playing those DVDs on 
devices purchased in the U.S. Because 
such consumers have a number of 
options that will permit them to view 
such region coded DVDs, the need for 
an exemption that would permit 
circumvention of region coding has not 
been demonstrated.
12. Proposed class: Video games stored on 
DVDs that are not available in Region 1 DVD 
format and access to which is prevented by 
technological measures.
A similar issue was raised with 
respect to region coding on video games. 
However, supporters came forward with 
virtually no evidence relating to 
problems with region coding of video 
games. In the previous rulemaking, the 
Register noted that there was not 
enough evidence to support an 
exemption. Thus, the proponents were 
on notice that they needed to supply 
more and better evidence in order to 
sustain the proposed exemption. Such 
evidence has not been produced in this 
rulemaking.
13. Proposed class: Audiovisual works 
embodied in DVDs encrypted by CSS.
The comments in support of this 
exemption sought to engage in a variety 
of sometimes unspecified claimed fair 
uses with respect to audiovisual works 
on DVDs that do not necessarily appear 
to fall within the scope of the proposed 
exemptions discussed above. However, 
they failed to provide evidence of actual 
or likely harm and, therefore, the 
Register cannot recommend such an 
exemption. While some commenters 
mentioned uses that may theoretically 
qualify as a fair use, specific facts were 
not provided and it was not shown that 
the works were unavailable in an 
unprotected format.
14. Proposed class: Software designed for 
use on dedicated video game players.
This proponent of this exemption 
provided almost no evidence in support 
of his proposal, failing to identify a 
technological measure that controls 
access to copyrighted works and failing 
sufficiently to identify what 
noninfringing activity is adversely 
affected.
15. Proposed class: Literary works 
(including ebooks), sound recordings, and 
audiovisual works protected by access 
controls that prevent post-sale uses of works; 
‘‘tethered’’ works.
A number of commenters proposed 
exemptions for works that are tethered 
to particular devices, i.e., works that 
cannot be copied to and used on other 
devices. The purpose of limiting access 
to particular devices or hardware is to 
enable varying degrees of control over 
certain uses. Many of these commenters 
focused on ebooks. An exemption for 
tethered ebooks cannot be sustained. 
The consumer often has choices 
between various ebook formats as well 
as between ebook formats and 
alternative formats for books, e.g., hard 
copies or audio versions. Commenters 
who believe that users should be able to 
‘‘space-shift’’ any work they purchase in 
order to access this work on any device 
of their choosing did not make a 
persuasive case that such ‘‘spaceshifting,’’ involving reproduction of the 
work, is a noninfringing use. The 
purpose of tethering is to limit 
subsequent reproduction and 
distribution of the reproductions. While 
this may limit a user’s options, such 
user limitations would appear to 
represent only an inconvenience as long 
as alternative formats of the work are 
available for noninfringing uses. 
Similar arguments were made with 
respect to tethering of motion pictures 
and of sound recordings of musical 
works. As with the space-shifting of 
ebooks, commenters seek to ‘‘platformshift’’ their sound recordings or motion 
pictures. However, tethering and DRM 
policies serve a legitimate purpose for 
limiting access to certain devices in 
order to protect the copyright owners 
from digital redistribution of their 
works. Moreover, consumers have 
choices of formats and may decide 
whether their intended use is best 
served by a digital online version or by 
another available version of a work. 
While availability for use has been 
restricted in certain digital formats, the 
overall availability for use of these 
works has not been adversely affected. 
The effect of circumvention of the 
protection measures employed on these 
works would likely decrease the digital 
offerings for these classes of works, 
reduce the options for users, and 
decrease the value of these works for 
copyright owners.
VerDate jul<14>2003 15:08 Oct 30, 2003 Jkt 203001 PO 00000 Frm 00030 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\31OCR1.SGM 31OCR1

[PAGE 7]
62017Federal Register / Vol. 68, No. 211 / Friday, October 31, 2003 / Rules and Regulations 
16. Proposed class: Audiovisual works, 
including motion pictures, the DVD copies of 
which are tethered to operating systems that 
prevent rendering on alternative operating 
systems.
A number of commenters sought 
exemption of a class of works consisting 
of motion pictures on DVDs playable on 
computers only when the computers 
have particular operating systems, e.g., 
Windows or Macintosh, and that cannot 
be played on alternative systems, such 
as Linux. 
Because there are a variety of devices 
that will play DVDs, the inability to play 
a DVD on a particular device or with a 
particular operating system is simply a 
matter of preference and inconvenience. 
Persons wishing to play CSS-protected 
DVDs on computers with the Linux 
operating system have the same options 
that other consumers have. As a general 
proposition, the DVD medium has 
increased the availability of motion 
pictures for sale and rental by the 
general public, and the motion picture 
studios’ willingness to distribute their 
works in this medium is due in part to 
the faith they have in the protection 
offered by CSS. The balancing of the 
incremental benefit of allowing 
circumvention for the purposes of 
watching a movie on a Linux-based 
computer is outweighed by the threat of 
increased piracy that underlies 
Congress’ motivation for enacting 
section 1201.
17. Proposed class: Sound recordings, 
audiovisual works and literary works 
(including computer programs) protected by 
access control mechanisms that require 
assent to End-User License Agreements as a 
condition of gaining access.
One commenter proposed an 
exemption for sound recordings, 
audiovisual works and literary works 
(including computer programs) 
protected by access control mechanisms 
employed by or at the request of the 
copyright holder which require, as a 
condition of gaining access, that the 
prospective user agree to contractual 
terms which restrict or limit any of the 
limitations on the exclusive rights of the 
copyright holder. Little evidence was 
offered in support of this proposed 
class. The proponent’s complaint 
appears to be with the practice of 
requiring users of certain works to enter 
into End User License Agreements 
(EULAs) rather than with access 
controls as such. While technological 
measures may prevent access unless a 
user signals assent to the terms of a 
contract, the prohibition on 
circumvention does not appear to 
enforce the terms of a contract.
18. Proposed class: published sound 
recordings of musical works on compact 
discs that use technological measures that 
prevent access on certain playback devices.
One commenter proposed a class of 
‘‘Sound recordings released on compact 
disc (‘‘CDs’’) that are protected by 
technological protection measures that 
malfunction so as to prevent access on 
certain playback devices.’’ In part, this 
proposal relates to copy controls that 
malfunction and inadvertently restrict 
access to sound recordings on CDs. The 
proponent itself expressed doubt 
whether these are actually access 
controls subject to the prohibition in 
section 1201(a)(1); opponents said they 
are not and the Register agrees. 
However, in some cases the 
technologies in question are intended to 
deny access to particular copies of 
sound recordings under certain 
circumstances, e.g., CDs distributed 
with two sessions: a ‘‘first session’’ that 
is not accessible on certain devices and 
a compressed digital file of a ‘‘second 
session’’ that is accessible on those 
devices but which is protected from 
certain uses. The purpose of the second 
session is to permit playability on 
devices such as computers, but to 
hinder the ability of computer users to 
reproduce and disseminate the copies, 
e.g., in a peer-to-peer network. In those 
cases, users have access to the work. 
The comments provided insufficient 
information to conclude that access 
controls have caused users to be denied 
access to a sound recording. Moreover, 
thus far the deployment of CDs 
protected by any technological measures 
in the United States has been minimal. 
The record does not support a 
conclusion that at present, access 
controls on CDs have had a substantial 
adverse effect on noninfringing uses of 
sound recordings on CDs.
19. Proposed class: Sound recordings on 
copy-protected Red Book Audio format 
compact discs.
The Digital Media Association 
(‘‘DiMA’’), on behalf of webcasters 
operating under a statutory license to 
transmit performances of sound 
recordings, sought an exemption that 
would permit circumvention of access 
controls in order to make ephemeral 
copies (as permitted in section 112 of 
the Copyright Act) of sound recordings 
on CDs protected by access controls. In 
particular, they wish to make server 
copies of the higher quality ‘‘first 
session’’ on CDs using the ‘‘second 
session’’ technology. Because section 
112(e)(8) already provides licensed 
webcasters with a mechanism for 
circumventing access controls that 
prevent webcasters from making 
ephemeral copies, there is no need for 
an exemption here, especially when 
webcasters thus far do not appear to 
have experienced actual problems.
20. Proposed exemption: Broadcast news 
monitoring.
A group of broadcast monitors, 
businesses that tape television news 
programs off the air for their customers, 
sought an exemption that would 
‘‘exempt news and public affairs 
programming from the scope of the 
broadcast flag.’’ This was a reference to 
a proposal pending before the Federal 
Communications Commission that 
would require certain consumer 
electronic devices to respond to a 
‘‘broadcast flag’’ in television 
programming which would place 
certain limits on how digital broadcasts 
can be redistributed after receipt by a 
consumer. The broadcast monitors seek 
an exemption that would allow them to 
bypass the broadcast flag for the 
purpose of making copies of news 
segments for their customers.
The Register cannot recommend such 
an exemption. The ‘‘limited purpose’’ 
for which the broadcast monitors seek 
an exemption does not appear to 
constitute a noninfringing use. 
Moreover, the broadcast monitors’ fears 
relating to the broadcast flag, which at 
this point is simply a proposal before 
another federal agency, are speculative. 
Even if the speculative adverse effects 
were to become a reality, such adverse 
effects would only cause an 
inconvenience with respect to the 
intended use, since broadcast monitors 
have other means to go about their 
business.
21. Proposed exemption: Reverse 
engineering for interoperability and the Static 
Control proposals.
Static Control Components, Inc. 
proposed exemptions to permit 
circumvention of access controls on 
computer programs embedded in 
computer printers and toner cartridges 
and that control the interoperation and 
functions of the printer and toner 
cartridge. Static Control is in litigation 
with computer printer manufacturer 
Lexmark, which sells laser printer toner 
cartridges that cannot be refilled by 
third-party remanufacturers because a 
technological measure contained on a 
microchip in those cartridges renders 
those cartridges useless when they are 
refilled by third-party remanufacturers. 
The Register concludes that an existing 
exemption in section 1201(f) addresses 
the concerns of remanufacturers, 
making an exemption under section 
1201(a)(1)(D) unnecessary.
VerDate jul<14>2003 15:08 Oct 30, 2003 Jkt 203001 PO 00000 Frm 00031 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\31OCR1.SGM 31OCR1

[PAGE 8]
62018 Federal Register / Vol. 68, No. 211 / Friday, October 31, 2003 / Rules and Regulations 
6 See, e.g. C43 and C44.
22. Proposed exemption: Computer issues: 
encryption research, data file formats, 
recovery of passwords, personally identifying 
material.
A number of commenters raised 
issues relating to encryption and 
security research and to access controls 
that permit the privacy of users of works 
to be compromised. These proposals, in 
effect, sought broadening of statutory 
exemptions enacted as part of the 
DMCA such as section 1201(d)–(g) and 
(i)–(j). In some cases, the commenters 
failed to explain why the existing 
exemptions are insufficient. Most 
commenters also failed to provide 
specific examples of problems leading 
to the alleged need for an exemption 
and, therefore, the Register cannot 
recommend exemptions in these cases.
23. Proposed exemption: Conversion of 
data file formats and source code.
A few commenters submitted 
comments relating to source code or 
data file formats, but insufficient 
information was provided to understand 
the nature of the problem, or even 
whether the prohibition against 
circumvention contained in section 
1201(a)(1) is implicated.
24. Proposed exemption: Privacy and 
personally identifying information.
Two comments addressed issues 
relating to privacy and the protection of 
personally identifying information. 
However, insufficient information was 
provided to ascertain the nature and 
extent of the problem, or the degree to 
which access controls were involved. To 
the extent that the concern relates to 
disclosure of personally identifying 
information, the commenters did not 
explain why the existing statutory 
exemption in section 1201(i) does not 
adequately address the problem.
25. Other comments beyond the scope of 
the rulemaking: Webcasting, Limitations of 
Liability for Online Service Providers and the 
Antitrafficking provisions of the DMCA.
A number of comments discussed 
issues unrelated to the 
anticircumvention provision that are 
beyond the scope of this rulemaking. 
Some of these comments consisted of 
criticisms of the DMCA generally, 
without citing any particular facts to 
support such criticism.
6 Other 
comments attacked particular aspects of 
the DMCA, e.g., criticism of the rate 
established for the statutory license for 
the webcasting of sound recordings, 
alleged adverse effects of section 512 
relating to limitations on liability for 
online service providers, and the 
antitrafficking provisions of section 
1201(a)(2) and 1201(b).
IV. Conclusion 
Having considered the evidence in the 
record, the contentions of the parties, 
and the statutory objectives, the Register 
of Copyrights recommends that the 
Librarian of Congress publish the four 
classes of copyrighted works designated 
above, so that the prohibition against 
circumvention of technological 
measures that effectively control access 
to copyrighted works shall not apply to 
persons who engage in noninfringing 
uses of those particular classes of works.
Dated: October 27, 2003. 
Marybeth Peters, 
Register of Copyrights.
Determination of the Librarian of 
Congress 
Having duly considered and accepted 
the recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights that the prohibition against 
circumvention of technological 
measures that effectively control access 
to copyrighted works shall not apply to 
persons who engage in noninfringing 
uses of the four classes of copyrighted 
works designated above, the Librarian of 
Congress is exercising his authority 
under 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C) and (D) 
and is publishing as a new rule the four 
classes of copyrighted works that shall 
be subject to the exemption found in 17 
U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(B) from the 
prohibition against circumvention of 
technological measures that effectively 
control access to copyrighted works set 
forth in 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(A) for the 
period from October 28, 2003 through 
October 27, 2006, as follows:
List of Subjects in 37 CFR Part 201 
Cable television, Copyright, 
Exemptions to prohibition against 
circumvention, Literary works, 
Recordings, Satellites.
Final Regulations
I For the reasons set forth in the 
preamble, 37 CFR part 201 is amended 
as follows:
I 1. The authority citation for part 201 
continues to read as follows:
Authority: 17 U.S.C. 702.
I 2. Section 201.40 is amended by 
revising paragraph (b) and by adding 
new paragraph (c). 
The revisions and additions to 
§ 201.40 read as follows:
§ 201.40 Exemption to prohibition against 
circumvention.
* * * * *
(b) Classes of copyrighted works. 
Pursuant to the authority set forth in 17 
U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C) and (D), and upon 
the recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights, the Librarian has 
determined that during the period from 
October 28, 2003, through October 27, 
2006, the prohibition against 
circumvention of technological 
measures that effectively control access 
to copyrighted works set forth in 17 
U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(A) shall not apply to 
persons who engage in noninfringing 
uses of the following four classes of 
copyrighted works: 
(1) Compilations consisting of lists of 
Internet locations blocked by 
commercially marketed filtering 
software applications that are intended 
to prevent access to domains, websites 
or portions of websites, but not 
including lists of Internet locations 
blocked by software applications that 
operate exclusively to protect against 
damage to a computer or computer 
network or lists of Internet locations 
blocked by software applications that 
operate exclusively to prevent receipt of 
e-mail. 
(2) Computer programs protected by 
dongles that prevent access due to 
malfunction or damage and which are 
obsolete. 
(3) Computer programs and video 
games distributed in formats that have 
become obsolete and which require the 
original media or hardware as a 
condition of access. A format shall be 
considered obsolete if the machine or 
system necessary to render perceptible a 
work stored in that format is no longer 
manufactured or is no longer reasonably 
available in the commercial 
marketplace. 
(4) Literary works distributed in 
ebook format when all existing ebook 
editions of the work (including digital 
text editions made available by 
authorized entities) contain access 
controls that prevent the enabling of the 
ebook’s read-aloud function and that 
prevent the enabling of screen readers to 
render the text into a specialized format. 
(c) Definitions. (1) ‘‘Internet 
locations’’ are defined to include 
domains, uniform resource locators 
(URLs), numeric IP addresses or any 
combination thereof. 
(2) ‘‘Obsolete’’ shall mean ‘‘no longer 
manufactured or reasonably available in 
the commercial marketplace.’’ 
(3) ‘‘Specialized format,’’ ‘‘digital 
text’’ and ‘‘authorized entities’’ shall 
have the same meaning as in 17 U.S.C. 
121.
Dated: October 28, 2003. 
James H. Billington, 
The Librarian of Congress.
[FR Doc. 03–27537 Filed 10–30–03; 8:45 am] 
BILLING CODE 1410 –30–P
VerDate jul<14>2003 15:08 Oct 30, 2003 Jkt 203001 PO 00000 Frm 00032 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\31OCR1.SGM 31OCR1