[PAGE 1]
68472 Federal Register / Vol. 71, No. 227 / Monday, November 27, 2006 / Rules and Regulations 
1 A copy of the Register’s memorandum may be 
found at http://www.copyright.gov/1201. 
2 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(D). 
3 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of 
Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, 65 FR 64555 (October 27, 2000); 
http://www.copyright.gov/fedreg/2000/ 
65fr64555.pdf. The Federal Register notice 
contained the recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights and the determination of the Librarian. 
4 The announcement was published in the 
Federal Register on October 31, 2003. Exemption to 
Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright 
Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, 68 FR 62011 (October 31, 2003); 
http://www.copyright.gov/fedreg/2003/ 
68fr2011.pdf. On October 30, 2006, the Librarian 
announced that the existing classes of works were 
being extended, on an interim basis, pending the 
conclusion of the current rulemaking proceeding. 
Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of 
Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, 71 FR 63247 (October 30, 2006). 
Route 3 to the beginning point in the 
town of Chester. 
Signed: September 25, 2006. 
John J. Manfreda, 
Administrator. 
Approved: October 27, 2006. 
Timothy E. Skud, 
Deputy Assistant Secretary (Tax, Trade, and 
Tariff Policy). 
[FR Doc. E6–20023 Filed 11–24–06; 8:45 am] 
BILLING CODE 4810 –31–P 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 
Copyright Office 
37 CFR Part 201 
[Docket No. RM 2005–11] 
Exemption to Prohibition on 
Circumvention of Copyright Protection 
Systems for Access Control 
Technologies 
AGENCY: Copyright Office, Library of 
Congress. 
ACTION: Final rule. 
SUMMARY: This notice announces that 
during the next three years, the 
prohibition against circumvention of 
technological measures that effectively 
control access to copyrighted works 
shall not apply to persons who engage 
in noninfringing uses of six classes of 
copyrighted works. 
EFFECTIVE DATE: November 27, 2006. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT : 
Steven Tepp, Principal Legal Advisor, 
and David O. Carson, General Counsel, 
Copyright GC/&, P.O. Box 70400, 
Southwest Station, Washington, D.C. 
20024–0400. Telephone: (202) 707– 
8380; telefax: (202) 707–8366. 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: In this 
notice, the Librarian of Congress, upon 
the recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights, announces that during the 
period from the time of this notice 
through October 27, 2009, the 
prohibition against circumvention of 
technological measures that effectively 
control access to copyrighted works 
shall not apply to persons who engage 
in noninfringing uses of six classes of 
copyrighted works. This announcement 
is the culmination of a rulemaking 
proceeding commenced by the Register 
on October 3, 2005. A more 
comprehensive statement of the 
background and legal requirements of 
the rulemaking, a discussion of the 
record and the Register’s analysis may 
be found in the Register’s memorandum 
of November 17, 2006, to the Librarian, 
which contains the full explanation of 
the Register’s recommendation.
1 This 
notice summarizes the Register’s 
recommendation and publishes the 
regulatory text codifying the six 
exempted classes of works. 
I. Background 
A. Legislative Requirements for 
Rulemaking Proceeding 
In 1998, Congress enacted the Digital 
Millennium Copyright Act (‘‘DMCA’’), 
which among other things amended title 
17, United States Code, to add section 
1201. Section 1201 prohibits 
circumvention of technological 
measures employed by or on behalf of 
copyright owners to protect their works 
(hereinafter ‘‘access controls’’). In order 
to ensure that the public will have 
continued ability to engage in 
noninfringing uses of copyrighted 
works, such as fair use, subparagraph 
(B) limits this prohibition, exempting 
noninfringing uses of any ‘‘particular 
class of works’’ when users are (or in the 
next 3 years are likely to be) adversely 
affected by the prohibition in their 
ability to make noninfringing uses of 
that class of works. Identification of 
such classes of works is made in a 
rulemaking proceeding conducted by 
the Register of Copyrights, who is to 
provide notice of the rulemaking, seek 
comments from the public, consult with 
the Assistant Secretary for 
Communications and Information of the 
Department of Commerce, and 
recommend final regulations to the 
Librarian of Congress. The regulations, 
to be issued by the Librarian of 
Congress, announce ‘‘any class of 
copyrighted works for which the 
Librarian has determined, pursuant to 
the rulemaking conducted under 
subparagraph (C), that noninfringing 
uses by persons who are users of a 
copyrighted work are, or are likely to be, 
adversely affected, and the prohibition 
contained in subparagraph (A) shall not 
apply to such users with respect to such 
class of works for the ensuing 3–year 
period.’’
2 
The first section 1201 rulemaking 
took place in 2000, and on October 27, 
2000, the Librarian determined that 
noninfringing users of two classes of 
works would not be subject to the 
prohibition on circumvention of access 
controls.
3 Exemptions to the prohibition 
on circumvention remain in force for a 
three–year period and expire at the end 
of that period. The Librarian is required 
to make a determination on potential 
new exemptions every three years. The 
second rulemaking culminated in the 
Librarian’s October 28, 2003, 
announcement that noninfringing users 
of four classes of works would not be 
subject to the prohibition on 
circumvention of access controls.
4 
B. Responsibilities of Register of 
Copyrights and Librarian of Congress 
The purpose of the rulemaking 
proceeding conducted by the Register is 
to determine whether users of particular 
classes of copyrighted works are, or in 
the next three years are likely to be, 
adversely affected by the prohibition in 
their ability to make noninfringing uses 
of copyrighted works. In making her 
recommendation to the Librarian, the 
Register must carefully balance the 
availability of works for use, the effect 
of the prohibition on particular uses and 
the effect of circumvention on 
copyrighted works. Section 
1201(a)(1)(C) directs the Register and 
the Librarian to examine: ‘‘(i) the 
availability for use of copyrighted 
works; (ii) the availability for use of 
works for nonprofit archival, 
preservation, and educational purposes; 
(iii) the impact that the prohibition on 
the circumvention of technological 
measures applied to copyrighted works 
has on criticism, comment, news 
reporting, teaching, scholarship, or 
research; (iv) the effect of circumvention 
of technological measures on the market 
for or value of copyrighted works; and 
(v) such other factors as the Librarian 
considers appropriate.’’ 
C. The Purpose and Focus of the 
Rulemaking 
1. Purpose of the Rulemaking 
As originally drafted, section 
1201(a)(1) provided simply that ‘‘No 
person shall circumvent a technological 
measure that effectively controls access 
to a work protected under this title.’’ 
However, in response to concerns that 
section 1201, in its original form, might 
undermine Congress’s commitment to 
fair use if developments in the 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 16:30 Nov 24, 2006 Jkt 211001 PO 00000 Frm 00042 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27NOR1.SGM 27NOR1sroberts on PROD1PC70 with RULES

[PAGE 2]
68473 Federal Register / Vol. 71, No. 227 / Monday, November 27, 2006 / Rules and Regulations 
5 70 FR 57526 (October 3, 2005); http:// 
www.copyright.gov/fedreg/2005/70fr57526.html. 
6 http://www.copyright.gov/1201/index.html. 
Some of the witnesses at the hearing submitted 
audiovisual materials which are not available on 
the website, but are on file with the Copyright 
Office. 
marketplace relating to use of access 
controls result in less access to 
copyrighted materials that are important 
to education, scholarship, and other 
socially vital endeavors, it was 
determined that a triennial rulemaking 
proceeding should take place to monitor 
the use of access controls. If the 
rulemaking record revealed that access 
was being unduly restricted, e.g., by 
elimination of print or other hard–copy 
versions, permanent encryption of all 
electronic copies or adoption of 
business models that restrict 
distribution and availability of works, 
then users of particular classes of works 
who are engaging in noninfringing uses 
of those works would be allowed to 
circumvent access controls without 
running afoul of the prohibition in 
section 1201(a)(1). The rulemaking 
proceeding, to be conducted by the 
Register of Copyrights, was considered a 
‘‘fail–safe’’ mechanism, monitoring 
developments in the marketplace for 
copyrighted materials, and would allow 
the enforceability of the prohibition 
against the act of circumvention to be 
selectively waived, for limited time 
periods, if necessary to prevent a 
diminution in the availability to 
individual users of a particular category 
of copyrighted materials. 
2. The Necessary Showing 
Proponents of an exemption have the 
burden of proof. In order to make a 
prima facie case for an exemption, 
proponents must show by a 
preponderance of the evidence that 
there has been or is likely to be a 
substantial adverse effect on 
noninfringing uses by users of 
copyrighted works. De minimis 
problems, isolated harm or mere 
inconveniences are insufficient to 
provide the necessary showing. 
Similarly, for proof of ‘‘likely’’ adverse 
effects on noninfringing uses, a 
proponent must prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that the 
harm alleged is more likely than not; a 
proponent may not rely on speculation 
alone to sustain a prima facie case of 
likely adverse effects on noninfringing 
uses. It is also necessary to show a 
causal nexus between the prohibition on 
circumvention and the alleged harm. 
Proposed exemptions are reviewed de 
novo. The existence of a previous 
exemption creates no presumption for 
consideration of a new exemption, but 
rather the proponent of such an 
exemption must make a prima facie case 
in each three–year period. 
3. Determination of ‘‘Class of Works’’ 
In previous rulemakings, it was 
determined that the starting point for 
any definition of a ‘‘particular class’’ of 
works in this rulemaking must be one of 
the categories of works set forth in 
section 102 of the Copyright Act, but 
that those categories are only a starting 
point and a ‘‘class’’ will generally 
constitute some subset of a section 102 
category. The determination of the 
appropriate scope of a ‘‘class of works’’ 
recommended for exemption will also 
take into account the likely adverse 
effects on noninfringing uses and the 
adverse effects an exemption may have 
on the market for or value of 
copyrighted works. 
It was also determined that while 
starting with a section 102 category of 
works, or a subcategory thereof, the 
description of a ‘‘particular class’’of 
works ordinarily should be further 
refined by reference to other factors that 
assist in ensuring that the scope of the 
class addresses the scope of the harm to 
noninfringing uses. For example, the 
class might be defined in part by 
reference to the medium on which the 
works are distributed, or even to the 
access control measures applied to 
them. But classifying a work solely by 
reference to the medium on which the 
work appears, or the access control 
measures applied to the work, would be 
beyond the scope of what ‘‘particular 
class of work’’ is intended to be. 
In the current proceeding, the Register 
has concluded that in certain 
circumstances, it will also be 
permissible to refine the description of 
a class of works by reference to the type 
of user who may take advantage of the 
exemption or by reference to the type of 
use of the work that may be made 
pursuant to the exemption. The Register 
reached this conclusion in reviewing a 
request to exempt a class of works 
consisting of ‘‘audiovisual works 
included in the educational library of a 
college or university’s film or media 
studies department and that are 
protected by technological measures 
that prevent their educational use.’’ 
Concluding that a ‘‘class’’ must be 
properly tailored not only to address the 
harm demonstrated, but also to limit the 
adverse consequences that may result 
from the creation of an exempted class, 
the Register has concluded that given 
the facts demonstrated by the film 
professor proponents of the exemption 
and the legitimate concerns expressed 
by the opponents of the proposed 
exemption, it makes sense that a class 
may, in appropriate cases, be 
additionally refined by reference to the 
particular type of use and/or user. 
D. Consultation with the Assistant 
Secretary for Communications and 
Information 
As required by section 1201(a)(1)(C), 
the Register consulted with the 
Assistant Secretary for Communications 
and Information of the Department of 
Commerce, meeting with him at the 
outset of the rulemaking proceeding and 
exchanging information throughout the 
course of the proceeding. The Assistant 
Secretary communicated his views to 
the Register in letters dated September 
13, 2006, and October 31, 2006. The 
letters related to the proposal to 
designate as a class of works ‘‘Computer 
programs that operate wireless 
communications handsets,’’ and are 
discussed below in the discussion of 
that particular proposal. 
II. Solicitation of Public Comments 
and Hearings 
On October 3, 2005, the Register 
initiated the current rulemaking 
proceeding pursuant to section 
1201(a)(1)(C) with publication of a 
Notice of Inquiry.
5 The Copyright Office 
received 74 written comments 
proposing a class or classes of works for 
exemption. Supporters and opponents 
of these proposals filed 35 reply 
comments. Four days of public hearings 
were conducted in Spring 2006 in 
Washington, D.C., and Palo Alto, 
California. Following the hearings, the 
Office sent follow–up questions to some 
of the hearing witnesses, and responses 
were received during the summer. The 
entire record in this and the previous 
section 1201(a)(1)(C) rulemakings are 
available on the Office’s website.
6 
The Register has now carefully 
reviewed and analyzed the entire record 
in this rulemaking proceeding to 
determine whether any classes of 
copyrighted works should be exempt 
from the prohibition against 
circumvention during the next three 
years. The Register recommends that 
noninfringing users of six classes of 
works be exempt from the prohibition 
on circumvention of access controls. 
III. Discussion 
A.The Six Exempted Classes 
Based on the Register’s review of the 
record, the case has been made for 
exemptions pertaining to the following 
six classes of copyrighted works. 
1. Audiovisual works included in the 
educational library of a college or 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 16:30 Nov 24, 2006 Jkt 211001 PO 00000 Frm 00043 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27NOR1.SGM 27NOR1sroberts on PROD1PC70 with RULES

[PAGE 3]
68474 Federal Register / Vol. 71, No. 227 / Monday, November 27, 2006 / Rules and Regulations 
university’s film or media studies 
department, when circumvention is 
accomplished for the purpose of making 
compilations of portions of those works 
for educational use in the classroom by 
media studies or film professors. 
A number of film and media studies 
professors proposed a class consisting of 
‘‘Audiovisual works included in the 
educational library of a college or 
university’s film or media studies 
department and that are protected by 
technological measures that prevent 
their educational use.’’ They asserted 
that in order to teach their classes 
effectively, they need to be able to create 
compilations of portions of motion 
pictures distributed on DVDs protected 
by CSS for purposes of classroom 
performance. They also asserted that in 
order to show pedagogically necessary, 
high quality content in a reasonably 
efficient manner, they must circumvent 
CSS in order to extract the portions of 
motion pictures or audiovisual works 
necessary for their pedagogical 
purposes. 
The proponents of this exemption 
demonstrated that the reproduction and 
public performance of short portions of 
motion pictures or other audiovisual 
works in the course of face–to–face 
teaching activities of a film or media 
studies course would generally 
constitute a noninfringing use. 
Moreover, the record did not reveal any 
alternative means to meet the 
pedagogical needs of the professors. The 
professors demonstrated that the 
encrypted DVD versions of motion 
pictures often are of higher quality than 
copies in other available formats and 
contain attributes that are extremely 
important to teaching about film for a 
number of reasons. For example, the 
DVD version of a motion picture can 
preserve the original color balance and 
aspect ratio of older motion pictures 
when other available alternatives fail to 
do so. 
The most significant objection to the 
proposal was the concern expressed by 
copyright owners that an exemption for 
a ‘‘class of works’’ would necessarily 
exempt a much broader range of uses 
than those in which the film professors 
wished to engage. Copyright owners 
noted that in prior rulemakings, the 
Register had determined that a class 
must be based primarily on attributes of 
the work itself and not the nature of the 
use or the user. Therefore, recognizing 
the class sought by the film professors 
would benefit not only persons 
similarly situated to the film professors, 
but others engaging in entirely different 
uses. Further, copyright owners 
believed that such an exemption would 
create confusion about the 
circumstances in which circumvention 
was appropriate. 
The concerns of the copyright owners 
were well–founded, but the Register has 
concluded that those concerns can be 
addressed without denying an 
exemption that will enable the film 
professors to engage in the 
noninfringing uses they have identified. 
The facts underlying the film professors’ 
proposal justify a refinement of the 
approach that has been taken in 
determining what may be a ‘‘particular 
class of works.’’ Even though a ‘‘class’’ 
must begin, as its starting point, by 
reference to one of the categories of 
authorship enumerated in section 102 of 
the Copyright Act (or a subset thereof), 
the ways in which that primary 
classification should be further 
delineated depend on the specific facts 
demonstrated in the proceeding. Based 
on the facts presented with respect to 
this proposed class of works and based 
on a review of the statutory text and 
legislative history, the Register has 
concluded that given the appropriate 
factual showing, it is permissible to 
refine the definition of a ‘‘class’’ of 
works by reference to particular types of 
uses and/or users. 
If it had not been possible to define 
a class of works by reference to the users 
or the uses made of those works, it 
might have been difficult for the 
Register to recommend an exemption for 
this class of works. The Register would 
have had to make difficult choices 
between (1) recommending an 
exemption for a particular class of 
works that would permit circumvention 
for a broad ranges of uses, even though 
the case had been made for only a 
narrow noninfringing use, and (2) 
refusing to recognize an exemption for 
a class because the adverse 
consequences of a broadly defined class 
would outweigh the prohibition’s 
adverse effects to a narrow 
noninfringing use. Refining the 
exempted class by reference to the users 
and uses for which a case had been 
made in this rulemaking proceeding 
permits the Librarian to designate a 
class of works that is tailored to the case 
that was made in the rulemaking but 
avoids adverse consequences that may 
result from the recognition of too broad 
a class. Such an approach is consistent 
with Congress’s directive that a 
‘‘‘particular class of copyrighted works’ 
[should] be a narrow and focused subset 
of the broad categories of works of 
authorship identified in section 102.’’ 
In this case, the proposed class should 
be refined by reference to both the user 
and the use, as follows: ‘‘when 
circumvention is accomplished for the 
purpose of making compilations of 
portions of those works for educational 
use in the classroom by media studies 
or film professors.’’ 
2. Computer programs and video games 
distributed in formats that have become 
obsolete and that require the original 
media or hardware as a condition of 
access, when circumvention is 
accomplished for the purpose of 
preservation or archival reproduction of 
published digital works by a library or 
archive. A format shall be considered 
obsolete if the machine or system 
necessary to render perceptible a work 
stored in that format is no longer 
manufactured or is no longer reasonably 
available in the commercial marketplace. 
The Internet Archive, along with 
some supporting commenters, proposed 
an exemption that is identical to the 
classes of works exempted in the 2003 
Rulemaking proceeding. There was no 
direct opposition to this request, apart 
from a concern by copyright owners that 
many old video games and computer 
programs are being reintroduced into 
the market in new ways by their 
copyright owners, who wished to 
exclude from the exemption video 
games that have been re–released on a 
new gaming platform because 
circumvention of access controls would 
cause significant harm to copyright 
owners in their exploitation of these re– 
released works. The copyright owners 
stated that they appreciated that the 
Internet Archive is solely interested in 
preservation and archival use, which 
would not necessarily be harmful to 
copyright owners’ interests. Yet, they 
argued, because the exemption is not 
limited by reference to the specific use 
or user, the effect of the exemption 
could extend well beyond the specific 
use that served as the basis of the 
exemption, i.e., archival and 
preservation use. 
Because the particular noninfringing 
use sought by the Internet Archive that 
serves as the sole basis for this 
exemption is preservation and archival 
use, and because the Register has 
determined that in appropriate cases, 
the definition of a class of works may 
be refined by reference to particular 
kinds of users and/or uses, the concerns 
of copyright owners can be addressed by 
such a refinement, which also meets the 
case presented by the Internet Archive. 
The Internet Archive established that its 
archival and preservation activities are 
noninfringing and that computer 
programs and video games that were 
distributed in formats that have become 
obsolete and that require the original 
media or hardware as a condition of 
access (e.g., that the original floppy 
diskette must be inserted into a 
computer’s disc drive in order for the 
program to operate) constitute works 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 16:30 Nov 24, 2006 Jkt 211001 PO 00000 Frm 00044 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27NOR1.SGM 27NOR1sroberts on PROD1PC70 with RULES

[PAGE 4]
68475 Federal Register / Vol. 71, No. 227 / Monday, November 27, 2006 / Rules and Regulations 
protected by access controls. Without 
the ability to circumvent those 
‘‘original–only’’ access controls, the 
Internet Archive could not engage in its 
preservation and archival activities with 
respect to those works. Therefore, the 
Register recommends renewal of this 
exemption. 
The Internet Archive also sought an 
exemption for a second proposed class: 
‘‘Computer programs and video games 
distributed in formats that require 
obsolete operating systems or obsolete 
hardware as a condition of access.’’ The 
Register cannot recommend adoption of 
an exemption for this proposed class 
because it does not involve access 
controls and, therefore, no exemption is 
needed. This is, in fact, consistent with 
the request of the Internet Archive, 
which sought designation of the second 
class ‘‘only if, and only to the extent 
that, the Copyright Office determines 
that such practical restrictions on access 
created by the lack of backward 
compatibility in new software and 
hardware platforms constitute 
‘‘technological protection measures’ 
within the meaning of the Digital 
Millennium Copyright Act.’’ The fact 
that the creators of the computer 
programs and video games in question 
designed them to run on particular 
operating systems or particular 
hardware does not make the operating 
system or hardware ‘technological 
measures that control access to works.’’ 
Section 1201 addresses technological 
measures that copyright owners place 
on works in order to restrict access to 
those who are not authorized to gain 
access. There is no suggestion in the 
record that the operating systems and 
hardware in question are such 
technological measures. Because 
organizations such as the Internet 
Archive do not violate § 1201(a)(1)(A) 
when they take measures to make such 
computer programs and video games 
run on new operating systems or 
hardware, there is no need to designate 
a class for exemption from the operation 
of § 1201(a)(1)(A). 
3. Computer programs protected by 
dongles that prevent access due to 
malfunction or damage and which are 
obsolete. A dongle shall be considered 
obsolete if it is no longer manufactured 
or if a replacement or repair is no longer 
reasonably available in the commercial 
marketplace. 
A number of commenters proposed 
the renewal of an existing exemption 
from 2003, which in turn was a 
modified version of one of the 
exemptions from the first rulemaking in 
2000. As described in the first 
rulemaking, ‘‘[the] issue relates to the 
use of ‘dongles,’ hardware locks 
attached to a computer that interact 
with software to prevent unauthorized 
access to that software.’’ In both the 
previous rulemakings, evidence was 
presented that damaged or 
malfunctioning dongles can prevent 
authorized access to the protected 
software. Because in some instances the 
software vendors may be unresponsive 
or have gone out of business, the 
evidence painted a compelling picture 
of a genuine problem for authorized 
users of often–expensive computer 
programs who lose their ability to gain 
access to those programs due to 
malfunctioning or damaged hardware 
that cannot be replaced or repaired. 
The legal and analytical rationale for 
this exemption remains unchanged. 
Thus, the key question is whether the 
evidence in this record supports 
renewing the exemption for another 
three years. The Register concludes that 
a sufficient factual showing was made at 
the public hearing on this proposed 
exemption. However, for purposes of 
clarity and consistency, the description 
of the class should be refined to include 
an explanation of what constitutes an 
‘‘obsolete’’ dongle. This is consistent 
with the existing exemption for 
‘‘computer programs and video games 
distributed in formats that have become 
obsolete and which require the media or 
hardware as a condition of access.’’ That 
class of works includes a second 
sentence describing when a format is 
obsolete: ‘‘A format shall be considered 
obsolete if the machine or system 
necessary to render perceptible a work 
stored in that format is no longer 
manufactured or is no longer reasonably 
available in the commercial 
marketplace.’’ A similar explanation 
should be included in the description of 
this class. 
However, the Register cannot 
recommend adoption of an expanded 
exemption sought by one proponent. At 
the hearing on the proposed class of 
computer programs protected by 
dongles, that proponent asked, for the 
first time, that the class of works be 
expanded from ‘‘Computer programs 
protected by dongles that prevent access 
due to malfunction or damage and 
which are obsolete’’ to ‘‘Computer 
programs protected by dongles that 
prevent access due to malfunction or 
damage or hardware or software 
incompatibilities or require obsolete 
operating systems or obsolete hardware 
as a condition of access.’’ (Emphasis 
added.) That request was untimely. The 
purpose of the hearing, at a relatively 
late stage of the proceedings, is not to 
accept new proposals for exemptions or 
to entertain requests for expanded 
versions of exemptions that were 
proposed in a timely manner, but rather 
to give proponents and opponents of 
exemptions an opportunity to 
summarize the facts and arguments that 
have already been presented in written 
comments, to draw attention to those 
facts and arguments that they believe 
are most pertinent in the time allotted 
for the hearing, to respond to questions 
from the Register and her staff, and, if 
appropriate and applicable, to 
demonstrate some of the facts related in 
the written comments. 
4. Literary works distributed in ebook 
format when all existing ebook editions 
of the work (including digital text 
editions made available by authorized 
entities) contain access controls that 
prevent the enabling either of the book’s 
read–aloud function or of screen readers 
that render the text into a specialized 
format. 
A number of commenters, led by the 
American Foundation for the Blind, 
proposed renewal of an existing 
exemption for ebooks for which the 
‘‘screen readers’’ and the ‘‘read–aloud’’ 
function have been disabled. These 
functions enable the blind to ‘‘read’’ the 
text of an ebook by rendering the 
written text of the book into audible, 
synthetic speech. Screen readers also 
allow the text and layout of a text screen 
to be conveyed spatially so that a blind 
user can perceive the organization of a 
page on the screen or even the 
organization of a work as a whole and 
navigate through that ebook. 
Some literary works are distributed in 
ebook form with the read–aloud and 
screen reader functions disabled 
through the use of digital rights 
management tools. In order to alter the 
usage settings of such ebooks in order to 
enable read–aloud and screen reader 
functionality, a user would have to 
circumvent access controls. 
The proponents of this exemption 
selected a sample of five titles and 
conducted only a limited examination 
of the options available even for those 
five titles — a minimal showing at best. 
However, the Register has concluded 
that the proponents have met their 
burden, if only barely. Especially in 
light of the fact that nobody, including 
the copyright owners whose works 
would be subject to this exemption, has 
urged rejection of the proposed 
exemption, the Register recommends 
renewal of the exemption. 
However, proponents of the 
exemption have made a persuasive 
argument for a minor modification of 
the existing exemption, which currently 
is applicable only if there is no ebook 
edition of the work that contains access 
controls that prevent the enabling both 
of the ebook’s read–aloud function 
andof screen readers. Because of the 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 16:30 Nov 24, 2006 Jkt 211001 PO 00000 Frm 00045 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27NOR1.SGM 27NOR1sroberts on PROD1PC70 with RULES

[PAGE 5]
68476 Federal Register / Vol. 71, No. 227 / Monday, November 27, 2006 / Rules and Regulations 
limited functionality of the read–aloud 
function on ebooks and the ability that 
screen readers offer to the blind to 
actually navigate within an ebook, the 
Register is persuaded that the 
exemption should be applicable to a 
literary work when all existing ebook 
editions of the work (including digital 
text editions made available by 
authorized entities) contain access 
controls that prevent the enabling either 
of the book’s read–aloud function or of 
screen readers that render the text into 
a specialized format. In other words, if 
there is no screen reader functionality or 
no read–aloud functionality, the 
exemption will apply. 
5. Computer programs in the form of 
firmware that enable wireless telephone 
handsets to connect to a wireless 
telephone communication network, 
when circumvention is accomplished for 
the sole purpose of lawfully connecting 
to a wireless telephone communication 
network. 
The Wireless Alliance and Robert 
Pinkerton proposed an exemption for 
‘‘Computer programs that operate 
wireless communications handsets.’’ 
The proponents of this exemption stated 
that providers of mobile 
telecommunications (cellphone) 
networks are using various types of 
software locks in order to control 
customer access to the ‘‘bootloader’’ 
programs on cellphones and the 
operating system programs embedded 
inside mobile handsets (cellphones). 
These software locks prevent customers 
from using their handsets on a 
competitor’s network (even after all 
contractual obligations to the original 
wireless carrier have been satisfied) by 
controlling access to the software that 
operates the mobile phones (e.g., the 
mobile firmware). 
Many reply comments were submitted 
in support of this exemption and only 
one reply comment provided any 
opposition to the proposal. Only two 
witnesses testified at the hearing on this 
issue: a representative of the principal 
proponent of the exemption and a 
representative of some copyright owners 
(none of whom operate wireless 
telecommunication services, 
manufacture wireless handsets or make 
bootloader or operating system 
programs for cellphones). 
It was undisputed that mobile handset 
consumers who desire to use their 
handsets on a different 
telecommunications network are often 
precluded from doing so unless they can 
obtain access to the bootloader or 
operating system within the handset in 
order to direct the phone to a different 
carrier’s network. The evidence 
demonstrated that most wireless 
telecommunications network providers 
do not allow a consumer to obtain such 
access in order to switch a cell phone 
from one network to another, and that 
the consumer could not use the cell 
phone with another carrier, even after 
fulfilling his or her contractual 
obligations with the carrier that sold the 
phone. In order to switch carriers, the 
consumer would have to purchase a 
new phone from a competing mobile 
telecommunications carrier. 
The obstacle that prevents customers 
from using lawfully acquired handsets 
on different carriers is the software lock. 
At least one wireless 
telecommunications service has filed 
lawsuits alleging that circumvention of 
the software lock is a violation of 
section 1201(a)(1)(A) and has obtained a 
permanent injunction (albeit by 
stipulation). 
The Register has concluded that the 
software locks are access controls that 
adversely affect the ability of consumers 
to make noninfringing use of the 
software on their cellular phones. 
Moreover, a review of the four factors 
enumerated in § 1201(a)(1)(C)(i)–(iv) 
supports the conclusion that an 
exemption is warranted. There is 
nothing in the record that suggests that 
the availability for use of copyrighted 
works would be adversely affected by 
permitting an exemption for software 
locks. Nor is there any reason to 
conclude that there would be any 
impact — positive or negative — on the 
availability for use of works for 
nonprofit archival, preservation, and 
educational purposes or on the ability to 
engage in criticism, comment, news 
reporting, teaching, scholarship, or 
research. Nor would circumvention of 
software locks to connect to alternative 
mobile telecommunications networks be 
likely to have any effect on the market 
for or value of copyrighted works. The 
reason that these four factors appears to 
be neutral is that in this case, the access 
controls do not appear to actually be 
deployed in order to protect the 
interests of the copyright owner or the 
value or integrity of the copyrighted 
work; rather, they are used by wireless 
carriers to limit the ability of subscribers 
to switch to other carriers, a business 
decision that has nothing whatsoever to 
do with the interests protected by 
copyright. And that, in turn, invokes the 
additional factor set forth in 
§ 1201(a)(1)(C)(v): ‘‘such other factors as 
the Librarian considers appropriate.’’ 
When application of the prohibition on 
circumvention of access controls would 
offer no apparent benefit to the author 
or copyright owner in relation to the 
work to which access is controlled, but 
simply offers a benefit to a third party 
who may use § 1201 to control the use 
of hardware which, as is increasingly 
the case, may be operated in part 
through the use of computer software or 
firmware, an exemption may well be 
warranted. Such appears to be the case 
with respect to the software locks 
involved in the current proposal. 
The copyright owners who did 
express concern about the proposed 
exemption are owners of copyrights in 
music, sound recordings and 
audiovisual works whose works are 
offered for downloading onto cellular 
phones. They expressed concern that 
the proposed exemption might permit 
circumvention of access controls that 
protect their works when those works 
have been downloaded onto cellular 
phones. The record on this issue was 
fairly inconclusive, but in any event the 
proponents of the exemption provided 
assurances that there was no intention 
that the exemption be used to permit 
unauthorized access to those works. 
Rather, the exemption is sought for the 
sole purpose of permitting owners of 
cellular phone handsets to switch their 
handsets to a different network. 
Because the Register has concluded 
that, in appropriate circumstances, a 
class of works may be refined by 
reference to uses made of the works, this 
issue can best be resolved by modifying 
the proposed class of works to extend 
only to ‘‘Computer programs in the form 
of firmware that enable wireless 
telephone handsets to connect to a 
wireless telephone communication 
network, when circumvention is 
accomplished for the sole purpose of 
lawfully connecting to a wireless 
telephone communication network.’’ 
On September 18, 2006, long after the 
comments had been submitted and the 
hearings had been conducted in this 
rulemaking, the Register received 
unsolicited submissions from CTIA – 
The Wireless Association (a nonprofit 
trade association that promotes the 
interests of the wireless industry, 
representing both wireless carriers and 
manufacturers) and TracFone Wireless, 
Inc. (which describes itself as 
‘‘America’s largest prepaid wireless 
company’’). The submissions included 
the submitters’ responses to written 
questions that the Copyright Office had 
submitted to the two witnesses who had 
testified at the March 23, 2006, hearing 
on the proposed exemption — witnesses 
who had no relationship with Tracfone 
or CTIA. The submissions also 
contained arguments opposing the 
proposed exemption. 
In the course of his consultation with 
the Register of Copyrights on this 
rulemaking, the Acting Assistant 
Secretary of Commerce for 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 16:32 Nov 24, 2006 Jkt 211001 PO 00000 Frm 00046 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27NOR1.SGM 27NOR1sroberts on PROD1PC70 with RULES

[PAGE 6]
68477 Federal Register / Vol. 71, No. 227 / Monday, November 27, 2006 / Rules and Regulations 
Communications and Information 
shared his concern that the record on 
this proposal appeared to be incomplete 
and stated that he was pleased that the 
Register had sought additional 
information (in the form of the written 
questions to the witnesses) to 
supplement the record. Subsequently, 
he expressed to the Register his view 
that the CTIA and TracFone comments 
‘‘afford you a complete record in which 
the views of both users and creators of 
content are currently represented,’’ and 
urged the Register to consider those 
submissions in making her 
recommendation. 
The Assistant Secretary’s concerns are 
understandable, and the Register shares 
his desire that the views of both users 
and creators of content be represented 
in the rulemaking. However, complying 
with the Assistant Secretary’s request 
and accepting the last–minute 
submissions of CTIA and TracFone 
would undermine the procedural 
requirements of this proceeding and of 
the rulemaking process in general. 
While it is preferable that all interested 
parties make their views known in the 
rulemaking process, they must do so in 
compliance with the process that is 
provided for public comment, or offer a 
compelling justification for their failure 
to do so. In this case, they have failed 
to offer such justification. CTIA (which 
counts TracFone among its members) 
was aware of this rulemaking 
proceeding and this request for an 
exemption as early as January or 
February, 2006. Yet it remained silent 
until September 18, long after the 
opportunities provided for comment 
and testimony had expired. Nor did it 
offer any explanation for its silence. If 
these extremely untimely submissions 
were accepted, it would be difficult to 
imagine when it ever would be justified 
to reject an untimely comment. Such a 
precedent would be an invitation to 
chaos in future rulemakings. Therefore, 
the late submissions of CTIA and 
TracFone have not been considered. 
6. Sound recordings, and audiovisual 
works associated with those sound 
recordings, distributed in compact disc 
format and protected by technological 
protection measures that control access 
to lawfully purchased works and create 
or exploit security flaws or 
vulnerabilities that compromise the 
security of personal computers, when 
circumvention is accomplished solely for 
the purpose of good faith testing, 
investigating, or correcting such security 
flaws or vulnerabilities. 
A number of commenters sought an 
exemption based on facts arising out of 
the distribution, by Sony BMG Music 
Entertainment, of compact discs (CDs) 
which employed certain digital rights 
management (‘‘DRM’’) software that 
created security vulnerabilities on 
computers on which the software was 
installed. Specifically, they identified 
SunnComm’s MediaMax content 
protection software and First4Internet’s 
XCP copy protection software program. 
The leading proponents of such an 
exemption, Edward W. Felten, Professor 
of Computer Science and Public Affairs 
at Princeton University, and J. Alex 
Halderman, a graduate student at 
Princeton, proposed a class of ‘‘sound 
recordings and audiovisual works 
distributed in compact disc format and 
protected by technological measures 
that impede access to lawfully 
purchased works by creating or 
exploiting security vulnerabilities that 
compromise the security of personal 
computers.’’ 
The evidence in the record 
demonstrated that MediaMax and XCP 
controlled access to the sound 
recordings (as well as some related 
audiovisual works, such as music 
videos) on a number of CDs distributed 
in 2005 and, as a consequence, ended 
up being installed on perhaps half a 
million computer networks worldwide. 
The evidence also established that these 
access controls created security 
vulnerabilities on the personal 
computers on which they were 
installed. For example, XCP includes a 
‘‘rootkit’’ which cloaks the existence of 
other aspects of the XCP digital rights 
management software (a music player 
application and a device driver). The 
rootkit creates security vulnerabilities 
by providing a cloak that conceals 
malicious software, a cloak that, in fact, 
was exploited by disseminators of 
malware within days of the discovery of 
the XCP rootkit. 
Copyright owners opposed the 
proposed exemption primarily on the 
ground that they believe there already 
exists a statutory exemption that 
permits circumvention of access 
controls ‘‘for the purpose of good faith 
testing, investigating, or correcting, a 
security flaw or vulnerability, with the 
authorization of the owner or operator 
of such computer, computer system, or 
computer network.’’ See17 U.S.C. 
§ 1201(j). But while it appears that this 
statutory exemption may permit 
circumvention in cases such as those 
involving MediaMax and XCP, it is not 
clear whether that provision extends to 
such conduct. In light of that 
uncertainty and the seriousness of the 
problem, the Register recommends that 
the Librarian designate a class of works 
consisting of sound recordings, and 
audiovisual works associated with those 
sound recordings, distributed in 
compact disc format and protected by 
technological protection measures that 
control access to lawfully purchased 
works and create or exploit security 
flaws or vulnerabilities that compromise 
the security of personal computers, 
when circumvention is accomplished 
solely for the purpose of good faith 
testing, investigating, or correcting such 
security flaws or vulnerabilities. The 
restriction of the exemption to cases 
where the purpose of circumvention is 
to engage in good faith testing, 
investigating, or correcting of security 
flaws or vulnerabilities is language 
taken directly from § 1201(j), in 
recognition of Congress’s judgment that 
in such cases, the privilege to 
circumvent should extend only to 
conduct directed at the security flaws or 
vulnerabilities that justify the 
exemption in the first place. 
B. Other Exemptions Considered, But 
Not Recommended 
A number of other proposed 
exemptions were considered, but 
rejected. They are briefly discussed 
below. Similar proposed exemptions are 
discussed together. 
1. Compilations consisting of lists of 
Internet locations blocked by 
commercially marketed filtering software 
applications that are intended to prevent 
access to domains, websites or portions 
of websites, but not including lists of 
Internet locations blocked by software 
applications that operate exclusively to 
protect against damage to a computer or 
a computer network or lists of Internet 
locations blocked by software 
applications that operate exclusively to 
prevent receipt of email. 
This proposal is for the renewal of an 
existing exemption from 2003, which in 
turn was a modified version of one of 
the original exemptions from the 2000 
rulemaking. As in the previous two 
rulemakings, initial comments proposed 
an exemption to the prohibition on 
circumvention in order to access the 
lists of blocked websites or Internet 
addresses that are used in various 
filtering software programs sometimes 
referred to as ‘‘censorware.’’ These 
programs are intended to prevent 
children and other Internet users from 
viewing objectionable material while 
online. It has been alleged that although 
the software is intended to serve a 
useful societal purpose, the emphasis of 
the programs is on robust blocking 
rather than accuracy. Critics contend 
that the result of this focus is that this 
type of filtering software tends to over– 
block, thereby preventing access to 
legitimate informational resources. 
Proponents of the exemption (both 
previously and again this year) wish to 
legalize the circumvention of the 
technology which controls access to 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 16:30 Nov 24, 2006 Jkt 211001 PO 00000 Frm 00047 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27NOR1.SGM 27NOR1sroberts on PROD1PC70 with RULES

[PAGE 7]
68478 Federal Register / Vol. 71, No. 227 / Monday, November 27, 2006 / Rules and Regulations 
lists of blocked Internet locations and 
thus adversely affects one’s ability to 
comment on and criticize the lists of 
sites blocked by the technological 
protection measure. 
Although the notice of proposed 
rulemaking made clear that proponents 
of renewal of an existing exemption 
must make their case de novo, 
proponents in the current rulemaking 
proceeding made no attempt to make 
any factual showing whatsoever, 
choosing instead to rest on the record 
from three years ago and argue that the 
existing exemption has done no harm, 
that nothing has changed to suggest the 
exemption is no longer needed, and that 
if anything, the use of filtering software 
is on the rise. In a rulemaking 
proceeding that places the burden of 
coming forward with facts to justify an 
exemption for the ensuing three–year 
period on proponents, one cannot 
assume that the elements of the case 
that was made three years ago remain 
true now. Nor is there any evidence in 
the record that there has been any use 
of the exemption in the past three years, 
or that there would be likely to be any 
use of an exemption during the next 
three years. While this is not necessarily 
fatal, nevertheless a record that reveals 
no use of an existing exemption tends 
to indicate that the exemption is 
unnecessary. Together, the absence of 
any quantification of the current scope 
of the problem along with the absence 
of any demonstration that the existing 
exemption has offered any assistance to 
noninfringing users leaves a record that 
provides no basis to justify a 
recommendation for renewal of the 
exemption. 
2. Space –shifting. 
A number of commenters sought an 
exemption for an activity that is referred 
to by some of those commenters 
generally as ‘‘space–shifting.’’ In 
essence, these commenters sought an 
exemption to permit circumvention of 
technological protection measures 
applied to audiovisual and musical 
works in order to copy these works to 
other media or devices and to access 
these works on those alternative media 
or devices. In most cases, the comments 
did not identify the particular 
technological measures; indeed, in most 
cases it was unclear whether the 
commenters were referring to access 
controls or copy controls, or simply to 
incompatibility of formats. 
Many of the commenters claimed that 
their space–shifting of the works and 
their access to those works on an 
alternative device were noninfringing 
uses and that technological restrictions 
were impeding their ability to engage in 
a noninfringing use. Yet these 
commenters uniformly failed to cite 
legal precedent that establishes that 
such space–shifting is, in fact, a 
noninfringing use. The Register 
concludes that the reproduction of those 
works onto new devices is an 
infringement of the exclusive 
reproduction right unless some 
exemption or defense is applicable. In 
the absence of any persuasive legal 
authority for the proposition that 
making copies of a work onto any 
device of the user’s choosing is a 
noninfringing use, there is no basis for 
recommending an exemption to the 
prohibition on circumvention. 
3. DVDs that cannot be viewed on Linux 
operating systems. 
Some commenters proposed an 
exemption to allow circumvention of 
CSS in order to use their computers 
running the Linux operating system to 
view motion pictures on DVDs. DVDs 
protected by CSS may be played only on 
authorized DVD players licensed by the 
DVD Copy Control Association (DVD– 
CCA). Proponents of an exemption 
assert that there is no licensed player 
available for the Linux operating 
system. However, there is evidence in 
the record that Linux–based DVD 
players currently exist. Moreover, there 
are many readily available ways in 
which to view purchased DVDs. 
Standard DVD players that can connect 
to televisions have become inexpensive 
and portable DVD players have 
decreased in price. Similarly, Linux 
users can create dual–boot systems on 
their computers in order to use DVD 
software that is compatible with, for 
example, the Microsoft operating 
system. There are also alternative 
formats in which to purchase the 
motion pictures contained on DVDs. 
Due to these alternative options for 
access and use by consumers, there is 
no reason to conclude that the 
availability for use of the works on 
DVDs is adversely affected by the 
prohibition. An exemption is not 
warranted simply because some uses are 
unavailable in the particular manner 
that a user seeks to make the use, when 
other options are available. If a user may 
access the DVD in readily–available 
alternative ways or may purchase the 
works in alternative formats, the need 
for the exemption becomes simply a 
matter of convenience or preference. 
The proposal by users of the Linux 
operating system is a matter of 
consumer preference or convenience 
that is unrelated to the types of uses to 
which Congress instructed the Librarian 
to pay particular attention, such as 
criticism, comment, news reporting, 
teaching, scholarship, and research as 
well as the availability for use of works 
for nonprofit archival, preservation and 
educational purposes. The Register 
cannot recommend an exemption for 
this class of works. 
4. Region Coded DVDs. 
Two commenters sought an 
exemption to permit circumvention in 
order to obtain access to motion pictures 
protected by region coding, a 
technological protection measure 
contained on many commercially 
distributed DVDs that limits access to 
the content on DVDs to players coded 
for the same geographical region. On a 
more extensive record, such an 
exemption was denied three and six 
years ago. The reasoning behind the 
denial of the exemption in 2000 and 
2003 appears to be equally valid today: 
Region coding imposes, at most, an 
inconvenience rather than actual or 
likely harm, because there are numerous 
options available to individuals seeking 
access to content from other regions. 
Consumers who wish to view DVDs 
from other regions have a number of 
inexpensive options other than 
circumvention, including obtaining 
DVD players, including portable 
devices, set to play DVDs from other 
regions and obtaining DVD–ROM drives 
for their computers, and setting those 
drives to play DVDs from other regions. 
Region coding of audiovisual works on 
DVDs serves legitimate purposes as an 
access control, such as preventing the 
marketing of DVDs of a motion picture 
in a region of the world where the 
motion picture has not yet been released 
in theaters, or is still being exhibited in 
theaters. 
In light of the de minimis showing 
made in support of the proposed 
exemption, the Register recommends 
rejection of this proposed class. 
5. Computer programs protected by 
mechanisms that restrict their full 
operation to a particular platform or 
operating system. 
Two commenters asserted that certain 
lawfully obtained computer programs 
do not work properly when operating 
systems are upgraded. The brief 
comments submitted on this issue failed 
to present sufficient evidence from 
which to conclude that technological 
measures that control access to works 
are interfering with the ability of users 
of copyrighted works to make 
noninfringing uses. No exemption can 
be recommended in this case because 
insufficient information has been 
presented to understand the nature of 
the problem or even the relevance of 
§ 1201(a)(1). 
6. Computer games and software with 
Copy Protections that prevent legitimate 
users from installing and using games 
and programs. 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 16:30 Nov 24, 2006 Jkt 211001 PO 00000 Frm 00048 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27NOR1.SGM 27NOR1sroberts on PROD1PC70 with RULES

[PAGE 8]
68479 Federal Register / Vol. 71, No. 227 / Monday, November 27, 2006 / Rules and Regulations 
One commenter, in a one–page 
comment, stated that some copy 
protection systems create problems with 
the installation or using of computer 
games or programs, specifically citing 
SecureRom and StarForce as examples 
of such systems. The commenter did not 
present any evidence that the adverse 
effect articulated is the result of an 
access control. There is not sufficient 
evidence in the record to understand the 
problem adequately, to know whether 
the prohibition is the cause of the 
problem, or to know whether an 
exemption is warranted. 
7. Literary works distributed in electronic 
audio format by libraries. 
One commenter stated that an 
exemption should issue for 
circumvention of literary works 
distributed in electronic audio format by 
libraries, because although libraries lend 
downloadable versions of audio books, 
they require special software in order to 
use the legally checked–out 
downloaded books. However, the 
commenter did not identify any 
technological measures that control 
access to the literary content of the 
digital books, nor does it explain how 
such measures are creating problems for 
users. His complaint appeared to be 
about software incompatibility. 
In any event, it appears that the 
technology in question is the type of 
use–facilitating technology the DMCA 
was enacted to encourage. It would 
appear that the deployment of such 
technology actually results in greater 
access to copyrighted works by enabling 
libraries to engage in online lending that 
they would not otherwise be able to 
conduct without infringing the 
copyrights of the books that they 
distribute online. The Register cannot 
recommend an exemption. 
8. All works and fair use works. 
Many commenters stated that the 
DMCA adversely affects consumer rights 
and that all works should be exempt for 
a variety of purposes. These 
commenters have not articulated a 
sufficient class or provided sufficient 
evidence of adverse effects by the 
prohibition on noninfringing uses that 
would allow the articulation of a 
cognizable class. 
9. All works protected by access controls 
that prevent the creation of back–up 
copies. 
A number of commenters sought an 
exemption for a class that, while 
described in various ways, can be 
summarized as ‘‘works protected by 
access controls that prevent the creation 
of back–up copies.’’ Proponents made 
assertions such as that it is common 
sense to make back–up copies of 
expensive media such as CDs and DVDs 
due to their alleged fragility. 
However, the proponents offered no 
legal arguments in support of the 
proposition that the making of backup 
copies is noninfringing, and the Register 
is aware of no authority (apart from 
section 117 of the Copyright Act, which 
relates to computer programs) in 
support of that notion. Nor did 
proponents offer facts that would 
warrant a conclusion that media such as 
DVDs and CDs are so susceptible to 
damage and deterioration that the 
practice of making preventive backup 
copies should be noninfringing. 
The unauthorized reproduction of 
DVDs is already a critical problem 
facing the motion picture industry. 
Creating an exemption to satisfy the 
concern that a DVD may become 
damaged would sanction widespread 
circumvention to facilitate reproduction 
for works that are currently functioning 
properly. The Register finds that the 
record does not justify the proposed 
exemption. 
10. Audiovisual works and sound 
recordings protected by a broadcast flag. 
A number of comments assert that 
broadcast flags for television and radio 
broadcasts would interfere with time 
shifting, format–shifting, and recording 
for personal use. However, there is 
currently no broadcast flag mandate for 
either television or radio broadcasts and 
whether such a mandate will exist 
within the next three years is a matter 
of speculation. If it does exist, it will be 
due in whole or in part to Congressional 
action. Moreover, even if an audio or 
television broadcast flag were to be 
established, the precise substance of the 
requirement is unknown at this time. 
The Register cannot recommend an 
exemption based upon speculation 
about a legal regime that may or may not 
be imposed in the next three years. 
11. Miscellaneous Proposals. 
A number of individual comments, 
each of one page or less, were submitted 
that do not fall into any of the categories 
noted above. In each case, the 
proponent failed to provide information 
that would justify an exemption. These 
proposals include ‘‘any copyrighted 
work which has been available for 
purchase for more then one year’’; ‘‘any 
digital work’’ for the purpose of 
overriding End User License 
Agreements (‘‘EULAs’’) containing 
terms which prohibit comment and 
criticism; access controls used by 
satellite television services; ‘‘computer 
games and software’’; ‘‘any works in 
digital or electronic format which, due 
to their access controls, prevent the user 
from being able to access the user– 
created content’’; and ‘‘Digital 
Broadcasts which employ measures that 
protect ‘access’ to copyrighted works 
which disable, prevent, or otherwise 
make impossible, time–shifting of 
programs.’’ None of these comments 
presented sufficient facts or justification 
to warrant an exemption. 
IV. Conclusion 
Having considered the evidence in the 
record, the contentions of the parties, 
and the statutory objectives, the Register 
of Copyrights recommends that the 
Librarian of Congress publish the six 
classes of copyrighted works designated 
above, so that the prohibition against 
circumvention of technological 
measures that effectively control access 
to copyrighted works shall not apply to 
persons who engage in noninfringing 
uses of those particular classes of works. 
Dated: November 17, 2006 
Marybeth Peters, 
Register of Copyrights. 
Determination of the Librarian of 
Congress 
Having duly considered and accepted 
the recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights that the prohibition against 
circumvention of technological 
measures that effectively control access 
to copyrighted works shall not apply to 
persons who engage in noninfringing 
uses of the six classes of copyrighted 
works designated above, the Librarian of 
Congress is exercising his authority 
under 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C) and (D) 
and is publishing as a new rule the six 
classes of copyrighted works that shall 
be subject to the exemption found in 17 
U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(B) from the 
prohibition against circumvention of 
technological measures that effectively 
control access to copyrighted works set 
forth in 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(A) for the 
period from November 27, 2006 through 
October 27, 2009. 
List of Subjects 
37 CFR Part 201 
Copyright, Exemptions to prohibition 
against circumvention. 
Final Regulations 
I For the reasons set forth in the 
preamble, 37 CFR part 201 is amended 
as follows: 
PART 201—GENERAL PROVISIONS 
I 1. The authority citation for part 201 
continues to read as follows: 
Authority: Authority: 17 U.S.C. 702 
I 2. Section 201.40 is amended by 
revising paragraphs (b) and (c) to read 
as follows: 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 16:30 Nov 24, 2006 Jkt 211001 PO 00000 Frm 00049 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27NOR1.SGM 27NOR1sroberts on PROD1PC70 with RULES

[PAGE 9]
68480 Federal Register / Vol. 71, No. 227 / Monday, November 27, 2006 / Rules and Regulations 
§ 201.40 Exemption to prohibition against 
circumvention. 
* * * * * 
(b) Classes of copyrighted works. 
Pursuant to the authority set forth in 17 
U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C) and (D), and upon 
the recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights, the Librarian has 
determined that during the period from 
November 27, 2006 through October 27, 
2009, the prohibition against 
circumvention of technological 
measures that effectively control access 
to copyrighted works set forth in 17 
U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(A) shall not apply to 
persons who engage in noninfringing 
uses of the following six classes of 
copyrighted works: 
(1) Audiovisual works included in the 
educational library of a college or 
university’s film or media studies 
department, when circumvention is 
accomplished for the purpose of making 
compilations of portions of those works 
for educational use in the classroom by 
media studies or film professors. 
(2) Computer programs and video 
games distributed in formats that have 
become obsolete and which require the 
original media or hardware as a 
condition of access, when 
circumvention is accomplished for the 
purpose of preservation or archival 
reproduction of published digital works 
by a library or archive. A format shall 
be considered obsolete if the machine or 
system necessary to render perceptible a 
work stored in that format is no longer 
manufactured or is no longer reasonably 
available in the commercial 
marketplace. 
(3) Computer programs protected by 
dongles that prevent access due to 
malfunction or damage and which are 
obsolete. A dongle shall be considered 
obsolete if it is no longer manufactured 
or if a replacement or repair is no longer 
reasonably available in the commercial 
marketplace. 
(4) Literary works distributed in 
ebook format when all existing ebook 
editions of the work (including digital 
text editions made available by 
authorized entities) contain access 
controls that prevent the enabling either 
of the book’s read–aloud function or of 
screen readers that render the text into 
a specialized format. 
(5) Computer programs in the form of 
firmware that enable wireless telephone 
handsets to connect to a wireless 
telephone communication network, 
when circumvention is accomplished 
for the sole purpose of lawfully 
connecting to a wireless telephone 
communication network. 
(6) Sound recordings, and audiovisual 
works associated with those sound 
recordings, distributed in compact disc 
format and protected by technological 
protection measures that control access 
to lawfully purchased works and create 
or exploit security flaws or 
vulnerabilities that compromise the 
security of personal computers, when 
circumvention is accomplished solely 
for the purpose of good faith testing, 
investigating, or correcting such security 
flaws or vulnerabilities. 
(c) Definition. ‘‘Specialized format,’’ 
‘‘digital text’’ and ‘‘authorized entities’’ 
shall have the same meaning as in 17 
U.S.C. 121. 
Dated: November 20, 2006 
James H. Billington, 
The Librarian of Congress, 
[FR Doc. E6–20029 Filed 11–24–06; 8:45 am] 
BILLING CODE 1410 –30–S 
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
AGENCY 
40 CFR Part 52 
[EPA–R06–OAR–2006–0016; FRL–8248–3] 
Approval and Promulgation of Air 
Quality Implementation Plans; Texas; 
Revisions to Reid Vapor Pressure 
Requirements for Gasoline 
AGENCY: Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA). 
ACTION: Direct final rule. 
SUMMARY: EPA is taking direct final 
action approving Texas State 
Implementation Plan (SIP) revisions. 
The revisions pertain to Reid Vapor 
Pressure (RVP) requirements for 
gasoline. The revisions add exemptions 
to RVP requirements for research 
laboratories and academic institutions, 
competition racing, and gasoline that is 
being stored or transferred that is not 
used in the affected counties. The 
revisions also reduce recordkeeping 
requirements for retail gasoline 
dispensing outlets in the affected 
counties, and correct a typographical 
error. We are approving the revisions 
pursuant to section 110 and part D of 
the Federal Clean Air Act (CAA). 
DATES: This rule is effective on January 
26, 2007 without further notice, unless 
EPA receives adverse comment by 
December 27, 2006. If EPA receives such 
comment, EPA will publish a timely 
withdrawal in the Federal Register 
informing the public that this rule will 
not take effect. 
ADDRESSES: Submit your comments, 
identified by Docket No. EPA–R06– 
OAR–2006–0016, by one of the 
following methods: 
• Federal eRulemaking Portal: http:// 
www.regulations.gov. Follow the on-line 
instructions for submitting comments. 
• EPA Region 6 ‘‘Contact Us’’ Web 
site: http://epa.gov/region6/ 
r6coment.htm. Please click on ‘‘6PD’’ 
(Multimedia) and select ‘‘Air’’ before 
submitting comments. 
• E-mail: Mr. Thomas Diggs at 
diggs.thomas@epa.gov. Please also send 
a copy by e-mail to the person listed in 
the 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT  
section below. 
• Fax: Mr. Thomas Diggs, Chief, Air 
Planning Section (6PD–L), at fax 
number 214–665–7263. 
• Mail: Mr. Thomas Diggs, Chief, Air 
Planning Section (6PD–L), 
Environmental Protection Agency, 1445 
Ross Avenue, Suite 1200, Dallas, Texas 
75202–2733. 
• Hand or Courier Delivery: Mr. 
Thomas Diggs, Chief, Air Planning 
Section (6PD-L), Environmental 
Protection Agency, 1445 Ross Avenue, 
Suite 1200, Dallas, Texas 75202–2733. 
Such deliveries are accepted only 
between the hours of 8 a.m. and 4 p.m. 
weekdays except for legal holidays. 
Special arrangements should be made 
for deliveries of boxed information. 
Instructions: Direct your comments to 
Docket ID No. EPA–R06–OAR–2006– 
0016. EPA’s policy is that all comments 
received will be included in the public 
docket without change and may be 
made available online at 
www.regulations.gov, including any 
personal information provided, unless 
the comment includes information 
claimed to be Confidential Business 
Information (CBI) or other information 
whose disclosure is restricted by statute. 
Do not submit information that you 
consider to be CBI or otherwise 
protected through www.regulations.gov 
or e-mail. The www.regulations.gov Web 
site is an ‘‘anonymous access’’ system, 
which means EPA will not know your 
identity or contact information unless 
you provide it in the body of your 
comment. If you send an e-mail 
comment directly to EPA without going 
through www.regulations.gov your e- 
mail address will be automatically 
captured and included as part of the 
comment that is placed in the public 
docket and made available on the 
Internet. If you submit an electronic 
comment, EPA recommends that you 
include your name and other contact 
information in the body of your 
comment and with any disk or CD-ROM 
you submit. If EPA cannot read your 
comment due to technical difficulties 
and cannot contact you for clarification, 
EPA may not be able to consider your 
comment. Electronic files should avoid 
the use of special characters, any form 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 16:30 Nov 24, 2006 Jkt 211001 PO 00000 Frm 00050 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27NOR1.SGM 27NOR1sroberts on PROD1PC70 with RULES