[PAGE 1]
43825 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 143 / Tuesday, July 27, 2010 / Rules and Regulations 
Taking of Private Property 
This rule will not cause a taking of 
private property or otherwise have 
taking implications under Executive 
Order 12630, Governmental Actions and 
Interference with Constitutionally 
Protected Property Rights. 
Civil Justice Reform 
This rule meets applicable standards 
in sections 3(a) and 3(b)(2) of Executive 
Order 12988, Civil Justice Reform, to 
minimize litigation, eliminate 
ambiguity, and reduce burden. 
Protection of Children 
We have analyzed this rule under 
Executive Order 13045, Protection of 
Children from Environmental Health 
Risks and Safety Risks. This rule is not 
an economically significant rule and 
does not create an environmental risk to 
health or risk to safety that may 
disproportionately affect children. 
Indian Tribal Governments 
This rule does not have tribal 
implications under Executive Order 
13175, Consultation and Coordination 
with Indian Tribal Governments, 
because it does not have a substantial 
direct effect on one or more Indian 
tribes, on the relationship between the 
Federal Government and Indian tribes, 
or on the distribution of power and 
responsibilities between the Federal 
Government and Indian tribes. 
Energy Effects 
We have analyzed this rule under 
Executive Order 13211, Actions 
Concerning Regulations That 
Significantly Affect Energy Supply, 
Distribution, or Use. We have 
determined that it is not a ‘‘significant 
energy action’’ under that order because 
it is not a ‘‘significant regulatory action’’ 
under Executive Order 12866 and is not 
likely to have a significant adverse effect 
on the supply, distribution, or use of 
energy. The Administrator of the Office 
of Information and Regulatory Affairs 
has not designated it as a significant 
energy action. Therefore, it does not 
require a Statement of Energy Effects 
under Executive Order 13211. 
Technical Standards 
The National Technology Transfer 
and Advancement Act (NTTAA) (15 
U.S.C. 272 note) directs agencies to use 
voluntary consensus standards in their 
regulatory activities unless the agency 
provides Congress, through the Office of 
Management and Budget, with an 
explanation of why using these 
standards would be inconsistent with 
applicable law or otherwise impractical. 
Voluntary consensus standards are 
technical standards (e.g., specifications 
of materials, performance, design, or 
operation; test methods; sampling 
procedures; and related management 
systems practices) that are developed or 
adopted by voluntary consensus 
standards bodies. 
This rule does not use technical 
standards. Therefore, we did not 
consider the use of voluntary consensus 
standards. 
Environment 
We have analyzed this rule under 
Department of Homeland Security 
Management Directive 023–01 and 
Commandant Instruction M16475.lD, 
which guide the Coast Guard in 
complying with the National 
Environmental Policy Act of 1969 
(NEPA) (42 U.S.C. 4321–4370f), and 
have concluded this action is one of a 
category of actions which do not 
individually or cumulatively have a 
significant effect on the human 
environment. This rule is categorically 
excluded, under figure 2–1, paragraph 
(34)(g), of the Instruction. This rule 
involves establishing, disestablishing, or 
changing Regulated Navigation Areas 
and security or safety zones. An 
environmental analysis checklist and a 
categorical exclusion determination are 
available in the docket where indicated 
under 
ADDRESSES. 
List of Subjects in 33 CFR Part 165 
Harbors, Marine safety, Navigation 
(water), Reporting and recordkeeping 
requirements, Security measures, 
Waterways. 
■ For the reasons discussed in the 
preamble, the Coast Guard is amending 
33 CFR part 165 as follows: 
PART 165—REGULATED NAVIGATION 
AREAS AND LIMITED ACCESS AREAS 
■ 1. The authority citation for part 165 
continues to read as follows: 
Authority: 33 U.S.C. 1226, 1231; 46 U.S.C. 
Chapter 701, 3306, 3703; 50 U.S.C. 191, 195; 
33 CFR 1.05–1, 6.04–1, 6.04–6, and 160.5; 
Pub. L. 107–295, 116 Stat. 2064; Department 
of Homeland Security Delegation No. 0170.1. 
■ 2. Add § 165.T14–199 to read as 
follows: 
§ 165.T14–205 Safety Zone; He’eia Kea 
Small Boat Harbor, Kaneohe Bay, Oahu, 
Hawaii. 
(a) Location. The following area is a 
temporary safety zone: All waters 
contained within a specified area 
around five moored vessels in the He’eia 
Kea Small Boat Harbor located in 
Kaneohe Bay, Oahu, Hawaii. This safety 
zone is bounded by the points: 
21°26′30.9″ N, 157°48′40.4″ W; 
21°26′53.4″ N, 157°48′33.8″ W (aka 
Light #2); 21°26′40.9″ N, 157°48′10.5″ 
W, and 21°26′30.4″ N, 157°48′20.57″ W 
(aka Kealohi Pt) thence along the coast 
to the beginning point. This safety zone 
extends from the surface of the water to 
the ocean floor. 
These coordinates are based upon the 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration Coast Survey, Pacific 
Ocean, Oahu, Hawaii, chart 19359. 
(b) Regulations. (1) Entry into or 
remaining in the safety zone described 
in paragraph (a) of this section is 
prohibited unless authorized by the 
Coast Guard Captain of the Port 
Honolulu zone. 
(2) Persons desiring to transit in the 
safety zone may contact the Honolulu 
Captain of the Port on VHF channel 81A 
(157.075 MHz), VHF channel 16 
(156.800 MHz), or at telephone numbers 
1–808–563–9906 and 808–842–2600 to 
seek permission to transit the area with 
a designated escort vessel. If permission 
is granted, all persons and vessels must 
comply with the instructions of the 
Captain of the Port or his or her 
designated representative. 
(c) Effective period. This rule is 
effective from 5:00 a.m. local (HST) time 
on July 16, 2010 through 7:00 p.m. local 
(HST) time on August 13, 2010. 
(d) Regulations. In accordance with 
the general regulations in 33 CFR part 
165, Subpart C, no person or vessel may 
enter or remain in the zone except for 
support vessels and personnel, or other 
vessels authorized by the Captain of the 
Port or his designated representatives. 
(e) Penalties. Vessels or persons 
violating this rule would be subject to 
the penalties set forth in 33 U.S.C. 1232 
and 50 U.S.C. 192. 
Dated: June 24, 2010. 
R.E. McFarland, 
Commander, U.S. Coast Guard, Acting 
Captain of the Port Honolulu. 
[FR Doc. 2010–18268 Filed 7–26–10; 8:45 am] 
BILLING CODE 9110–04–P 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 
Copyright Office 
37 CFR Part 201 
[Docket No. RM 2008–8] 
Exemption to Prohibition on 
Circumvention of Copyright Protection 
Systems for Access Control 
Technologies 
AGENCY: Copyright Office, Library of 
Congress. 
ACTION: Final rule. 
SUMMARY: The Librarian of Congress 
announces that the prohibition against 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 15:25 Jul 26, 2010 Jkt 220001 PO 00000 Frm 00027 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27JYR1.SGM 27JYR1jdjones on DSK8KYBLC1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 2]
43826 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 143 / Tuesday, July 27, 2010 / Rules and Regulations 
circumvention of technological 
measures that effectively control access 
to copyrighted works shall not apply to 
persons who engage in noninfringing 
uses of six classes of copyrighted works. 
EFFECTIVE DATE: July 27, 2010. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT : 
Robert Kasunic, Assistant General 
Counsel, and David O. Carson, General 
Counsel, Copyright GC/I&R, P.O. Box 
70400, Washington, D.C. 20024. 
Telephone: (202) 707–8380. Telefax: 
(202) 707–8366. 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: In this 
notice, the Librarian of Congress, upon 
the recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights, announces that the 
prohibition against circumvention of 
technological measures that effectively 
control access to copyrighted works 
shall not apply to persons who engage 
in noninfringing uses of six classes of 
works. This announcement is the 
culmination of a rulemaking proceeding 
commenced by the Register on October 
6, 2008. A more comprehensive 
statement of the background and legal 
requirements of the rulemaking, a 
discussion of the record and the 
Register’s analysis may be found in the 
Register’s memorandum to the Librarian 
of Congress dated June 11, 2010, which 
contains the full explanation of the 
Register’s recommendation. A copy of 
the Register’s memorandum may be 
found at http://www.copyright.gov/ 
1201. This notice summarizes the 
Register’s recommendation, announces 
the Librarian’s determination, and 
publishes the regulatory text codifying 
the six exempted classes of works. 
I. Background 
A. Legislative Requirements for 
Rulemaking Proceeding 
The Digital Millennium Copyright Act 
(‘‘DMCA’’) was enacted to implement 
certain provisions of the WIPO 
Copyright Treaty and WIPO 
Performances and Phonograms Treaty. It 
established a wide range of rules that 
govern not only copyright owners in the 
marketplace for electronic commerce, 
but also consumers, manufacturers, 
distributors, libraries, educators, and 
on–line service providers. It defined 
whether consumers and businesses may 
engage in certain conduct, or use certain 
devices, in the course of transacting 
electronic commerce. 
Chapter 12 of title 17 of the United 
States Code prohibits circumvention of 
certain technological measures 
employed by or on behalf of copyright 
owners to protect their works (i.e., 
‘‘access controls’’). Specifically, Section 
1201(a)(1)(A) provides, in part, that no 
person shall circumvent a technological 
measure that effectively controls access 
to a work protected under this title. In 
order to ensure that the public will have 
continued ability to engage in 
noninfringing uses of copyrighted 
works, such as fair use, subparagraph 
(B) limits this prohibition. It provides 
that the prohibition against 
circumvention shall not apply to 
persons who are users of a copyrighted 
work which is in a particular class of 
works, if such persons are, or are likely 
to be in the succeeding three–year 
period, adversely affected by virtue of 
such prohibition in their ability to make 
noninfringing uses of that particular 
class of works under this title as 
determined in a rulemaking. The 
proceeding is conducted by the Register 
of Copyrights, who is to provide notice 
of the rulemaking, seek comments from 
the public, consult with the Assistant 
Secretary for Communications and 
Information of the Department of 
Commerce, and recommend final 
regulations to the Librarian of Congress. 
The regulations, to be issued by the 
Librarian of Congress, announce ‘‘any 
class of copyrighted works for which the 
Librarian has determined, pursuant to 
the rulemaking conducted under 
subparagraph (c), that noninfringing 
uses by persons who are users of a 
copyrighted work are, or are likely to be, 
adversely affected, and the prohibition 
contained in subparagraph (A) shall not 
apply to such users with respect to such 
class of works for the ensuing 3–year 
period.’’ This is the fourth Section 1201 
rulemaking. 
B. Responsibilities of Register of 
Copyrights and Librarian of Congress 
The primary responsibility of the 
Register and the Librarian in this 
rulemaking proceeding was to assess 
whether the implementation of access 
control measures is diminishing the 
ability of individuals to use copyrighted 
works in ways that are not infringing 
and to designate any classes of works 
with respect to which users have been 
adversely affected in their ability to 
make noninfringing uses. Congress 
intended that the Register solicit input 
that would enable consideration of a 
broad range of current or likely future 
adverse impacts. The statute directs that 
in conducting the rulemaking, the 
Register and the Librarian shall 
examine: 
(1) The availability for use of 
copyrighted works; 
(2) The availability for use of works 
for nonprofit archival, preservation, and 
educational purposes; 
(3) The impact that the prohibition on 
the circumvention of technological 
measures applied to copyrighted works 
has on criticism, comment, news 
reporting, teaching, scholarship, or 
research; 
(4) The effect of circumvention of 
technological measures on the market 
for or value of copyrighted works; and 
(5) Such other factors as the Librarian 
considers appropriate. 
These factors to be considered in the 
rulemaking process require the Register 
and the Librarian to carefully balance 
the availability of works for use, the 
effect of the prohibition on particular 
uses, and the effect of circumvention on 
copyrighted works. 
C. The Purpose and Focus of the 
Rulemaking 
1. Purpose of the Rulemaking 
The task of this rulemaking is to 
determine whether the availability and 
use of access control measures has 
already diminished or is about to 
diminish the ability of the users of any 
particular classes of copyrighted works 
to engage in noninfringing uses of those 
works similar or analogous to those that 
the public had traditionally been able to 
make prior to the enactment of the 
DMCA. In examining the factors set 
forth in Section 1201(a)(1)(C), the focus 
is on whether the implementation of 
technological protection measures has 
had an adverse impact on the ability of 
users to make lawful uses. 
2. The Necessary Showing 
Proponents of a class of works have 
the burden of proof. In order to make a 
prima facie case for designation of a 
class of works, proponents must show 
by a preponderance of the evidence that 
there has been or is likely to be a 
substantial adverse effect on 
noninfringing uses by users of 
copyrighted works. De minimis 
problems, isolated harm or mere 
inconveniences are insufficient to 
provide the necessary showing. 
Similarly, for proof of ‘‘likely’’ adverse 
effects on noninfringing uses, a 
proponent must prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that the 
harm alleged is more likely than not; a 
proponent may not rely on speculation 
alone to sustain a prima facie case of 
likely adverse effects on noninfringing 
uses. It is also necessary to show a 
causal nexus between the prohibition on 
circumvention and the alleged harm. 
Proposed classes are reviewed de 
novo. The existence of a previously 
designated class creates no presumption 
for consideration of a new class, but 
rather the proponent of such a class of 
works must make a prima facie case in 
each three–year period. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 15:25 Jul 26, 2010 Jkt 220001 PO 00000 Frm 00028 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27JYR1.SGM 27JYR1jdjones on DSK8KYBLC1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 3]
43827 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 143 / Tuesday, July 27, 2010 / Rules and Regulations 
3. Determination of ‘‘Class of Works’’ 
The starting point for any definition 
of a ‘‘particular class’’ of works in this 
rulemaking must be one of the 
categories of works set forth in section 
102 of the Copyright Act. However, 
those categories are only a starting point 
and a ‘‘class’’ will generally constitute 
some subset of a section 102 category. 
The determnation of the appropriate 
scope of a ’’class of works’’; 
recommended for exemption will also 
take into account the likely adverse 
effects on noninfringing uses and the 
adverse effects that designation of the 
class may have on the market for or 
value of copyrighted works. 
While starting with a section 102 
category of works, or a subcategory 
thereof, the description of a ‘‘particular 
class’’of works ordinarily should be 
further refined by reference to other 
factors that assist in ensuring that the 
scope of the class addresses the scope of 
the harm to noninfringing uses. For 
example, the class might be defined in 
part by reference to the medium on 
which the works are distributed, or even 
to the access control measures applied 
to them. The description of a class of 
works may also be refined, in 
appropriate cases, by reference to the 
type of user who may take advantage of 
the designation of the class of works or 
by reference to the type of use of the 
work that may be made pursuant to the 
designation. The ‘‘class’’ must be 
properly tailored not only to address the 
harm demonstrated, but also to limit the 
adverse consequences that may result 
from the creation of an exempted class. 
In every case, the contours of a ‘‘class’’ 
will depend on the unique factual 
circumstances established in the 
rulemaking record on a case–by–case 
basis. 
D. Consultation with the Assistant 
Secretary for Communications and 
Information 
Section 1201(a)(1)(C) requires the 
Register of Copyrights to consult with 
the Assistant Secretary for 
Communications and Information of the 
Department of Commerce (who is also 
the Administrator of the National 
Telecommunications and Information 
Administration) and report and 
comment on the views of the Assistant 
Secretary (‘‘NTIA’’) when she makes her 
recommendation to the Librarian of 
Congress. 
In addition to informal consultations 
throughout the course of the rulemaking 
proceeding, NTIA formally 
communicated its views in letters to the 
Register on November 4, 2009, and 
April 16, 2010. NTIA’s views were 
considered by the Register in forming 
her recommendation. A discussion of 
NTIA’s substantive analysis of 
particular proposals is presented in the 
relevant sections of the Register’s 
recommendation. 
II. Solicitation of Public Comments and 
Hearings 
On October 6, 2008, the Register 
initiated this rulemaking proceeding 
pursuant to Section 1201(a)(1)(C) with 
publication of a Notice of Inquiry. The 
NOI requested written comments from 
all interested parties, including 
representatives of copyright owners, 
educational institutions, libraries and 
archives, scholars, researchers, and 
members of the public. 
During the initial comment period 
that ended on December 2, 2008, the 
Copyright Office received nineteen 
written comments proposing twenty– 
five classes of works, all of which were 
posted on the Office’s website. Because 
some of the initial comments contained 
similar or overlapping proposals, the 
Copyright Office arranged related 
classes into groups, and set forth and 
summarized all proposed classes in a 
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking 
(‘‘NPRM’’) published on December 29, 
2008. This NPRM did not present the 
initial classes in the form of proposed 
rule, but merely as ‘‘a starting point for 
further consideration.’’ 
The NPRM asked interested parties to 
submit comments providing support, 
opposition, clarification, or correction 
regarding the proposals, and to provide 
factual and/or legal arguments in 
support of their positions. The 
Copyright Office received a total of 
fifty–six responsive comments before 
the comment period closed on February 
2, 2009, all of which were posted on the 
Copyright Office website. 
Four days of public hearings were 
conducted by the Register in May 2009 
at Stanford University and the Library of 
Congress. Thirty–seven witnesses, 
representing proponents and opponents 
of proposed classes of works, testified 
on twenty–one proposed classes. 
Following the hearings, the Copyright 
Office sent follow–up questions to some 
of the hearing witnesses, and responses 
were received during the summer. The 
entire record in this and the previous 
section 1201(a)(1)(C) rulemakings are 
available on the Office’s website, http:// 
www.copyright.gov/1201/index.html. 
On October 27, 2009, the Librarian of 
Congress published in the Federal 
Register a Notice of an interim rule, 
extending the existing classes of works 
exempted from the prohibition until the 
conclusion of the current rulemaking 
proceeding and the designation of any 
classes of works to be exempt from the 
prohibition for the ensuing three–year 
period by the Librarian of Congress. 
III. The Designated Classes 
A. Motion pictures on DVDs that are 
lawfully made and acquired and that 
are protected by the Content 
Scrambling System when 
circumvention is accomplished solely 
in order to accomplish the 
incorporation of short portions of 
motion pictures into new works for the 
purpose of criticism or comment, and 
where the person engaging in 
circumvention believes and has 
reasonable grounds for believing that 
circumvention is necessary to fulfill the 
purpose of the use in the following 
instances: 
• Educational uses by college and 
university professors and by college 
and university film and media studies 
students; 
• Documentary filmmaking; 
• Noncommercial videos. 
DVDs protected by the Content 
Scrambling System (CSS) have been an 
issue in this rulemaking proceeding 
since its inception in 2000. In the 2006 
rulemaking proceeding, the Librarian 
designated a class of ‘‘[a]udiovisual 
works included in the educational 
library of a college or university’s film 
or media studies department, when 
circumvention is accomplished for the 
purpose of making compilations of 
portions of those works for educational 
use in the classroom by media studies 
or film professors.’’ 
In the current rulemaking, educators 
sought to renew and, in a number of 
ways, to expand the existing class of 
works designated in the last proceeding. 
The proposed expansions of the class 
involved extending the class to include 
all of the motion pictures on CSS– 
protected DVDs contained in a college 
or university library (rather than just a 
film or media studies department) and 
to encompass classroom use by all 
college and university professors and 
students as well as elementary and 
secondary school teachers and students. 
Apart from educators, others sought 
designation of similar classes of works 
to address what they contended are 
adverse impacts on their ability to 
engage in noninfringing uses of 
copyrighted works. Documentary 
filmmakers argued that the prohibition 
on circumvention adversely affects their 
ability to use portions of motion 
pictures in documentary films, many of 
which would qualify as noninfringing 
uses for the purposes of criticism or 
comment. Creators of noncommercial 
videos that incorporate portions of 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 15:25 Jul 26, 2010 Jkt 220001 PO 00000 Frm 00029 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27JYR1.SGM 27JYR1jdjones on DSK8KYBLC1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 4]
43828 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 143 / Tuesday, July 27, 2010 / Rules and Regulations 
motion pictures contained on CSS– 
protected DVDs also alleged that the 
prohibition on circumvention adversely 
affected their ability to engage in 
noninfringing criticism or comment. 
Based on the record in this 
proceeding, the Register determines that 
CSS is a technological measure that 
protects access to copyrighted motion 
pictures. She also determined that a 
substantial number of uses in the record 
with respect to education, documentary 
filmmaking, and noncommercial videos 
qualify as noninfringing uses. 
NTIA supports expansion of the 
existing class of audiovisual works to 
include all college and university level 
instructors and students but does not 
believe the record justifies an expansion 
that would include elementary and 
secondary school teachers and students. 
NTIA also recommended limiting the 
class to address the use of DVDs 
included in the educational library or 
departments of the academic 
institutions. It also supported the 
proposal to designate a class of works 
for the benefit of documentary 
filmmakers. Finally, it expressed general 
support for the request to designate a 
class that would permit extraction of 
film clips for use in noncommercial 
videos, but suggested a requirement that 
the clips from the audiovisual work 
must be for remix videos that are used 
for social comment or criticism, or that 
are used in transformative–type works 
according to established fair use 
principles. 
Given that all of these proposed 
classes at issue involved motion 
pictures on CSS–protected DVDs, the 
Register recommends that the Librarian 
designate a single class addressing all of 
these adversely affected uses of DVDs. 
However, the Register concludes that 
the record does not support all of the 
proposed expansions of the existing 
class of audiovisual works and that in 
at least one respect, the record 
supported a contraction of that class. 
What the record does demonstrate is 
that college and university educators, 
college and university film and media 
studies students, documentary 
filmmakers, and creators of 
noncommercial videos frequently make 
and use short film clips from motion 
pictures to engage in criticism or 
commentary about those motion 
pictures, and that in many cases it is 
necessary to be able to make and 
incorporate high–quality film clips in 
order effectively to engage in such 
criticism or commentary. In such cases, 
it will be difficult or impossible to 
engage in the noninfringing use without 
circumventing CSS in order to make 
high–quality copies of short portions of 
the motion pictures. Because not all 
uses by educators, documentary 
filmmakers or makers of noncommerical 
videos will be noninfringing or will 
require such high–quality copies, the 
class of works recommended by the 
Register is not as extensive as what was 
requested by some proponents, and the 
class contains some limitations. First, 
proponents for educators failed to 
demonstrate that high–quality 
resolution film clips are necessary for 
K–12 teachers and students, or for 
college and university students other 
than film and media studies students. 
Because other means, such as the use of 
screen capture software, exist that 
permit the making of lower–quality film 
clips without circumventing access 
controls, the Register finds no 
justification in the record for expanding 
the class of works to include such 
persons as express beneficiaries of the 
designation of this class of works. 
Second, the circumvention of access 
controls must be accomplished solely in 
order to enable incorporation of short 
portions of motion pictures into new 
works for purposes of criticism of 
comment. The justification offered by 
proponents for designating a class of 
audiovisual works, and a key element of 
the Register’s conclusion that the 
intended uses will frequently be 
noninfringing fair uses, was that the 
uses that justify designation of the class 
were for purposes of criticism and 
commentary, which are classic ‘‘fair use’’ 
purposes. Moreover, all of the evidence 
in the rulemaking demonstrating 
noninfringing uses involved the use of 
short portions of motion pictures. While 
the Register is persuaded that it would 
be difficult and imprudent to quantify 
the precise contours of what constitutes 
a ‘‘short portion,’’ there was no evidence 
in the record to support the conclusion 
that anything more than incorporating 
relatively short portions of motion 
pictures into a new work for purposes 
of criticism or commentary would be a 
fair use. Similarly, in order to meet the 
requirements of the designated class of 
works, a new work must be created, 
whether that work is a compilation of 
clips for use in the classroom, or a 
documentary or video incorporating a 
clip or clips from a copyrighted motion 
picture. 
The final requirement of the 
recommended class is that the person 
engaging in the circumvention must 
reasonably believe that the 
circumvention is necessary in order to 
fulfill the purpose of the use – i.e., the 
noninfringing criticism or commentary. 
Because alternatives to circumvention 
such as video capture may suffice in 
many, and perhaps the vast majority of 
situations, users must make a reasonable 
determination that heightened quality is 
necessary to achieve the desired goal. 
The justification for designating this 
class of works is that some criticism 
and/or commentary requires the use of 
high–quality portions of motion pictures 
in order to adequately present the 
speech–related purpose of the use. 
Where alternatives to circumvention can 
be used to achieve the noninfringing 
purpose, such non–circumventing 
alternatives should be used. Thus, this 
limitation seeks to avoid an overly 
broad class of works given the limited 
number of uses that may require 
circumvention to achieve the intended 
noninfringing end. 
The class has also been limited to 
include only motion pictures rather 
than all audiovisual works. Because 
there was no evidence presented that 
addressed any audiovisual works other 
than motion pictures, there was no basis 
for including the somewhat broader 
class of audiovisual works (which 
includes not only motion pictures, but 
also works such as video games and 
slide presentations). 
B. Computer programs that enable 
wireless telephone handsets to execute 
software applications, where 
circumvention is accomplished for the 
sole purpose of enabling 
interoperability of such applications, 
when they have been lawfully obtained, 
with computer programs on the 
telephone handset. 
The Electronic Frontier Foundation 
(EFF) proposed a class that would allow 
circumvention of the technological 
measures contained on certain wireless 
phone handsets (known as 
‘‘smartphones’’) that prevent third–party 
software applications from being 
installed and run on such phones. This 
circumvention activity is colloquially 
referred to as ‘‘jailbreaking’’ a phone. 
The factual record with respect to this 
proposed class focused primarily on 
Apple’s iPhone, although there are 
allegations in the record involving other 
mobile phone manufacturers as well. 
EFF asserted, and Apple’s testimony 
confirmed, that any software or 
application to be used on the iPhone 
must be validated with the firmware 
that controls the iPhone’s operation. 
This validation process is intended to 
make it impossible for an owner of an 
iPhone to install and use third–party 
applications on the iPhone that have not 
been approved for distribution through 
Apple’s iTunes App Store. 
EFF argued that jailbreaking is a 
noninfringing activity for three reasons. 
First, it alleged that at least in some 
cases, jailbreaking can be done within 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 15:25 Jul 26, 2010 Jkt 220001 PO 00000 Frm 00030 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27JYR1.SGM 27JYR1jdjones on DSK8KYBLC1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 5]
43829 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 143 / Tuesday, July 27, 2010 / Rules and Regulations 
the scope of what is authorized under 
the license Apple grants to every iPhone 
user. It stated that ‘‘[t]o the extent a 
jailbreaking technique does not modify 
any of the individual software programs 
that comprise the iPhone firmware 
collection, but instead simply adds 
additional software components to the 
collection, the practice may not exceed 
the scope of the license to ‘use the 
iPhone software’ or constitute a 
‘modification’ of any Apple software 
components, any more than the addition 
of a new printer driver to a computer 
constitutes a ‘modification’ of the 
operating system already installed on 
the computer.’’ 
Second, EFF asserted that ‘‘to the 
extent a jailbreak technique requires the 
reproduction or adaptation of existing 
firmware beyond the scope of any 
license or other authorization by the 
copyright owner, it would fall within 
the ambit of 17 U.S.C. § 1l7(a).’’ EFF 
contended that the iPhone owner is also 
the owner of the copy of the firmware 
on the iPhone and that jailbreaking falls 
within the owner’s privilege ‘‘to adapt 
those copies to add new capabilities, so 
long as the changes do not ‘‘harm the 
interests of the copyright proprietor.’’ 
Finally, EFF contended that in any 
event, jailbreaking constitutes fair use of 
the firmware because jailbreaking is a 
purely noncommercial, private use of 
computer software, a largely functional 
work that operates the phone, and that 
the phone owner must reuse the vast 
majority of the original firmware in 
order for the phone to operate. Because 
the phone owner is simply modifying 
the firmware for her own use on the 
phone, there is no harm to the market 
for the firmware. 
Apple responded that jailbreaking by 
purchasers of the iPhone is a violation 
of the prohibition against circumvention 
of access controls. It stated that its 
validation system is necessary to protect 
consumers and Apple from harm. Apple 
further contended that modifying 
Apple’s operating system constituted 
the creation of an infringing derivative 
work. Specifically, Apple argued that 
because purchasers of an iPhone are 
licensees, not owners, of the computer 
programs contained on the iPhone, 
Section 117 of the Copyright Act is 
inapplicable as an exemption to the 
adaptation right. Apple further argued 
that the fair use defense codified in 
§ 107 would not apply to jailbreaking 
activity under the statutory factors. 
Based on the record, the Register has 
determined that the encryption and 
authentication processes on the 
iPhone’s computer programs are 
technological measures that control 
access to the copyrighted work (the 
firmware) for purposes of § 1201(a)(1). 
Moreover, the Register finds that the 
evidence supports the contention that a 
technological protection measure is 
adversely affecting adding applications 
to the iPhone. The critical question is 
whether jailbreaking an iPhone in order 
to add applications to the phone 
constitutes a noninfringing use. 
The Register does not find that the 
contract between Apple and purchasers 
of the iPhone authorize modification of 
the iPhone. Moreover, the Register 
cannot clearly determine whether the 
various versions of the iPhone contracts 
with consumers constituted a sale or 
license of a copy of the computer 
programs contained on the iPhone. The 
contractual language is unclear with 
respect to particular copies of the 
computer programs. Although Apple 
retains ownership of the computer 
programs, the contracts also expressly 
grant users ownership of the device. 
Since the ‘‘copy’’ of the computer 
program is fixed in hardware of the 
device, it is unclear what ownership 
status is to be given to the particular 
copy of the computer program 
contained in the device. Apple 
unquestionably has retained ownership 
of the intangible works, but the 
ownership of the particular copies of 
those works is unclear. 
Moreover, the state of the law with 
respect to the determination of 
ownership is in a state of flux in the 
courts. Both proponents and opponents 
cited case law in support of their 
respective positions, but the Register 
finds it impossible to determine how a 
court would resolve the issue of 
ownership on the facts presented here. 
While both parties agreed that the 
Second Circuit’s decision in Krause v. 
Titleserv, 402 F.3d 119 (2d Cir. 2005) is 
‘‘good law,’’ that case dealt with a 
situation that is distinguishable in many 
respects from the present situation. The 
Register finds that the Krause case does 
not provide clear guidance as to how 
resolve the current issue. 
However, the Register does find that 
the proponent’s fair use argument is 
compelling and consistent with the 
congressional interest in 
interoperability. The four fair use factors 
tend to weigh in favor of a finding of fair 
use. 
Under the first factor in Section 107, 
it appears fair to say that the purpose 
and character of the modification of the 
operating system is to engage in a 
private, noncommercial use intended to 
add functionality to a device owned by 
the person making the modification, 
albeit beyond what Apple has 
determined to be acceptable. The user is 
not engaging in any commercial 
exploitation of the firmware, at least not 
when the jailbreaking is done for the 
user’s own private use of the device. 
The fact that the person engaging in 
jailbreaking is doing so in order to use 
Apple’s firmware on the device that it 
was designed to operate, which the 
jailbreaking user owns, and to use it for 
precisely the purpose for which it was 
designed (but for the fact that it has 
been modified to run applications not 
approved by Apple) favors a finding that 
the purpose and character of the use is 
innocuous at worst and beneficial at 
best. Apple’s objections to the 
installation and use of ‘‘unapproved’’ 
applications appears to have nothing to 
do with its interests as the owner of 
copyrights in the computer programs 
embodied in the iPhone, and running 
the unapproved applications has no 
adverse effect on those interests. Rather, 
Apple’s objections relate to its interests 
as a manufacturer and distributor of a 
device, the iPhone. 
Moreover, Congress has determined 
that reverse engineering for the purpose 
of making computer programs 
interoperable is desirable when certain 
conditions are met, and has crafted a 
specific exemption from Section 
1201(a)’s prohibition on circumvention 
in such cases. While an iPhone owner 
who ‘‘jailbreaks’’ does not fall within the 
four corners of the statutory exemption 
in Section 1201(f), the fact that he or she 
is engaging in jailbreaking in order to 
make the iPhone’s firmware 
interoperable with an application 
specially created for the iPhone suggests 
that the purpose and character of the 
use are favored. 
Turning to the second fair use factor, 
it is customary for operating systems – 
functional works – to enable third party 
programs to interoperate with them. It 
does not and should not infringe any of 
the exclusive rights of the copyright 
owner to run an application program on 
a computer over the objections of the 
owner of the copyright in the 
computer’s operating system. Thus, if 
Apple sought to restrict the computer 
programs that could be run on its 
computers, there would be no basis for 
copyright law to assist Apple in 
protecting its restrictive business model. 
The second factor decisively favors a 
finding of fair use. 
Turning to the third factor, ‘‘the 
amount and substantiality of the portion 
used in relation to the copyrighted work 
as a whole,’’ EFF admitted that because 
the Apple firmware is necessary in 
order to operate the iPhone, it is 
necessary for individuals who jailbreak 
their phones to reuse the vast majority 
of the original firmware. However, the 
amount of the copyrighted work 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 15:25 Jul 26, 2010 Jkt 220001 PO 00000 Frm 00031 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27JYR1.SGM 27JYR1jdjones on DSK8KYBLC1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 6]
43830 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 143 / Tuesday, July 27, 2010 / Rules and Regulations 
modified in a typical jailbreaking 
scenario is fewer than 50 bytes of code 
out of more than 8 million bytes, or 
approximately 1/160,000 of the 
copyrighted work as a whole. Where the 
alleged infringement consists of the 
making of an unauthorized derivative 
work, and the only modifications are so 
de minimis, the fact that iPhone users 
are using almost the entire iPhone 
firmware for the purpose for which it 
was provided to them by Apple 
undermines the significance of this 
factor. While the third factor arguably 
disfavors a fair use finding, the weight 
to be given to it under the circumstances 
is slight. 
Addressing the fourth factor, ‘‘the 
effect of the use upon the potential 
market for or value of the copyrighted 
work,’’ EFF asserted that the firmware 
has no independent economic value, 
pointing out that the iPhone firmware is 
not sold separately, but is simply 
included when one purchases an 
iPhone. EFF also argued that the ability 
to lawfully jailbreak a phone will 
increase, not decrease, overall sales of 
the phones because users will know that 
by jailbreaking, they can ‘‘take advantage 
of a wider array of third party 
applications. 
Apple responded that unauthorized 
uses diminish the value of the 
copyrighted works to Apple. However, 
Apple is not concerned that the practice 
of jailbreaking will displace sales of its 
firmware or of iPhones; indeed, since 
one cannot engage in that practice 
unless one has acquired an iPhone, it 
would be difficult to make that 
argument. Rather, the harm that Apple 
fears is harm to its reputation. Apple is 
concerned that jailbreaking will breach 
the integrity of the iPhone’s 
‘‘ecosystem.’’ The Register concludes 
that such alleged adverse effects are not 
in the nature of the harm that the fourth 
fair use factor is intended to address. 
NTIA does not support designating 
the proposed class. While 
acknowledging that permitting iPhone 
jailbreaking could facilitate innovation, 
better serve customers, and encourage 
the market to utilize open platforms, 
NTIA believes ‘‘it might just as likely 
deter innovation by not allowing the 
developer to recoup its development 
costs and to be rewarded for its 
innovation.’’ NTIA also believes that the 
proponents’ ‘‘public policy’’ arguments 
should properly be considered by expert 
regulatory agencies, the Department of 
Justice, and the Congress. It concludes 
that the ‘‘Register ought only to consider 
recommending the proposed class if she 
concludes that the access control 
measure would be a bar to actions that 
the above bodies might take in response 
to policy judgments made at those 
agencies. 
The Register appreciates that many 
regulatory and policy issues pertaining 
to jailbreaking and smartphones fall 
within the competence of other 
agencies, and the Register has no desire 
to interfere with those agencies’ 
jurisdiction. However, the only question 
before the Register and the Librarian is 
whether Section 1201(a)(1)’s prohibition 
on circumvention is adversely affecting 
the ability of users of smartphones from 
engaging in noninfringing uses of the 
firmware on their devices. No other 
agency has the power to limit the 
application of the prohibition on 
circumvention in this (or any other) 
context. Any future action by a federal 
agency to permit jailbreaking will be 
futile without an exemption from 
liability under Section 1201(a)(1), but if 
a class is not designated in this 
rulemaking, all that it will mean is that 
Section 1201 cannot be used to prevent 
jailbreaking, without prejudice to any 
other legal or regulatory authority that 
might limit or prohibit jailbreaking. 
On balance, the Register concludes 
that when one jailbreaks a smartphone 
in order to make the operating system 
on that phone interoperable with an 
independently created application that 
has not been approved by the maker of 
the smartphone or the maker of its 
operating system, the modifications that 
are made purely for the purpose of such 
interoperability are fair uses. Case law 
and Congressional enactments reflect a 
judgment that interoperability is 
favored. The Register also finds that 
designating a class of works that would 
permit jailbreaking for purposes of 
interoperability will not adversely affect 
the market for or value of the 
copyrighted works to the copyright 
owner. 
Accordingly, the Register 
recommends that the Librarian 
designate the following class of works: 
Computer programs that enable wireless 
communication handsets to execute 
software applications, where 
circumvention is accomplished for the 
sole purpose of enabling interoperability 
of such applications, when they have 
been lawfully obtained, with computer 
programs on the telephone handset. 
C. Computer programs, in the form of 
firmware or software, that enable used 
wireless telephone handsets to connect 
to a wireless telecommunications 
network, when circumvention is 
initiated by the owner of the copy of the 
computer program solely in order to 
connect to a wireless 
telecommunications network and 
access to the network is authorized by 
the operator of the network. 
In 2006, the Librarian designated a 
class of ‘‘Computer programs in the form 
of firmware that enable wireless 
telephone handsets to connect to a 
wireless telephone communication 
network, when circumvention is 
accomplished for the sole purpose of 
lawfully connecting to a wireless 
telephone communication network,’’ in 
order to permit the circumvention of 
access controls that prevent the owner 
of a cellphone from switching service on 
that cellphone to another wireless 
communication network. The access 
controls in question are embedded in 
the mobile phone’s firmware or software 
and prevent the mobile phone owner 
from gaining access to the settings that 
connect the mobile phone to a network 
(e.g., Verizon’s) other than the original 
network (e.g., AT&T’s). Beneficiaries of 
that designation have now requested 
that the Librarian again designate a 
similar class of works. Representatives 
of wireless communication networks 
have opposed the request. 
As she did three years ago, the 
Register recognizes that the requests fall 
within the zone of interest subject to 
this rulemaking. That is, circumventing 
a mobile phone lock, without the 
authority of the copyright owner, to gain 
access to the protected work (i.e., the 
firmware) is likely actionable under 
Section 1201(a)(1) of the Act. Further, a 
wireless carrier who is harmed by the 
circumvention of the software lock may 
bring an action for violation of Section 
1201(a)(1) against anyone who 
circumvents such a technological 
protection measure. 
The proponents of this class have 
presented a prima facie case that the 
prohibition on circumvention has had 
an adverse effect on noninfringing uses 
of firmware on wireless telephone 
handsets. Proponents have shown that 
mobile phone locks prevent consumers 
from legally accessing alternative 
wireless networks with the phone of 
their choice. This is the same type of 
activity that was at issue when the 
existing class of works was being 
considered in 2006. 
The wireless networks asserted that 
by using a cellphone on another 
network, an act that is not authorized 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 15:25 Jul 26, 2010 Jkt 220001 PO 00000 Frm 00032 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27JYR1.SGM 27JYR1jdjones on DSK8KYBLC1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 7]
43831 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 143 / Tuesday, July 27, 2010 / Rules and Regulations 
under their contracts, the customers 
infringe the exclusive right to reproduce 
copies of the computer software, 
because use of the mobile phones 
necessarily involves the making of 
copies in the random access memory of 
the mobile phone. Moreover, they 
asserted that the alteration of the 
computer programs in order enable the 
mobile phones to connect to another 
network constituted the unlawful 
making of derivative works, in violation 
of the copyright owner’s exclusive right 
to prepare derivative works. 
Proponents of the class asserted that 
the owners of mobile phones are also 
the owners of the copies of the 
computer programs on those phones 
and that as owners they are entitled to 
exercise their privileges under Section 
117 of the Copyright Act, which gives 
the owner of a copy of a computer 
program the privilege to make or 
authorize the making of another copy or 
adaptation of that computer program 
under certain circumstances. The 
wireless networks responded that their 
contracts with their customers restrict 
the uses of the customers’ mobile 
phones and retain ownership of the 
copies of the computer programs that 
are loaded onto the mobile phones and 
enable the phones to operate. They also 
asserted those contractual restrictions 
make the networks – and not the 
customers – the owners of the copies of 
the computer programs, and therefore 
the privilege under Section 117 to make 
copies and adaptations of computer 
programs does not apply because that 
privilege is enjoyed only by the owner 
of the copy of the computer program. 
They also argued that the privilege does 
not extend to the customers’ conduct 
because the making of a new copy or 
adaptation in order to use the mobile 
phone on a network other than the 
original network is not, as the statute 
requires, ‘‘an essential step in the 
utilization of the computer program in 
conjunction with a machine.‘‘ 
The Register has reviewed the 
appropriate case law with respect to 
who is the ‘‘owner’’ of a copy of a 
computer program for purposes of 
Section 117 when a license or 
agreement imposes restrictions on the 
use of the computer program and has 
concluded that the state of the law is 
unclear. The Register cannot determine 
whether most mobile phone owners are 
also the owners of the copies of the 
computer programs on their mobile 
phones. However, based on the record 
in this proceeding, the Register finds 
that the proponents of the class have 
made a prima facie case that mobile 
phone owners are the owners of those 
copies. While the wireless networks 
have made a case that many mobile 
phone owners may not own the 
computer program copies because the 
wireless network’s contract with the 
consumer retains ownership of the 
copies, they have not presented 
evidence that this is always the case 
even if their interpretation of the law 
governing ownership is correct. The 
record therefore leads to the conclusion 
that a substantial portion of mobile 
phone owners also own the copies of 
the software on their phones. 
The Register also concludes that when 
the owner of a mobile makes RAM 
copies of the software in order to 
operate the phone – even if she is 
operating it on another network – she is 
making a noninfringing use of the 
software under Section 117 because the 
making of that copy is an essential step 
in the utilization of that software in 
conjunction with a machine. 
Similarly, the making of 
modifications in the computer program 
in order to enable the mobile phone to 
operate on another network would be a 
noninfringing act under Section 117. As 
a general rule, anyone who wishes to 
switch her mobile phone from one 
network to another must alter some 
information embedded in the device. 
However, in a substantial number of 
cases those alterations do not appear to 
implicate Section 117 because the 
elimination and insertion of codes or 
digits, or completely reflashing a phone, 
cannot be considered an infringement of 
the computer program controlling the 
device. When specific codes or digits 
are altered to identify the new network 
to which the phone will connect, those 
minor alterations of data also do not 
implicate any of the exclusive rights of 
copyright owners. And complete 
reflashing does not even constitute 
circumvention of an access control 
because it actually deletes the copy of 
the entire work that had been protected 
by the access control, thereby 
permanently denying access to that 
work. 
In those cases where more substantial 
changes must be made to the computer 
program in order to enable use of the 
mobile phone on another network, those 
changes might implicate the exclusive 
right to prepare derivative works. 
However, those changes would be 
privileged under Section 117, which 
permits the making of ‘‘a new copy or 
adaptation’’ that is created as an 
essential step in the utilization of the 
computer program in conjunction with 
a machine. 
Section 1201(a)(1)(C) factors. As was 
the case in 2006, the Register finds that 
the four factors enumerated in Section 
1201(a)(1)(C)(i)–(iv) do not weigh either 
in favor of or against designation of the 
proposed class of works. Moreover, 
because it appears that the opposition to 
designating the proposed class is based 
primarily on the desires of wireless 
carriers to preserve an existing business 
model that has little if anything to do 
with protecting works of authorship, it 
is appropriate to address the additional 
factor (‘‘such other factors as the 
Librarian considers appropriate’’) set 
forth in Section 1201(a)(1)(C)(v). It 
seems clear that the primary purpose of 
the locks is to keep consumers bound to 
their existing networks, rather than to 
protect the rights of copyright owners in 
their capacity as copyright owners. This 
observation is not a criticism of the 
mobile phone industry’s business plans 
and practices, which may well be 
justified for reasons having nothing to 
do with copyright law and policy, but 
simply a recognition of existing 
circumstances. Because there appear to 
be no copyright–based reasons why 
circumvention under these 
circumstances should not be permitted, 
the Register recommends that the 
Librarian designate a class of works 
similar to the class designated in 2006. 
The Register notes that the 2006 class, 
and the new one designated herein, are 
both narrow, apply only to claims under 
Section 1201(a)(1), and do not establish 
a general federal policy of ensuring that 
customers have the freedom to switch 
wireless communications service 
providers. The designated classes, both 
new and old, simply reflect a 
conclusion that unlocking a mobile 
phone to be used on another wireless 
network does not ordinarily constitute 
copyright infringement and that Section 
1201(a)(1), a statute intended to protect 
copyright interests, should not be used 
to prevent mobile phone owners from 
engaging in such noninfringing activity. 
NTIA supported designation of a class 
similar to the class designated in 2006, 
but proposed that while non–profit 
entities should be permitted to take 
advantage of the exemption, commercial 
users should not. The Register’s 
recommendation, in contrast, would 
permit some commercial activity, so 
long as it (1) involves only used 
handsets, (2) is done by the owner of the 
copy of the computer program, and (3) 
is done ‘‘solely in order to access such 
a wireless telecommunications network 
and access to the network is authorized 
by the operator of the network.’’ The 
Register believes that these limitations 
ensure that the designation of this class 
will not benefit those who engage in the 
type of commercial activity that is at the 
heart of the objections of opponents of 
the proposed class: the ‘‘bulk resellers’’ 
who purchase new mobile phone 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 15:25 Jul 26, 2010 Jkt 220001 PO 00000 Frm 00033 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27JYR1.SGM 27JYR1jdjones on DSK8KYBLC1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 8]
43832 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 143 / Tuesday, July 27, 2010 / Rules and Regulations 
handsets at subsidized prices and, 
without actually using them on the 
networks of the carriers who market 
those handsets, resell them for profit. 
The type of commercial activity that 
would be permitted would be the resale 
of used handsets after the owners of the 
handsets have used them and then given 
or sold them to somebody else, who 
then resells them just as a used 
bookstore sells used books. The Register 
acknowledges that NTIA’s general view 
that the class should not extend to any 
commercial activity is inconsistent with 
aspects of the Register’s 
recommendation, but believes that to 
the extent her recommendation goes 
beyond what NTIA was willing to 
endorse, it does so in a way that, in 
NTIA’s words, ‘‘prevents unlawful use 
by those that would misuse the 
exemption for commercial purposes.’’ 
However, the applicability of the 
proposed class to commercial recyclers, 
such as the ones who had proposed the 
original class of works, is limited. When 
the commercial recycler has made a 
derivative work that is within Section 
117’s privilege for making ‘‘adaptations,’’ 
the recycler is subject to a significant 
limitation contained within Section 117: 
such adaptations may be transferred 
only with the authorization of the 
copyright owner. Thus, a recycler who 
prepares such an adaptation may not 
transfer ownership of the copy of the 
adapted computer program to anybody 
else without the authorization of the 
copyright owner. On the other hand, a 
recycler who has not prepared an 
adaptation is free to resell the mobile 
phone along with the copy of the 
computer program contained within it. 
The new class is also cabined by 
existing law in two important respects. 
First, as with any regulation under 
Section 1201(a)(1)(C) and (D), the 
designation of this class offers no safe 
harbor from liability under Section 
1201(a)(2) which strictly prohibits an 
entity from offering a circumvention 
service. Second, a wireless carrier’s 
‘‘Terms of Purchase’’ and ‘‘Terms of 
Service’’, which are binding contracts, 
still impose use restrictions on 
consumers notwithstanding the 
designation of this class. However, the 
wireless carrier must seek a remedy by 
asserting a claim of breach of contract, 
and not a claim under Section 
1201(a)(1). 
D. Video games accessible on personal 
computers and protected by 
technological protection measures that 
control access to lawfully obtained 
works, when circumvention is 
accomplished solely for the purpose of 
good faith testing for, investigating, or 
correcting security flaws or 
vulnerabilities, if: 
•The information derived from the 
security testing is used primarily to 
promote the security of the owner or 
operator of a computer, computer 
system, or computer network; and 
•The information derived from the 
security testing is used or maintained in 
a manner that does not facilitate 
copyright infringement or a violation of 
applicable law. 
Professor J. Alex Halderman proposed 
two classes of works relating to 
investigating and correcting security 
flaws or vulnerabilities created or 
exploited by technological measures 
protecting certain kinds of works. The 
Register concludes that Halderman has 
made the case for a class pertaining to 
video games, but has not made the case 
for a broader class pertaining to literary 
works, sound recordings and 
audiovisual works. 
In each case, Halderman qualified the 
scope of the proposed class by 
restricting it to (1) lawfully obtained 
works protected by access control 
measures that create or exploit security 
flaws or vulnerabilities that compromise 
the security of personal computers, and 
(2) cases where circumvention is 
accomplished solely for the purpose of 
good faith testing, investigating, or 
correcting such security flaws or 
vulnerabilities. 
In the current proceeding, Halderman 
did not present any evidence that the 
prohibition on circumvention is 
adversely affecting or is likely, in the 
next three years, to adversely affect the 
ability to engage in noninfringing uses 
of sound recordings or audiovisual 
works, or of literary works except to the 
extent that video games may be 
considered, in part, to constitute 
audiovisual works associated with such 
sound recordings. There is no 
information in the record that would 
justify again exempting the class 
designated three years ago. 
However, Halderman did present 
evidence and legal analysis in support 
of a class of works limited to video 
games. Under Section 102(a) of the 
Copyright Act, video games are ‘‘hybrid’’ 
in that they fall within two statutory 
classes of works. Video games typically 
are, in part, computer programs, which 
are a subset of the statutory category of 
‘‘literary works.’’ The evidence related to 
two types of access controls applied to 
video games: Macrovision’s SafeDisc 
software and Sony’s SecuRom software. 
Halderman asserted that the measures 
constitute access controls because, in 
both cases, the measures authenticate 
discs and enforce access policies. 
The alleged underlying noninfringing 
use involved is two–fold. First, 
purchasers of video games (including 
researchers) are engaged in 
noninfringing use when they install, 
access, and play authorized copies of 
such video games while further seeking 
to protect the security of their 
computers. Second, researchers in 
lawful possession of copies of games are 
engaged in noninfringing uses when 
they seek solely to research and 
investigate whether a video game, or the 
technological measure protecting it, 
creates security vulnerabilities or flaws. 
Professor Halderman asserted that such 
good faith research that does not cause 
or promote infringement generally 
constitutes fair use. 
Halderman alleged that SecuROM 
may create security flaws or 
vulnerabilities. He referred to a number 
of articles and class action lawsuits 
suggesting that SecuROM may contain 
flaws or cause vulnerabilities. He 
further stated that a single definitive 
scientific study might quell the ‘‘panic, 
protests, and litigation’’ to ‘‘what may 
turn out to be nonexistent or easily 
reparable faults.’’ 
Halderman also alleged that harm is 
caused by Macrovision’s SafeDisc. He 
alleged that SafeDisc was pre–installed 
on ‘‘nearly every copy of the Microsoft 
Windows XP and Windows 2003 
operating systems, [and that] the 
vulnerability affected nearly one billion 
PCs, two thousand times more than the 
[Sony] rootkit,’’‘‘ the security 
vulnerability that serviced as the factual 
basis for designating a class in the last 
rulemaking. He claimed that the 
security flaw created by SafeDisc was 
much more dangerous than the Sony 
rootkit flaw involved in the previous 
rulemaking that concluded in 2006, 
because this flaw allowed attackers to 
execute unrestricted ‘kernel–level’ code 
and read or write to any area of the hard 
disk or memory of the PC, thus 
facilitating the complete compromise of 
the security of the PC. 
Opponents raised three principal 
arguments against Halderman’s 
proposal. First, they argued that he 
provided little concrete or documented 
evidence that any security flaws or 
vulnerabilities associated with access 
control mechanisms used in connection 
with video games exist. Second, they 
argued that there is no evidence that 
research has been chilled, pointing to 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 15:25 Jul 26, 2010 Jkt 220001 PO 00000 Frm 00034 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27JYR1.SGM 27JYR1jdjones on DSK8KYBLC1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 9]
43833 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 143 / Tuesday, July 27, 2010 / Rules and Regulations 
what they called a robust ecosystem 
within which security experts routinely 
identify such flaws, collaborate on 
remedies, and disseminate information 
to alert computer users of the problems 
and them to solutions. Third, they 
argued that Professor Halderman failed 
to establish that the conduct at issue is 
prohibited by Section 1201(a)(1), since a 
statutory exemption (in particular, 17 
U.S.C. 1201(j) might apply to the 
security research. 
NTIA has advised the Register that he 
believes the record supports designating 
the requested class relating to video 
games and other works accessible on 
personal computers. NTIA believed that 
the proponents have ‘‘persuasively 
argued that without a research 
exemption, research into all current and 
future vulnerabilities will be and is 
chilled now,’’ and concurred with the 
Librarian’s conclusion in 2006 that the 
research may not be covered completely 
by the existing statutory exemptions. 
NTIA further believes that although the 
Sony Rootkit vulnerability no longer 
exists, ‘‘it seems to be a certainty that 
new vulnerabilities will emerge in the 
next three years.’’ 
Overall, the Register has concluded 
that the factors set forth in 17 U.S.C. 107 
tend to strongly support a finding that 
such good faith research constitutes fair 
use. The socially productive purpose of 
investigating computer security and 
informing the public do not involve use 
of the creative aspects of the work and 
are unlikely to have an adverse effect on 
the market for or value of the 
copyrighted work itself. The proponents 
established an underlying noninfringing 
use. 
The next question is whether the 
prohibition is causing an adverse effect 
on such noninfringing uses. The record 
is essentially limited to SecuRom and 
SafeDisc. The evidence relating to 
SecuRom tends to be highly speculative, 
but Professor Halderman asserted that 
‘‘this situation has been crying out for an 
investigation by reputable security 
researchers in order to rigorously 
determine the nature of the problem that 
this system cause[s], and dispel this 
uncertainty about exactly what’s going 
on.’’ He believed that the prohibition on 
circumvention is at least in part to 
blame for the lack of rigorous, 
independent analysis. 
In contrast to SecuROM, SafeDisc has 
created a verifiable security 
vulnerability on a large number of 
computers. Opponents of the proposed 
class did not dispute that SafeDisc 
created a security vulnerability, but they 
argued that the security flaw was 
patched by Microsoft in 2007, without 
the need of an exemption. However, 
SafeDisc was pre–loaded on nearly 
every copy of Microsoft’s Windows XP 
and Windows 2003 operating systems 
and was on the market for over six years 
before a security researcher discovered 
malware exploiting the security. The 
vulnerability had the capacity to affect 
nearly one billion PCs. 
The record supports the conclusion 
that since the 2006 rulemaking, 
substantial vulnerabilities have existed 
with respect to video games – certainly 
with respect to SafeDisc and possibly 
with respect to SecuROM. Within the 
same class of works, security 
researchers have proposed investigation 
of unconfirmed allegations of security 
vulnerabilities on another technological 
protection measure (SecureROM) that 
protects access, but have expressed 
unwillingness to do so without clear 
legal authority. Aggregating the 
evidentiary record, the proponents have 
shown that they need to be able to fix 
flaws that are identified in this class of 
works and they need to be able to 
investigate other alleged security 
vulnerabilities in this class. 
Opponents argued that there may be 
no need to designate a class in this 
proceeding because circumvention may 
already be excused pursuant to Section 
1201(j), which provides an exemption 
for security testing. However, the 
Register has concluded, as she did three 
years ago, that it is unclear whether 
Section 1201(j) applies in cases where 
the person engaging in security testing 
is not seeking to gain access to, in the 
words of Section 1201(j), ‘‘a computer, 
computer system, or computer 
network.’’ Therefore, it is appropriate to 
designate a class of works in this 
proceeding. 
Section 1201(j) does, however, 
influence both the decision to 
recommend designation of a class and 
the decision on how to fashion the class. 
Section 1201(j) is evidence of Congress’s 
general concern to permit 
circumvention under appropriate 
circumstances for purposes of security 
testing, and it also is evidence of the 
conditions Congress believes should be 
imposed on those who take advantage of 
an exemption for security testing. 
Accordingly the Register recommends 
that the Librarian designate a class of 
video games protected by access 
controls, when circumvention is done 
for the purpose of good faith testing for, 
investigating, or correcting security 
flaws or vulnerabilities. Further 
refinements to the class include a 
requirement that the information 
derived from the testing be used 
primarily to promote the security of the 
owner or operator of a computer, 
computer system, or computer network; 
and a requirement that that information 
be used or maintained in a manner that 
does not facilitate copyright 
infringement or a violation of applicable 
law. 
E. Computer programs protected by 
dongles that prevent access due to 
malfunction or damage and which are 
obsolete. A dongle shall be considered 
obsolete if it is no longer manufactured 
or if a replacement or repair is no 
longer reasonably available in the 
commercial marketplace. 
Three years ago, the Librarian 
designated the above–referenced class of 
works, which is similar to classes of 
works designated in each of the 
previous rulemakings. In the current 
proceeding the proponent of that class, 
Joseph V. Montoro, Jr., on behalf of 
Spectrum Software, Inc., has proposed 
an expanded class of works related to 
dongles. Dongles are a type of hardware 
that attach to either the printer port or 
the USB port of a computer in order to 
make secured software function. 
Montoro stated that dongles are sold 
along with certain types of software and 
are necessary for the user to access that 
software on a computer. He further 
explained that in order for the dongle to 
operate properly, the operating system 
must support the hardware and the 
required device driver must be installed. 
Montoro submitted that there are four 
situations where an exemption is 
necessary to rectify actual harm: (1) 
when dongles become obsolete; (2) 
when dongles fail; (3) where there are 
incompatibilities between the dongle 
and the operating system, and (4) where 
there are incompatibilities between the 
dongle and certain hardware. Montoro 
had stressed that his proposal is as 
much about the computer ecosystem as 
it is about dongles, in particular. He said 
that it is important to realize that the 
dongle, the operating system software 
and the computer hardware work in 
tandem and that the proposed class 
necessarily covers all of these parts. 
Representatives of the computer 
software industry stated that they do not 
oppose renewing the existing class of 
works, but object to expanding it 
beyond its current terms. 
As in 2006, the Register finds that the 
case has been made for designation of a 
class of works protected by dongles. 
Montoro has effectively met his burden 
of proof for a class relating to dongles 
that are malfunctioning or damaged and 
that are obsolete, a point on which there 
is no disagreement in the record. When 
the dongle no longer functions and is 
obsolete, there is a substantial adverse 
effect on noninfringing uses because 
there is no other means to access the 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 15:25 Jul 26, 2010 Jkt 220001 PO 00000 Frm 00035 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27JYR1.SGM 27JYR1jdjones on DSK8KYBLC1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 10]
43834 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 143 / Tuesday, July 27, 2010 / Rules and Regulations 
lawfully acquired software. When a 
dongle malfunctions or becomes 
obsolete, a person lawfully entitled to 
access the software should be able to 
rely on self–help if remedial measures 
are not reasonably available in the 
commercial marketplace. Moreover, the 
record reveals no evidence of harm to 
the market for, or value of, copyrighted 
works protected by dongles since the 
designation of the original class of 
works in 2000. 
The class, however, should not 
include cases where a replacement 
dongle is reasonably available or can be 
easily repaired. Some copyright owners 
legitimately use dongles to control 
access to a computer program by 
unauthorized users and are entitled to 
the full benefit of the prohibition as long 
as reasonable accommodations are 
offered for malfunctioning or damaged 
dongles. Montoro has not demonstrated 
that the standard previously applied – 
reasonably available in the marketplace 
– is insufficient to meet the needs of 
users of copyrighted works whose 
dongles malfunction or are damaged. 
Montoro also argues that the current 
class should be expanded to reach 
situations involving incompatibility 
between the dongle and a new or 
upgraded version of an operating 
system. The Register finds that he has 
failed to submit cogent evidence to 
support an expanded class in this 
context. A sufficient record would 
require more detail about the precise 
cause of the problems, the scope of the 
problem, and the noninfringing means 
available to resolve the problem. 
The evidence presented in the record 
also does not support Montoro’s request 
to expand the class in relation to 
obsolete hardware, specifically parallel 
ports on computers. While it appears to 
be the case that parallel ports may be 
obsolescent, there is insufficient 
evidence in the record to support the 
conclusion that parallel ports are 
currently, or in the next three years will 
be, obsolete. In order to make a case for 
an expanded class in relation to obsolete 
hardware, Montoro would have to 
demonstrate that the hardware is, or is 
likely to be, obsolete in the next three 
year period (either as a pre–installed 
item or as an optional configuration), 
that the unavailability of this obsolete 
hardware would adversely affect 
noninfringing uses, and that copyright 
owners are not meeting the legitimate 
needs of existing users. 
IV. Other Classes Considered, but Not 
Recommended 
A. Subscription based services that 
offer DRM–protected streaming video 
where the provider has only made 
available players for a limited number 
of platforms, effectively creating an 
access control that requires a specific 
operating system version and/or set of 
hardware to view purchased material; 
and Motion pictures protected by anti– 
access measures, such that access to the 
motion picture content requires use of 
a certain platform. 
Two proposals sought designation of 
classes of works that would allow 
circumvention of technological 
protection measures in order to provide 
access to motion pictures on platforms 
other than those authorized by content 
providers or their licensees. 
Megan Carney proposed a class of 
works in order to allow circumvention 
of DRM–protected streaming videos 
offered by subscription based services, 
where the provider has made players 
available only for a limited number of 
platforms. She argued that this 
restriction of viewing options effectively 
constitutes an access control by 
requiring a specific operating system 
version and/or set of hardware to view 
purchased material. She sought to use 
Netflix’s ‘‘Watch Instantly’’ streaming 
video feature, which installs digital 
rights management and runs only on 
certain platforms of computer software 
and hardware. ‘‘Watch Instantly’’ is 
included, at no charge, in the monthly 
Netflix membership, but Carney said 
that she is unable to use it because she 
does not own a computer that operates 
on a compatible platform (PCs running 
Windows or Apple computers with Intel 
chips). Carney proposed that the 
Librarian designate a class or works in 
order to allow a user in her situation to 
create a separate program to circumvent 
the DRM on the streaming service 
system in order to view streaming video 
content made available by Netflix. 
Another proponent, Mark Rizik, 
proposed a class of works to allow the 
circumvention of motion pictures on 
DVDs protected by the CSS access 
control system, which requires the use 
of a certain platform for access. 
Specifically, Rizik would like to view, 
on a Linux–based computer that does 
not have a CSS–licensed video player, 
DVDs that are only viewable on CSS– 
licensed players. Rizik sought 
designation of a class in order to permit 
the creation of an unencrypted digital 
copy of the DVD by decrypting and 
extracting contents of DVDs for personal 
viewing purposes on Linux operating 
systems. 
The Motion Picture Association of 
America, Time Warner, and a coalition 
of copyright industry trade associations 
(the ‘‘Joint Creators’’) opposed these 
requests. NTIA has advised that it 
believes that the record does not 
support granting the requests. 
The proponents of both classes of 
works sought to circumvent the access 
controls because, they contended, it is 
too expensive to acquire the hardware 
and software with the minimum 
requirements necessary to view motion 
pictures on the distribution mechanism 
of their choice. They also argued that 
there are no reasonable, noninfringing 
alternatives to circumvention for those 
wishing to engage in the activity 
affected by these platform requirements. 
Similar classes to those proposed by 
Carney and Rizik have been requested 
and denied in the past three 
rulemakings. Although the streaming 
video proposal presents a new factual 
situation, the Register concludes that 
the legal arguments are fundamentally 
similar to the proposals relating to the 
viewing of DVDs on computers with 
Linux operating systems that were 
advanced in the previous three 
rulemakings, when those proposals 
were rejected. Likewise, arguments for 
the streaming video and Linux classes 
fail for fundamentally the same reasons 
as the earlier Linux proposals, and the 
Register cannot recommend that the 
Librarian designate either of these 
proposed classes of works. 
In these rulemakings, proposed 
classes have regularly been rejected in 
cases where a user who wished to 
engage in a noninfringing use of a work 
using a particular device already had 
the ability lawfully to engage in the 
same noninfringing use of the work 
using a different device. The same 
principle applies here. Alternative 
means exist to gain access to and view 
the motion pictures that Carney and 
Rizik wish to view after circumventing 
access controls. In any event, it is 
unclear from the record regarding 
streaming videos what is actually 
prohibiting Carney from being able to 
access the Netflix ‘‘Watch Instantly’’ 
feature and, in particular, whether the 
technological issue is centered around 
an access control. It cannot be discerned 
from the record whether Carney cannot 
gain access due to digital rights 
management or due to software and/or 
hardware incompatibility. 
Regarding DVD circumvention, many 
operating systems on the market enable 
authorized access to the works 
contained on CSS–protected DVDs. 
Moreover, CSS–compatible DVD players 
are in fact available for some Linux 
systems. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 15:25 Jul 26, 2010 Jkt 220001 PO 00000 Frm 00036 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27JYR1.SGM 27JYR1jdjones on DSK8KYBLC1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 11]
43835 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 143 / Tuesday, July 27, 2010 / Rules and Regulations 
Further, many alternatives exist for 
both Carney and Rizik, including other 
streaming video alternatives and online 
content download sites. There are many 
reasonably–priced alternatives that may 
fulfill consumers’ wants and needs, 
including purchasing a DVD player. 
Mere consumer inconvenience is not 
sufficient to support the designation of 
a class of works. The statute does not 
provide that this rulemaking is to enable 
the most convenient method of 
consuming video content. The 
proponents have merely advanced 
requests in order to satisfy their 
convenience and preferences as to how 
they would like to access media and 
have failed to demonstrate a need for 
remedial action. Accordingly, the 
Register cannot recommend the 
Librarian designate either proposed 
class in light of the alternatives that 
exist in the marketplace today. 
B. Lawfully purchased sound 
recordings, audiovisual works, and 
software programs distributed 
commercially in digital format by 
online music and media stores and 
protected by technological measures 
that depend on the continued 
availability of authenticating servers, 
when such authenticating servers cease 
functioning because the store fails or 
for other reasons; and 
Lawfully purchased sound 
recordings, audiovisual works, and 
software programs distributed 
commercially in digital format by 
online music and media stores and 
protected by technological measures 
that depend on the continued 
availability of authenticating servers, 
prior to the failure of the servers for 
technologists and researchers studying 
and documenting how the 
authenticating servers that effectuate 
the technological measures function. 
Christopher Soghoian of the Berkman 
Center for Internet & Society at Harvard 
University has proposed two classes of 
works to allow the circumvention of 
technological measures that depend on 
the continued availability of 
authenticating servers (or ‘‘DRM 
servers’’) for the following uses: (1) by 
consumers, for access to and ordinary 
enjoyment of purchased works, and (2) 
by technologists and researchers, 
documenting the function of the 
technological measures. The 
technological measures in question 
regulate user access to copyrighted 
works via connections to remote online 
authenticating servers, and therefore 
always require that the server be 
operational; if the server is shut down, 
the authentication process cannot take 
place and access for the user will be 
denied. 
Joint Creators and Time Warner 
opposed Soghoian’s requests, and NTIA 
has advised the Register that it believes 
that the record does not support them. 
Soghoian’s first proposal, regarding 
DRM servers that control access to 
lawfully purchased sound recordings, 
audiovisual works and software 
programs, was based upon several 
recent instances where ‘‘online music 
and media stores’’ that tethered their 
commercial distribution of digital works 
to DRM servers ceased operations. The 
proposal would not permit 
circumvention of operational DRM 
servers, but would cover only situations 
in which the particular authentication 
server has ceased to function. Soghoian 
argued that when the DRM servers 
malfunction or are shut down by their 
operators, consumers lose the ability to 
engage in the legitimate, noninfringing 
usage of content that they lawfully 
purchased and reasonably expected to 
continue using. However, there is no 
evidence that such a loss of rights has 
actually occurred thus far. 
Soghoian argued that, given the 
record he presents of digital media 
stores shutting down their DRM servers, 
and given the increased migration of 
customers from physical CDs to 
downloads, it is likely that in the next 
three years at least one DRM–media 
store and/or its authenticating servers 
will shut down, adversely affecting the 
ability to engage in noninfringing use of 
the protected works by those who 
purchased them. He proposed that 
exempting circumvention of DRM server 
technology after a server has stopped 
functioning is a reasonable remedy for 
these adverse effects under three of the 
four Section 1201(a)(1)(C) factors. 
The Register cannot recommend this 
proposed class for the simple reason 
that the proponent has not sustained his 
burden of demonstrating that the 
prohibition on circumvention of access 
controls either has produced, or is likely 
to produce, any adverse effects on 
noninfringing uses of the proposed class 
of works. Here, no such instances of 
adverse effects have been shown. If, in 
the absence of current adverse effect, 
designation of a class of works is to be 
based solely upon anticipated harm, 
‘‘the evidence of likelihood of future 
adverse impact during that time period 
[must be] highly specific, strong and 
persuasive.’’ Evidence of such a 
compelling nature is lacking here as 
well. 
The fundamental question in 
evaluating this proposal is whether the 
adverse effects complained of by the 
proponent, ‘‘DRM–based stores that 
cease to operate or abandon their 
authenticating server system cause their 
customers to lose full, and often any, 
access to, and thus use of, their lawfully 
purchased works,’’ are real, verifiable 
and reasonably likely to recur. There are 
several persuasive reasons in the record 
to answer this question in the negative. 
Regarding the three categories of 
copyrighted works that Soghoian 
identified in his proposal, he presented 
no information that one of them, 
software in this instance, is even being 
sold by online retailers using 
authentication servers. Thus, the 
Register’s review of adverse effects must 
be restricted to sound recordings and 
audiovisual works. Soghain asserts that 
such works were sold by two entities, 
Circuit City and Google, who, upon 
deciding to withdraw from the market, 
fully refunded their customers’ 
purchase costs. In his testimony, 
Soghoian stated that he was willing to 
narrow the proposed class to permit 
circumvention only ‘‘in the event that 
the service does not provide any remedy 
for consumers.’’ He further stated that a 
‘‘refund is a totally appropriate and 
satisfactory remedy.’’ Since the record of 
DRM–protected audiovisual works 
reveal only two defunct services and 
reveals that both provided acceptable 
remedies, there is no reason for the 
Register to consider this category of 
works in her determination. 
With regard to sound recordings, of 
the three retailers who stopped selling 
DRM–protected works, Yahoo Music 
has provided full refunds. The two 
others, MSN Music and Walmart, 
announced in response to consumer 
backlash that they would keep their 
servers operational. The record 
demonstrates that, thus far, there have 
been no adverse effects on the 
noninfringing use of DRM–protected 
sound recording downloads since 
purchasers retain identical access and 
use abilities. 
Soghoian’s proposed class focused 
more on future harm, arguing that ‘‘there 
is no reason to believe that other 
companies or services that fail or are 
shut down in the future will provide 
similar corrective steps.’’ He predicted 
that companies smaller than Microsoft 
and Walmart will not have the resources 
to provide refunds or keep 
authentication servers operating and 
that given the state of the economy, 
more companies will be jettisoning their 
DRM–protected music businesses and 
may decide simply to deactivate their 
authentication servers without advance 
warning. This appears to be pure 
conjecture. Soghoian presented no 
evidence supporting his claim that if 
another online retailer decides to 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 15:25 Jul 26, 2010 Jkt 220001 PO 00000 Frm 00037 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27JYR1.SGM 27JYR1jdjones on DSK8KYBLC1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 12]
43836 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 143 / Tuesday, July 27, 2010 / Rules and Regulations 
disable its authentication server, it will 
leave affected consumers without a 
remedy. To the contrary, the record 
shows that the two companies (MSN 
Music and Walmart) that have 
discontinued their services are still 
keeping the servers operational. Thus, 
the prediction that, within the next 
three years, consumers will be 
prevented from accessing and using 
DRM–protected works due to the 
cessation of operations by an 
authentication server is purely 
hypothetical. 
The Register therefore recommends 
rejection of this proposed class. 
Soghoian’s second proposal relates to 
circumvention of the same DRM servers 
controlling access to the same categories 
of works as his first proposal. However, 
instead of being for the direct benefit of 
consumers, it would aid ‘‘technologists 
and researchers studying and 
documenting how the authenticating 
servers that effectuate the technological 
measures function.’’ Such study and 
documentation, the proposal states, 
would take place ‘‘prior to the failure of 
the servers.’’ This is intended to support 
Soghoian’s first proposed user class by 
providing consumers with 
documentation about how DRM servers 
function, so that they can actually 
understand how to engage in 
circumvention of works in his first 
proposed class. 
Soghoian’s legal argument in support 
of the ‘‘researcher’’ class rested upon a 
comparison with a similar class relating 
to ‘‘rootkits’’ that was designated in the 
2006 rulemaking, where the Librarian 
designated a class to permit 
circumvention technological measures 
that (1) control access to lawfully 
purchased sound recordings and 
associated audiovisual works on CDs 
and (2) create or exploit security flaws 
or vulnerabilities that compromise the 
security of personal computers, when 
circumvention is accomplished solely 
for the purpose of good faith testing, 
investigating, or correcting such security 
flaws or vulnerabilities. Soghoian’s 
proposal focused on the purpose of the 
existing ‘‘rootkit’’ class, contending that 
because his researcher class is also 
intended solely for good faith testing, 
investigation, and correction, it too 
meets the requirements for exemption 
from the anti–circumvention statute. He 
did point out, however, that the cases of 
failed DRM and copy protection systems 
do not easily fit into the category of 
‘‘security flaw or vulnerability.’’ 
Soghoian’s proposed ‘‘research’’ class 
of works ultimately rests upon the same 
speculative argument as his ‘‘user’’ class. 
Since the record makes clear that the 
purpose of designating the research 
class is to facilitate circumvention of 
works in the ‘‘user’’ class, the arguments 
supporting the research class fail on the 
same basis as those supporting the user 
class. Accordingly, the Register 
recommends the rejection of this 
proposed class. 
C. Software and information recorded, 
produced, stored, manipulated or 
delivered by the software, that a 
forensic investigator seeks to copy, 
activate, or reverse engineer in order to 
obtain evidence in a court proceeding. 
Glenn Pannenborg proposed 
designating a class of works for the 
benefit of forensic investigators (i.e., 
court–appointed evidence examiners) 
seeking evidence in a court proceeding. 
According to Pannenborg, forensic 
examiners practicing in the fields of 
financial or information technology may 
be faced with evidence that is recorded, 
produced, stored, manipulated or 
delivered by software covered under 17 
U.S.C. 1201, or evidence that may be the 
software itself, as in a patent or 
licensing dispute. He asserted that in 
order to obtain access to such evidence, 
a forensic investigator may have to 
circumvent a technological protection 
measure in violation of Section 
1201(a)(1)(A). 
Joint Creators opposed Pannenborg’s 
proposal, and NTIA has advised the 
Register that it believes the record does 
not support granting the request. 
The Register finds that the proponent 
in this case has not met the statutory 
burden of proof. Pannenborg failed to 
intelligibly describe the nature of 
authorship of the proposed class of 
works. Moreover, he presented no 
compelling evidence, and provides no 
concrete examples, that noninfringing 
uses of works in the proposed class have 
been or will be affected by the 
circumvention ban. Indeed, he provided 
little information about the works to 
which he has apparently been denied 
access. Because of the lack of such 
information in the record, an evaluation 
of whether and the extent to which the 
prohibition on circumvention caused an 
adverse effect on noninfringing uses was 
not possible. The Register, therefore, 
declines to recommend that the 
Librarian designate this proposed class 
of works. 
D. Audiovisual works delivered by 
digital television (‘‘DTV’’) transmission 
intended for free, over–the–air 
reception by anyone, which are marked 
with a ‘‘broadcast flag’’ indicator that 
prevents, restricts, or inhibits the 
ability of recipients to access the work 
at a time of the recipient’s choosing and 
subsequent to the time of transmission, 
or using a machine owned by the 
recipient but which is not the same 
machine that originally acquired the 
transmission. 
In the 2006 rulemaking, a number of 
commenters sought the designation of 
classes of works that target broadcast 
flags for television and radio broadcasts, 
noting that such restrictions could 
possibly interfere with the personal 
recording of digital broadcast content 
for time–shifting and format–shifting 
purposes. The Register rejected those 
requests, stating that there was no 
broadcast flag mandate in effect for 
either television or radio at that time 
and concluding that no relief could be 
granted based upon non–existent 
regulations. The broadcast flag can be 
described as a digital code embedded in 
a digital television (‘‘DTV’’) broadcasting 
stream, which prevents digital 
television reception equipment from 
redistributing broadcast content. The 
FCC had broadcast flag restrictions, but 
they were overturned by the United 
States Court of Appeals for the District 
of Columbia Circuit. 
In the current proceeding, Matt 
Perkins proposed a new ‘‘broadcast flag’’ 
class based upon the belief that 
broadcasters and copyright owners will 
experiment with copy protection 
measures to restrict the recording of 
broadcast television content after the 
completion of the transition to DTV. He 
asserted that consumers will experience 
frustration if their television recording 
privileges are in any way restricted. 
The National Association of 
Broadcasters (‘‘NAB’’) opposed this 
request, and NTIA advised the Register 
that it believes the record does not 
support the request. 
Perkins has failed to make his case for 
designating the proposed class. He has 
generally stated that a broadcast flag 
would interfere with the recording of 
digital television programming for 
personal use. However, he has not met 
his burden of proof in showing that 
regulatory action by the Librarian is 
warranted. There is no broadcast flag 
mandate for digital television broadcasts 
in effect, and it is highly speculative as 
to whether broadcasters and copyright 
owners will work to implement 
measures to restrict consumer recording 
privileges in the new DTV era. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 15:25 Jul 26, 2010 Jkt 220001 PO 00000 Frm 00038 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27JYR1.SGM 27JYR1jdjones on DSK8KYBLC1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 13]
43837 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 143 / Tuesday, July 27, 2010 / Rules and Regulations 
In addition, the record does not 
indicate that there currently are any 
devices that include broadcast flags. 
Furthermore, Perkins’ theory in support 
of his request lacks any explanation or 
justification as to what noninfringing 
use would be prevented by the 
prohibition on circumvention with 
respect to the broadcast flag and fails to 
provide evidence that actual harm exists 
or that it is ‘‘likely’’ to occur in the 
ensuing three year period. The proposed 
class is also misguided because it affects 
redistribution of content and does not 
appear to be related to an access control 
technology measure for purposes of 
Section 1201(a)(1). For the reasons 
stated above, the Register cannot 
recommend that the proposed request 
be granted. 
E. Audiovisual works embedded in a 
physical medium (such as Blu–ray 
discs) which are marked for ‘‘down– 
conversion’’ or ‘‘down–resolutioning’’ 
(such as by the presence of an Image 
Constraint Token ‘‘ICT‘‘) when the work 
is to be conveyed through any of a 
playback machine’s existing audio or 
visual output connectors, and therefore 
restricts the literal quantity of the 
embedded work available to the user 
(measured by visual resolution, 
temporal resolution, and color fidelity). 
Matt Perkins proposed a class of 
works based on audiovisual works 
embedded in Blu–ray discs. He stated 
that the Blu–ray disc’s data structure 
allows a disc publisher to assign an 
image constraint token to an audiovisual 
work. He further explained that a 
licensed Blu–ray disc player responds to 
that token by ‘‘down–rezzing’’ the 
electronic video signal when conveyed 
over an ‘‘untrusted’’ analog connection 
(i.e., a trio of RCA cables). He asserted 
that no such constraints occur when the 
signal is conveyed over the preferred, 
‘‘trusted’’ digital pathway (High– 
Definition Multimedia Interface 
[‘‘HDMI’’] incorporating High– 
bandwidth Digital Content Protection 
[‘‘HDCP’’]). He argued that ICT denies 
access to discarded video details until a 
condition is satisfied (HDMI 
connectivity), and therefore that ICT 
qualifies as an access control measure 
under Section 1201. He admitted that 
there is little evidence that ICTs are 
currently embedded in available Blu– 
ray discs, but nevertheless asserted that 
the possible inclusion of an image 
constraint token will cause user 
frustration because program content will 
not be seen in the promised high 
definition format. 
Advanced Access Content System 
Licensing Administrator, LLC (‘‘AACS 
LA’’) opposed the request, and NTIA has 
advised the Register that it believes the 
record does not support granting the 
request. 
Perkins’ request cannot withstand 
scrutiny. He has failed to meet his 
burden of proof demonstrating that 
relief is warranted with regard to the 
willful down–conversion of high 
definition programming recorded on 
Blu–ray discs. He has not shown that 
the prohibition on circumvention has 
had or is likely to have a substantial 
adverse effect on a clearly identifiable 
noninfringing use. Similarly, he has not 
demonstrated the existence of actual 
harm, or the likelihood of future harm 
that designation of the proposed class 
would necessarily rectify. Specifically, 
he has not provided evidence that ICTs 
are currently being used on Blu–ray 
discs to restrict users from accessing the 
highest resolution format offered by 
Blu–ray discs. Further, the request is 
unnecessary because the potential 
problem described by Perkins is a 
rapidly disappearing legacy issue 
related to early generation high 
definition televisions. The Register 
recommends that the proposed class of 
works be rejected. 
F. Literary works distributed in ebook 
format when all existing ebook editions 
of the work (including digital text 
editions made available by authorized 
entities) contain access controls that 
prevent the enabling either of the 
book’s read–aloud function or of screen 
readers that render the text into a 
specialized format. 
In 2006, the Librarian designated a 
class consisting of ‘‘Literary works 
distributed in ebook format when all 
existing electronic book (‘‘ebook’’) 
editions of the work (including digital 
text editions made available by 
authorized entities) contain access 
controls that prevent the enabling either 
of the book’s read–aloud function or of 
screen readers that render the text into 
a specialized format.’’ The American 
Foundation for the Blind (‘‘AFB’’), 
which was the principal proponent of 
ebook exemptions in 2003 and 2006, has 
proposed that the Librarian redesignate 
the existing class to ensure that people 
who are blind or visually impaired are 
not excluded from the digital revolution 
in education, information and 
entertainment. 
In support of its proposal, AFB 
offered an examination of five ebooks, 
two which it tested in the PDF format 
and three which it tested in the 
Microsoft Lit format. AFB stated that of 
these five books, only one—or twenty 
percent of the sample—was accessible. 
In order to make its case, the AFB had 
to demonstrate that the prohibition on 
circumvention has adversely affected, or 
is likely to adversely affect, users’ 
ability to make noninfringing uses of a 
particular class of works. There was no 
dispute that making an ebook accessible 
to blind and visually impaired persons 
is a noninfringing use. Therefore, the 
main question is whether the 
prohibition on circumvention of 
technological measures that control 
access has adversely affected the ability 
of blind and visually impaired persons 
to gain access to the literary content in 
ebooks. 
In short, the proponents surveyed five 
ebook titles and found that three 
(Brian’s Hunt, The Bridges of Madison 
County, and The Einstein Theory of 
Relativity) were not accessible in 
editions published in the Microsoft Lit 
format, one (The Sign of the Fish) was 
not accessible in an edition published in 
the Adobe PDF format, and one (The 
Complete Works of Edgar Alan Poe 
Volume 1) was accessible in the Adobe 
PDF format. Thus, four out of the five 
titles sampled were available in formats 
that were not accessible. 
Proponents of the class presented no 
other factual information relating to 
whether (and the extent to which) the 
prohibition on circumvention actually 
has had an adverse effect on the ability 
of blind and visually impaired persons 
to engage in the noninfringing use of 
reading ebooks by using screen readers 
and the read–aloud function offered in 
many ebooks. 
Joint Creators did not oppose the 
request, but did question whether the 
prohibition on circumvention of access 
controls was to blame for the 
discrepancy between access for the fully 
sighted and access for the visually 
impaired. NTIA has advised the Register 
that it believes that an exemption based 
on this proposals should be renewed. 
NTIA did not state that the record 
supports granting the requested 
exemption; in fact, it observed that the 
case made by proponents is weak. 
Nevertheless, NTIA concluded that 
despite the limited level of information 
provided, it is persuaded that harm to 
these uses and users is likely to exist. 
In reviewing the evidence presented 
in support of designating the proposed 
class, the first issue that is readily 
apparent is that two of the five works 
examined by AFB (The Einstein Theory 
of Relativity and The Complete Works of 
Edgar Alan Poe Volume 1) are in the 
public domain. Section 1201 does not 
prohibit circumvention of a 
technological protection measure when 
it simply controls access to a public 
domain work; in such a case, it is lawful 
to circumvent the technological 
protection measure and there is no need 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 15:25 Jul 26, 2010 Jkt 220001 PO 00000 Frm 00039 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27JYR1.SGM 27JYR1jdjones on DSK8KYBLC1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 14]
43838 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 143 / Tuesday, July 27, 2010 / Rules and Regulations 
for an exemption. Thus, the two works 
in the public domain included in the 
tiny sample – forty percent of the entire 
sample – are irrelevant to the case for 
an exemption. Even though one of these 
two public domain works was found to 
be inaccessible, the prohibition on 
circumvention cannot be said to be 
adversely affecting uses of that work 
given that the prohibition does not 
apply to public domain works. 
Two of the other ebooks cited in 
support of designating the class –– 
Brian’s Hunt and The Bridges of 
Madison County, –– are alleged to be 
inaccessible in Microsoft Lit format. 
However, the proponents did not state 
whether those titles are accessible and 
available in other formats, such as the 
widely–used PDF format. Because the 
proposed class, like the classes 
approved in 2003 and 2006, requires 
that ‘‘all existing ebook editions of the 
work (including digital text editions 
made available by authorized entities) 
contain access controls that prevent the 
enabling either of the book’s read–aloud 
function or of screen readers that render 
the text into a specialized format,’’ the 
evidence relating to these two titles is 
insufficient to justify the designation of 
the proposed class. If Brian’s Hunt and 
The Bridges of Madison County are 
available in other editions that provide 
read–aloud and screen reader 
accessibility, then they are not examples 
of works justifying redesignation of the 
class. In failing to even check to see 
whether Brian’s Hunt and The Bridges 
of Madison County are available in an 
accessible format, the proponents failed 
to meet their burden of proof with 
respect to those two titles. 
The final book offered as an example 
of inaccessibility was The Sign of the 
Fish, by Joann Klusmeyer. The 
proponents of the class stated that the 
book ‘‘opened in Acrobat, but content 
was not accessible.’’ Nothing was said 
about whether the book was also 
available in other formats (and, if so, 
whether those formats were accessible). 
Again, the proponents presented 
insufficient evidence to evaluate 
whether yet another of the limited 
number of titles in their sample was 
inaccessible in all ebook formats. 
Although the Register could 
recommend against designation of the 
proposed class based simply upon the 
proponents’ failure to provide sufficient 
evidence to evaluate whether any of the 
three non–public domain books cited by 
the proponents are inaccessable in all 
ebook formats, the Register’s staff 
conducted some additional research to 
determine whether the case could be 
made that any or all of those books are 
inaccessible in all formats. With respect 
to Brian’s Hunt and The Bridges of 
Madison County, a quick review of the 
market revealed that both of these works 
are available as digital texts through 
Bookshare.org. However, The Sign of 
the Fish is not available in any edition 
that permits the enabling of the ebook 
read–aloud function or of screen 
readers. However, the Register cannot 
conclude that the prohibition on 
circumvention has had an adverse effect 
on the noninfringing use of reading 
ebooks with screen readers or the read– 
aloud function when the evidence 
reveals the case is built upon a single 
obscure book. 
The Register fully supports universal 
accessibility to ebooks for the blind and 
visually impaired. However, the 
rulemaking established by Congress 
requires proponents to demonstrate, de 
novo, in each rulemaking proceeding, 
that relief relating to a particular class 
of works is warranted for the ensuing 
three–year period. The Register is 
sympathetic to the needs of the blind 
and visually impaired, and agrees that 
as a matter of policy, access to e–books 
for the visually impaired should be 
encouraged and that, when there is 
evidence that the prohibition on 
circumvention is having an adverse 
impact on that goal, an appropriate class 
of works should be designated in this 
rulemaking. The Register has not 
hesitated to recommend such classes 
when the record has supported such a 
recommendation. However, unless the 
burden of presenting a prima facie case 
is met, the statutory standard 
established for this rulemaking does not 
permit the designation of a class of 
works. Presenting strong policy 
arguments in favor of exempting a class 
of works from the prohibition on 
circumvention is only part of the battle 
that a proponent must wage; it is also 
necessary to provide sufficient facts to 
justify a finding that the prohibition 
actually is having or is likely to have an 
adverse effect on noninfringing uses. 
For all of the reasons set forth above, 
the Register finds no factual basis for 
designating the proposed class of works. 
While the Register’s recommendations 
in previous rulemakings made clear that 
the Register understands and accepts 
the legal and policy reasons for such an 
exemption, the constraints established 
by Congress in this rulemaking 
proceeding do not permit the 
designation of a class of works in the 
absence of a factual record that supports 
the need for the designation. No such 
showing has been made in this 
proceeding. 
IV. Conclusion 
Having considered the evidence in the 
record, the contentions of the parties, 
and the statutory objectives, the Register 
of Copyrights recommends that the 
Librarian of Congress publish the five 
classes of copyrighted works designated 
above, so that the prohibition against 
circumvention of technological 
measures that effectively control access 
to copyrighted works shall not apply to 
persons who engage in noninfringing 
uses of those particular classes of works. 
Dated: July 19, 2010 
Marybeth Peters, 
Register of Copyrights. 
Determination of the Librarian of 
Congress 
Having duly considered the 
recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights as summarized above and 
having accepted that recommendation 
with respect to all but one of the classes 
of works under consideration, the 
Librarian of Congress is exercising his 
authority under 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C) 
and (D) and is publishing as a new rule 
the six classes of copyrighted works that 
shall be subject to the exemption found 
in 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(B) from the 
prohibition against circumvention of 
technological measures that effectively 
control access to copyrighted works set 
forth in 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(A). 
The Librarian has considered but 
rejected the Register’s recommendation 
with respect to the proposed class of 
works consisting of literary works 
distributed in ebook format. This class 
of works was proposed by the American 
Foundation for the Blind (AFB) and is 
identical to that for which an exemption 
was granted in 2006 and similar to the 
class for which an exemption was 
granted in 2003. 
The Librarian understands, and agrees 
with, the Register regarding the 
requirement that a decision on a 
proposed class of works be made based 
on the record developed in the 
rulemaking proceeding. In the view of 
the Librarian, the proposed exemption 
should be granted because: (1) the 
record includes statements on the 
likelihood of access not being available 
to blind individuals, (2) no one opposed 
the exemption, and (3) there are broad 
benefits to society in making works 
accessible to the visually impaired. The 
Librarian notes that, in contrast with its 
actions in both 2003 and 2006, the 
Copyright Office did not submit any 
post–hearing questions on this proposed 
exemption. Such development of the 
record would have been helpful. The 
Librarian also notes that the Assistant 
Secretary for Communications and 
Information of the Department of 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 15:25 Jul 26, 2010 Jkt 220001 PO 00000 Frm 00040 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\27JYR1.SGM 27JYR1jdjones on DSK8KYBLC1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 15]
43839 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 143 / Tuesday, July 27, 2010 / Rules and Regulations 
Commerce, with whom the Register is 
required by Section 1201(a)(l)(C) to 
consult when she makes her 
recommendation, supports granting the 
exemption. 
Accordingly, the Librarian is 
designating the class of works relating to 
literary works distributed in ebook 
format. 
Notwithstanding the above, the 
Librarian is aware that, in the past two 
years, the Register and her legal staff 
have invested a great deal of time in 
analyzing the myriad of issues that 
combine to make it difficult for blind 
and print–disabled persons to obtain 
access to certain e–books. The Copyright 
Office has hosted comprehensive 
meetings with stakeholders, solicited 
public comment on the application of 
domestic and international law to 
accessibility, participated in interagency 
and intergovernmental meetings in 
Washington, DC and Geneva, and, with 
the World Intellectual Property 
Organization, co–sponsored a major 
international training program for 
experts from developing countries. 
Through this work, the Register has 
come to believe that more general 
Congressional attention on the issue of 
accessibility is merited. I agree with the 
Register in this determination. 
The section 1201 process is a 
regulatory process that is at best ill– 
suited to address the larger challenges of 
access for blind and print–disabled 
persons. The exemption that the 
Librarian is approving here offers a 
solution to specific concerns that were 
raised in the narrow context of the 
rulemaking. Moreover, it is a temporary 
solution, as the 1201 process begins 
anew every three years. 
Outside of section 1201and the issue 
of technological protection measures, 
the Register has been examining 
whether copyright law, and to some 
extent related disabilities and education 
laws, adequately serve the blind and 
print–disabled population in the digital 
age. In particular, the Register has 
learned that, even where books are 
published electronically for the general 
public, the digital format used or 
licensed may be employed in a way that 
is incompatible with Braille readers and 
other assistive technologies on which 
blind and print-disabled persons rely. In 
the long run, this incompatibility may 
lead to delays, cost challenges and 
standards issues that may off-set the 
long-awaited benefits of digital media. 
Copyright and content issues cannot be 
divorced from the general goal of 
ensuring that hardware devices are 
designed with accessibility in mind. 
The Librarian fully supports the Register 
in her examination of these issues and 
urges Congress to work with the 
Copyright Office to consider 
accessibility beyond the contours of this 
1201 rulemaking. 
List of Subjects in 37 CFR 201 
Copyright, Exemptions to prohibition 
against circumvention. 
Final Regulations 
For the reasons set forth in the 
preamble, 37 CFR part 201 is amended 
as follows: 
PART 201–GENERAL PROVISIONS 
■ 1. The authority citation for part 201 
continues to read as follows: 
Authority: 17 U.S.C. 702 
■ 2. Section 201.40 is amended by 
revising paragraph (b) to read as follows: 
§ 201.40 Exemption to prohibition 
against circumvention. 
* * * * * 
(b) Classes of copyrighted works. 
Pursuant to the authority set forth in 17 
U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C) and (D), and upon 
the recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights, the Librarian has 
determined that the prohibition against 
circumvention of technological 
measures that effectively control access 
to copyrighted works set forth in 17 
U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(A) shall not apply to 
persons who engage in noninfringing 
uses of the following five classes of 
copyrighted works: 
(1) Motion pictures on DVDs that are 
lawfully made and acquired and that are 
protected by the Content Scrambling 
System when circumvention is 
accomplished solely in order to 
accomplish the incorporation of short 
portions of motion pictures into new 
works for the purpose of criticism or 
comment, and where the person 
engaging in circumvention believes and 
has reasonable grounds for believing 
that circumvention is necessary to fulfill 
the purpose of the use in the following 
instances: 
(i) Educational uses by college and 
university professors and by college and 
university film and media studies 
students; 
(ii) Documentary filmmaking; 
(iii) Noncommercial videos. 
(2) Computer programs that enable 
wireless telephone handsets to execute 
software applications, where 
circumvention is accomplished for the 
sole purpose of enabling interoperability 
of such applications, when they have 
been lawfully obtained, with computer 
programs on the telephone handset. 
(3) Computer programs, in the form 
of firmware or software, that enable 
used wireless telephone handsets to 
connect to a wireless 
telecommunications network, when 
circumvention is initiated by the owner 
of the copy of the computer program 
solely in order to connect to a wireless 
telecommunications network and access 
to the network is authorized by the 
operator of the network. 
(4) Video games accessible on 
personal computers and protected by 
technological protection measures that 
control access to lawfully obtained 
works, when circumvention is 
accomplished solely for the purpose of 
good faith testing for, investigating, or 
correcting security flaws or 
vulnerabilities, if: 
(i) The information derived from the 
security testing is used primarily to 
promote the security of the owner or 
operator of a computer, computer 
system, or computer network; and 
(ii) The information derived from the 
security testing is used or maintained in 
a manner that does not facilitate 
copyright infringement or a violation of 
applicable law. 
(5) Computer programs protected by 
dongles that prevent access due to 
malfunction or damage and which are 
obsolete. A dongle shall be considered 
obsolete if it is no longer manufactured 
or if a replacement or repair is no longer 
reasonably available in the commercial 
marketplace. 
(6) Literary works distributed in 
ebook format when all existing ebook 
editions of the work (including digital 
text editions made available by 
authorized entities) contain access 
controls that prevent the enabling either 
of the book’s read–aloud function or of 
screen readers that render the text into 
a specialized format. 
Dated: July 20, 2010 
James H. Billington, 
The Librarian of Congress. 
[FR Doc. 2010–18339 Filed 7–26–10; 8:45 am] 
BILLING CODE 1410–30–S 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 15:25 Jul 26, 2010 Jkt 220001 PO 00000 Frm 00041 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 9990 E:\FR\FM\27JYR1.SGM 27JYR1jdjones on DSK8KYBLC1PROD with RULES