[PAGE 1]
65260 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2012 / Rules and Regulations 
From To MEA 
*10000—MRA 
#GNSS MEA 
From To MEA MAA 
§ 95.7528 JET ROUTE J528 Is Amended To Delete 
WHATCOM, WA VORTAC ............................................... U.S. CANADIAN BORDER .......................................... .... 18000 45000 
Airway segment Changeover points 
From To Distance From 
§ 95.8003 VOR Federal Airway Changeover Points V1 
CHARLESTON, SC VORTAC .................................... GRAND STRAND, SC VORTAC ............................... 46 CHARLESTON 
Is Amended To Add Changeover Point V208 
SANTA CATALINA, CA VORTAC .............................. OCEANSIDE, CA VORTAC ...................................... 31 SANTA CATAL INA 
Is Amended To Add Changeover Point V27 
SANTA CATALINA, CA VORTAC .............................. OCEANSIDE, CA VORTAC ...................................... 31 SANTA CATAL INA 
Is Amended To Add Changeover Point V34 
ROCHESTER, NY VOR/DME .................................... HANCOCK, NY VOR/DME ........................................ 60 ROCHESTE R 
Is Amended To Add Changeover Point V458 
SANTA CATALINA, CA VORTAC .............................. OCEANSIDE, CA VORTAC ...................................... 31 SANTA CATAL INA 
[FR Doc. 2012–26334 Filed 10–25–12; 8:45 am] 
BILLING CODE 4910–13–P 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 
Copyright Office 
37 CFR Part 201 
[Docket No. 2011–7] 
Exemption to Prohibition on 
Circumvention of Copyright Protection 
Systems for Access Control 
Technologies 
AGENCY: Copyright Office, Library of 
Congress. 
ACTION: Final rule. 
SUMMARY: Having duly considered and 
accepted the Recommendation of the 
Register of Copyrights that the 
prohibition against circumvention of 
technological measures that effectively 
control access to copyrighted works 
shall not apply to persons who engage 
in noninfringing uses of certain classes 
of copyrighted works, the Librarian of 
Congress is exercising his authority to 
publish a new rule designating classes 
of copyrighted works that shall be 
subject to statutory exemption. 
DATES: Effective Date: October 28, 2012. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT : 
Jacqueline C. Charlesworth, Senior 
Counsel to the Register of Copyrights, 
Office of the Register of Copyrights, by 
email at jcharlesworth@loc.gov; 
Christopher S. Reed, Senior Advisor for 
Policy & Special Projects, Office of the 
Register of Copyrights, by email at 
creed@loc.gov; or call the U.S. Copyright 
Office by phone at 202–707–8350. 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The 
Librarian of Congress, upon the 
recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights, has determined that the 
prohibition against circumvention of 
technological measures that effectively 
control access to copyrighted works 
shall not apply to persons who engage 
in noninfringing uses of certain classes 
of works. This rulemaking is the 
culmination of a proceeding initiated by 
the Register on September 29, 2011. A 
more comprehensive statement of the 
background and legal requirements of 
the rulemaking, a discussion of the 
record, and the Register’s analysis are 
set forth in the Register’s 
Recommendation, which was 
transmitted to the Librarian on October 
12, 2012. A copy of the 
Recommendation may be found at 
www.copyright.gov/1201/. This notice 
summarizes the Register’s 
Recommendation, announces the 
Librarian’s determination, and 
publishes the regulatory text codifying 
the exempted classes of works. 
I. Background 
A. Statutory Requirements 
The Digital Millennium Copyright Act 
(‘‘DMCA’’) was enacted to implement 
certain provisions of the WIPO 
Copyright Treaty and WIPO 
Performances and Phonograms Treaty. It 
established a wide range of rules for the 
digital marketplace that govern not only 
copyright owners, but also consumers, 
manufacturers, distributors, libraries, 
educators, and online service providers. 
Chapter 12 of Title 17 of the United 
States Code prohibits the circumvention 
of certain technological measures 
employed by or on behalf of copyright 
owners to protect their works 
(‘‘technological measures’’ or ‘‘access 
controls’’). Specifically, Section 
1201(a)(1)(A) provides, in part, that 
‘‘[n]o person shall circumvent a 
technological measure that effectively 
controls access to a work protected’’ by 
the Copyright Act. In order to ensure 
that the public will have the continued 
ability to engage in noninfringing uses 
of copyrighted works, however, 
subparagraph (B) limits this prohibition. 
It provides that the prohibition shall not 
apply to persons who are users of a 
copyrighted work in a particular class of 
works if such persons are, or in the 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 18:46 Oct 25, 2012 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00008 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1emcdonald on DSK67QTVN1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 2]
65261 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2012 / Rules and Regulations 
succeeding three-year period are likely 
to be, adversely affected by virtue of the 
prohibition in their ability to make 
noninfringing uses of such works, as 
determined in this rulemaking 
proceeding. 
The proceeding is conducted by the 
Register of Copyrights, who is to 
provide notice of the proceeding, seek 
comments from the public, consult with 
the Assistant Secretary for 
Communications and Information of the 
Department of Commerce, and 
recommend final regulations to the 
Librarian of Congress. According to 
Section 1201(a)(1)(D), the resulting 
regulations, which are issued by the 
Librarian of Congress, announce ‘‘any 
class of copyrighted works for which the 
Librarian has determined, pursuant to 
the rulemaking * * * that noninfringing 
uses by persons who are users of a 
copyrighted work are, or are likely to be, 
adversely affected, and the prohibition 
contained in subparagraph (A) shall not 
apply to such users with respect to such 
class of works for the ensuing 3-year 
period.’’ 
The primary responsibility of the 
Register and the Librarian in this 
rulemaking proceeding is to assess 
whether the implementation of access 
control measures is diminishing the 
ability of individuals to use copyrighted 
works in ways that are not infringing 
and to designate any classes of works 
with respect to which users have been 
adversely affected in their ability to 
make such noninfringing uses. Congress 
intended that the Register solicit input 
that would enable consideration of a 
broad range of current or likely future 
adverse impacts. Section 1201(a)(1)(C) 
directs that the rulemaking proceeding 
examine: (1) The availability for use of 
copyrighted works; (2) the availability 
for use of works for nonprofit archival, 
preservation, and educational purposes; 
(3) the impact that the prohibition on 
the circumvention of technological 
measures applied to copyrighted works 
has on criticism, comment, news 
reporting, teaching, scholarship, or 
research; (4) the effect of circumvention 
of technological measures on the market 
for or value of copyrighted works; and 
(5) such other factors as the Librarian 
considers appropriate. These statutory 
factors require the Register and 
Librarian to balance carefully the 
availability of copyrighted works for 
use, the effect of the prohibition on 
particular uses, and the effect of 
circumvention on copyrighted works. 
B. The Rulemaking Process 
In examining the factors set forth in 
Section 1201(a)(1)(C), the focus is on 
whether the implementation of 
technological measures has an adverse 
impact on the ability of users to make 
lawful uses of copyrighted works. The 
statutory prohibition on circumvention 
is presumed to apply to any and all 
kinds of works unless, and until, the 
criteria have been met for a particular 
class. 
In each rulemaking proceeding, the 
Register and Librarian review the 
proposed classes de novo. The fact that 
a class previously has been designated 
creates no presumption that 
redesignation is appropriate. While in 
some cases earlier legal analysis by the 
Register may be relevant to analyzing a 
proposed exemption, the proponent of a 
class must still make a persuasive 
factual showing with respect to the 
three-year period currently under 
consideration. When a class has been 
previously designated, however, 
evidence relating to the costs, benefits, 
and marketplace effects ensuing from 
the earlier designation may be relevant 
in assessing whether a similar class 
should be designated for the subsequent 
period. 
Proponents of an exemption for a 
class of works bear the burden of 
demonstrating that the exemption is 
warranted. In order to establish a prima 
facie case for designation of a particular 
class of works, the proponent must 
show that: (1) Uses affected by the 
prohibition on circumvention are or are 
likely to be noninfringing; and (2) as a 
result of a technological measure 
controlling access to a copyrighted 
work, the prohibition is causing, or in 
the next three years is likely to cause, 
a substantial adverse impact on those 
uses. 
There are several types of 
noninfringing uses that could be 
affected by the prohibition of Section 
1201(a)(1), including fair use and the 
use of public domain works, among 
others. A proponent must show that the 
proposed use is or is likely 
noninfringing. It is not sufficient that 
the use could be noninfringing, as the 
Register does not apply a ‘‘rule of 
doubt’’ when it is unclear whether a 
proposed use is likely to be fair or 
otherwise noninfringing. 
A proponent may not rely on 
speculation to support a proposed class, 
but instead must show by a 
preponderance of evidence that the 
alleged harm to noninfringing uses is 
more likely than not to occur during the 
next three years. The harm must be 
distinct and measurable, and more than 
de minimis. The Register and Librarian 
will, when appropriate, consider 
whether alternatives exist to accomplish 
the proposed noninfringing uses. The 
mere fact that a particular medium or 
technology may be more convenient for 
noninfringing uses than other formats is 
generally insufficient to support an 
exemption. If sufficient alternatives 
exist, there is no substantial adverse 
impact or adequate basis to designate 
the class. 
C. Defining a Class 
The starting point in defining a 
‘‘particular class’’ of works to be 
designated as a result of the rulemaking 
is one of the categories of works set 
forth in Section 102 of the Copyright 
Act, such as literary works, musical 
works, or sound recordings. Those 
categories are only a starting point, 
however; a ‘‘class’’ will generally 
constitute some subset of a Section 102 
category. The determination of the 
appropriate scope of a class of works 
recommended for exemption will also 
depend on the evidentiary record and 
take into account the adverse impact on 
noninfringing uses, as well as the 
market for and value of the copyrighted 
works. 
While beginning with a category of 
works identified in Section 102, or a 
subcategory thereof, the description of 
the ‘‘particular class’’ ordinarily will be 
refined with reference to other factors so 
that the scope of the class is 
proportionate to the scope of harm to 
noninfringing uses. For example, a class 
might be refined in part by reference to 
the medium on which the works are 
distributed, or to the access control 
measures applied to the works. The 
description of a class of works may also 
be refined, in appropriate cases, by 
reference to the type of user who may 
take advantage of the exemption or the 
type of use that may be made pursuant 
to the designation. The class must be 
properly tailored to address not only the 
demonstrated harm, but also to limit the 
adverse consequences that may result 
from the exemption to the prohibition 
on circumvention. In every case, the 
contours of a class will depend on the 
factual record established in the 
rulemaking proceeding. 
II. History of the Proceeding 
A. Solicitation of Public Comments and 
Hearings 
This is the fifth triennial rulemaking 
proceeding pursuant to Section 
1201(a)(1)(C). The Register initiated the 
rulemaking on September 29, 2011 (76 
FR 60398) with publication of a Notice 
of Inquiry (‘‘NOI’’). The NOI requested 
written comments from all interested 
parties, including representatives of 
copyright owners, educational 
institutions, libraries and archives, 
scholars, researchers, and members of 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 14:26 Oct 25, 2012 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00009 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1emcdonald on DSK67QTVN1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 3]
65262 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2012 / Rules and Regulations 
the public, concerning whether 
noninfringing uses of certain classes of 
works are, or are likely to be, adversely 
affected by the prohibition against 
circumvention of measures that control 
access to copyrighted works. 
During the initial comment period 
that ended on December 1, 2011, the 
Copyright Office received 22 comments, 
all of which were posted on the Office’s 
Web site. Based on these comments, the 
Register identified proposed exemptions 
for the upcoming period. Because some 
of the initial comments contained 
similar or overlapping proposals, the 
Copyright Office organized the 
proposals into ten proposed classes of 
works, and set forth and summarized 
each class in a Notice of Proposed 
Rulemaking (‘‘NPRM’’) published on 
December 20, 2011 (76 FR 78866). 
The NPRM did not present the initial 
classes in the form of a proposed rule, 
but merely as ‘‘a starting point for 
further consideration.’’ The NPRM 
asked interested parties to submit 
additional comments and reply 
comments providing support, 
opposition, clarification, or correction 
regarding the proposed classes of works, 
and to provide factual and/or legal 
arguments in support of their positions. 
The Copyright Office received a total of 
674 comments before the comment 
period closed on February 10, 2012. The 
Office also received 18 reply comments 
before the reply comment period closed 
on March 2, 2012. 
On March 15, 2012, the Register 
published a Notice indicating that 
public hearings would be conducted at 
the University of California, UCLA 
School of Law, in California, and at the 
Library of Congress in Washington, DC, 
in May and June 2012 to consider the 
proposed exemptions. Requests to 
testify were due April 2, 2012. Public 
hearings were held on five separate 
days: at the Library of Congress on May 
11, 2012; at University of California, Los 
Angeles, School of Law on May 17, 
2012; and at the Library of Congress on 
May 31, June 4, and June 5, 2012. 
Witnesses representing proponents and 
opponents of proposed classes of works 
offered testimony and answered 
questions from Copyright Office staff. 
Following the hearings, the Copyright 
Office sent follow-up questions 
pertaining to certain issues to witnesses 
who had testified. The purpose of these 
written inquiries was to clarify for the 
record certain statements made during 
the hearings and to elicit further 
responses to questions raised at the 
hearings. 
B. Consultation With the Assistant 
Secretary for Communications and 
Information 
As contemplated by Congress, the 
Register also sought input from the 
Assistant Secretary for Communications 
and Information of the Department of 
Commerce, who oversees the National 
Telecommunications and Information 
Administration (‘‘NTIA’’). NTIA staff 
were briefed on the rulemaking process 
and informed of developments through 
a series of meetings and telephone 
conferences. They also were in 
attendance at many of the hearings. 
NTIA formally communicated its 
views on the proposed classes in a letter 
delivered to the Register on September 
21, 2012. 
III. The Designated Classes 
Upon the recommendation of the 
Register of Copyrights, the Librarian has 
determined that the following classes of 
works shall be exempt from the 
prohibition against circumvention of 
technological measures set forth in 
Section 1201(a)(1)(A): 
A. Literary Works Distributed 
Electronically—Assistive Technologies 
Literary works, distributed electronically, 
that are protected by technological measures 
which either prevent the enabling of read- 
aloud functionality or interfere with screen 
readers or other applications or assistive 
technologies, (i) when a copy of such a work 
is lawfully obtained by a blind or other 
person with a disability, as such a person is 
defined in 17 U.S.C. 121; provided, however, 
the rights owner is remunerated, as 
appropriate, for the price of the mainstream 
copy of the work as made available to the 
general public through customary channels; 
or (ii) when such work is a nondramatic 
literary work, lawfully obtained and used by 
an authorized entity pursuant to 17 U.S.C. 
121. 
This exemption is a modification of 
the proponents’ proposal. It permits the 
circumvention of literary works that are 
distributed electronically to allow blind 
and other persons with disabilities to 
obtain books through the open market 
and use screen readers and other 
assistive technologies to read them, 
regardless of whether an accessible copy 
may be available for purchase, but 
provided the author, publisher, or other 
rights owner receives remuneration, as 
appropriate. It also permits authorized 
entities operating under Section 121 to 
use such works and ensures that such 
use conforms to the provisions and 
safeguards of that section. 
Proponents American Council of the 
Blind and American Foundation for the 
Blind, supported by The Samuelson- 
Glushko Technology Law & Policy 
Clinic at the University of Colorado Law 
School, sought an exemption to access 
literary works that are distributed 
electronically—i.e., ebooks—that are 
legally obtained by individuals who are 
blind or print disabled but cannot be 
used with screen readers or other 
assistive technologies. In 2006 and 
2010, the Librarian designated a class 
consisting of ‘‘[l]iterary works 
distributed in ebook format when all 
existing ebook editions of the work 
(including digital text editions made 
available by authorized entities) contain 
access controls that prevent the enabling 
either of the book’s read-aloud function 
or of screen readers that render the text 
into a specialized format.’’ See 37 CFR 
201.40(b)(6). In this proceeding, 
proponents sought to eliminate the 
requirement that all existing ebook 
editions contain access controls, but at 
the same time proposed to limit the 
exemption to individuals with print 
disabilities as defined by Section 121 of 
the Copyright Act and to authorized 
entities under Section 121 distributing 
works exclusively to such persons. 
Proponents asserted that the 
exception is necessary because 
technological measures to control access 
to copyrighted works have been 
developed and deployed in ways that 
prevent access to ebooks by people who 
are blind or visually impaired. 
Proponents explained that, despite the 
rapid growth of the ebook market, most 
ebook titles remain inaccessible due to 
fragmentation within the industry and 
differing technical standards and 
accessibility capabilities across 
platforms. Although precise figures 
remain elusive, press accounts cited by 
the proponents suggest that only a 
fraction of the publicly available ebooks 
are accessible; proponents estimated 
that there are approximately 1.8 million 
inaccessible ebook titles. Proponents 
cited an example, The Mill River 
Recluse by Darcie Chan, ebook editions 
of which are available in each of the 
three major ebook stores. Only the 
iBookstore edition is accessible, 
however. An individual with a print 
disability would thus be required to 
have an iPhone, iPad, or other Apple 
device in order to access the book. 
Joint Creators and Copyright Owners, 
consisting of the Association of 
American Publishers, the American 
Society of Media Photographers, the 
Business Software Alliance, the 
Entertainment Software Association, the 
Motion Picture Association of America, 
the Picture Archive Council of America, 
and the Recording Industry Association 
of America (‘‘Joint Creators’’), 
representing various content owner 
groups, offered no objection in principle 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 14:26 Oct 25, 2012 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00010 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1emcdonald on DSK67QTVN1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 4]
65263 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2012 / Rules and Regulations 
to an exemption such as that 
promulgated in 2010. They observed 
that the market is evolving rapidly and 
that the market share of the major 
electronic book platforms had increased 
substantially since the last rulemaking. 
However, they opposed elimination of 
the requirement in the existing 
exemption that all ebook formats 
contain access controls before the 
exemption could be invoked. 
When the Register was first called 
upon to consider an exemption for 
ebooks in 2003, the marketplace was 
very different. At that time, ebooks were 
distributed primarily for use on 
personal computers (‘‘PCs’’), readable 
with freely available software, and the 
public’s reception of ebooks was 
tentative. Today, ebooks are marketed 
mainly for use on mobile devices, 
ranging from dedicated ebook readers 
using proprietary software (e.g., 
Amazon’s Kindle) to multipurpose 
devices running free software 
applications (e.g., an Apple iPad 
running Amazon’s Kindle app). 
Nonetheless, there are often substantial 
costs associated with owning dedicated 
reading devices, and there are 
inefficiencies associated with having to 
own more than one such device. The 
restrictions recommended by the 
Register in prior rulemakings are 
therefore not reflective of the current 
market conditions. 
The Register determined that the 
statutory factors of Section 1201(a)(1)(C) 
strongly favor an exempted class to 
address the adverse effects that were 
established in the record. The 
designated class is not merely a matter 
of convenience, but is instead intended 
to enable individuals who are blind or 
visually impaired to have meaningful 
access to the same content that 
individuals without such impairments 
are able to perceive. As proponents 
explained, their desire is simply to be 
able to access lawfully acquired content. 
In short, the exemption is designed to 
permit effective access to a rapidly 
growing array of ebook content by a 
population that would otherwise go 
without. 
NTIA also indicated its support for 
the adoption of an exemption, noting 
that ‘‘[r]equiring visually impaired 
Americans to invest hundreds of dollars 
in an additional device (or even 
multiple additional devices), 
particularly when an already-owned 
device is technically capable of 
rendering literary works accessible, is 
not a reasonable alternative to 
circumvention * * *.’’ 
Explaining that literary works are 
distributed electronically in a wide 
range of formats, not all of which are 
necessarily widely understood to 
constitute ‘‘ebooks,’’ NTIA noted that it 
preferred the more general term 
‘‘literary works, distributed 
electronically.’’ 
At the hearing, proponents confirmed 
that it was not their intent to create a 
situation where publishers are not 
getting paid for their works, and that the 
author or publisher should be 
compensated for the price of the 
mainstream book available to the 
general public. Thus, the first prong of 
the designated class permits 
circumvention by blind or other persons 
with disabilities, effectively ensuring 
that they have access through the open 
market, while also ensuring that rights 
owners receive appropriate 
remuneration. 
The second prong of the proposal (the 
part that would extend the exemption to 
authorized entities) is a new 
consideration; it has not been the 
subject of a prior Section 1201 
rulemaking and proponents did not 
provide extensive analysis. Nonetheless, 
the Register found that the proposal was 
supported by relevant evidence and 
thus recommended that authorized 
entities should enjoy an exemption to 
the extent required to carry out their 
work under Section 121. The Register 
recommended some modifications to 
the proposal as written to ensure that it 
is consistent with, but not an 
enlargement of, Section 121. In relevant 
part, Section 121 permits qualified 
‘‘authorized entities’’ to reproduce and 
distribute nondramatic literary works 
provided the resulting copies are in 
‘‘specialized formats exclusively for use 
by blind or other persons with 
disabilities.’’ 
In her recommendation, the Register 
noted that several provisions in Section 
121 appear ill-suited to the digital world 
and could benefit from comprehensive 
review by Congress. Section 121 was 
enacted in 1996 following careful 
consideration of the public interest, 
including the interests of persons with 
disabilities and the interest of authors 
and other copyright owners. The issues 
relating to digital uses are complex and 
deserving of consideration beyond what 
can be accomplished in this proceeding. 
B. Wireless Telephone Handsets— 
Software Interoperability 
Computer programs that enable wireless 
telephone handsets to execute lawfully 
obtained software applications, where 
circumvention is accomplished for the sole 
purpose of enabling interoperability of such 
applications with computer programs on the 
telephone handset. 
This exemption is a modification of 
the proponents’ proposal. It permits the 
circumvention of computer programs on 
mobile phones to enable interoperability 
of non-vendor-approved software 
applications (often referred to as 
‘‘jailbreaking’’), but does not apply to 
tablets—as had been requested by 
proponents—because the record did not 
support it. 
Proponent Electronic Frontier 
Foundation (‘‘EFF’’), joined by New 
America Foundation’s Open Technology 
Initiative, New Media Rights, Mozilla 
Corporation (‘‘Mozilla’’), and the Free 
Software Foundation (‘‘FSF’’), as well as 
several hundred individual supporters, 
sought an exemption to permit the 
circumvention of access controls on 
wireless devices so that the devices can 
be used with non-vendor-approved 
software that is lawfully acquired. In 
2010, the Register recommended, and 
the Librarian designated, a class that 
permitted circumvention of 
technological measures on certain 
telephone handsets known as 
‘‘smartphones.’’ In recommending that 
class, the Register found that many such 
phones are protected by access controls, 
that proponents’ intended use—to 
render certain lawfully acquired 
applications interoperable with the 
handset’s software—was fair, and that 
the access controls adversely affected 
that use. The Register also found that 
the statutory factors prescribed by 17 
U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C) weighed in favor of 
granting the exemption. 
In this proceeding, proponents urged 
an expanded version of the class 
designated in 2010, citing dramatic 
growth in the mobile phone market, 
along with continued widespread use of 
technological measures to prevent users 
from installing unauthorized 
applications on such phones. They 
proposed that the exemption be 
extended to include ‘‘tablets,’’ such as 
Apple’s iPad, which, in EFF’s words, 
have ‘‘enjoyed similar radical popularity 
over the past two years.’’ 
EFF asserted that courts have long 
found copying and modification to 
enable device interoperability 
noninfringing under the doctrine of fair 
use. It further noted that the Register 
concluded in the 2010 rulemaking that 
jailbreaking was a fair use, and 
maintained that nothing in the factual or 
legal record since the last proceeding 
suggested that a change in this position 
was warranted. 
EFF also asserted that the last three 
years have seen dramatic growth in the 
adoption of smartphones and tablets as 
consumers increasingly shift from 
traditional personal computers to 
mobile devices. EFF argued that the 
technological restrictions on phones and 
tablets have an adverse effect on 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 14:26 Oct 25, 2012 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00011 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1emcdonald on DSK67QTVN1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 5]
65264 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2012 / Rules and Regulations 
consumer choice and competition. 
Specifically, it noted that Apple, whose 
devices ‘‘refuse to run any unapproved 
third-party software,’’ has strict rules 
about the type of programs approved for 
sale through its ‘‘App Store,’’ the only 
authorized source of iPhone and iPad 
applications. EFF further asserted that 
although Android-based devices are 
generally less restricted than Apple 
devices, most still employ technological 
measures to block functionality and 
prevent the installation of certain types 
of software. EFF urged the Register to 
consider that such technological 
measures are not intended to protect the 
copyrighted firmware, but instead to 
promote anticompetitive business 
practices. 
Joint Creators asserted that the 
proposed exemption is unnecessary and 
beyond the scope of the rulemaking 
because Section 1201(f) of the Copyright 
Act already defines ‘‘the contours of 
acceptable circumvention related to 
interoperability.’’ Specifically, Joint 
Creators argued that the proponents 
have not established that Section 1201(f) 
does not already permit the conduct in 
which proponents seek to engage and, 
‘‘if it were established that Congress 
chose not to include the conduct at 
issue within [Section] 1201(f),’’ then 
proponents have failed to establish that 
the Librarian has the authority to upset 
that decision through this proceeding. 
The Register concluded that it was 
unclear, at best, whether Section 1201(f) 
applies in this circumstance, so she 
proceeded to analyze the merits of the 
proposed exemption. 
Joint Creators did not directly 
challenge EFF’s fair use analysis but 
instead took issue with the Register’s 
previous fair use finding. In reviewing 
the fair use question, the Register noted 
that the factual record with respect to 
fair use was substantially the same as it 
was in 2010 and that there had been no 
significant developments in pertinent 
case law that would cause the Register 
to reevaluate the analytical framework 
applied in 2010. The purpose and 
character of the use is noncommercial 
and personal so that individual owners 
of smartphones may use them for the 
purpose for which they were intended. 
The nature of the copyrighted work— 
firmware—remains the same as it was in 
2010, and it remains true that one 
engaged in jailbreaking need only 
modify the functional aspects of the 
firmware, which may or may not be 
subject to copyright protection. Those 
engaged in jailbreaking use only that 
which is necessary to engage in the 
activity, which is often de minimis, 
rendering the third factor potentially 
unfavorable, but nevertheless of 
minimal consequence. With respect to 
market harm, notwithstanding the 
earlier exemption, the proliferation of 
smartphones has increased since the last 
rulemaking, suggesting that the fourth 
factor favored a fair use finding even 
more than it did in 2010. 
The Register found that proponents 
had established that the prohibition is 
adversely affecting, and is likely to 
continue to have an adverse impact on, 
certain uses of mobile devices in which 
the firmware, a copyrightable work, is 
protected by technological measures. 
The evidence in the record indicated 
that smartphones have been widely 
adopted and that consumer acceptance 
of such devices will continue to 
increase in the future. Nonetheless, the 
vast majority of mobile phones sold 
today contain technological measures 
that restrict users’ ability to install 
unauthorized applications. 
The Register determined that the 
statutory factors weighed in favor of a 
renewed exemption for smartphones, as 
nothing in the record suggested that the 
market for mobile phones had been 
negatively impacted by the designation 
of such a class and, in fact, such a class 
might make smartphones more 
attractive to consumers. While Joint 
Creators raised concerns about pirated 
applications that are able to run on 
jailbroken devices, the record did not 
demonstrate any significant relationship 
between jailbreaking and piracy. 
On the other hand, the Register 
concluded that the record did not 
support an extension of the exemption 
to ‘‘tablet’’ devices. The Register found 
significant merit to the opposition’s 
concerns that this aspect of the 
proposed class was broad and ill- 
defined, as a wide range of devices 
might be considered ‘‘tablets,’’ 
notwithstanding the significant 
distinctions among them in terms of the 
way they operate, their intended 
purposes, and the nature of the 
applications they can accommodate. For 
example, an ebook reading device might 
be considered a ‘‘tablet,’’ as might a 
handheld video game device or a laptop 
computer. 
NTIA supported the designation of a 
class for both smartphones and tablets. 
Noting the broad support for such an 
exemption and the numerous 
noninfringing uses enabled by 
jailbreaking, NTIA asserted that ‘‘the 
mobile application market has thrived, 
and continues to do so, despite—and 
possibly in part because of—the current 
exemption.’’ NTIA was persuaded that 
the proposed class should apply to 
tablets as well as mobile phones, 
believing that category to have been 
sufficiently defined by EFF. As noted, 
however, the Register determined that 
the record lacked a sufficient basis to 
develop an appropriate definition for 
the ‘‘tablet’’ category of devices, a 
necessary predicate to extending the 
exemption beyond smartphones. In 
future rulemakings, as mobile 
computing technology evolves, such a 
definition might be more attainable, but 
on this record, the Register was unable 
to recommend the proposed expansion 
to tablets. 
C. Wireless Telephone Handsets— 
Interoperability With Alternative 
Networks 
Computer programs, in the form of 
firmware or software, that enable a wireless 
telephone handset originally acquired from 
the operator of a wireless 
telecommunications network or retailer no 
later than ninety days after the effective date 
of this exemption to connect to a different 
wireless telecommunications network, if the 
operator of the wireless communications 
network to which the handset is locked has 
failed to unlock it within a reasonable period 
of time following a request by the owner of 
the wireless telephone handset, and when 
circumvention is initiated by the owner, an 
individual consumer, who is also the owner 
of the copy of the computer program in such 
wireless telephone handset, solely in order to 
connect to a different wireless 
telecommunications network, and such 
access to the network is authorized by the 
operator of the network. 
This exemption is a modification of 
the proponents’ proposal. It permits the 
circumvention of computer programs on 
mobile phones to enable such mobile 
phones to connect to alternative 
networks (often referred to as 
‘‘unlocking’’), but with limited 
applicability. In order to align the 
exemption to current market realities, it 
applies only to mobile phones acquired 
prior to the effective date of the 
exemption or within 90 days thereafter. 
Proponents Consumers Union, 
Youghiogheny Communications, LLC, 
MetroPCS Communications, Inc., and 
the Competitive Carriers Association, 
supported by other commenting parties, 
submitted similar proposals seeking an 
exemption to permit circumvention to 
enable wireless devices to interoperate 
with networks other than the network 
on which the device was originally 
used. In 2006, and again in 2010, the 
Register recommended, and the 
Librarian designated, a class of works 
that permitted the circumvention of 
technological protection measures 
applied to firmware in wireless 
handsets for the purpose of switching to 
an alternative wireless network. 
Proponents advanced several theories 
as to why ‘‘unlocking’’ is a 
noninfringing use, including that it does 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 14:26 Oct 25, 2012 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00012 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1emcdonald on DSK67QTVN1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 6]
65265 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2012 / Rules and Regulations 
not implicate any copyright interests or, 
if it does, the conduct is permitted 
under Section 117 of the Copyright Act. 
In particular, proponents asserted that 
the owners of mobile phones are also 
the owners of the copies of the 
computer programs on those phones 
and that, as owners, they are entitled to 
exercise their rights under Section 117, 
which gives the owner of a copy of a 
computer program the privilege to make 
or authorize the making of another copy 
or adaptation of that computer program 
under certain circumstances, such as to 
permit the program to be used on a 
particular machine. 
Proponents noted that ‘‘huge 
numbers’’ of people have already 
unlocked their phones under the 2006 
and 2010 exemptions and claimed that 
ending the exemption will lead to 
higher device prices for consumers, 
increased electronic waste, higher costs 
associated with switching service 
providers, and widespread mobile 
customer ‘‘lock-in.’’ Although 
proponents acknowledged that 
unlocked mobile devices are widely 
available for purchase, they contended 
that an exemption is still warranted 
because some devices sold by carriers 
are permanently locked and because 
unlocking policies contain restrictions 
and may not apply to all of a carrier’s 
devices. Proponents characterized 
software locks as impediments to a 
competitive marketplace. They claimed 
that absent the exemption, consumers 
would be forced to continue to do 
business with the carrier that sold the 
device to the consumer in the first 
instance, or to discard the device. 
CTIA—The Wireless Association 
(‘‘CTIA’’), a trade association comprised 
of various commercial wireless service 
providers, objected to the proposals as 
drafted. Overall, CTIA maintained that 
an exemption for unlocking is not 
necessary because ‘‘the largest 
nationwide carriers * * * have liberal, 
publicly available unlocking policies,’’ 
and because unlocked phones are 
‘‘freely available from third party 
providers—many at low prices.’’ 
Nonetheless, CTIA indicated that its 
members did not object to a ‘‘narrowly 
tailored and carefully limited 
exception’’ to permit individual 
customers of wireless carriers to unlock 
phones for the purpose of switching 
networks. 
CTIA explained that the practice of 
locking cell phones is an essential part 
of the wireless industry’s predominant 
business model, which involves 
subsidizing the cost of wireless handsets 
in exchange for a commitment from the 
customer that the phone will be used on 
that carrier’s service so that the subsidy 
can eventually be recouped by the 
carrier. CTIA alleged that the industry 
has been plagued by ‘‘large scale phone 
trafficking operations’’ that buy large 
quantities of pre-paid phones, unlock 
them, and resell them in foreign markets 
where carriers do not subsidize 
handsets. On the question of 
noninfringing use, CTIA asserted that 
the Section 117 privileges do not apply 
because owners of wireless devices do 
not necessarily own the software on 
those devices. 
The Register confronted similar 
arguments about Section 117 in the 
2010 proceeding. There, the parties 
relied primarily upon Krause v. 
Titleserv, Inc., 402 F.3d 119 (2d Cir. 
2005), as the leading authority regarding 
ownership of computer programs. After 
reviewing mobile phone agreements 
introduced in the 2010 proceeding, 
based on the state of the law at that 
time, the Register concluded that ‘‘[t]he 
record * * * leads to the conclusion 
that a substantial portion of mobile 
phone owners also own the copies of 
the software on their phones.’’ 
Since the Register rendered her 2010 
Recommendation, the case law has 
evolved. In 2010, the Ninth Circuit 
issued its decision in Vernor v. 
Autodesk, Inc., 621 F.3d 1102 (9th Cir. 
2010), holding that ‘‘a software user is 
a licensee rather than an owner of a 
copy where the copyright owner (1) 
Specifies that the user is granted a 
license; (2) significantly restricts the 
user’s ability to transfer the software; 
and (3) imposes notable use 
restrictions.’’ 
Proponents made only a cursory 
attempt to respond to Vernor and failed 
to offer relevant agreements to support 
their view of software ownership. CTIA, 
by contrast, cited agreements from 
several major carriers in an effort to 
demonstrate that the software on the 
mobile handsets is licensed, rather than 
sold, to a phone’s owner. Nonetheless, 
the Register was forced to conclude that 
the state of the law—and its 
applicability to mobile phone 
software—remains indeterminate. 
Although Vernor and Krause are useful 
guideposts in considering the status of 
software ownership, they are controlling 
precedent in only two circuits and are 
inconsistent in their approach; whether 
and how those standards would be 
applied in other circuits is unknown. 
Moreover, while CTIA contended that 
the agreements it offered unequivocally 
supported a finding that users do not 
own the software, in reviewing those 
agreements, the Register believed the 
question to be a closer call. The Register 
therefore determined that some subset 
of wireless customers—i.e., anyone 
considered to own the software on their 
phones under applicable precedent— 
would be entitled to exercise the 
Section 117 privilege. 
The Register further concluded that 
the record before her supported a 
finding that, with respect to new 
wireless handsets, there are ample 
alternatives to circumvention. That is, 
the marketplace has evolved such that 
there is now a wide array of unlocked 
phone options available to consumers. 
While it is true that not every wireless 
device is available unlocked, and 
wireless carriers’ unlocking polices are 
not free from all restrictions, the record 
clearly demonstrates that there is a wide 
range of alternatives from which 
consumers may choose in order to 
obtain an unlocked wireless phone. 
Thus, the Register determined that with 
respect to newly purchased phones, 
proponents had not satisfied their 
burden of showing adverse effects 
related to a technological protection 
measure. 
However, with respect to ‘‘legacy’’ 
phones—i.e., used (or perhaps unused) 
phones previously purchased or 
otherwise acquired by a consumer—the 
record pointed to a different conclusion. 
The record demonstrated that there is 
significant consumer interest in and 
demand for using legacy phones on 
carriers other than the one that 
originally sold the phone to the 
consumer. It also supported a finding 
that owners of legacy phones— 
especially phones that have not been 
used on any wireless network for some 
period of time—may have difficulty 
obtaining unlocking codes from wireless 
carriers, in part because an older or 
expired contract might not require the 
carrier to cooperate. 
Despite the increasing availability of 
unlocked phones in the marketplace 
and the trend toward wireless carriers’ 
unlocking phones in certain 
circumstances, NTIA favored a broader 
exemption. It asserted that the 
unlocking policies of most wireless 
carriers are not reasonable alternatives 
to circumvention because many such 
policies apply only to current customers 
or subscribers, because some carriers 
will refuse to unlock devices, and 
because unlocking policies are often 
contingent upon the carrier’s ability to 
obtain the necessary code. Further, 
‘‘NTIA does not support the notion that 
it is an appropriate alternative for a 
current device owner to be required to 
purchase another device to switch 
carriers.’’ 
The Register concluded after a review 
of the statutory factors that an 
exemption to the prohibition on 
circumvention of mobile phone 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 14:26 Oct 25, 2012 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00013 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1emcdonald on DSK67QTVN1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 7]
65266 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2012 / Rules and Regulations 
computer programs to permit users to 
unlock ‘‘legacy’’ phones is both 
warranted and unlikely to harm the 
market for such programs. At the same 
time, in light of carriers’ current 
unlocking policies and the ready 
availability of new unlocked phones in 
the marketplace, the record did not 
support an exemption for newly 
purchased phones. Looking to 
precedents in copyright law, the 
Register recommended that the class 
designated by the Librarian include a 
90-day transitional period to allow 
unlocking by those who may acquire 
phones shortly after the new exemption 
goes into effect. 
D. Motion Picture Excerpts— 
Commentary, Criticism, and 
Educational Uses 
• Motion pictures, as defined in 17 U.S.C. 
101, on DVDs that are lawfully made and 
acquired and that are protected by the 
Content Scrambling System, where the 
person engaging in circumvention believes 
and has reasonable grounds for believing that 
circumvention is necessary because 
reasonably available alternatives, such as 
noncircumventing methods or using screen 
capture software as provided for in 
alternative exemptions, are not able to 
produce the level of high-quality content 
required to achieve the desired criticism or 
comment on such motion pictures, and 
where circumvention is undertaken solely in 
order to make use of short portions of the 
motion pictures for the purpose of criticism 
or comment in the following instances: (i) In 
noncommercial videos; (ii) in documentary 
films; (iii) in nonfiction multimedia ebooks 
offering film analysis; and (iv) for 
educational purposes in film studies or other 
courses requiring close analysis of film and 
media excerpts, by college and university 
faculty, college and university students, and 
kindergarten through twelfth grade 
educators. For purposes of this exemption, 
‘‘noncommercial videos’’ includes videos 
created pursuant to a paid commission, 
provided that the commissioning entity’s use 
is noncommercial. 
• Motion pictures, as defined in 17 U.S.C. 
101, that are lawfully made and acquired via 
online distribution services and that are 
protected by various technological protection 
measures, where the person engaging in 
circumvention believes and has reasonable 
grounds for believing that circumvention is 
necessary because reasonably available 
alternatives, such as noncircumventing 
methods or using screen capture software as 
provided for in alternative exemptions, are 
not able to produce the level of high-quality 
content required to achieve the desired 
criticism or comment on such motion 
pictures, and where circumvention is 
undertaken solely in order to make use of 
short portions of the motion pictures for the 
purpose of criticism or comment in the 
following instances: (i) In noncommercial 
videos; (ii) in documentary films; (iii) in 
nonfiction multimedia ebooks offering film 
analysis; and (iv) for educational purposes in 
film studies or other courses requiring close 
analysis of film and media excerpts, by 
college and university faculty, college and 
university students, and kindergarten 
through twelfth grade educators. For 
purposes of this exemption, ‘‘noncommercial 
videos’’ includes videos created pursuant to 
a paid commission, provided that the 
commissioning entity’s use is 
noncommercial. 
• Motion pictures, as defined in 17 U.S.C. 
101, on DVDs that are lawfully made and 
acquired and that are protected by the 
Content Scrambling System, where the 
circumvention, if any, is undertaken using 
screen capture technology that is reasonably 
represented and offered to the public as 
enabling the reproduction of motion picture 
content after such content has been lawfully 
decrypted, when such representations have 
been reasonably relied upon by the user of 
such technology, when the person engaging 
in the circumvention believes and has 
reasonable grounds for believing that the 
circumvention is necessary to achieve the 
desired criticism or comment, and where the 
circumvention is undertaken solely in order 
to make use of short portions of the motion 
pictures for the purpose of criticism or 
comment in the following instances: (i) in 
noncommercial videos; (ii) in documentary 
films; (iii) in nonfiction multimedia ebooks 
offering film analysis; and (iv) for 
educational purposes by college and 
university faculty, college and university 
students, and kindergarten through twelfth 
grade educators. For purposes of this 
exemption, ‘‘noncommercial videos’’ 
includes videos created pursuant to a paid 
commission, provided that the 
commissioning entity’s use is 
noncommercial. 
• Motion pictures, as defined in 17 U.S.C. 
101, that are lawfully made and acquired via 
online distribution services and that are 
protected by various technological protection 
measures, where the circumvention, if any, is 
undertaken using screen capture technology 
that is reasonably represented and offered to 
the public as enabling the reproduction of 
motion picture content after such content has 
been lawfully decrypted, when such 
representations have been reasonably relied 
upon by the user of such technology, when 
the person engaging in the circumvention 
believes and has reasonable grounds for 
believing that the circumvention is necessary 
to achieve the desired criticism or comment, 
and where the circumvention is undertaken 
solely in order to make use of short portions 
of the motion pictures for the purpose of 
criticism or comment in the following 
instances: (i) In noncommercial videos; (ii) in 
documentary films; (iii) in nonfiction 
multimedia ebooks offering film analysis; 
and (iv) for educational purposes by college 
and university faculty, college and university 
students, and kindergarten through twelfth 
grade educators. For purposes of this 
exemption, ‘‘noncommercial videos’’ 
includes videos created pursuant to a paid 
commission, provided that the 
commissioning entity’s use is 
noncommercial. 
These related exemptions are 
modifications of the proponents’ 
proposals. They permit the 
circumvention of motion pictures 
contained on DVDs and delivered 
through online services to permit the 
use of short portions for purposes of 
criticism and comment in 
noncommercial videos, documentary 
films, nonfiction multimedia ebooks 
offering film analysis, and for certain 
educational uses by college and 
university faculty and students and 
kindergarten through twelfth grade 
educators. They also permit the use of 
screen capture technology to the extent 
an exemption is necessary under the 
law. However, the exemptions do not 
apply to the use of motion picture 
excerpts in fictional films, as the 
Register was unable to conclude on the 
record presented that such use is 
noninfringing. 
Proponents submitted eight proposals 
requesting the designation of classes to 
allow the circumvention of lawfully 
made and acquired motion pictures and 
audiovisual works protected by various 
access controls where the user seeks to 
engage in a noninfringing use. The 
proposals were comprised of three 
subgroups: 
First, proponents of exemptions for 
noncommercial videos sought to use 
clips from motion pictures to create new 
noncommercial videos, such as remix or 
mash-up videos, for criticism, comment, 
and other noninfringing uses. 
Proponents for these uses included EFF 
and University of Michigan Library 
(‘‘UML’’), supported by the Organization 
for Transformative Works. UML’s 
proposal requested an exemption very 
similar to the Register’s 2010 
recommended exemption for motion 
pictures contained on DVDs protected 
by Content Scrambling System (‘‘CSS’’), 
which encompassed educational uses 
and documentary filmmaking, in 
addition to noncommercial videos. 
However, UML indicated that the 
exemption should apply not only to 
motion pictures but to audiovisual 
works generally. EFF sought to broaden 
the 2010 exemption by expanding it to 
include audiovisual works and to 
include circumvention of motion 
pictures acquired via online distribution 
services. It also sought to enlarge the 
exemption to include not just criticism 
or comment but any noninfringing use, 
and to cover ‘‘primarily noncommercial 
videos,’’ a category that would include 
videos generating some amount of 
revenue. 
Second, proponents of exemptions for 
commercial uses by documentary 
filmmakers, fictional filmmakers, and 
multimedia ebook authors sought an 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 14:26 Oct 25, 2012 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00014 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1emcdonald on DSK67QTVN1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 8]
65267 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2012 / Rules and Regulations 
exemption to use clips from motion 
pictures to engage in criticism, 
comment, or other fair uses. Proponents 
for these uses included International 
Documentary Association, Kartemquin 
Educational Films, Inc., National 
Alliance for Media Arts and Culture, 
and Independent Filmmaker Project 
(collectively ‘‘Joint Filmmakers’’); UML; 
and Mark Berger, Bobette Buster, Barnet 
Kellman, and Gene Rosow (collectively 
‘‘Joint Ebook Authors’’). Each of these 
proposals requested an exemption to 
circumvent motion pictures or other 
audiovisual works for use by creators of 
noninfringing commercial works, 
namely, documentary films, fictional 
films, and multimedia ebooks offering 
film analysis. As noted, UML’s proposal 
largely tracked the exemption 
recommended by the Register in 2010. 
Joint Filmmakers’ proposal sought to 
expand the 2010 exemption by adding 
fictional filmmakers, as well as by 
extending the exemption to cover any 
noninfringing use. Joint Filmmakers 
also sought to include circumvention of 
Blu-ray discs protected by the Advanced 
Access Content System (‘‘AACS’’) and 
motion pictures digitally transmitted 
through protected online services. Joint 
Ebook Authors’ proposal sought the use 
of short portions of motion pictures for 
the purpose of multimedia ebook 
authorship. Like Joint Filmmakers, Joint 
Ebook Authors indicated that the 
proposed exemption should not depend 
on uses that involve criticism or 
comment but should instead merely 
require that the use be noninfringing. 
Joint Ebook Authors also proposed that 
the exemption include digitally 
transmitted video in addition to CSS- 
protected DVDs. 
Finally, proponents of exemptions for 
educational uses sought to use clips 
from motion pictures for criticism, 
comment, or other educational purposes 
by college and university professors and 
faculty, college and university students, 
and kindergarten through twelfth grade 
educators. Proponents for these uses 
included UML; Library Copyright 
Alliance (‘‘LCA’’); Peter Decherney, 
Katherine Sender, Michael X. Delli 
Carpini, International Communication 
Association, Society for Cinema and 
Media Studies, and American 
Association of University Professors 
(‘‘Joint Educators’’); and Media 
Education Lab at the Harrington School 
of Communication and Media at the 
University of Rhode Island (‘‘MEL’’). 
The proposals by UML and LCA 
requested an exemption similar to the 
2010 exemption recommended by the 
Register for circumvention of CSS- 
protected DVDs, except that UML 
sought to broaden it to apply to 
audiovisual works, as well as to 
students across all disciplines of study. 
Joint Educators’ proposed exemption 
sought to enable college and university 
students, as well as faculty, to use short 
portions of video, as well as to 
circumvent AACS-protected Blu-ray 
discs and digitally transmitted works. 
Finally, MEL requested an exemption 
for the circumvention of audiovisual 
works used for educational purposes by 
kindergarten through twelfth grade 
educators. 
Because each of the proposals 
involved the use of clips from motion 
pictures or audiovisual works, the eight 
possible exemptions were addressed as 
a group in the Register’s 
Recommendation. The proposals for 
exemptions to allow the circumvention 
of lawfully obtained motion pictures 
protected by access controls for various 
commercial, noncommercial, and 
‘‘primarily noncommercial’’ purposes 
shared a unifying feature in that in each 
case, proponents were seeking an 
exemption to allow circumvention for 
the purpose of reproducing short clips 
to facilitate alleged noninfringing uses. 
Creators of noncommercial videos 
sought to use portions of motion 
pictures to create noninfringing works 
involving criticism or comment that 
they asserted were transformative. 
Documentary filmmakers and 
multimedia ebook authors sought to 
reproduce portions of motion pictures 
in new works offering criticism or 
commentary. Fictional filmmakers 
wished to incorporate motion pictures 
into new films to convey certain 
messages. Film and media studies 
professors sought to assemble motion 
picture excerpts to demonstrate 
concepts, qualities, and techniques. 
Other educators sought to reproduce 
clips of motion pictures to illustrate 
points for classroom discussion. 
Joint Creators and DVD Copy Control 
Association (‘‘DVD CCA’’) opposed the 
proposals pertaining to noncommercial 
videos and, more generally, the use of 
motion pictures contained on CSS- 
protected DVDs. Joint Creators also 
opposed the use of motion pictures 
acquired via online distribution 
services. Joint Creators questioned 
whether proponents had met the 
required statutory burden for an 
exemption. They urged the Register 
precisely to analyze the alleged 
noninfringing uses to determine 
whether they were, in fact, 
noninfringing. In addition, they argued 
that the proposed exemption for 
circumvention of AACS-protected Blu- 
ray discs should not be approved. 
DVD CCA maintained that none of the 
examples offered in support of the 
proposed exemptions for documentary 
filmmakers, fictional filmmakers, or 
multimedia ebook authors sufficiently 
established that CSS is preventing the 
proposed uses. DVD CCA asserted that 
there are several alternatives to 
circumvention, including clip licensing, 
screen capture software, and video 
recording via smartphone that would 
enable proponents affordably and 
effectively to copy short portions of 
motion pictures without the requested 
exemption. 
As for educational uses, Joint Creators 
and DVD CCA did not oppose the 
granting of an exemption covering 
circumvention of CSS for a variety of 
college and university uses involving 
copying of short portions of motion 
pictures, but asserted that the 
exemption should be limited to conduct 
that is clearly noninfringing and 
requires high-quality content. 
Advanced Access Content System 
License Administrator (‘‘AACS LA’’) 
generally opposed the requested 
exemptions as they would apply to 
AACS-protected Blu-ray discs. It 
asserted that proponents have failed to 
make the case that they face substantial 
adverse effects with respect to content 
available only on Blu-ray discs. 
In reviewing the proposed classes, the 
Register noted that certain of the 
proposed exemptions referred to 
‘‘audiovisual works’’ as opposed to 
‘‘motion pictures.’’ The Register 
observed that Section 101 defines 
‘‘motion pictures’’ as ‘‘audiovisual 
works consisting of a series of related 
images which, when shown in 
succession, impart an impression of 
motion, together with accompanying 
sounds, if any.’’ Section 101 defines 
‘‘audiovisual works’’ somewhat more 
broadly, as ‘‘works that consist of a 
series of related images which are 
intrinsically intended to be shown by 
the use of machines or devices such as 
projectors, viewers, or electronic 
equipment, together with accompanying 
sounds, if any, regardless of the nature 
of the material objects, such as films or 
tapes, in which the works are 
embodied.’’ Under the Copyright Act, 
‘‘motion pictures’’ are thus a subset 
(albeit a very large one) of ‘‘audiovisual 
works.’’ The record for the proposed 
classes was directed to uses of motion 
pictures such as movies, television 
shows, commercials, news, DVD extras, 
etc., and did not focus on uses of 
audiovisual works that would fall 
outside of the Copyright Act’s definition 
of ‘‘motion pictures.’’ Based on the 
record, the Register found no basis for 
considering exemptions beyond motion 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 14:26 Oct 25, 2012 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00015 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1emcdonald on DSK67QTVN1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 9]
65268 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2012 / Rules and Regulations 
pictures and treated the requested 
exemptions for ‘‘audiovisual works’’ as 
requests relating to motion pictures. 
The Register determined that 
proponents of exemptions for 
noncommercial videos, commercial uses 
by documentary filmmakers and 
multimedia ebook authors, and uses in 
educational contexts had established 
that a significant number of the 
proposed uses were for purposes of 
criticism and commentary. She noted 
that such uses fall within the favored 
purposes referenced in the preamble of 
Section 107 and, especially in light of 
the brevity of the excerpts used, are 
likely to be fair uses. More specifically, 
the Register determined that the 
proposed uses tended to be 
transformative in nature, employing 
short clips for purposes of criticism, 
comment, teaching, and/or scholarship, 
rather than for the works’ originally 
intended purpose. Despite the 
commercial aspect of uses by 
documentary filmmakers and 
multimedia ebook authors, the Register 
noted that when a short excerpt of a 
motion picture is used for purposes of 
criticism and comment, even in a 
commercial context, it may well be a 
productive use that serves the essential 
function of fair use as a free speech 
safeguard. While the Register did not 
conclude that a court would find each 
and every one of proponents’ examples 
to be transformative, she did find that 
the record amply supported the 
conclusion that a substantial number of 
the proffered examples likely would be 
considered transformative fair uses. 
The Register also concluded, 
however, that the same fair use analysis 
did not apply to fictional filmmakers, at 
least on the record presented. She noted 
that fictional films differ from the other 
categories of use because their purpose 
is typically for entertainment, rather 
than for criticism or comment. As the 
Register explained in her 
Recommendation, under appropriate 
circumstances, a use by a fictional 
filmmaker might well be a fair use. But 
fictional film proponents merely 
described their desired uses and did not 
present concrete examples—such as 
existing films that made use of 
preexisting material in a clearly 
transformative manner—that permitted 
the Register to make a finding of fair use 
in this context. The record did not allow 
a satisfying determination as to the 
nature of the fictional filmmakers’ 
proposed uses, the amount of the 
underlying works fictional filmmakers 
generally sought to use, or whether or 
how such uses might affect the market 
for the original works. 
In addition, the Register observed 
that, to the extent discernible from 
proponents’ descriptions, a number of 
the examples cited did not appear 
readily to lend themselves to a 
conclusion that the described use would 
likely be considered fair. More 
specifically, the use of an earlier work 
to flesh out characters or motivations in 
a new work, or to develop a storyline, 
as suggested by some of proponents’ 
descriptive examples, does not 
inherently serve the purpose of criticism 
or comment on the existing work. The 
Register therefore concluded, on the 
record before her, that fictional 
filmmakers had failed to establish that 
the uses in which they sought to engage 
were likely to be noninfringing. 
Having determined otherwise with 
respect to the other proposed categories 
of use involving criticism and comment, 
however, the Register proceeded to 
consider whether there were adequate 
alternatives to circumvention to 
accommodate these noninfringing uses. 
Opponents pointed to clip licensing, 
smartphone video recording, and screen 
capture software as alternatives to 
achieve the desired uses. The Register 
found that clip licensing was not a 
reasonable alternative, as the scope of 
content offered through reasonably 
available licensing sources was far from 
complete. Moreover, requiring a creator 
who is making fair use of a work to 
obtain a license is in tension with the 
Supreme Court’s holding in Campbell v. 
Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569 
(1994), that rightsholders do not have an 
exclusive right to markets for 
commentary on or criticism of their 
copyrighted works. 
Nor did smartphone recording appear 
to be an adequate option, as the 
evidence indicated that smartphone 
recordings yielded inferior video and 
audio quality, and failed to capture the 
complete image as it was meant to 
appear on the screen. 
In the 2010 proceeding, the Register 
determined that screen capture 
technology offered a cost-effective 
alternative technique to allow 
reproduction of motion pictures for 
certain uses. Unlike the last proceeding, 
where the Register raised screen capture 
technology as a possible alternative, in 
the current proceeding it was opponents 
who pointed to screen capture as a 
reasonable solution. However, based on 
the video evidence and commentary 
from proponents and opponents 
concerning screen capture technology, 
the Register determined that the screen 
capture images, while improved in 
quality since the last rulemaking, were 
still of lower quality than those 
available by circumvention of access 
controls on motion pictures; they were 
somewhat diminished in clarity and 
depth, and could exhibit pixilation. 
Concerning screen capture, 
documentary filmmakers suggested that 
the lower-quality images generated by 
this technology were not suitable for the 
dissemination of their films. The 
Register found a similar argument 
persuasive in the previous rulemaking 
based on certain distribution standards 
generally requiring that films adhere to 
specific quality standards that cannot be 
met by screen capture. Unlike in the last 
proceeding, however, the Register was 
not convinced on the present record that 
the distribution requirements would 
give rise to significant adverse effects. In 
this proceeding, the parties explained 
the standards in greater detail, including 
the fact that certain accommodations are 
made by distributors with respect to 
pre-existing materials. 
Nonetheless, the record did support 
the conclusion that, in some cases, for 
other reasons, the inability to 
circumvent to make use of higher- 
quality material available on DVDs and 
in protected online formats is likely to 
impose significant adverse effects on 
documentary filmmakers, 
noncommercial video makers, 
multimedia ebook authors, and certain 
educational users. Creators of 
noncommercial videos provided the 
most extensive record to support the 
need for higher-quality source material. 
Based on the video evidence presented, 
the Register concluded that diminished 
quality likely would impair the 
criticism and comment contained in 
noncommercial videos. For example, 
the Register was able to perceive that 
certain noncommercial videos would 
suffer significantly because of blurring 
and the loss of detail in characters’ 
expression and sense of depth. 
Although the record was not as robust 
in the case of documentary filmmakers 
and multimedia ebook authors, it was 
sufficient to support a similar finding 
that for certain uses—i.e., when trying to 
convey a point that depends upon the 
ability to perceive details or subtleties 
in a motion picture excerpt— 
documentary filmmakers and ebook 
authors would likely suffer adverse 
effects if they were unable to 
incorporate higher-quality images. 
Similarly, educational uses that depend 
upon close analysis of film or media 
images might be adversely impacted if 
students are unable to apprehend the 
subtle detail or emotional impact of the 
images they are analyzing. But where 
precise detail is not required for the 
particular use in question—for example, 
where a clip is presented simply to 
illustrate a historical event—the Register 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 14:26 Oct 25, 2012 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00016 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1emcdonald on DSK67QTVN1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 10]
65269 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2012 / Rules and Regulations 
concluded that lower-quality screen 
capture images appeared adequate to 
fulfill the noninfringing use. 
As an additional concern relating to 
screen capture technology, proponents 
maintained that even if the Register 
acknowledged now, as she did in 2010, 
that certain types of video capture 
software are noncircumventing, there is 
still no assurance that all copyright 
owners share this view. Proponents 
observed, for example, that litigation 
had been instituted over the use of 
similar methods of acquiring content 
protected by access controls. In light of 
the unsettled legal landscape, the 
Register determined that there is a need 
for limited exemptions to address the 
possible circumvention of protected 
motion pictures when using screen 
capture technology. 
The record also indicated that there is 
some amount of motion picture material 
available only on Blu-ray discs, such as 
bonus material or, more rarely, entire 
films released exclusively on Blu-ray. 
However, the cited uses of Blu-ray- 
exclusive content in the record were 
insignificant in number. Moreover, with 
respect to documentary filmmakers in 
particular, for the reasons discussed 
above, the Register was not persuaded 
that Blu-ray content is necessary to meet 
applicable distribution standards. The 
Register therefore concluded that the 
record did not reflect a substantial 
adverse impact due to the inability to 
use motion picture materials contained 
on Blu-ray discs. 
Overall, based on the record 
presented, the Register determined that, 
when a higher-quality excerpt is 
essential to a particular use, an 
exemption to permit circumvention of 
CSS-protected DVDs and protected 
online formats is appropriate. For uses 
where high-quality material is not 
critical, screen capture technology 
provides an adequate alternative to 
circumvention, and an exemption to 
permit the use of such technology is 
appropriate. 
Looking to the statutory factors, the 
Register noted in her previous 
determination that ‘‘while CSS- 
protected DVDs may very well have 
fostered the digital distribution of 
motion pictures to the public, there is 
no credible support for the proposition 
that the digital distribution of motion 
pictures continues to depend on the 
integrity of the general ‘principle’ that 
the circumvention of CSS is always 
unlawful.’’ She found that the record in 
the current proceeding similarly failed 
to support a finding that there could be 
no exemption to the prohibition on 
circumvention of CSS-protected DVDs. 
In light of the negative impact the 
prohibition on circumvention has on 
favored uses, such as criticism, 
comment, news reporting, teaching, 
scholarship, and research, as established 
in the proceeding, the Register 
concluded that the statutory factors 
support appropriately tailored 
exemptions to facilitate those uses. 
NTIA agreed that an appropriate 
exemption to permit proposed 
noninfringing uses is necessary because 
users lack sufficient alternatives to 
circumvention. It asserted that 
‘‘generally, the technological 
alternatives [to circumvention] produce 
low-quality videos, and associated 
license agreements often impose 
significant content limitations on the 
final work product.’’ It further noted 
that clip services are limited in scope 
and may not meet the needs of all users, 
and that licensing negotiations are 
‘‘expensive and burdensome, especially 
when the licensee seeks to critique the 
copyrighted work.’’ 
NTIA proposed that the Register 
recommend a class that encompasses 
‘‘[m]otion pictures and other similar 
audiovisual works on DVDs or delivered 
via Internet Protocol,’’ asserting that the 
class should encompass ‘‘audiovisual 
works,’’ which is broader than ‘‘motion 
pictures.’’ NTIA also proposed to 
replace ‘‘for the purpose of criticism or 
comment’’ with ‘‘for the purpose of fair 
use,’’ and to expand the applicable 
circumstances beyond documentary 
filmmaking to include educational uses 
by college and university professors and 
college students, educational uses by 
kindergarten through twelfth grade 
educators, primarily noncommercial 
videos, and nonfictional or educational 
multimedia ebooks. Citing an 
inadequate definition of the proposed 
class of users, and a lack of 
demonstrated harm, the NTIA did not 
support an exemption for fictional 
filmmakers. 
While the NTIA’s views largely 
tracked those of the Register’s 
concerning the need to designate 
appropriate classes, for the reasons 
discussed above, the Register did not 
believe that certain of NTIA’s proposed 
expansions were supported by the 
record. 
In explaining her recommended 
exemptions, the Register emphasized 
that the use of only short portions or 
clips was critical to her determination 
that the proposed uses were 
noninfringing. She rejected the 
proposed expansion of the exemption to 
cover unspecified ‘‘noninfringing’’ or 
‘‘fair’’ uses where circumvention is not 
undertaken for the purpose of criticism 
or comment as, based on the record, 
criticism or comment were central to the 
uses supporting the exemption. 
The Register also noted that while 
there might be additional noninfringing 
uses by multimedia ebook authors that 
could support a more broadly conceived 
exemption, the record in the proceeding 
supported only an exemption for ebooks 
offering film analysis. 
Further, to the extent proponents for 
noncommercial videos sought an 
expanded exemption to cover 
‘‘primarily noncommercial videos’’—as 
opposed to ‘‘noncommercial videos’’— 
they failed to demonstrate that a 
meaningful number of such uses would 
qualify as noninfringing; proponents 
identified only a single video that 
allegedly fell within this category, 
because it generated advertising 
revenue. It was not clear from the 
record, however, as to why such an 
example should be considered 
‘‘primarily noncommercial’’ as opposed 
to ‘‘primarily commercial.’’ On the other 
hand, proponents established a 
sufficient basis to clarify that the 
exemption for noncommercial works 
should include videos created pursuant 
to a paid commission, provided that the 
commissioning entity uses the work 
solely in a noncommercial manner. 
With respect to educational uses, the 
Register found that the record supported 
a determination that college and 
university professors and other faculty, 
as well as students, in film studies and 
other courses focused on close analysis 
of media excerpts may sometimes need 
to reproduce content from CSS- 
protected DVDs and protected online 
formats to enable such analysis. Because 
the recommended exemption is limited 
to educational activities involving close 
analysis, there was no basis to limit the 
exemption only to professors. The 
Register further determined that non- 
professor faculty at colleges and 
universities also should be permitted to 
take advantage of the exemption when 
there is a pedagogical need for high- 
quality source material. In addition, the 
record supported a finding that 
instructors of pre-college-level students 
sometimes engage in close analysis of 
motion picture excerpts in media- 
oriented courses and might have a need 
for high-quality source material. 
The Register stressed that prospective 
users of the recommended exemptions 
for the use of motion picture excerpts 
should take care to ensure that they 
satisfy each requirement of the narrowly 
tailored exemptions before seeking to 
operate under their benefits, and 
consider whether there is an adequate 
alternative before engaging in 
circumvention under a recommended 
exemption. The Register noted that 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 14:26 Oct 25, 2012 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00017 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1emcdonald on DSK67QTVN1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 11]
65270 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2012 / Rules and Regulations 
screen capture technology should only 
be employed when it is reasonably 
represented, and offered to the public, 
as enabling the reproduction of motion 
picture content after such content has 
been lawfully decrypted—that is, when 
it is offered as a noncircumventing 
technology. And, finally, users of the 
limited exemptions should be prepared 
to defend their activities in light of the 
alternatives as they exist at the time of 
their use of the exemption, including 
any further innovations in screen 
capture or other technologies that may 
produce higher-quality results than 
were obtainable as of the Register’s 
Recommendation. 
E. Motion Pictures and Other 
Audiovisual Works—Captioning and 
Descriptive Audio 
Motion pictures and other audiovisual 
works on DVDs that are protected by the 
Content Scrambling System, or that are 
distributed by an online service and 
protected by technological measures that 
control access to such works, when 
circumvention is accomplished solely to 
access the playhead and/or related time code 
information embedded in copies of such 
works and solely for the purpose of 
conducting research and development for the 
purpose of creating players capable of 
rendering visual representations of the 
audible portions of such works and/or 
audible representations or descriptions of the 
visual portions of such works to enable an 
individual who is blind, visually impaired, 
deaf, or hard of hearing, and who has 
lawfully obtained a copy of such a work, to 
perceive the work; provided however, that 
the resulting player does not require 
circumvention of technological measures to 
operate. 
This exemption is a modification of 
the proponents’ proposal. It permits the 
circumvention of motion pictures and 
other audiovisual works contained on 
DVDs or delivered through online 
services to facilitate research and 
development of players capable of 
rendering captions and descriptive 
audio for persons who are blind, 
visually impaired, deaf, or hard of 
hearing. The exemption responds to the 
primary need articulated by proponents 
in their submissions and at the hearings 
and one compelled by public policy, 
namely research and development. With 
respect to other uses proposed by 
proponents, the Register was unable to 
conduct a fair use analysis due to 
insufficient facts on the record, and, in 
particular, a lack of clear information 
regarding how captions and descriptive 
audio would be created, disseminated, 
or otherwise made available in 
connection with the underlying 
audiovisual work. 
Proponents Telecommunications for 
the Deaf and Hard of Hearing, Inc., 
Gallaudet University, and the 
Participatory Culture Foundation 
proposed that the Register recommend 
four related classes of works to allow 
circumvention of technological 
measures applied to content distributed 
via the internet and ‘‘fixed-disc media’’ 
for the purpose of creating, improving, 
and rendering captions and descriptive 
audio tracks to enable individuals with 
disabilities to perceive such works, and 
for the purpose of conducting research 
and development on technologies to 
enable such accessibility. They urged 
that the prohibition on circumvention 
has had a ‘‘decidedly negative’’ impact 
on teaching, scholarship, research, and 
criticism. They stated that not only does 
the prohibition stifle the research and 
development associated with the 
development of accessible technologies, 
it also restricts the amount of content 
that is perceptible by individuals with 
disabilities. 
Although not particularly clear from 
the proponents’ written filings, at the 
hearing it became apparent that the 
primary interest was in the development 
of players capable of merging 
commercially accessible content with 
captions and descriptive audio that are 
created separately, generally by parties 
other than the copyright owner of the 
original copyrightable work. Proponents 
alleged that circumvention was 
necessary to achieve their objectives 
because they required access to the 
‘‘playhead,’’ that is, the technical timing 
information embedded in internet- 
delivered and fixed-disc-based content 
that would allow proper 
synchronization of captions and 
descriptive audio with the underlying 
video content to which it applied. 
Proponents explained that although 
some of the content in question is 
already captioned or provides 
descriptive audio, most does not. They 
acknowledged that the recently passed 
Twenty-First Century Communications 
and Video Accessibility Act (‘‘CVAA’’), 
Public Law 111–260 (codified in 
scattered sections of 47 U.S.C.), likely 
will require a substantial amount of 
digitally distributed programming to be 
captioned. However, they asserted that 
the CVAA does not extend to a wide 
range of content, including that which 
is distributed exclusively online (e.g., 
content that does not appear first on 
broadcast or cable television). Indeed, in 
recent rulemaking proceedings under 
the CVAA, many content producers and 
distributors asserted that the creation or 
improvement of captions and 
descriptive audio is burdensome and 
would require permission from the 
copyright owners. 
Proponents noted that the motion 
picture industry separately had asserted 
that voluntary captioning of a limited 
amount of programming would require 
‘‘eight years to phase in.’’ They further 
noted that Netflix provides captions or 
subtitles on fewer than 5,000 of its 
nearly 12,000 titles. In addition, 
proponents explained that when such 
captions do exist, they may be ‘‘riddled 
with errors’’ or inconsistently formatted, 
hampering accessibility. With respect to 
descriptive audio, proponents observed 
that such tracks may play back at an 
inappropriate volume. 
As for opposition, AACS LA and DVD 
CCA filed separate but substantially 
similar comments, taking issue with the 
proposed exemptions. They argued that 
the marketplace has evolved and will 
continue to evolve in such a way that 
satisfies accessibility needs. AACS LA 
further asserted that the proposed 
exemption potentially could harm 
future growth of the marketplace 
solutions for accessibility concerns. At 
the hearings, AACS LA offered a free 
license to its technology to enable 
developers to develop compatible 
implementations to enable accessibility, 
and it was suggested that DVD CCA 
would do so as well. 
Joint Creators also opposed, similarly 
asserting that voluntary efforts and 
regulatory compliance are sufficient 
marketplace drivers for accessible 
materials. In addition, they maintained 
that proponents had failed to meet their 
burden. In their view, proponents had 
presented only scattered examples of 
errors in captions and that such errors 
are little more than a ‘‘mere 
inconvenience’’; they also suggested 
that the proposed underlying uses might 
infringe the reproduction, distribution, 
and adaptation rights of the copyright 
owners. 
Assessing the record in light of the 
statutory factors, the Register concluded 
that a limited exemption was 
appropriate to facilitate the proposed 
research and development. The Register 
found that the substantial quantity of 
inaccessible content, and the likely 
increase in the amount of content 
distributed free from any requirement 
that it be rendered accessible, 
essentially limits the universe of 
materials with respect to which 
individuals with certain disabilities may 
engage in commentary, criticism, 
scholarship, and the like. As observed 
by the Register, the proposal was aimed 
at allowing the wide range of motion 
pictures and other audiovisual works 
that are available to the general 
population to be accessed and enjoyed 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 14:26 Oct 25, 2012 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00018 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1emcdonald on DSK67QTVN1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 12]
65271 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2012 / Rules and Regulations 
by those with disabilities. For such 
individuals, the exemption represents 
the difference between having and not 
having access to works available to 
everyone else. 
The Register determined that the 
record with respect to research and 
development was sufficiently clear to 
support an exemption for those 
activities. Dr. Christian Vogler of 
Gallaudet University demonstrated a 
software development effort aimed at 
creating a player to combine captions or 
descriptive audio with commercially 
available motion picture and 
audiovisual content. With respect to this 
project, the Register was able to 
conclude that the purported use did not 
implicate the copyrighted content itself, 
but only certain non-protectable 
information about the work—i.e., the 
timecode information accessible 
through the protected ‘‘playhead.’’ 
Moreover, the Register found that there 
did not appear to be any reasonable 
alternatives to circumvention in order to 
obtain this information. Although, as 
noted, AACS LA and DVDCCA had 
indicated a willingness to offer a free 
license to those interested in developing 
accessibility tools for playback devices, 
the record indicated that no such 
license was currently in place, and it 
was unclear whether such a license 
would come to fruition during the next 
three years. 
The Register found that proponents 
had demonstrated that there is a wide 
range of content contained on CSS- 
protected DVDs and delivered in 
protected online formats that is 
inaccessible to individuals with certain 
disabilities and as to which there is no 
alternative, accessible version. She 
further determined that the record did 
not support the proposition that 
circumvention was necessary with 
respect to Blu-ray content, as the same 
content is generally available on DVDs 
or online. 
Beyond research and development, 
the Register found that the scope of 
proponents’ intended uses was difficult 
to discern from proponents’ written 
submissions, as the papers were fraught 
with broad generalizations. During the 
hearing, proponents were able to 
articulate three broad categories of 
conduct: (1) Conducting research and 
development on accessible technologies 
to develop a player capable of 
presenting or manipulating captions or 
descriptive audio (as discussed above); 
(2) creating such captions or descriptive 
audio or corrections thereto; and (3) 
presenting such captions or descriptive 
audio along with the underlying 
lawfully acquired work. Still, the 
precise contours of certain aspects of the 
proponents’ intended exploitation of the 
proposed exemption remained elusive. 
Pointing to a footnote in Sony 
Corporation of America v. Universal 
Studios, Inc., 464 U.S. 417 (1984), 
which provides in dicta that ‘‘making a 
copy of a copyrighted work for the 
convenience of a blind person is * * * 
an example of fair use,’’ proponents 
asserted that each of the broadly defined 
intended uses was fair. However, fair 
use analyses are, by statute, necessarily 
fact specific. Most of the proposed uses 
relating to the creation of captions and 
descriptive audio proposed by the 
proponents were so generally described 
that the Register found it impossible to 
evaluate whether they would be 
noninfringing. For example, proponents 
discussed both creating captions for 
content that is uncaptioned, including 
through crowdsourcing techniques, and 
fixing incorrect or poorly implemented 
captions. Each of these activities could 
have different implications under a 
traditional fair use analysis. Absent 
specific facts pertaining to the 
particularized uses, however, such an 
analysis was not possible. 
NTIA supported proponents’ 
proposals but suggested that the Register 
should recraft the exemptions into three 
categories that it believes were 
supported by the record. Specifically, 
NTIA would have fashioned a class 
specifically aimed at those developing 
the tools to facilitate the creation, 
improvement, or rendering of captions 
and descriptive audio; another class 
specifically for those engaged in the 
creation of captions and descriptive 
audio; and a third class for those using 
the captions and descriptive audio. 
NTIA further noted that it did not 
support the inclusion of Blu-ray because 
DVD remains the dominant format, 
online video distribution is outpacing 
Blu-ray adoption, and the effect of the 
proposals on the Blu-ray market was 
uncertain. 
The Register and NTIA were in 
agreement on the need to ‘‘open the 
doors for innovation and empower the 
millions of Americans with visual and 
hearing disabilities to participate to the 
fullest possible extent in our society’s 
multimedia culture.’’ However, for the 
reasons described above, the Register 
determined that, based on the current 
record, a more narrowly tailored class to 
permit research and development of 
assistive technologies was appropriate. 
The Register nonetheless made a point 
of encouraging the continued 
development of accessibility 
technologies and future proposals for 
exemptions to advance such efforts. 
IV. Classes Considered But Not 
Recommended 
Upon the recommendation of the 
Register of Copyrights, the Librarian has 
determined that the following classes of 
works shall not be exempt from the 
prohibition against circumvention of 
technological measures set forth in 
Section 1201(a)(1)(A): 
A. Literary Works in the Public 
Domain—Digital Access 
The Register concluded that the 
requested exemption to access public 
domain works was beyond the scope of 
the rulemaking proceeding and declined 
to recommend its adoption. As further 
explained in the 2010 rulemaking, 
‘‘Section 1201 does not prohibit 
circumvention of a technological 
protection measure when it simply 
controls access to a public domain 
work; in such a case, it is lawful to 
circumvent the technological protection 
measure and there is no need for an 
exemption.’’ 
Proponent Open Book Alliance 
(‘‘OBA’’) proposed an exemption to 
permit the circumvention of literary 
works in the public domain to enable 
access to works that are digitally 
distributed. Proponent sought a 
‘‘clarification’’ that circumvention of 
technological measures for the purpose 
of accessing such literary works does 
not violate Section 1201(a)(1). 
As explained above, Section 
1201(a)(1) provides that ‘‘[n]o person 
shall circumvent a technological 
measure that effectively controls access 
to a work protected under this title.’’ 
The prohibition on circumvention of 
technological protection measures thus 
does not apply to public domain 
materials because such materials are not 
protected under Title 17. 
Joint Creators filed comments in 
response to OBA’s proposal. Joint 
Creators did not object to the conclusion 
that Section 1201(a)(1) is inapplicable to 
literary works that are in the public 
domain but cautioned that many 
distributions of such literary works 
contain ancillary copyrightable 
elements, such as cover art, inserts, 
photographs, prefaces, and the like. 
NTIA shared the proponent’s concern 
that ‘‘the implementation of 
[technological measures] restricts 
universal access’’ to public domain 
material, and that such restrictions 
‘‘may have a negative impact on 
educational institutions and research 
organizations,’’ as well as other adverse 
impacts on the public. NTIA also 
recognized, however, that works in the 
public domain are not affected by the 
prohibition on circumvention. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 14:26 Oct 25, 2012 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00019 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1emcdonald on DSK67QTVN1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 13]
65272 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2012 / Rules and Regulations 
Accordingly, NTIA agreed that an 
exemption is not required for this class 
of works. 
As Joint Creators observed, questions 
may arise when a technological measure 
controls access not only to a work in the 
public domain, but at the same time 
controls access to other works that are 
protected by copyright. There was no 
need for the Register to address this 
issue on the record presented, however, 
because proponents neither raised it nor 
presented any evidence relating to it. 
B. Video Game Consoles—Software 
Interoperability 
Because the Register determined that 
the evidentiary record failed to support 
a finding that the inability to 
circumvent access controls on video 
game consoles has, or over the course of 
the next three years likely would have, 
a substantial adverse impact on the 
ability to make noninfringing uses, the 
Register declined to recommend the 
proposed class. 
EFF, joined by Andrew ‘‘bunnie’’ 
Huang (‘‘Huang’’), FSF, SaurikIT, LLC 
(SaurikIT), and numerous individual 
supporters, sought an exemption to 
permit the circumvention of access 
controls on video game console 
computer code so that the consoles 
could be used with non-vendor- 
approved software that is lawfully 
acquired. 
EFF observed that modern video game 
consoles are increasingly sophisticated 
computing devices that are capable of 
running not only games but ‘‘entire 
computer operating systems.’’ All three 
major video game manufacturers, 
however—Sony, Microsoft, and 
Nintendo—have deployed technological 
restrictions that force console 
purchasers to limit their operating 
systems and software exclusively to 
vendor-approved offerings. These 
restrictions require a console owner 
who would like to install a computer 
operating system or run a ‘‘homebrew’’ 
(i.e., independently developed) 
application to defeat a number of 
technical measures before they can do 
so—a process that proponents refer to as 
‘‘jailbreaking.’’ Proponents sought an 
exemption from Section 1201(a)(1) to 
permit such jailbreaking of video game 
consoles. Because the class they 
proposed would enable interoperability 
only with ‘‘lawfully obtained software 
programs,’’ proponents asserted that the 
exemption would not authorize or foster 
infringing activities. 
In its comments, EFF explained the 
circumvention process with reference to 
Sony’s PlayStation 3 (‘‘PS3’’). Sony’s 
PS3 employs a series of technological 
protections so that the console can only 
install and run authenticated, encrypted 
code. One such measure is the 
encryption of the console’s firmware, 
which restricts access to the console. 
The firmware must be authenticated by 
the console’s ‘‘bootloader’’ software and 
decrypted before it can be used. Once 
the firmware has been authenticated 
and decrypted, it, in turn, authenticates 
applications before they can be installed 
or run on the PS3. EFF added that 
Microsoft’s Xbox 360 and Nintendo’s 
Wii employ similar authentication 
procedures as technological protection 
measures. 
In further support of its requested 
exemption, EFF recounted that when 
Sony launched the PS3 in 2006, it 
included a software application called 
‘‘OtherOS’’ that permitted users to 
install Linux and UNIX operating 
systems on their consoles. EFF provided 
examples of researchers who were able 
to use these earlier PS3 consoles in lieu 
of other computer systems to conduct 
various forms of scientific research, 
citing an Air Force project that made 
use of 1700 PS3s, as well as two 
academic projects employing clusters of 
PS3s to create high-performance 
computers. Some of these researchers 
chose to use clustered PS3s because 
they were less expensive than the 
available alternatives. In 2010, however, 
Sony issued a firmware update for the 
PS3 that removed the OtherOS 
functionality. PS3 users were not forced 
to upgrade, but the failure to adopt the 
upgrade precluded access to certain 
gameplay features and might make 
repair or replacement of the gaming 
system more difficult. 
EFF further asserted that none of the 
three major console manufacturers 
currently allows the installation of 
independently developed applications 
on their consoles unless the developer 
has obtained approval of the software 
from the manufacturer through a 
‘‘stringent’’ process that may require the 
developer to license costly development 
tools. As a result, hobbyists and 
homebrew developers engage in 
circumvention to defeat technical 
restrictions in order to create and run 
games and other applications on the 
PS3, Wii, and Xbox consoles. 
EFF noted over 450 independently 
created games and applications for 
Nintendo’s Wii available on the 
homebrew site WiiBrew.org, as well as 
some 18 homebrew games and several 
nongaming applications developed for 
the PS3—including a file backup 
program called ‘‘Multiman’’ and an 
application that transforms the PS3 into 
an FTP server—and a handful of other 
homebrew applications for other 
platforms and handheld gaming devices. 
EFF pointed out that there is no strong 
homebrew community for the Xbox360, 
attributing this phenomenon to a 
Microsoft development program that 
allows developers to publish games 
‘‘with relative ease.’’ 
Proponents argued that 
manufacturers’ technological 
restrictions on video game consoles not 
only constrain consumer choice but also 
inhibit scientific research and 
homebrew development activities. 
Pointing to the Register’s determination 
in the last Section 1201 rulemaking that 
circumvention of technological 
measures on smartphones to enable 
interoperability with lawfully obtained 
applications was a permissible fair use, 
proponents urged that the same logic 
should apply here. According to 
proponents, the restrictions on video 
game consoles do not protect the value 
or integrity of copyrighted works but 
instead reflect a business decision to 
restrict the applications that users can 
run on their devices. 
EFF explained that a ‘‘large 
community’’ of console jailbreakers 
currently exists for all three major video 
game consoles but noted that such 
jailbreakers face potential liability under 
Section 1201(a)(1). As evidence of this, 
EFF cited recent litigation pursued by 
Sony against an individual and others 
who developed a method for 
jailbreaking the PS3. EFF explained that 
in January 2010, George Hotz (also 
known by his online name ‘‘GeoHot’’) 
published a method for jailbreaking the 
PS3. In response, Sony initiated a 
lawsuit against Hotz and others alleging, 
among other things, that the defendants 
had conspired to violate the DMCA. 
Finally, a few supporters of EFF’s 
proposal suggested potential scenarios 
in which a console might need to be 
jailbroken to effectuate a repair but did 
not provide any specific evidence of 
actual repair issues. 
The proposal to permit circumvention 
of video game consoles was vigorously 
opposed by the Entertainment Software 
Association (‘‘ESA’’), Sony Computer 
Entertainment America LLC (‘‘SCEA’’ or 
‘‘Sony’’), and Joint Creators. Opponents 
filed extensive comments in response to 
EFF’s request. 
ESA characterized video game 
consoles as ‘‘the center of an intellectual 
property ecosystem’’ which makes 
copyrighted content readily and legally 
accessible, stating that the entire system 
depends upon effective and secure 
access controls. ESA explained that 
there are at least two potential access 
controls at issue. To play an 
unauthorized application, the user must 
circumvent not only the encryption on 
the console’s firmware, but also modify 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 14:26 Oct 25, 2012 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00020 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1emcdonald on DSK67QTVN1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 14]
65273 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2012 / Rules and Regulations 
the firmware to defeat the 
authentication check access control. It 
added that once modified, the firmware 
will operate, but the access controls will 
be circumvented, effectively allowing 
the console to run unauthorized 
content. 
SCEA’s comments focused on its PS3 
console (the dominant example 
addressed in EFF’s proposal). SCEA 
confirmed that the technological 
restrictions controlling access to the PS3 
protect both its firmware and the 
copyrighted video games that are 
developed for that system. As explained 
by SCEA, allowing circumvention of the 
PS3 access controls would mean that 
the basic security checks could be 
skipped and the firmware freely 
modified to bypass or eliminate the 
process by which the video games are 
authenticated for use on the console, 
thus making it ‘‘virtually certain that 
successful hackers, under the guise of 
the exemption, will create the tools that 
enable even novice users to make, 
distribute, download, and play back 
illegal copies of games.’’ 
Throughout their comments, 
opponents stressed piracy as an 
overriding concern, noting that once a 
user circumvents a console’s security 
measures—even for an ostensibly 
benign purpose—it becomes a vehicle 
for unauthorized content. In their view, 
EFF’s attempt to limit the exemption to 
interoperability with lawful 
applications would make no difference 
in practice, because ‘‘all known 
methods for circumventing game 
console [technological protection 
measures] necessarily eliminate the 
measures’ ability to preclude the play, 
reproduction and distribution of 
infringing content.’’ 
In support of their contentions 
regarding the link between 
circumvention and piracy, opponents 
provided documentation of console 
‘‘hacking packages’’ that come bundled 
with applications to play pirated 
content. They further noted, again with 
supporting materials, that the homebrew 
channel installed with a popular Wii 
hacking package automatically includes 
applications that enable the console to 
play pirated content. They pointed out, 
with still further support in the record, 
that the ‘‘Multiman’’ backup system 
referenced by EFF as an example of a 
useful application enabled by jailbroken 
PS3s is used to decrypt and copy 
protected PS3 games so they can be 
illegally distributed. Other documentary 
evidence submitted by opponents 
showed that the PS3 FTP file server 
application described by EFF is used as 
a means to transfer illegal files. 
Opponents also furnished multiple 
examples of advertisements for console 
jailbreaking services that included (for 
an all-in price) a library of pirated 
games. 
Opponents pointed to online forums 
and other sources that specifically 
referenced George Hotz’s hack of the 
PS3—described sympathetically by EFF 
in its proposal—as permitting users to 
play pirated games and content, and 
provided representative postings. The 
documentation evidenced a broadly 
shared perception in the gaming 
community that jailbreaking leads to 
piracy. Notably, some of those providing 
commentary made the further 
observation that such piracy would 
negatively impact the development of 
new games. 
Possibly referring to Hotz, SCEA 
elaborated on the hacking issue by 
commenting specifically on the events 
surrounding a 2010 breach of its PS3 
system. In that case, hackers announced 
that they had successfully circumvented 
the technological measures on PS3 
firmware, which was accomplished by 
exploiting vulnerabilities in Linux 
operating in the OtherOS environment. 
Although the hackers stated that they 
did not endorse or condone piracy, one 
hacker subsequently published PS3’s 
encryption keys on the Internet, which 
were quickly used to create jailbreak 
software to permit the use of illegally 
made games. Sony saw an immediate 
rise in the number of illegal copies but 
no increase in homebrew development, 
while sales of legitimate software 
‘‘declined dramatically.’’ As a result of 
the hack, Sony decided it had no choice 
but to discontinue OtherOS and issued 
a system upgrade that disabled OtherOS 
functionality for those who wished to 
maintain access to Sony’s PlayStation 
network. 
Mindful of the exemption established 
by the Librarian in the prior proceeding 
to permit jailbreaking of smartphones, 
opponents urged that video game 
consoles are not the equivalent of 
iPhones, asserting that the technological 
measures on game consoles legitimately 
protect the creation and dissemination 
of copyrighted works by discouraging 
pirated content and protecting creators’ 
investment in new games. Opponents 
distinguished the development of a 
video game—a long and intensive 
process ‘‘akin to * * * motion picture 
production’’ involving a team of 
developers that can cost tens of millions 
of dollars—from the relative ease and 
inexpensiveness of creating a 
smartphone application. According to 
opponents, the development of new 
video games would be significantly 
impaired without reliable technological 
protections to protect developers’ 
investments. 
With respect to the need to jailbreak 
consoles to permit the operation of 
Linux-based homebrew programs, 
opponents observed that while EFF’s 
request focused on the PS3, the 
homebrew community for that device is 
small, as evidenced by the fact that less 
than one-tenth of one percent of PS3 
users (fewer than 2,000 in all) had made 
use of the PS3’s OtherOS feature. In any 
event, they noted, there are over 4,000 
devices on which Linux can be run 
without the need for circumvention, and 
homebrew games and applications can 
be played on a wide array of open 
platform devices. Opponents further 
observed that each of the three major 
video game console manufacturers has a 
program to support independent 
developers in creating and publishing 
compatible games. 
Finally, opponents disputed 
proponents’ suggestion that 
circumvention is necessary to repair 
broken game consoles, explaining that 
each console maker offers authorized 
repair services free of charge for 
consoles still under warranty for a 
nominal fee thereafter. 
Although EFF sought to rely upon the 
Register’s 2010 determination that 
modification of smartphone software to 
permit interoperability with non- 
vendor-approved applications was a fair 
use, the Register concluded that the fair 
use analysis for video consoles diverged 
from that in the smartphone context. 
Unlike in the case of smartphones, the 
record demonstrated that access 
controls on gaming consoles protect not 
only the console firmware, but the video 
games and applications that run on the 
console as well. The evidence showed 
that video games are far more difficult 
and complex to produce than 
smartphone applications, requiring 
teams of developers and potential 
investments in the millions of dollars. 
While the access controls at issue might 
serve to further manufacturers’ business 
interests, they also protect highly 
valuable expressive works—many of 
which are created and owned by the 
manufacturers—in addition to console 
firmware itself. 
The Register noted that research 
activities and functional applications 
that proponents claimed would be 
enabled by circumvention might well 
constitute transformative uses. On the 
other hand, circumventing console code 
to play games and other entertainment 
content (even if lawfully acquired) is 
not a transformative use, as the 
circumvented code is serving the same 
fundamental purpose as the unbroken 
code. While the second and third fair 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 14:26 Oct 25, 2012 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00021 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1emcdonald on DSK67QTVN1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 15]
65274 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2012 / Rules and Regulations 
use factors did not greatly affect the 
analysis, on the significant question of 
market harm, the Register concluded 
that opponents had provided 
compelling evidence that circumvention 
of access controls to permit 
interoperability of video game 
consoles—regardless of purpose—had 
the effect of diminishing the value of, 
and impairing the market for, the 
affected code, because the compromised 
code could no longer serve as a secure 
platform for the development and 
distribution of legitimate content. The 
Register noted that instead of countering 
this evidence with a factual showing to 
prove opponents wrong, EFF merely 
asserted that its proposal would not 
permit infringing uses. The Register did 
not believe that this response satisfied 
proponents’ obligation to address the 
‘‘real-world impact’’ of their proposed 
exemption. Overall, the Register found 
that proponents had failed to fulfill their 
obligation to establish persuasively that 
fair use could serve as a basis for the 
exemption they sought. 
The Register further found that even 
if proponents had satisfied their burden 
of establishing noninfringing uses, they 
nonetheless failed to demonstrate that 
video game console access controls have 
or are likely to have a substantial 
adverse impact on such uses. 
Proponents identified two broad 
categories of activities that were 
allegedly threatened by the prohibition 
on circumvention, scientific research 
and homebrew software development. 
With respect to scientific research, a 
small number of research projects 
involving only one type of gaming 
console, the PS3, suggested a de 
minimis impact, if any. This conclusion 
was reinforced by record evidence 
indicating that Sony had in fact 
cooperated with and been a supporter of 
research efforts and that alternative 
computing resources for such projects 
were available in the marketplace. 
Nor, according to the Register’s 
analysis, did the record support a 
finding that Section 1201(a)(1) is having 
a substantial adverse impact on lawful 
homebrew activities. The most 
significant level of homebrew activity 
identified by EFF appears to have 
occurred in relation to the Wii, but the 
record was relatively sparse in relation 
to other gaming platforms. Concerning 
the use of video game consoles to 
operate Linux software generally, the 
record showed that only a very small 
percentage of PS3 users availed 
themselves of the (now discontinued) 
OtherOS option that permitted users to 
run Linux on their PS3s. At the same 
time, there are thousands of alternative 
devices that can be used to develop and 
run Linux-based video games and other 
applications. In addition, the record 
indicated that developers can and do 
take advantage of various manufacturer 
programs to pursue independent 
development activities. 
Finally, as noted above, the Register 
determined that proponents offered no 
factual basis in support of their 
suggestion that users are having 
difficulty repairing their consoles as a 
result of Section 1201(a)(1). This 
appeared to be only a hypothetical 
concern, as proponents failed to 
document any actual instances of users 
seeking to make repairs. 
The Register therefore concluded that 
proponents had failed to establish that 
the prohibition on circumvention, as 
applied to video game console code, is 
causing substantial adverse effects. 
Turning to the statutory factors, the 
Register took issue with proponents’ 
view that piracy was an irrelevant 
consideration because the exemption 
they sought was only to allow 
interoperability with ‘‘lawfully obtained 
applications.’’ The Register explained 
that she could not ignore the record 
before her. Even if piracy were not the 
initial or intended purpose for 
circumvention, the record substantiated 
opponents’ assessment that in the case 
of video games, console jailbreaking 
leads to a higher level of infringing 
activity, thus sharply distinguishing the 
case of video consoles from 
smartphones, where the record did not 
support the same finding. The evidence 
also suggested that the restriction 
limiting the proposed class to ‘‘lawfully 
obtained’’ applications—which the 
Register has found effective in other 
contexts—did not provide adequate 
assurance in this case. The Register 
noted that simply to suggest, as 
proponents had, that unlawful uses 
were outside the scope of the exemption 
and therefore of no concern was not a 
persuasive answer. 
Finally, the Register agreed with 
proponents’ assessment that the access 
controls protecting video game console 
code facilitate a business model, as 
many technological restrictions do. But 
the Register concluded that in the case 
of gaming platforms, that was not the 
sole purpose. Console access controls 
protect not only the integrity of the 
console code, but the copyrighted works 
that run on the consoles. In so doing, 
they provide important incentives to 
create video games and other content for 
consoles, and thus play a critical role in 
the development and dissemination of 
highly innovative copyrighted works. 
NTIA supported the ‘‘innovative spirit 
epitomized by independent developers 
and researchers whose needs 
proponents contemplate in this class,’’ 
but noted that the evidence in the 
record was insufficient to support the 
considerable breadth of the proposed 
class. NTIA asserted that the record was 
unclear with respect to the need for an 
exemption to enable software 
interoperability, and that there was 
compelling evidence of reasonable 
alternatives available for research 
purposes. NTIA was also ‘‘cognizant of 
the proposal’s likely negative impact on 
the underlying business model that has 
enabled significant growth and 
innovation in the video game industry.’’ 
Although NTIA did not support the 
exemption as requested by proponents, 
it did support a limited exemption to 
allow videogame console owners to 
repair or replace hardware components, 
or to ‘‘obtain unlicensed repairs when 
the console is out of warranty or when 
the console and authorized replacement 
parts are no longer on the market.’’ As 
explained above, however, the Register 
found that the record lacked any factual 
basis upon which to recommend the 
designation of even such a limited class. 
C. Personal Computing Devices— 
Software Interoperability 
While the Register recognized that the 
concern expressed by proponents—that 
a broad implementation of restrictive 
access controls could preclude users 
from installing operating systems and 
applications of their choice—is a 
significant one, she found that 
proponents had relied heavily on 
speculation and failed to present 
specific and compelling evidence in 
support of a focused exemption. The 
Register therefore declined to 
recommend the adoption of the 
proposed class. 
Software Freedom Law Center 
(‘‘SFLC’’), supported by FSF, Mozilla, 
SaurikIT, New Yorkers for Fair Use, 
Huang, and others, sought an exemption 
to permit the circumvention of 
computer programs on personal 
computing devices to enable the 
installation of other software, including 
alternative operating systems, when 
such software is lawfully obtained. The 
proposed exemption would have 
allowed circumvention by the device 
owner or by someone acting at the 
device owner’s request. 
In requesting this exemption, SFLC 
explained that there are two broad 
categories of access controls on personal 
computing devices: ‘‘application locks,’’ 
which effectively prevent users from 
installing certain software applications, 
and ‘‘OS locks,’’ which effectively 
prevent users from installing 
replacement operating systems. Citing 
the Librarian’s 2010 determination 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 14:26 Oct 25, 2012 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00022 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1emcdonald on DSK67QTVN1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 16]
65275 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2012 / Rules and Regulations 
permitting jailbreaking of smartphones 
to enable interoperability, SFLC asserted 
that the restrictions addressed by the 
smartphone exemption have become 
commonplace on other mobile 
computing devices and have begun to 
appear on personal computers. 
Accordingly, SFLC contended that the 
smartphone exemption should be 
‘‘expanded’’ to include ‘‘all personal 
computing devices’’ so as to permit 
circumvention for the purpose of 
installing any software the user chooses, 
including a new operating system. 
SFLC explained that the mobile 
device market, which includes not only 
smartphones but also tablet computers, 
is dominated by Google’s Android 
operating system and Apple’s iOS, 
which together account for 94 percent of 
the market. The two most popular ebook 
readers, Amazon’s Kindle and Barnes & 
Noble’s Nook, are Android-based 
devices. According to SFLC, ‘‘[a]ll of the 
restrictions addressed by the 
[smartphone] exemption are reproduced 
on the new formats.’’ Thus, the iOS on 
the iPhone and iPad limits applications 
to those obtained from Apple’s store. In 
the case of Android, users are allowed 
to install applications obtained from 
channels other than Google’s Android 
Marketplace, but Android withholds 
‘‘many vital privileges’’ (i.e., important 
device functionalities) from 
alternatively sourced applications. In 
addition, even though the Kindle and 
Nook are Android-based, Amazon and 
Barnes & Noble have substituted their 
own exclusive distribution channels, 
which cannot be avoided without 
jailbreaking. 
SFLC further observed that Microsoft 
has announced that it will require 
hardware manufacturers for the 
forthcoming Windows 8 operating 
system to enable a secure boot system— 
which can function as a type of OS 
lock—‘‘by default.’’ It asserted that 
because Microsoft controls nearly 90 
percent of the operating system market, 
secure boot will be a ‘‘nearly 
ubiquitous’’ feature on personal 
computers in the next year. According 
to SFLC, this will ‘‘decimate’’ what is 
now a thriving market for alternative PC 
operating systems. In a further 
submission to the Copyright Office, 
however, SFLC conceded that Microsoft 
had established a program to enable 
developers to ‘‘have their operating 
systems signed by Microsoft’’—i.e., to 
acquire a secure boot key—for a fee of 
99 dollars. 
SFLC acknowledged that the stated 
justification for OS locks is to protect 
device owners from malicious software 
by making it impossible for viruses to 
gain access to, or replace, a device’s 
operating system. But in SFLC’s words, 
‘‘[t]his ‘security feature’ is undiscerning: 
it will reject the device owner’s 
intentional installation of an operating 
system just as it will reject a virus’s 
payload.’’ SFLC observed that ‘‘[t]o the 
extent the firmware lock being 
circumvented merely prevents 
unauthorized operating systems from 
running, it does not protect access to a 
copyrighted work of the device 
producer, but rather prevents access to 
a competing copyrighted work to which 
the device owner has a license.’’ 
On the question of noninfringing use, 
SFLC asserted that it is not infringing 
for the owner of a device to install 
applications that have not been 
approved by the device’s manufacturer. 
According to SFLC, this conclusion— 
drawn from the Register’s analysis and 
findings in the 2010 rulemaking 
proceeding—applies with equal force to 
application locks on devices other than 
smartphones, as well as to OS locks. 
SFLC noted that in 2010, the Register 
determined that circumvention for the 
purpose of achieving interoperability 
was either ‘‘noninfringing or fair.’’ SFLC 
further opined that, while modification 
of a preinstalled operating system is 
sometimes necessary to circumvent an 
application lock, the same is not true of 
OS locks, as removal of a device’s 
default operating system does not 
implicate any of the exclusive rights of 
the owner of the operating system. 
The proposed class was opposed by 
Joint Creators, who argued that the 
requested exemption ‘‘targets every 
device and every platform, and creates 
an open-ended standard for 
circumvention.’’ In their view, if 
granted, the exemption ‘‘would strip 
any copyright owner, distributor, or 
licensee from exercising any choices 
with respect to how to construct a 
distribution system related to personal 
computing, and would thus expose 
copyright owners and their business 
partners to unnecessary risk, piracy, and 
unpredictability.’’ Joint Creators 
characterized proponents’ request as, 
‘‘at best, premature,’’ and maintained 
that proponents had failed to meet the 
substantial burden required for an 
exemption. 
Joint Creators also contended that the 
‘‘primary effects’’ of such an exemption 
would be to enable distribution of 
pirated applications, and to remove 
technical limitations that would 
otherwise protect trial versions of 
applications. According to Joint 
Creators, circumvention of technical 
measures on computer programs is 
accomplished primarily to unlock trial 
versions of software or enable access to 
pirated copies or unauthorized modified 
versions. 
Joint Creators stressed that 
proponents’ arguments in favor of the 
proposed class were based on 
speculation rather than facts. They 
asserted that proponents’ comments 
presented ‘‘theories’’ about what might 
occur but failed to demonstrate that the 
scenarios they portrayed were more 
likely than not. In particular, with 
respect to the secure boot issue, Joint 
Creators pointed out that proponents 
had not identified a single platform that 
precluded the installation of an 
alternative operating system. 
Finally, Joint Creators asserted that 
the proposed class—in purporting to 
immunize circumvention, ‘‘performed 
* * * at the request of the device’s 
owner’’—amounted to a request to 
exempt the provision of circumvention 
services, which is prohibited under 
Section 1201(a)(1)(E). 
The Register found that proponents 
had offered very little support for their 
claim that the uses for which they 
sought an exemption are noninfringing, 
even though it is a threshold 
requirement before an exemption can be 
considered. Instead, proponents chose 
to rest their case upon the Register’s 
conclusion in the 2010 rulemaking—in 
the context of smartphones—that it was 
not an infringement to install 
applications that have not been 
approved by a device’s manufacturer. 
The Register opined that proponents’ 
conclusory declaration that the 
expansive set of uses upon which they 
premised their request was 
noninfringing was inadequate in the 
context of the rulemaking. 
The Register noted that the record was 
murky on the especially critical issue of 
whether the removal of an operating 
system from a device in its entirety—an 
activity proponents sought to facilitate 
through the rulemaking process— 
required the circumvention of technical 
measures before erasing the operating 
system, or whether it was possible to 
remove an operating system without 
prior circumvention (even if such 
removal also simultaneously removed 
the access controls for that operating 
system). At the hearings, the Copyright 
Office sought clarification on this point 
from the parties, but the results were 
inconclusive. Another question that was 
not answered by the record was whether 
an OS lock preventing the operation of 
an alternative operating system is in fact 
a technological measure protecting a 
copyrighted work within the meaning of 
Section 1201(a). 
The Register explained that to the 
extent an operating system can be 
removed without having first to gain 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 14:26 Oct 25, 2012 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00023 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1emcdonald on DSK67QTVN1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 17]
65276 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2012 / Rules and Regulations 
access to the work through an act of 
circumvention, even if such work is 
protected for other purposes by 
technological measures, such removal 
would not constitute a violation of 
Section 1201(a)(1). This is because upon 
deletion of the work, any such 
technological measure is no longer 
‘‘effectively control[ling] access’’ to the 
work. In such a case, of course, an 
exemption is unnecessary. 
The Register also observed that much 
of proponents’ concern appeared to be 
centered on Microsoft’s to be launched 
Windows 8 operating system and its 
‘‘secure boot’’ functionality. But 
proponents’ own statements indicated 
that this concern was speculative. It 
appeared undisputed in the record that, 
at least as of today, purchasers of PCs 
are able to install alternative operating 
systems without resorting to 
circumvention. Indeed, proponents 
conceded that the specification 
allegedly adopted by Microsoft ‘‘does 
not prevent manufacturers from 
allowing users to disable the lock or add 
non-Microsoft keys,’’ and also 
acknowledged that Microsoft permitted 
developers to acquire keys for 99 
dollars. 
The Register determined that 
proponents’ suppositions concerning 
the features of forthcoming software fell 
short of making a case that the harmful 
effects they posited were more likely to 
occur than not. The Register reiterated 
that mere speculation cannot support an 
exception to Section 1201(a)(1); rather, 
predicted adverse effects are only 
cognizable ‘‘in extraordinary 
circumstances in which the evidence of 
likelihood of future adverse impact is 
highly specific, strong and persuasive.’’ 
The Register concluded that proponents 
had failed to offer any such evidence 
here. 
The Register additionally observed 
that granting an exemption for such a 
sweeping class would be without 
precedent in the history of Section 1201 
rulemakings. In the past, faced with a 
proposed class with respect to which 
the proponents have offered substantial 
and persuasive evidence, but for which 
the definition proposed is not fully 
congruent with the proponents’ 
showing, the Register has—to the extent 
a sufficient basis exists in the record— 
refined the class definition to ensure 
that it is appropriately tailored to her 
findings. But such refinement is only 
possible where the proponent of the 
proposed class has otherwise succeeded 
in demonstrating that some version of 
its exemption is warranted. The Register 
cannot delineate the appropriate 
contours of a class ‘‘in a factual 
vacuum.’’ 
As a final consideration, the Register 
noted that to the extent the proposed 
class would effectively permit the 
provision of circumvention services to 
others—as it appeared to do—it must be 
rejected, as the provision of such 
services to others is forbidden under 
Section 1201(a)(2) of the DMCA. 
NTIA was ‘‘not convinced that Secure 
Boot constitutes ‘a technological 
measure that effectively controls access 
to a work’ protected by U.S. copyright 
law.’’’ It further noted that proponents 
had failed to present evidence that the 
secure boot functionality restricted 
access to Windows 8 or any other work 
for purposes of protecting copyright. 
NTIA thus did not support the 
designation of the proposed class. 
D. Motion Pictures and Other Works on 
DVDs and Other Media—Space Shifting 
The Register concluded that 
proponents had failed to establish that 
the prohibition on circumvention is 
imposing an adverse impact on 
noninfringing uses and declined to 
recommend the requested exemptions 
for space shifting. 
Proponent Public Knowledge, as well 
as proponents Cassiopaea, Tambolini, 
Susan Fuhs, Kellie Heistand, Andy 
Kossowsky, and Curt Wiederhoeft, 
sought similar exemptions to permit the 
circumvention of motion pictures and 
other works on DVDs and other media 
to enable ‘‘space shifting,’’ i.e., the 
copying of complete works to permit 
personal use on alternative devices. 
Proponent Public Knowledge stated a 
desire to move lawfully acquired motion 
pictures on DVDs to consumer 
electronic devices, such as tablet 
computers and laptop computers, that 
lack DVD drives. It asserted that 
consumers’ inability to play lawfully 
acquired DVDs on the newest devices 
adversely affected noninfringing uses of 
the works contained on DVDs, and that 
a reasonable solution was for these 
consumers to copy the motion pictures 
into a format that could be viewed on 
the new devices. Public Knowledge 
urged that such an exemption ‘‘would 
merely allow a user to make use of a 
motion picture she has already 
acquired.’’ The space shifting proposals 
by the additional proponents—most of 
which were one page or less—sought 
similar exemptions, but offered few 
factual details and little or no legal 
analysis. 
The current proposals were not unlike 
the proposal sought in the 2006 
rulemaking. In that rulemaking, the 
Register declined to recommend a space 
shifting exemption in part because the 
proponents failed to offer persuasive 
legal arguments that space shifting was 
a noninfringing use. The Register also 
addressed space shifting in the 2003 
rulemaking in her consideration of a 
requested exemption regarding 
‘‘tethering.’’ In her 2003 
recommendation, the Register observed 
that ‘‘no court has held that ‘space- 
shifting’ is a fair use.’’ 
Public Knowledge cited RIAA v. 
Diamond Multimedia Systems Inc., 180 
F.3d 1072 (1999), and Sony Corporation 
of America v. Universal City Studios, 
Inc., 464 U.S. 417 (1984), in support of 
its contention that space shifting is a 
noncommercial personal use, and 
therefore a fair use. It applied the four- 
factor fair use test of Section 107 in 
support of its assertion that the sort of 
space shifting for which it sought an 
exemption is a noninfringing use. Public 
Knowledge further argued that the space 
shifting would not negatively impact the 
availability of, or harm the market for, 
copyrighted works, or contribute to 
piracy. Finally, Public Knowledge 
claimed that there were no reasonable 
alternatives to such space shifting. 
Public Knowledge asked the Register 
to evaluate the legitimacy of personal 
space shifting through ‘‘independent 
examination.’’ According to Public 
Knowledge, the Section 1201(a) 
rulemaking process of ‘‘recommending, 
consulting, determining, and 
speculating necessarily requires the 
Register to draw conclusions beyond 
parroting the statute and existing case 
law.’’ 
Proponents of the additional 
proposals sought to exempt other digital 
works, including sound recordings and 
ebooks, in addition to motion pictures, 
for purposes of space shifting. They 
offered insufficient factual or legal 
analysis in support of their proposed 
exemptions, however. 
DVD CCA opposed the requested 
exemptions by first observing that, 
although many new electronic devices 
are made without DVD drives, 
consumers can still play DVDs on such 
devices through the use of peripheral 
tools, i.e., external drives that connect to 
the devices and are capable of playing 
DVDs. DVD CCA argued that just 
because a consumer prefers a portable 
device for certain purposes, it does not 
mean that the consumer is foreclosed 
from using a different device to play 
DVDs or that an exemption for space 
shifting is warranted. 
DVDCCA further noted that, contrary 
to the statements made by Public 
Knowledge, consumers have not 
purchased the motion picture itself, but 
a DVD copy of the motion picture, 
which affords only the right to access 
the work according to the DVD format 
specifications, i.e., through the use of a 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 14:26 Oct 25, 2012 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00024 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1emcdonald on DSK67QTVN1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 18]
65277 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2012 / Rules and Regulations 
DVD player. DVDCCA explained that 
consumers are able to purchase the copy 
at its retail price—typically less than 20 
dollars—because it is distributed on a 
specific medium that will only play 
back on a licensed player. It stated that 
the Register has previously recognized 
that there is no unqualified right to 
access a work on a particular device. 
DVDCCA alleged that the proposed 
exemption would harm the market for 
works distributed in the DVD medium 
as well as that for works offered in other 
digital media, explaining that the 
proposed exemption would displace 
sales for existing and forthcoming 
digital offerings that the DMCA was 
meant to encourage. It further alleged 
that the proposed exemption would 
create ‘‘public confusion’’ as to what is 
permitted activity. 
Joint Creators similarly disputed 
Public Knowledge’s assertion that 
consumers are adversely affected by an 
inability to play DVDs on electronic 
devices that are not designed to play 
DVDs, pointing to services that provide 
access to numerous titles for low 
subscription prices. They argued that it 
was not the purpose of the rulemaking 
to provide consumers with the most 
cost-effective manner to obtain 
commercial video content. 
AACS LA opposed an exemption for 
space shifting that would apply to 
AACS technology protecting Blu-ray 
discs. It noted that proponents had 
failed to satisfy their burden to 
demonstrate that an exemption is 
warranted or that space shifting is a 
noninfringing act. 
The Register recognized that there is 
significant consumer interest in the 
proposed exemption. Proponents, 
however, had the burden of 
demonstrating that the requested use 
was noninfringing. Neither of the two 
key cases relied upon by proponents, 
however, addresses or informs the space 
shifting activities at issue. 
The Register noted that she had 
previously explained that Diamond 
Multimedia—a case in which the court 
was called upon to interpret the Audio 
Home Recording Act (‘‘AHRA’’)—‘‘did 
not hold that ‘space-shifting’ is fair use. 
It did state, in dicta, that ‘space-shifting’ 
of digital and analog musical recordings 
is a noncommercial personal use 
consistent with the Audio Home 
Recording Act.’’ Notably, neither 
Diamond Multimedia, nor the statute it 
interpreted, addressed motion pictures, 
the focus of Public Knowledge’s 
proposal. 
Turning to Sony, the Register clarified 
that that case involved ‘‘time-shifting,’’ 
defined by the Supreme Court as ‘‘the 
practice of recording a program to view 
it once at a later time, and thereafter 
erasing it.’’ It did not address the 
legality of ‘‘librarying,’’ i.e., the 
maintenance of copies of copyrighted 
works. Here, by contrast, librarying was 
among the activities contemplated by 
the proposed exemptions. 
The Register further observed that the 
law does not guarantee access to 
copyrighted material in a user’s 
preferred format or technique. Indeed, 
copyright owners typically have the 
legal authority to decide whether and 
how to exploit new formats. The 
Register noted that while the law may 
someday evolve to accommodate some 
of proponents’ proposed uses, more 
recent cases touching upon space 
shifting confirm that the fair use 
implications of various forms of space 
shifting are far from settled. The 
Register reiterated her view that the 
Section 1201 rulemaking process was 
‘‘not the forum in which to break new 
ground on the scope of fair use.’’ She 
then proceeded to assess the proposed 
exemptions under the traditional fair 
use factors. 
In urging that space shifting is a fair 
use, Public Knowledge characterized the 
copying of motion pictures for use on 
personal devices as a ‘‘paradigmatic 
noncommercial personal use’’ that 
could facilitate a transformative use. It 
further asserted that integrating 
reproductions of motion pictures from 
DVDs into a consumer’s media 
management software was analogous to 
the integration of thumbnail images into 
Internet search engines found to be a 
transformative use in Perfect 10, Inc. v. 
Amazon.com, Inc., 487 F.3d 701 (9th 
Cir. 2007). 
The Register did not agree with this 
analysis. In her view, the incorporation 
of reproductions of motion pictures 
from DVDs into a consumer’s media 
management software is not equivalent 
to the provision of public search engine 
functionality. Rather, it is simply a 
means for an individual consumer to 
access content for the same 
entertainment purpose as the original 
work. Put another way, it does not 
‘‘add[] something new, with a further 
purpose or different character, altering 
the first with new expression, 
meaning,’’ or advance criticism, 
comment, or any other interest 
enumerated in the preamble of Section 
107. The Register therefore concluded 
that the first fair use factor did not favor 
a finding of fair use. The Register 
additionally determined that where 
creative works were being copied in 
their entirety, factors two and three also 
weighed against fair use, and that there 
was an inadequate basis in the record to 
conclude that the developing market for 
the online distribution of motion 
pictures would not be harmed by the 
proposed uses. 
Finally, the Register concluded that 
proponents had failed to demonstrate 
that the use of a reasonably priced 
peripheral, a different device, or an 
online subscription service to access 
and play desired content did not offer 
a reasonable alternative to 
circumvention. Accordingly, the 
Register was not persuaded that the 
inability to engage in the space shifting 
activities described by proponents is 
having a substantial adverse impact on 
consumers’ ability to make 
noninfringing uses of copyrighted 
works. 
NTIA suggested what it described as 
a ‘‘more narrowly-constructed’’ version 
of Public Knowledge’s proposed 
exemption. Specifically, it supported an 
exemption to allow circumvention of 
lawfully acquired DVDs ‘‘when the DVD 
neither contains nor is accompanied by 
an additional copy of the work in an 
alternative digital format, and when 
circumvention is undertaken solely in 
order to accomplish the noncommercial 
space shifting of the contained motion 
picture.’’ NTIA voiced support for the 
motion picture industry’s efforts to 
make content available on the wide 
range of new devices, and encouraged 
the industry to continue developing 
new offerings. It contended that by 
limiting the exemption to circumstances 
in which the market had not supplied 
alternatives to DVDs, ‘‘the potential 
adverse effect on the market is 
minimal.’’ 
The Register likewise expressed 
support for the motion picture 
industry’s innovation and the 
development of market approaches to 
satisfy the demand for electronically 
distributed content. But while the 
Register was sympathetic to the desire 
to consume content on a variety of 
different devices, she noted that there is 
no basis under current law to assume 
that the space shifting activities that 
would be permitted under NTIA’s 
proposal would be noninfringing. 
Moreover, in light of the record before 
her, the Register did not find that such 
activities would not adversely affect the 
legitimate future markets of copyright 
owners. 
V. Conclusion 
Having considered the evidence in the 
record, the contentions of the 
commenting parties, and the statutory 
objectives, the Register of Copyrights 
has recommended that the Librarian of 
Congress publish certain classes of 
works, as designated above, so that the 
prohibition against circumvention of 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 14:26 Oct 25, 2012 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00025 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1emcdonald on DSK67QTVN1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 19]
65278 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2012 / Rules and Regulations 
technological measures that effectively 
control access to copyrighted works 
shall not apply to persons who engage 
in noninfringing uses of those particular 
classes of works. 
Dated: October 22, 2012. 
Maria A. Pallante, 
Register of Copyrights. 
Determination of the Librarian of 
Congress 
Having duly considered and accepted 
the Recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights, which Recommendation is 
hereby incorporated by reference, the 
Librarian of Congress is exercising his 
authority under 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C) 
and (D) and is publishing as a new rule 
the classes of copyrighted works that 
shall be subject to the exemption found 
in 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(B) from the 
prohibition against circumvention of 
technological measures that effectively 
control access to copyrighted works set 
forth in 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(A). 
List of Subjects in 37 CFR Part 201 
Copyright, Exemptions to prohibition 
against circumvention. 
Final Regulations 
For the reasons set forth in the 
preamble, 37 CFR part 201 is amended 
as follows: 
PART 201—GENERAL PROVISIONS 
■ 1. The authority citation for part 201 
continues to read as follows: 
Authority: 17 U.S.C. 702. 
■ 2. Section 201.40 is amended by 
revising paragraph (b) to read as follows: 
§ 201.40 Exemption to prohibition against 
circumvention. 
* * * * * 
(b) Classes of copyrighted works. 
Pursuant to the authority set forth in 17 
U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C) and (D), and upon 
the recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights, the Librarian has 
determined that the prohibition against 
circumvention of technological 
measures that effectively control access 
to copyrighted works set forth in 17 
U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(A) shall not apply to 
persons who engage in noninfringing 
uses of the following classes of 
copyrighted works: 
(1) Literary works, distributed 
electronically, that are protected by 
technological measures which either 
prevent the enabling of read-aloud 
functionality or interfere with screen 
readers or other applications or assistive 
technologies in the following instances: 
(i) When a copy of such a work is 
lawfully obtained by a blind or other 
person with a disability, as such a 
person is defined in 17 U.S.C. 121; 
provided, however, the rights owner is 
remunerated, as appropriate, for the 
price of the mainstream copy of the 
work as made available to the general 
public through customary channels; or 
(ii) When such work is a nondramatic 
literary work, lawfully obtained and 
used by an authorized entity pursuant to 
17 U.S.C. 121. 
(2) Computer programs that enable 
wireless telephone handsets to execute 
lawfully obtained software applications, 
where circumvention is accomplished 
for the sole purpose of enabling 
interoperability of such applications 
with computer programs on the 
telephone handset. 
(3) Computer programs, in the form of 
firmware or software, that enable a 
wireless telephone handset originally 
acquired from the operator of a wireless 
telecommunications network or retailer 
no later than ninety days after the 
effective date of this exemption to 
connect to a different wireless 
telecommunications network, if the 
operator of the wireless 
communications network to which the 
handset is locked has failed to unlock it 
within a reasonable period of time 
following a request by the owner of the 
wireless telephone handset, and when 
circumvention is initiated by the owner, 
an individual consumer, who is also the 
owner of the copy of the computer 
program in such wireless telephone 
handset, solely in order to connect to a 
different wireless telecommunications 
network, and such access to the network 
is authorized by the operator of the 
network. 
(4) Motion pictures, as defined in 17 
U.S.C. 101, on DVDs that are lawfully 
made and acquired and that are 
protected by the Content Scrambling 
System, where the person engaging in 
circumvention believes and has 
reasonable grounds for believing that 
circumvention is necessary because 
reasonably available alternatives, such 
as noncircumventing methods or using 
screen capture software as provided for 
in alternative exemptions, are not able 
to produce the level of high-quality 
content required to achieve the desired 
criticism or comment on such motion 
pictures, and where circumvention is 
undertaken solely in order to make use 
of short portions of the motion pictures 
for the purpose of criticism or comment 
in the following instances: 
(i) In noncommercial videos; 
(ii) In documentary films; 
(iii) In nonfiction multimedia ebooks 
offering film analysis; and 
(iv) For educational purposes in film 
studies or other courses requiring close 
analysis of film and media excerpts, by 
college and university faculty, college 
and university students, and 
kindergarten through twelfth grade 
educators. For purposes of this 
exemption, ‘‘noncommercial videos’’ 
includes videos created pursuant to a 
paid commission, provided that the 
commissioning entity’s use is 
noncommercial. 
(5) Motion pictures, as defined in 17 
U.S.C. 101, that are lawfully made and 
acquired via online distribution services 
and that are protected by various 
technological protection measures, 
where the person engaging in 
circumvention believes and has 
reasonable grounds for believing that 
circumvention is necessary because 
reasonably available alternatives, such 
as noncircumventing methods or using 
screen capture software as provided for 
in alternative exemptions, are not able 
to produce the level of high-quality 
content required to achieve the desired 
criticism or comment on such motion 
pictures, and where circumvention is 
undertaken solely in order to make use 
of short portions of the motion pictures 
for the purpose of criticism or comment 
in the following instances: 
(i) In noncommercial videos; 
(ii) In documentary films; 
(iii) In nonfiction multimedia ebooks 
offering film analysis; and 
(iv) For educational purposes in film 
studies or other courses requiring close 
analysis of film and media excerpts, by 
college and university faculty, college 
and university students, and 
kindergarten through twelfth grade 
educators. For purposes of this 
exemption, ‘‘noncommercial videos’’ 
includes videos created pursuant to a 
paid commission, provided that the 
commissioning entity’s use is 
noncommercial. 
(6)(i) Motion pictures, as defined in 
17 U.S.C. 101, on DVDs that are lawfully 
made and acquired and that are 
protected by the Content Scrambling 
System, where the circumvention, if 
any, is undertaken using screen capture 
technology that is reasonably 
represented and offered to the public as 
enabling the reproduction of motion 
picture content after such content has 
been lawfully decrypted, when such 
representations have been reasonably 
relied upon by the user of such 
technology, when the person engaging 
in the circumvention believes and has 
reasonable grounds for believing that 
the circumvention is necessary to 
achieve the desired criticism or 
comment, and where the circumvention 
is undertaken solely in order to make 
use of short portions of the motion 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 14:26 Oct 25, 2012 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00026 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1emcdonald on DSK67QTVN1PROD with RULES

[PAGE 20]
65279 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2012 / Rules and Regulations 
pictures for the purpose of criticism or 
comment in the following instances: 
(A) In noncommercial videos; 
(B) In documentary films; 
(C) In nonfiction multimedia ebooks 
offering film analysis; and 
(D) For educational purposes by 
college and university faculty, college 
and university students, and 
kindergarten through twelfth grade 
educators. 
(ii) For purposes of this exemption, 
‘‘noncommercial videos’’ includes 
videos created pursuant to a paid 
commission, provided that the 
commissioning entity’s use is 
noncommercial. 
(7)(i) Motion pictures, as defined in 
17 U.S.C. 101, that are lawfully made 
and acquired via online distribution 
services and that are protected by 
various technological protection 
measures, where the circumvention, if 
any, is undertaken using screen capture 
technology that is reasonably 
represented and offered to the public as 
enabling the reproduction of motion 
picture content after such content has 
been lawfully decrypted, when such 
representations have been reasonably 
relied upon by the user of such 
technology, when the person engaging 
in the circumvention believes and has 
reasonable grounds for believing that 
the circumvention is necessary to 
achieve the desired criticism or 
comment, and where the circumvention 
is undertaken solely in order to make 
use of short portions of the motion 
pictures for the purpose of criticism or 
comment in the following instances: 
(A) In noncommercial videos; 
(B) In documentary films; 
(C) In nonfiction multimedia ebooks 
offering film analysis; and 
(D) For educational purposes by 
college and university faculty, college 
and university students, and 
kindergarten through twelfth grade 
educators. 
(ii) For purposes of this exemption, 
‘‘noncommercial videos’’ includes 
videos created pursuant to a paid 
commission, provided that the 
commissioning entity’s use is 
noncommercial. 
(8) Motion pictures and other 
audiovisual works on DVDs that are 
protected by the Content Scrambling 
System, or that are distributed by an 
online service and protected by 
technological measures that control 
access to such works, when 
circumvention is accomplished solely to 
access the playhead and/or related time 
code information embedded in copies of 
such works and solely for the purpose 
of conducting research and 
development for the purpose of creating 
players capable of rendering visual 
representations of the audible portions 
of such works and/or audible 
representations or descriptions of the 
visual portions of such works to enable 
an individual who is blind, visually 
impaired, deaf, or hard of hearing, and 
who has lawfully obtained a copy of 
such a work, to perceive the work; 
provided however, that the resulting 
player does not require circumvention 
of technological measures to operate. 
* * * * * 
Dated: October 22, 2012. 
James H. Billington, 
The Librarian of Congress. 
[FR Doc. 2012–26308 Filed 10–25–12; 8:45 am] 
BILLING CODE 1410–30–P 
POSTAL SERVICE 
39 CFR Part 111 
Domestic Competitive Products 
Pricing and Mailing Standards 
Changes 
AGENCY: Postal ServiceTM. 
ACTION: Final rule. 
SUMMARY: The Postal Service is revising 
Mailing Standards of the United States 
Postal Service, Domestic Mail Manual 
(DMM
® ), to reflect changes to prices and 
mailing standards for the following 
competitive products: Express Mail
® , 
Priority Mail® , First-Class Package 
ServiceTM, Parcel Select® , Parcel Post® , 
Extra Services, Return Services, Mailer 
Services, and Recipient Services. 
DATES: Effective Date: January 27, 2013. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT : 
Margaret Choiniere (202) 268–7231 or 
Garry Rodriguez (202) 268–7281. 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This final 
rule describes new prices and product 
features for competitive products, by 
class of mail, established by the 
Governors of the United States Postal 
Service
® . New prices are available 
under Docket Number CP2013–3 on the 
Postal Regulatory Commission’s (PRC) 
Web site at http://www.prc.gov, and are 
also located on the Postal Explorer
®  
Web site at http://pe.usps.com. 
Competitive product prices and 
changes are identified by product as 
follows: 
Express Mail 
Prices 
Overall, Express Mail prices will 
increase 5.9 percent. Express Mail will 
continue to offer zoned Retail, 
Commercial Base
TM and Commercial 
PlusTM pricing tiers. 
Retail prices will increase an average 
of 6.5 percent. The price for the Retail 
Flat Rate Envelope, Legal Flat Rate 
Envelope, and the recently-introduced 
Padded Flat Rate Envelope is increasing 
to $19.95. The Flat Rate Box price will 
remain at $39.95. 
The existing Commercial Base prices 
offer lower prices to customers who use 
online and other authorized postage 
payment methods. Commercial Base 
prices will increase 2.0 percent. 
The existing Commercial Plus price 
category offers price incentives to large 
volume customers. Commercial Plus 
prices will increase 1.0 percent. 
Priority Mail 
Prices 
Overall, Priority Mail prices will 
increase 6.3 percent. The price increase 
varies by price cell and price tier. 
Retail prices will increase an average 
of 9.0 percent, but Retail Priority Mail 
will now include USPS
® tracking and 
confirmation of delivery at no 
additional charge, offsetting about 3 
percent of the increase. The regular Flat 
Rate envelope will be priced at $5.60, 
with the Legal Flat Rate Envelope priced 
at $5.75 and Padded Flat Rate Envelope 
priced at $5.95. Flat Rate Box prices will 
be: Small, $5.80; Medium, $12.35; 
Large, $16.85 and Large APO/FPO, 
$14.85. 
Commercial Base prices offer lower 
prices to customers who use online and 
other authorized postage payment 
methods. Commercial Base prices will 
increase an average of 3.7 percent. 
Commercial Base pricing will offer an 
average 11.3 percent discount off retail 
prices. 
Commercial Plus price category offers 
attractive price incentives to large 
volume customers. Commercial Plus 
prices will increase an average of 3.8 
percent. Commercial Plus pricing will 
offer an average 16.2 percent discount 
off retail prices. 
Critical Mail 
Critical Mail
® letters and flats are 
enhanced with a new option, signature 
upon delivery, as part of the service 
offering. The Critical Mail letter with 
signature option is priced at $4.60; the 
Critical Mail flat with signature option 
is priced at $5.35. 
Critical Mail Returns 
The Postal Service is providing a new 
option within the suite of USPS Returns 
Services to include Critical Mail pieces. 
This new product will afford customers 
the ability to expedite their returns by 
using barcoded USPS Critical Mail 
(letters and flats). 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 14:26 Oct 25, 2012 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00027 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1emcdonald on DSK67QTVN1PROD with RULES