[PAGE 1]
54010 Federal Register / Vol. 83, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2018 / Rules and Regulations 
1 Acting Register of Copyrights, Section 1201 
Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding to 
Determine Exemptions to the Prohibition on 
Circumvention, Recommendation of the Acting 
Register of Copyrights (Oct. 2018) (‘‘Acting 
Register’s Recommendation’’). 
2 Staff of H. Comm. on the Judiciary, 105th Cong., 
Section-by-Section Analysis of H.R. 2281 as Passed 
by the United States House of Representatives on 
August 4, 1998, at 7 (Comm. Print 1998). 
3 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(3)(A). 
4 Id. at 1201(a)(3)(B). 
5 See H.R. Rep. No. 105–551, pt. 2, at 36 (1998) 
(‘‘Commerce Comm. Report’’). 
6 See 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1). 
7 Id. at 1201(a)(1)(C). 
8 Id. 
(8) Labeling must include: 
(i) A summary of clinical testing 
conducted with the device that includes 
a summary of device-related 
complications and adverse events; 
(ii) Instructions for use; 
(iii) A surgical guide for implantation, 
which includes instructions for imaging 
to assess bone dimensions; 
(iv) A shelf life, for device 
components provided sterile; 
(v) A patient identification card; and 
(vi) A patient user manual. 
Dated: October 22, 2018. 
Leslie Kux, 
Associate Commissioner for Policy. 
[FR Doc. 2018–23412 Filed 10–25–18; 8:45 am] 
BILLING CODE 4164–01–P 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 
U.S. Copyright Office 
37 CFR Part 201 
[Docket No. 2017–10] 
Exemption to Prohibition on 
Circumvention of Copyright Protection 
Systems for Access Control 
Technologies 
AGENCY: U.S. Copyright Office, Library 
of Congress. 
ACTION: Final rule. 
SUMMARY: In this final rule, the Librarian 
of Congress adopts exemptions to the 
provision of the Digital Millennium 
Copyright Act (‘‘DMCA’’) that prohibits 
circumvention of technological 
measures that control access to 
copyrighted works, codified in the 
United States Code. As required under 
the statute, the Acting Register of 
Copyrights, following a public 
proceeding, submitted a 
Recommendation concerning proposed 
exemptions to the Librarian of Congress. 
After careful consideration, the 
Librarian adopts final regulations based 
upon the Acting Register’s 
Recommendation. 
DATE: Effective October 28, 2018. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT : 
Regan A. Smith, General Counsel and 
Associate Register of Copyrights, by 
email at regans@copyright.gov, Anna 
Chauvet, Assistant General Counsel, by 
email at achau@copyright.gov, or Kevin 
Amer, Senior Counsel for Policy and 
International Affairs, by email at 
kamer@copyright.gov. Each can be 
contacted by telephone by calling (202) 
707–8350. 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The 
Librarian of Congress, pursuant to 
section 1201(a)(1) of title 17, United 
States Code, has determined in this 
seventh triennial rulemaking proceeding 
that the prohibition against 
circumvention of technological 
measures that effectively control access 
to copyrighted works shall not apply to 
persons who engage in noninfringing 
uses of certain classes of such works. 
This determination is based upon the 
Recommendation of the Acting Register 
of Copyrights, which was transmitted to 
the Librarian on October 5, 2018.
1 
The below discussion summarizes the 
rulemaking proceeding and Register’s 
Recommendation, announces the 
Librarian’s determination, and 
publishes the regulatory text specifying 
the exempted classes of works. A more 
complete discussion of the rulemaking 
process, the evidentiary record, and the 
Acting Register’s analysis can be found 
in the Acting Register’s 
Recommendation, which is posted at 
www.copyright.gov/1201/2018/. 
I. Background 
A. Statutory Requirements 
Congress enacted the DMCA in 1998 
to implement certain provisions of the 
WIPO Copyright and WIPO 
Performances and Phonograms Treaties. 
Among other things, title I of the DMCA, 
which added a new chapter 12 to title 
17 of the U.S. Code, prohibits 
circumvention of technological 
measures employed by or on behalf of 
copyright owners to protect access to 
their works. In enacting this aspect of 
the law, Congress observed that 
technological protection measures 
(‘‘TPMs’’) can ‘‘support new ways of 
disseminating copyrighted materials to 
users, and . . . safeguard the 
availability of legitimate uses of those 
materials by individuals.’’
2 
Section 1201(a)(1) provides in 
pertinent part that ‘‘[n]o person shall 
circumvent a technological measure that 
effectively controls access to a work 
protected under [title 17].’’ Under the 
statute, to ‘‘circumvent a technological 
measure’’ means ‘‘to descramble a 
scrambled work, to decrypt an 
encrypted work, or otherwise to avoid, 
bypass, remove, deactivate, or impair a 
technological measure, without the 
authority of the copyright owner.’’
3 A 
technological measure that ‘‘effectively 
controls access to a work’’ is one that 
‘‘in the ordinary course of its operation, 
requires the application of information, 
or a process or a treatment, with the 
authority of the copyright owner, to gain 
access to the work.’’
4 
Section 1201(a)(1) also includes what 
Congress characterized as a ‘‘fail-safe’’ 
mechanism,
5 which requires the 
Librarian of Congress, following a 
rulemaking proceeding, to publish any 
class of copyrighted works as to which 
the Librarian has determined that 
noninfringing uses by persons who are 
users of a copyrighted work are, or are 
likely to be, adversely affected by the 
prohibition against circumvention in the 
succeeding three-year period, thereby 
exempting that class from the 
prohibition for that period.
6 The 
Librarian’s determination to grant an 
exemption is based upon the 
recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights, who conducts the 
rulemaking proceeding.
7 The Register, 
in turn, consults with the Assistant 
Secretary for Communications and 
Information of the Department of 
Commerce, who oversees the National 
Telecommunications and Information 
Administration (‘‘NTIA’’), in the course 
of formulating her recommendation.
8 
The primary responsibility of the 
Register and the Librarian in the 
rulemaking proceeding is to assess 
whether the implementation of access 
controls impairs the ability of 
individuals to make noninfringing uses 
of copyrighted works within the 
meaning of section 1201(a)(1). To do 
this, the Register develops a 
comprehensive administrative record 
using information submitted by 
interested members of the public, and 
makes recommendations to the 
Librarian concerning whether 
exemptions are warranted based on that 
record. 
Under the statutory framework, the 
Librarian, and thus the Register, must 
consider ‘‘(i) the availability for use of 
copyrighted works; (ii) the availability 
for use of works for nonprofit archival, 
preservation, and educational purposes; 
(iii) the impact that the prohibition on 
the circumvention of technological 
measures applied to copyrighted works 
has on criticism, comment, news 
reporting, teaching, scholarship, or 
research; (iv) the effect of circumvention 
of technological measures on the market 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:06 Oct 25, 2018 Jkt 247001 PO 00000 Frm 00046 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1khammond on DSK30JT082PROD with RULES

[PAGE 2]
54011 Federal Register / Vol. 83, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2018 / Rules and Regulations 
9 Id. 
10 Id. at 1201(a)(2). 
11 Id. at 1201(b). 
12 See id. at 1201(a)(1)(E) (‘‘Neither the exception 
under subparagraph (B) from the applicability of the 
prohibition contained in subparagraph (A), nor any 
determination made in a rulemaking conducted 
under subparagraph (C), may be used as a defense 
in any action to enforce any provision of this title 
other than this paragraph.’’). 
13 Acting Register’s Recommendation at 9–19; 
U.S. Copyright Office, Section 1201 of Title 17 105– 
15 (2017), https://www.copyright.gov/policy/1201/ 
section-1201-full-report.pdf (‘‘Section 1201 
Report’’). 
14 Section 1201 Report at 111; accord Register of 
Copyrights, Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth 
Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to 
the Prohibition on Circumvention, 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 14 
(Oct. 2015). References to the Register’s 
Recommendations in prior rulemakings are cited by 
the year of publication followed by 
‘‘Recommendation’’ (e.g., ‘‘2015 
Recommendation’’). Prior Recommendations are 
available on the Copyright Office website at https:// 
www.copyright.gov/1201/. 
15 Section 1201 Report at 112. 
16 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(B). 
17 2006 Recommendation at 19. 
18 Section 1201 Report at 127–28, 145–46. 
19 See Commerce Comm. Report at 37 (explaining 
that for every rulemaking, ‘‘the assessment of 
adverse impacts on particular categories of works is 
to be determined de novo’’). 
20 Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access 
Controls on Copyrighted Works, 82 FR 29804, 
29805 (June 30, 2017) (‘‘NOI’’). 
21 Section 1201 Report at vi. 
for or value of copyrighted works; and 
(v) such other factors as the Librarian 
considers appropriate.’’
9 
Significantly, exemptions adopted by 
rule under section 1201(a)(1) apply only 
to the conduct of circumventing a 
technological measure that controls 
access to a copyrighted work. Other 
parts of section 1201, by contrast, 
address the manufacture and provision 
of—or ‘‘trafficking’’ in—products and 
services designed for purposes of 
circumvention. Section 1201(a)(2) bars 
trafficking in products and services that 
are used to circumvent technological 
measures that control access to 
copyrighted works (for example, a 
password needed to open a media 
file),
10 while section 1201(b) bars 
trafficking in products and services used 
to circumvent technological measures 
that protect the exclusive rights of the 
copyright owner in their works (for 
example, technology that prevents the 
work from being reproduced).
11 The 
Librarian of Congress has no authority 
to adopt exemptions for the anti- 
trafficking prohibitions contained in 
section 1201(a)(2) or (b).
12 More 
broadly, activities conducted under the 
regulatory exemptions must still comply 
with other applicable laws, including 
non-copyright provisions. 
Also significant is the fact that the 
statute contains certain permanent 
exemptions to permit specified uses. 
These include: Section 1201(d), which 
exempts certain activities of nonprofit 
libraries, archives, and educational 
institutions; section 1201(e), which 
exempts ‘‘lawfully authorized 
investigative, protective, information 
security, or intelligence activity’’ of a 
state or the federal government; section 
1201(f), which exempts certain 
‘‘[r]everse engineering’’ activities to 
facilitate interoperability; section 
1201(g), which exempts certain types of 
research into encryption technologies; 
section 1201(h), which exempts certain 
activities to prevent the ‘‘access of 
minors to material on the internet’’; 
section 1201(i), which exempts certain 
activities ‘‘solely for the purpose of 
preventing the collection or 
dissemination of personally identifying 
information’’; and section 1201(j), 
which exempts certain acts of ‘‘security 
testing’’ of computers and computer 
systems. 
C. Rulemaking Standards 
In adopting the DMCA, Congress 
imposed legal and evidentiary 
requirements for the section 1201 
rulemaking proceeding, as discussed in 
greater detail in the Acting Register’s 
Recommendation and the Copyright 
Office’s recent policy study on section 
1201.
13 The Register will recommend 
granting an exemption only ‘‘when the 
preponderance of the evidence in the 
record shows that the conditions for 
granting an exemption have been 
met.’’
14 ‘‘[I]t is the totality of the 
rulemaking record (i.e., the evidence 
provided by commenters or 
administratively noticed by the Office) 
that must, on balance, reflect the need 
for an exemption by a preponderance of 
the evidence. Such evidence must, on 
the whole, show that it is more likely 
than not that users of a copyrighted 
work will, in the succeeding three-year 
period, be adversely affected by the 
prohibition on circumvention in their 
ability to make noninfringing uses of a 
particular class of copyrighted 
works.’’
15 
To establish a case for an exemption, 
proponents must show at a minimum 
(1) that uses affected by the prohibition 
on circumvention are or are likely to be 
noninfringing; and (2) that as a result of 
a technological measure controlling 
access to a copyrighted work, the 
prohibition is causing, or in the next 
three years is likely to cause, an adverse 
impact on those uses. In addition, the 
Librarian must also examine the 
statutory factors listed in section 
1201(a)(1)(C): ‘‘(i) The availability for 
use of copyrighted works; (ii) the 
availability for use of works for 
nonprofit archival, preservation, and 
educational purposes; (iii) the impact 
that the prohibition on the 
circumvention of technological 
measures applied to copyrighted works 
has on criticism, comment, news 
reporting, teaching, scholarship, or 
research; (iv) the effect of circumvention 
of technological measures on the market 
for or value of copyrighted works; and 
(v) such other factors as the Librarian 
considers appropriate.’’ In some cases, 
weighing these factors requires the 
consideration of the benefits that the 
technological measure brings with 
respect to the overall creation and 
dissemination of works in the 
marketplace, in addition to any negative 
impact. 
Finally, when granting an exemption, 
section 1201(a)(1) specifies that the 
exemption adopted as part of this 
rulemaking must be defined based on ‘‘a 
particular class of works.’’
16 Among 
other things, the determination of the 
appropriate scope of a ‘‘class of works’’ 
recommended for exemption may also 
take into account the adverse effects an 
exemption may have on the market for 
or value of copyrighted works. 
Accordingly, ‘‘it can be appropriate to 
refine a class by reference to the use or 
user in order to remedy the adverse 
effect of the prohibition and to limit the 
adverse consequences of an 
exemption.’’
17 
D. Streamlined Renewal Process 
Following a comprehensive policy 
study, and in response to stakeholder 
feedback, for this seventh triennial 
proceeding, the Office introduced a 
streamlined process to renew section 
1201 exemptions adopted during the 
2015 rulemaking.
18 Previously, in 
recognition of legislative history stating 
that the basis of an exemption should be 
established de novo in each triennial 
proceeding,
19 the Office had required 
the factual record be developed anew in 
each rulemaking.
20 In its Section 1201 
Report, the Office evaluated the 
possibility of a renewal process, noting 
a ‘‘broad consensus in favor of 
streamlining the process for renewing 
exemptions to which there is no 
meaningful opposition.’’
21 As described 
in further detail in that report, the Office 
ultimately concluded that ‘‘the statutory 
language appears to be broad enough to 
permit determinations to be based upon 
evidence drawn from prior proceedings, 
but only upon a conclusion that this 
evidence remains reliable to support 
granting an exemption in the current 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:06 Oct 25, 2018 Jkt 247001 PO 00000 Frm 00047 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1khammond on DSK30JT082PROD with RULES

[PAGE 3]
54012 Federal Register / Vol. 83, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2018 / Rules and Regulations 
22 Id. at 143. 
23 Id. at 142, 145. 
24 NOI, 82 FR at 29805–07; Exemptions to Permit 
Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted 
Works, 82 FR 49550, 49552 (Oct. 26, 2017) 
(‘‘NPRM’’). 
25 NOI, 82 FR at 29805–06; NPRM, 82 FR at 
49552. 
26 Section 1201 Report at 143–44; NOI, 82 FR at 
29806; NPRM, 82 FR at 49552. 
27 NPRM, 82 FR at 49552. 
28 Section 1201 Report at 145. 
29 See NPRM, 82 FR at 49554 (stating that if a 
renewal petition is meaningfully opposed, ‘‘the 
exemption would be considered pursuant to the 
more comprehensive rulemaking process (i.e., three 
rounds of written comment, followed by public 
hearings)’’). 
30 Section 1201 Report at 149–51. 
31 NOI, 82 FR at 29804. 
32 Comments received in this rulemaking are 
available at http://copyright.gov/1201/2018. 
33 NPRM, 82 FR at 49550, 49553–63. 
34 Video recordings of the roundtables are 
available at https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2018/ 
and https://www.youtube.com/uscopyrightoffice/. 
35 Participant’s post-hearing letter responses are 
available on the Office’s website. Responses to Post- 
Hearing Questions, U.S. Copyright Office, (last 
visited Oct 2, 2018), https://www.copyright.gov/ 
1201/2018/post-hearing/answers/. 
36 Letter from John T. Lynch, Jr., Chief, Comput. 
Crime & Intellectual Prop. Section, Criminal Div., 
U.S. Dep’t of Justice, to Regan A. Smith, Gen. 
Counsel & Assoc. Register of Copyrights, U.S. 
Copyright Office (June 28, 2018), https://
www.copyright.gov/1201/2018/USCO-letters/ 
USDOJ_Letter_to_USCO.pdf; Letter from to Regan 
A. Smith, Gen. Counsel & Assoc. Register of 
Copyrights, U.S. Copyright Office, to Class 10 
Participants (June 29, 2018), https://
www.copyright.gov/1201/2018/additional- 
correspondence/Proposed_Class_10_Letter.pdf. 
37 NPRM, 82 FR at 49563; see Section 1201 Report 
at 150–51 (documenting stakeholder desire for such 
further communication). 
proceeding.’’ 22 The Office concluded 
that renewal may be sought only for 
exemptions in their current form, 
without modification, and that the 
Register ‘‘must apply the same 
evidentiary standards in recommending 
the renewal of exemptions as for first- 
time exemption requests.’’
23 
The Office detailed the renewal 
process in its notices for this 
proceeding.24 Streamlined renewal is 
based upon a determination that, due to 
a lack of legal, marketplace, or 
technological changes, the factors that 
led the Register to recommend adoption 
of the exemption in the prior 
rulemaking are expected to continue 
into the forthcoming triennial period.
25 
That is, the same material facts and 
circumstances underlying the 
previously-adopted regulatory 
exemption may be relied on to renew 
the exemption.
26 Because the statute 
itself requires that exemptions must be 
adopted upon a fresh determination 
concerning the next three-year period, 
the fact that the Librarian previously 
adopted an exemption creates no 
presumption that readoption is 
appropriate. Instead, the Office first 
solicited petitions summarizing the 
continuing need and justification for the 
exemption, and petitioners signed a 
declaration stating that, ‘‘to the best of 
their personal knowledge, there has not 
been any material change in the facts, 
law, or other circumstances set forth in 
the prior rulemaking record such that 
renewal of the exemption would not be 
justified.’’
27 Next, the Office solicited 
comments from participants opposing 
the readoption of the exemption. 
Opponents were required to provide 
evidence that would allow the Acting 
Register to reasonably conclude that the 
prior rulemaking record and any further 
information provided in the petitions 
are insufficient for her to recommend 
renewal without the benefit of a further 
developed record. For example, ‘‘a 
change in case law might affect whether 
a particular use is noninfringing, new 
technological developments might affect 
the availability for use of copyrighted 
works, or new business models might 
affect the market for or value of 
copyrighted works.’’
28 If the 
appropriateness of renewing an 
exemption is meaningfully contested, 
that exemption would be fully noticed 
for written comment and public hearing 
to generate an updated administrative 
record for the Register to evaluate 
whether to recommend readoption, 
modification, or elimination of that 
exemption to the Librarian.
29 
The streamlined renewal process 
elicited favorable responses during the 
2018 rulemaking hearings. As detailed 
below, as a result of this new process, 
the Acting Register was able to 
recommend renewal of all exemptions 
adopted in the 2015 rulemaking, and 
subsequently consider whether some of 
them should be modified to 
accommodate additional new uses 
through the development of an 
expanded administrative record. 
II. History of the Seventh Triennial 
Proceeding 
In this rulemaking, the Copyright 
Office used the phased comment 
structure introduced in the last 
proceeding, to best facilitate a clear and 
thorough record. As promised in its 
Section 1201 Report,
30 the Office also 
created video tutorials explaining the 
rulemaking process, issued the Notice of 
Proposed Rulemaking (‘‘NPRM’’) earlier 
to give parties more time to participate, 
and offered increased opportunities for 
participant input, including through an 
established procedure for transparent ex 
parte meetings. 
The Office initiated the seventh 
triennial rulemaking proceeding 
through a Notice of Inquiry (‘‘NOI’’) on 
June 30, 2017.
31 The NOI requested 
petitions for renewals, petitions in 
opposition to renewal, and any petitions 
for new exemptions. In response, the 
Office received thirty-nine renewal 
petitions, five comments regarding the 
scope of the renewal petitions, and one 
comment in opposition to renewal of a 
current exemption.
32 The Office also 
received twenty-three petitions for new 
exemptions, including seventeen 
seeking to expand certain current 
exemptions, and six petitions for new 
exemptions. 
Next, on October 26, 2017, the Office 
issued its NPRM identifying the existing 
exemptions for which the Acting 
Register intended to recommend 
renewal, and outlined the proposed 
classes for new exemptions (including 
proposed expansions of previously- 
adopted exemptions) for which three 
rounds of public comments were 
initiated.
33 Those classes were 
organized into twelve classes of works. 
Seven of the twelve proposed 
exemptions seek expansions of existing 
exemptions, while five propose new 
exemptions. The Office received 181 
total submissions in response to the 
NPRM, substantially less than the 
approximately 40,000 submissions 
received in the last rulemaking. 
After analyzing the written comments, 
the Office held seven days of hearings 
in Washington, DC (April 10–13) and 
Los Angeles, California (April 23–25). 
For the first time, the roundtables at 
both locations held audience 
participation panels and were live 
streamed online. Video recordings for 
these roundtables are available through 
the Office’s website and YouTube 
pages.
34 In total, the Office heard 
testimony from seventy-seven 
individuals. After the hearings, the 
Office issued questions to hearing 
participants in four proposed classes 
and received eighteen responses.
35 
Subsequently, the Office received an 
unsolicited letter from the Computer 
Crime and Intellectual Property Section 
of the Criminal Division of the United 
States Department of Justice (‘‘CCIPS’’) 
regarding Proposed Class 10, and the 
Office solicited comment from Class 10 
participants in response.
36 
As noted in its NPRM, the Office 
determined that further informal 
communications with non- 
governmental participants might be 
beneficial in limited circumstances.
37 
The Office thus established guidelines 
for ex parte meetings, noting that the 
Office will not consider or accept any 
new documentary materials at these 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:06 Oct 25, 2018 Jkt 247001 PO 00000 Frm 00048 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1khammond on DSK30JT082PROD with RULES

[PAGE 4]
54013 Federal Register / Vol. 83, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2018 / Rules and Regulations 
38 NPRM, 82 FR at 49563; Ex Parte 
Communications, U.S. Copyright Office (last visited 
Oct. 2, 2018), https://www.copyright.gov/1201/ 
2018/ex-parte-communications.html. 
39 See Ex Parte Communications, U.S. Copyright 
Office, https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2018/ex- 
parte-communications.html (last visited Oct. 2, 
2018). 
40 NTIA’s recommendations can be viewed at 
https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2018/2018_NTIA_
Letter.pdf. 
41 See, e.g., NPRM, 82 FR at 49554. 
42 Id. 
43 The Acting Register’s analysis and conclusions 
regarding streamlined renewals can be found in the 
NPRM. See id. at 49552–58. 
meetings, and requiring participants to 
provide a letter summarizing the 
meeting for the Office to include in the 
rulemaking record.
38 The Office held 
nine ex parte meetings with participants 
concerning five proposed classes.39 
As required by section 1201(a)(1), the 
Acting Register consulted with NTIA 
during this rulemaking. NTIA provided 
input at various stages and participated 
in the public hearings held in 
Washington, DC and Los Angeles. NTIA 
formally communicated its views on 
each of the proposed exemptions to the 
Acting Register on September 25, 
2018.
40 
III. Summary of Register’s 
Recommendation 
A. Renewal Recommendations 
As set forth in the NPRM, the Acting 
Register received petitions to renew 
every one of the exemptions adopted 
pursuant to the sixth triennial 
rulemaking. To the extent any renewal 
petition proposed uses beyond the 
current exemption, the Office 
disregarded those portions of the 
petition for purposes of considering the 
renewal of the exemption, and instead 
focused on whether it provided 
sufficient information to warrant 
readoption of the exemption in its 
current form.
41 While a single party 
filed an opposition to renewal, the 
Acting Register concluded that its 
opposition was not sufficiently material 
to undermine the conclusion that the 
record and legal reasoning from the 
prior rulemaking supported renewal.
42 
Finding the renewal petitions sufficient 
under the guidelines outlined above, the 
Acting Register thus recommended 
renewal of each of the existing 
exemptions.
43 The existing exemptions, 
and the bases for the recommendation to 
readopt each exemption in accordance 
with the streamlined renewal process, 
are summarized below. Where noted, 
these exemptions served as a baseline 
for the Acting Register in considering 
subsequent requests for expansion. 
1. Literary Works Distributed 
Electronically—Assistive Technologies 
Multiple organizations petitioned to 
renew the exemption for literary works 
distributed electronically (i.e., e-books), 
for use with assistive technologies for 
persons who are blind, visually 
impaired, or have print disabilities. No 
oppositions were filed against 
readoption of this exemption. The 
petitions demonstrated the continuing 
need and justification for the 
exemption, stating that individuals who 
are blind, visually impaired, or print 
disabled are significantly disadvantaged 
with respect to obtaining accessible 
e-book content because TPMs interfere 
with the use of assistive technologies 
such as screen readers and refreshable 
Braille displays. In addition, the 
petitioners demonstrated personal 
knowledge and experience with regard 
to the assistive technology exemption; 
they are all organizations that advocate 
for the blind, visually impaired, and 
print disabled. 
Accordingly, the Acting Register 
recommends renewal of the following 
exemption: 
Literary works, distributed electronically, 
that are protected by technological measures 
that either prevent the enabling of read-aloud 
functionality or interfere with screen readers 
or other applications or assistive 
technologies: 
(i) When a copy of such a work is lawfully 
obtained by a blind or other person with a 
disability, as such a person is defined in 17 
U.S.C. 121; provided, however, that the rights 
owner is remunerated, as appropriate, for the 
price of the mainstream copy of the work as 
made available to the general public through 
customary channels; or 
(ii) When such work is a nondramatic 
literary work, lawfully obtained and used by 
an authorized entity pursuant to 17 U.S.C. 
121. 
2. Literary Works—Compilations of Data 
Generated by Implanted Medical 
Devices—To Access Personal Data 
Hugo Campos, member of the 
Coalition of Medical Device Patients 
and Researchers, and represented by the 
Harvard Law School Cyberlaw Clinic, 
petitioned to renew the exemption 
covering access to patient data on 
networked medical devices. No 
oppositions were filed against the 
petition to renew this exemption. Mr. 
Campos’s petition demonstrated the 
continuing need and justification for the 
exemption, stating that patients 
continue to need access to data output 
from their medical devices to manage 
their health. Mr. Campos himself is a 
patient needing access to the data 
output from his medical device. 
Accordingly, the Acting Register 
recommends renewal of the following 
exemption: 
Literary works consisting of compilations 
of data generated by medical devices that are 
wholly or partially implanted in the body or 
by their corresponding personal monitoring 
systems, where such circumvention is 
undertaken by a patient for the sole purpose 
of lawfully accessing the data generated by 
his or her own device or monitoring system 
and does not constitute a violation of 
applicable law, including without limitation 
the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996, the Computer 
Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986 or regulations 
of the Food and Drug Administration, and is 
accomplished through the passive 
monitoring of wireless transmissions that are 
already being produced by such device or 
monitoring system. 
3. Computer Programs—‘‘Unlocking’’ of 
Cellphones, Tablets, Mobile Hotspots, or 
Wearable Devices 
Multiple organizations petitioned to 
renew the exemption for computer 
programs that operate cellphones, 
tablets, mobile hotspots, or wearable 
devices (e.g., smartwatches), to allow 
connection of a used device to an 
alternative wireless network 
(‘‘unlocking’’). No oppositions were 
filed against the petitions seeking to 
renew this exemption. The petitions 
demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption, stating 
that consumers of the enumerated 
products continue to need to be able to 
unlock the devices so they can switch 
network providers. For example, the 
Institute of Scrap Recycling Industries, 
Inc. (‘‘ISRI’’) stated that its members 
continue to purchase or acquire donated 
cell phones and tablets, and try to reuse 
them, but that wireless carriers still lock 
devices to prevent them from being used 
on other carriers. In addition, the 
petitioners demonstrated personal 
knowledge and experience with regard 
to this exemption: Competitive Carriers 
Association, Owners’ Rights Initiative 
(‘‘ORI’’), and ISRI represent companies 
that rely on the ability to unlock 
cellphones. 
Accordingly, the Acting Register 
recommends renewal of this exemption 
and will consider proposed expansions 
below in the discussion on Proposed 
Class 5. 
4. Computer Programs—‘‘Jailbreaking’’ 
of Smartphones, Smart TVs, Tablets, or 
Other All-Purpose Mobile Computing 
Devices 
Multiple organizations petitioned to 
renew the exemptions for computer 
programs that operate smartphones, 
smart TVs, tablets, or other all-purpose 
mobile computing devices, to allow the 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:06 Oct 25, 2018 Jkt 247001 PO 00000 Frm 00049 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1khammond on DSK30JT082PROD with RULES

[PAGE 5]
54014 Federal Register / Vol. 83, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2018 / Rules and Regulations 
device to interoperate with or to remove 
software applications (‘‘jailbreaking’’). 
The petitions demonstrate the 
continuing need and justification for the 
exemptions, and that petitioners had 
personal knowledge and experience 
with regard to these exemptions. 
Specifically, the petitions state that, 
absent the exemptions, TPMs applied to 
the enumerated products would have an 
adverse effect on noninfringing uses, 
such as being able to install third-party 
applications on a smartphone or to 
download third-party software on a 
smart TV to enable interoperability. For 
example, the Electronic Frontier 
Foundation’s (‘‘EFF’s’’) petition 
outlined its declarant’s experience 
searching current mobile computing 
device markets and technologies, 
working as a software engineer, and 
participating in four prior 1201 
rulemakings. Similarly, the Libiquity 
petition was submitted by a person who 
‘‘work[s] with the operating system and 
many of the system libraries that lie at 
the core of the firmware systems of a 
large majority of smartphones, portable 
all-purpose mobile computing devices, 
and smart televisions.’’ In a brief two- 
page comment, BSA √ The Software 
Alliance (‘‘BSA’’) opposed the 
readoption of this exemption, asserting 
that ‘‘alternatives to circumvention 
exist,’’ and that ‘‘jailbreaking can 
undermine the integrity and security of 
a platform’s operating system in a 
manner that facilitates copyright 
infringement and exposes users to 
heightened risks of privacy violations.’’ 
In the NPRM, the Office concluded 
that BSA’s opposition was not sufficient 
to draw the conclusion that the past 
rulemaking record is no longer reliable, 
or that the reasoning adopted in the 
Register’s 2015 Recommendation cannot 
be relied upon for the next three-year 
period. Specifically, the Office stated 
that BSA’s comment largely re- 
articulated a general opposition to a 
jailbreaking exemption, and noted that 
the past three rulemakings have adopted 
some form of an exemption for 
jailbreaking certain types of mobile 
computing devices. The Office also 
noted that BSA had failed to identify 
any specific circumvention alternatives, 
changes in case law, new technological 
developments, or new issues that had 
not already been considered and 
evaluated in granting the exemption 
previously. 
Accordingly, the Acting Register 
recommends renewal of this exemption 
and will consider proposed expansions 
below in the discussion on Proposed 
Class 6. 
5. Computer Programs—Diagnosis, 
Repair, and Lawful Modification of 
Motorized Land Vehicles 
Multiple organizations petitioned to 
renew the exemption for computer 
programs that control motorized land 
vehicles, including farm equipment, for 
purposes of diagnosis, repair, and 
modification of the vehicle. The 
petitions demonstrated the continuing 
need and justification for the exemption 
to prevent owners of motorized land 
vehicles from being adversely impacted 
in their ability to diagnose, repair, and 
modify their vehicles as a result of 
TPMs that protect the copyrighted 
computer programs on the electronic 
control units (‘‘ECUs’’) that control the 
functioning of the vehicles. Indeed, the 
Motor & Equipment Manufacturers 
Association, which during the sixth 
triennial rulemaking initially opposed 
any exemption that would impact the 
software and TPMs in vehicles, now 
supports the exemption as striking an 
appropriate balance between 
encouraging marketplace competition 
and innovation while mitigating the 
impact on safety, regulatory, and 
environmental compliance. The 
petitioners demonstrated personal 
knowledge and experience with regard 
to this exemption; each either represents 
or gathered information from 
individuals conducting repairs or 
businesses that manufacture, distribute, 
and sell motor vehicle parts, and 
perform vehicle service and repair. 
Accordingly, the Acting Register 
recommends renewal of this exemption 
and will consider proposed expansions 
below in the discussion on Proposed 
Class 7. 
6. Computer Programs—Security 
Research 
Multiple organizations and security 
researchers petitioned to renew the 
exemption for purposes of good-faith 
security research. The petitioners 
demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption, and 
personal knowledge and experience 
with regard to this exemption. For 
example, Professors Bellovin, Blaze, and 
Heninger stated that they have 
conducted their own security research 
in reliance on the existing exemption, 
and that they ‘‘regularly engage’’ with 
other security researchers who have 
similarly relied on the exemption. They 
provided an example of a recent 
computer security conference in which 
thousands of participants relied on the 
existing exemption to examine and test 
electronic voting devices—the results of 
which were reported to election officials 
to improve the security of their voting 
systems. 
Accordingly, the Acting Register 
recommends renewal of this exemption 
and will consider proposed expansions 
below in the discussion on Proposed 
Class 10. 
7. Computer Programs—3D Printers 
Michael Weinberg and ORI jointly 
petitioned to renew the exemption for 
computer programs that operate 3D 
printers to allow use of alternative 
feedstock. No oppositions were filed 
against readoption of this exemption. 
The petition demonstrated the 
continuing need and justification for the 
exemption, and the petitioners 
demonstrated personal knowledge and 
experience, in particular, through Mr. 
Weinberg’s experience petitioning for 
the exemption adopted in 2015. In 
addition, the petition states that printers 
continue to restrict the use of third- 
party feedstock, thereby requiring 
renewal of the exemption. 
Accordingly, the Acting Register 
recommends renewal of this exemption 
and will consider proposed expansions 
below in the discussion on Proposed 
Class 12. 
8. Video Games Requiring Server 
Communication—for Continued 
Individual Play and Preservation of 
Games by Libraries, Archives, and 
Museums 
Multiple organizations petitioned to 
renew the exemption for video games 
for which outside server support has 
been discontinued. The petitions stated 
that individuals still need the 
exemption to engage in continued play 
and libraries and museums continue to 
need the exemption to preserve and 
curate video games in playable form. In 
addition, the petitioners demonstrated 
personal knowledge and experience 
with regard to this exemption through 
past participation in the 1201 triennial 
rulemaking relating to access controls 
on video games and consoles, and/or 
representing major library associations 
with members that have relied on this 
exemption. 
Accordingly, the Acting Register 
recommends renewal of this exemption 
and will consider proposed expansions 
below in the discussion on Proposed 
Class 8. 
9. Audiovisual Uses—Educational and 
Derivative Uses 
Multiple individuals and 
organizations petitioned to renew the 
exemption consisting of multiple 
subparts covering use of short portions 
of motions pictures for various 
educational and derivative uses. No 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:06 Oct 25, 2018 Jkt 247001 PO 00000 Frm 00050 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1khammond on DSK30JT082PROD with RULES

[PAGE 6]
54015 Federal Register / Vol. 83, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2018 / Rules and Regulations 
oppositions were filed. Petitions to 
renew the various subparts of the 
exemption are discussed below. 
9a. Audiovisual Uses—Educational 
Uses—Colleges and Universities 
Multiple individuals and 
organizations petitioned to renew the 
exemption’s subpart covering use of 
motion picture clips for educational 
uses by college and university 
instructors and students (codified at 37 
CFR 201.40(b)(1)(iv) (2016)). No 
oppositions were filed against 
readoption. The petitions demonstrated 
the continuing need and justification for 
the exemption, and personal knowledge 
and experience with regard to the 
exempted use. For example, Professors 
Decherney, Sender, and Carpini, the 
Department of Communications at the 
University of Michigan (‘‘DCSUM’’), the 
International Communication 
Association (‘‘ICA’’), the Society for 
Cinema and Media Studies (‘‘SCMS’’), 
the American Association of University 
Professors (‘‘AAUP’’), and the Library 
Copyright Alliance (‘‘LCA’’) stated that 
courses on video essays (or multimedia 
or videographer criticism), now taught 
at many universities, would not be able 
to exist without relying on this 
exemption. Similarly, Professor Hobbs, 
who represents more than 17,000 digital 
and media literacy educators, and the 
National Association for Media Literacy 
Education (‘‘NAMLE’’), an organization 
devoted to media literacy with more 
than 3,500 members, stated that teachers 
must sometimes circumvent a DVD 
protected by the Content Scramble 
System (‘‘CSS’’) when screen-capture 
software or other non-circumventing 
alternatives are unable to produce the 
required level of high-quality content. 
9b. Audiovisual Uses—Educational 
Uses—Primary and Secondary Schools 
(K–12) 
Multiple organizations petitioned to 
renew the exemption’s subparts 
covering use of motion picture clips for 
educational uses by K–12 instructors 
and students. No oppositions were filed 
against readoption. The petitions 
demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption, stating 
that K–12 instructors and students 
continue to rely on excerpts from digital 
media for class presentations and 
coursework, and must sometimes use 
screen-capture technology. In addition, 
the petitioners demonstrated personal 
knowledge and experience with regard 
to this exemption through 
representation of thousands of digital 
and literacy educators and/or members 
supporting K–12 instructors and 
students, combined with past 
participation in the section 1201 
triennial rulemaking. 
9c. Audiovisual Uses—Educational 
Uses—Massive Open Online Courses 
(‘‘MOOCs’’). 
Professors Decherney, Sender, and 
Carpini, DCSUM, ICA, SCMS, and LCA 
petitioned to renew the exemption’s 
subpart covering use of motion picture 
clips for educational uses in MOOCs. 
No oppositions were filed against 
readoption. The petition demonstrated 
the continuing need and justification for 
the exemption, stating that instructors 
continue to rely on the exemption to 
develop, provide, and improve MOOCs, 
as well as increase the number of (and 
therefore access to) MOOCs in the field 
of film and media studies. For example, 
the declarant, Professor Decherney, 
demonstrated personal knowledge by 
describing his reliance on the 
exemption to teach MOOCs on film and 
media studies. 
9d. Audiovisual Uses—Educational 
Uses—Educational Programs Operated 
by Libraries, Museums, and Other 
Nonprofits 
Multiple organizations petitioned to 
renew the subpart of the exemption 
covering use of motion picture clips for 
educational uses in digital and literacy 
programs offered by libraries, museums, 
and other nonprofits. No oppositions 
were filed against readoption. The 
petitions demonstrated the continuing 
need and justification for the 
exemption, and demonstrated personal 
knowledge and experience with regard 
to the exempted use. For example, LCA 
stated that librarians across the country 
have relied on the current exemption 
and will continue to do so for their 
digital and literacy programs. In 
addition, Professor Hobbs and NAMLE 
stated that librarians will continue to 
rely on the exemption for their digital 
and literacy programs, and to advance 
the digital media knowledge of their 
patrons. 
9e. Audiovisual Uses—Derivative 
Uses—Multimedia E-Books Offering 
Film Analysis 
A professor and two organizations 
collectively petitioned to renew the 
subpart of the exemption covering the 
use of motion picture clips for 
multimedia e-books offering film 
analysis. No oppositions were filed 
against readoption. The petition 
demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption, attesting 
that the availability of video necessary 
for authors to undertake film analysis in 
e-books continues to be limited to 
formats encumbered by technological 
protection measures. In addition, the 
petitioners demonstrated personal 
knowledge through Professor Buster’s 
continued work on an e-book series 
based on her lecture series, 
‘‘Deconstructing Master Filmmakers: 
The Uses of Cinematic Enchantment,’’ 
and Authors Alliance’s feedback that its 
members continue to desire authoring 
e-books that incorporate film for the 
purpose of analysis. 
9f. Audiovisual Uses—Derivative 
Uses—Documentary Filmmaking 
Multiple organizations petitioned to 
renew the subpart of the exemption 
covering the use of motion picture clips 
for uses in documentary films. No 
oppositions were filed against 
readoption. The petitions summarized 
the continuing need and justification for 
the exemption, and the petitioners 
demonstrated personal knowledge and 
experience with regard to the exempted 
use. For example, Film Independent 
(‘‘FI’’), the International Documentary 
Association (‘‘IDA’’), Kartemquin 
Educational Films, Inc. (‘‘KEF’’), the 
Center for Independent Documentary 
(‘‘CID’’), and Women in Film and Video 
(‘‘WIFV’’) stated that TPMs such as 
encryption continue to prevent 
filmmakers from accessing needed 
material in a sufficiently high quality to 
satisfy demands of distributors and 
viewers. Petitioners state that they 
personally know many filmmakers who 
have found it necessary to rely on this 
exemption, and will continue to do so. 
9g. Audiovisual Uses—Derivative 
Uses—Noncommercial Remix Videos 
Two organizations petitioned to 
renew the subpart of the exemption 
covering the use of motion picture clips 
for uses in noncommercial videos. No 
oppositions were filed against 
readoption. The petitions demonstrated 
the continuing need and justification for 
the exemption, and the petitioners 
demonstrated personal knowledge and 
experience with regard to the exempted 
use. For example, the Organization for 
Transformative Works (‘‘OTW’’) has 
advocated for the noncommercial video 
exemption in past triennial 
rulemakings, and has heard from a 
number of noncommercial remix artists 
who have used the exemption and 
anticipate needing to use it in the 
future. Similarly, New Media Rights 
(‘‘NMR’’) stated that it has spoken to a 
number of noncommercial video 
creators who have relied on this 
exemption, and intend to do so in the 
future. 
Accordingly, the Acting Register 
recommends renewal of this exemption, 
including all of its subparts, and will 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:06 Oct 25, 2018 Jkt 247001 PO 00000 Frm 00051 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1khammond on DSK30JT082PROD with RULES

[PAGE 7]
54016 Federal Register / Vol. 83, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2018 / Rules and Regulations 
44 The Acting Register’s analysis and conclusions 
for this class, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Recommendation at 31–89. 
consider proposed expansions below in 
the discussion on Proposed Class 1. 
B. New or Expanded Designations of 
Classes 
Based upon the record in this 
proceeding regarding proposed 
expansions to existing exemptions or 
newly proposed exemptions, the Acting 
Register recommends that the Librarian 
determine that the following classes of 
works be exempt from the prohibition 
against circumvention of technological 
measures set forth in section 1201(a)(1): 
1. Proposed Class 1: Audiovisual 
Works—Criticism and Comment
44 
Several petitions sought expansion of 
the existing exemption for 
circumvention of access controls 
protecting ‘‘short portions’’ of motion 
pictures on DVDs, Blu-Ray discs, and 
digitally transmitted video for purposes 
of criticism and comment by various 
users, including creators of 
noncommercial videos, college and 
university faculty and students, faculty 
of MOOCs, documentary filmmakers, 
and for nonfiction multimedia e-books 
offering film analysis. With the 
exception of one petition, proponents 
sought to keep the limitation to 
circumvention for uses of ‘‘short 
portions’’ of motion pictures, which the 
Register has previously found to be 
‘‘integral’’ in recommending the current 
exemption. The proposed expansions 
implicate the same types of TPMs 
regardless of proposed noninfringing 
use, namely CSS-protected DVDs, 
AACS-protected Blu-ray discs, and 
various TPMs applicable to online 
distribution services. Because the new 
proposals raised some shared concerns, 
including the impact of TPMs on the 
alleged noninfringing uses of motion 
pictures and whether alternative 
methods of accessing the content could 
alleviate potential adverse impacts, the 
Office grouped these petitions into one 
class. This approach also accounted for 
a petition which proposed an 
‘‘overarching exemption that would 
embrace multiple audiovisual classes’’ 
and collapse (essentially) all of the 
subparts in the existing exemption to 
eliminate limitations on the types of 
user or use—and instead allow 
circumvention so long as the purpose is 
for criticism and comment. 
Screen-Capture Technology 
For several of the activities it covers, 
the current exemption expressly permits 
the use of screen-capture technology 
and also allows circumvention only 
where the user ‘‘reasonably believes that 
screen-capture software or other non- 
circumventing alternatives are unable to 
produce the required level of high- 
quality content.’’ Here, proponents 
sought to remove references to screen- 
capture technology, arguing that it is not 
a viable alternative because it does not 
permit the proposed uses, or else results 
in degraded-quality (and thus unusable) 
content. Others contended that the dual 
references to screen-capture technology 
are confusing. In response, opponents 
argued that screen-capture technology 
remains an adequate alternative to 
circumvention. 
In the 2015 rulemaking, the Register 
concluded that certain uses of motion 
picture clips for criticism and comment 
do not require access to higher-quality 
content, and that screen-capture 
technology may be an alternative to 
circumvention—but that it can be 
unclear to users as to whether screen- 
capture technology may in fact involve 
circumvention. Accordingly, in this 
rulemaking the Acting Register 
recommended retaining a screen- 
capture provision for these categories to 
address the possibility of circumvention 
when using this technology. In addition, 
the Acting Register found it appropriate 
to continue to distinguish between 
purposes requiring high-quality motion 
picture clips and more general purposes 
that do not. 
AACS2 Technology 
Opponents argued that the exemption 
should not be expanded to include 
AACS2 technology, which is employed 
to protect ultra-high-definition or ‘‘4K’’ 
content distributed on Ultra HD Blu-ray 
discs. Opponents maintained that none 
of the petitions expressly sought 
extension to AACS2, and that the 
current exemption does not extend to 
AACS2 on Ultra HD Blu-ray discs, as 
that technology did not exist at the time 
of the 2015 rulemaking. In response, 
proponents asserted that the Acting 
Register should extend the proposed 
exemption to AACS2 technology 
because although AACS2 is different in 
form, it is fundamentally the same in 
function. 
The Acting Register found the record 
insufficient to support extending the 
proposed class to AACS2. Her analysis 
of this proposed exemption thus 
addressed only TPMs employed on 
DVDs and Blu-ray discs, and by various 
online streaming services to protect 
motion pictures. 
a. Single Overarching Exemption for 
Purposes of Comment and Criticism 
EFF, NMR, and OTW proposed 
permitting circumvention to make use 
of motion picture excerpts so long as the 
purpose is for criticism and comment. 
They did not provide specific examples 
of proposed noninfringing uses or 
analyze such proposed uses under the 
1201 statutory factors, but rather 
focused on ‘‘the value of adopting a 
simple overarching exemption that 
would embrace multiple audiovisual 
classes’’ for purposes of criticism and 
comment. EFF, NMR, and OTW asserted 
that the existing language is ‘‘practically 
unreadable’’ due to their complexities, 
and ‘‘a challenge for clients and 
attorneys alike to apply in practice.’’ 
Opponents contended that the 
petition to create a single overarching 
exemption overstates the complexity of 
the existing exemption, and that the 
proposed expansion would eliminate 
carefully drawn distinctions among 
potential users of motion picture 
content. Opponents also asserted that to 
be appropriately narrow, exemptions 
should identify the specific persons 
who will be adversely affected in their 
abilities to make noninfringing uses by 
the section 1201 prohibition. 
NTIA opposed the removal of all 
limitations on the types of user or use, 
concluding that ‘‘eliminating all of the 
categories of specific users . . . would 
stray too far from the statutory 
requirement of specificity.’’ 
The Acting Register declined to 
recommend adopting EFF, NMR, and 
OTW’s proposed language, finding it 
overly broad for purposes of section 
1201, and inconsistent with the 
rulemaking record upon which the 
current exemption has been adopted. 
She noted that courts evaluate fair use 
claims on a case-by-case basis, and the 
context in which use of the work is 
being made is part of that inquiry (e.g., 
commercial versus noncommercial use). 
She found that the proposed language 
would eliminate these legally important 
distinctions. 
b. Universities and K–12 Educational 
Institutions 
BYU filed a petition to create a single 
consolidated exemption that would 
permit circumvention for nonprofit 
educational purposes in accordance 
with sections 110(1) and 110(2) of the 
Copyright Act. BYU proposed 
eliminating the ‘‘criticism and 
comment’’ limitation, references to 
screen-capture technology, and 
distinctions based on education level 
and type of educational course. 
Opponents argued that although 
section 110(1) allows certain public 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:06 Oct 25, 2018 Jkt 247001 PO 00000 Frm 00052 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1khammond on DSK30JT082PROD with RULES

[PAGE 8]
54017 Federal Register / Vol. 83, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2018 / Rules and Regulations 
performances of complete motion 
pictures in classrooms without 
obtaining licenses, it does not allow 
those performances to be made from 
unauthorized copies. Opponents also 
noted that sections 110(1) and 110(2) 
provide exceptions only to the public 
performance and display rights, not to 
the rights of reproduction or 
distribution, and that therefore they 
would not fully cover the proposed 
uses, which involve making and 
‘‘librarying’’ copies of full-length films. 
NTIA recommended allowing 
circumvention for colleges and 
universities to make use of entire 
motion pictures. In its view, the storage 
of a copy ‘‘in a central secured server 
available only for transmission to the 
institution’s classrooms’’ is ‘‘not 
fundamentally different from the uses 
allowed by the existing exemption’’ for 
purposes of analyzing whether the 
activity is a fair use. 
The Acting Register concluded that 
section 110 cannot, by itself, establish 
that BYU’s proposed activities are 
noninfringing because any performances 
of motion pictures under sections 110(1) 
and 110(2) must originate from lawfully 
acquired copies. The Acting Register 
thus evaluated whether the copies made 
and used to facilitate the proposed 
motion picture performances were 
themselves noninfringing under section 
112(f) and/or the fair use doctrine. The 
Acting Register determined that on its 
face, section 112(f) does not permit 
nonprofit educational institutions to 
make copies to facilitate performances 
under section 110(1). She found, 
however, that section 112(f) does 
support a conclusion that making and 
temporarily storing digital copies of 
motion pictures to perform ‘‘reasonable 
and limited portions’’ in distance 
teaching would be noninfringing, 
assuming the other requirements of 
section 110(2) are met. But she 
determined that such activity appears to 
be already covered by the existing 
exemption. 
Regarding the use of short motion 
picture clips in face-to-face teaching, the 
Acting Register concluded that the 
record demonstrates that a significant 
number of the proposed uses are likely 
to be fair, such as using short film clips 
to create compilations from foreign 
language films with and without 
subtitles. By contrast, based on the 
relevant case law, the Acting Register 
could not conclude as a general matter 
that the contemplated uses of full-length 
motion pictures are likely to be fair. She 
found that DVD and Blu-ray players are 
still widely available on the market and 
that extending the exemption to such 
uses could undermine the value of the 
market for works in those formats. She 
noted that, although institutions may 
incur a cost in re-purchasing digital 
versions of audiovisual works, the 
section 1201 exemption process is not 
meant to guarantee consumers the 
ability to access content through their 
preferred method or format. 
Ultimately, the Acting Register 
recommended an expansion that allows 
K–12 and university faculty and 
students to engage with motion picture 
excerpts of high quality in contexts 
other than courses requiring close 
analysis of film excerpts, as well as for 
teaching or scholarship more generally. 
Based upon additional examples 
provided in this rulemaking cycle, the 
Acting Register recommended that the 
exemption retain the requirement that a 
person must reasonably believe that 
non-circumventing alternatives are 
unworkable, but remove the references 
to ‘‘film studies or other courses 
requiring close analysis’’ and eliminate 
distinctions between K–12 and 
universities and colleges, as well as 
between faculty and students. The 
Acting Register recommended, however, 
that the exemption require K–12 
students to act under the direct 
supervision of K–12 educators. 
c. Massively Open Online Courses 
(‘‘MOOCs’’) 
Professors Decherney, Sender, 
Carpini, and DCSUM requested an 
expansion to allow faculty of MOOCs to 
circumvent for ‘‘all online courses’’ (i.e., 
remove the limitation to ‘‘film studies or 
other courses requiring close analysis of 
film and media excerpts’’), and for 
MOOCs offered by unaccredited and for- 
profit educational institutions. They 
maintained that without expanding the 
exempted use of MOOCs, there would 
be no ability for unaccredited, for-profit, 
or for-credit online educational offerings 
to use motion picture clips in MOOCs 
without licensing. They also argued that 
because the motion picture clips in this 
context would be used exclusively for 
educational purposes, such use would 
be unlikely to harm the market for 
motion pictures. 
Opponents argued that proponents 
failed to support their assertion that 
including for-profit and unaccredited 
educational institutions likely 
constitutes fair use, and that the record 
lacked any examples of for-profit or 
unaccredited educational institutions 
wanting, but unable, to offer MOOCs, 
suggesting the expansion would cover 
only speculative uses. 
Based on its review of the record, 
NTIA recommended expansion to for- 
profit educational institutions, but not 
to unaccredited educational institutions. 
The Acting Register concluded that 
the record lacked examples sufficient to 
evaluate or recommend expansion to 
for-profit or unaccredited educational 
institutions, and did not demonstrate 
that section 1201 is inhibiting the use of 
motion pictures in online education 
offered by for-profit and/or unaccredited 
educational institutions. The Acting 
Register also found that proponents’ 
broadly framed proposal seeking to 
encompass ‘‘all online courses’’ would 
seemingly encompass any online video 
that could be characterized as an 
educational experience. The Register 
therefore recommended that the MOOCs 
language from the existing exemption be 
readopted without substantive changes. 
d. Filmmaking 
FI, IDA, and KEF sought expansion of 
the current exemption to permit 
circumvention for use of motion picture 
clips in all types of films (i.e., remove 
the ‘‘documentary’’ limitation), a 
request rejected by the Register in 2015. 
Proponents argued that the exemption 
should be expanded because defining a 
‘‘documentary’’ film is difficult, as 
many films that are not traditionally 
classified as a ‘‘documentary’’ use 
motion picture excerpts to engage in 
educational and social commentary. 
Proponents also asserted that many 
filmmakers do not know whether they 
are permitted to use the exemption. 
The 2015 rulemaking identified fair 
use as the noninfringing basis for this 
exemption, and the Acting Register 
evaluated the proposed expansion on 
the same grounds. Proponents provided 
multiple examples of non-documentary 
films using short motion picture clips 
for parody or for the clip’s biographical 
or historical significance, ostensibly to 
provide criticism or commentary. 
Proponents also disputed that either 
clips created using non-circumventing 
screen capture technology, or clips 
obtained via licensing are viable 
alternatives for the proposed uses, and 
argued that expansion of the exemption 
to non-documentaries would not affect 
the market for motion pictures. 
Opponents maintained that 
proponents failed to develop a record of 
likely noninfringing uses to support 
extension of the exemption to non- 
documentary films. Opponents also 
argued that the proposed uses would 
negatively impact the clip licensing 
market for motion pictures, and that 
licenses are readily available for using 
short portions of motion pictures. 
Opponents further contended that 
screen-capture technologies serve as 
valid alternatives to circumvention. 
NTIA concluded that the existing 
exemption should be expanded to all 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:06 Oct 25, 2018 Jkt 247001 PO 00000 Frm 00053 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1khammond on DSK30JT082PROD with RULES

[PAGE 9]
54018 Federal Register / Vol. 83, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2018 / Rules and Regulations 
45 The Acting Register’s analysis and conclusions 
for this class, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Recommendation at 89–111. 
46 ‘‘Captioning’’ is ‘‘the process of converting the 
audio content’’ of audiovisual material, such as a 
motion picture, ‘‘into text and displaying the text 
on a screen, monitor, or other visual display 
system.’’ Nat’l Ass’n of the Deaf, What is 
films. It maintained that the record 
supports a finding that in many 
instances the use of short portions of 
motion pictures is likely a noninfringing 
fair use and that opponents failed to 
demonstrate the expansion to non- 
documentaries would cause market 
harm. 
Based on the extensive record, the 
Acting Register recommended that the 
existing exemption for documentary 
films be expanded to include a subset of 
fictional (e.g., narrative) films for 
purposes of criticism and comment, 
where the clip is used for parody or its 
biographical or historically significant 
nature. She concluded this limitation 
would best reflect the examples in the 
record, many of which appear to involve 
the use of clips for purposes of criticism 
and comment, while preserving the 
requirement that filmmakers continue to 
seek authorization before using excerpts 
for general storytelling uses. The Acting 
Register found that the use of small 
portions of films for these purposes is 
consistent with principles of fair use 
and is unlikely to supplant the market 
for motion pictures, but cautioned that 
filmmakers would continue to need to 
obtain authorization for uses of clips 
outside of these uses. 
e. Multimedia E-Books 
The Authors Alliance, AAUP, OTW, 
the Interactive Fiction Technology 
Foundation, and Professor Buster 
(collectively, ‘‘Authors Alliance et al.’’) 
sought expansion of the current 
exemption to permit circumvention for 
use of motion picture clips in all 
nonfiction multimedia e-books by 
removing the ‘‘offering film analysis’’ 
limitation. Authors Alliance et al. also 
sought expansion to fictional 
multimedia e-books and removal of 
references to screen-capture technology. 
The 2015 rulemaking identified fair 
use as the noninfringing basis for this 
exemption, and the proposed expansion 
was evaluated on the same grounds. 
Proponents asserted that the uses of 
clips for comment or criticism in 
nonfiction multimedia e-books beyond 
those offering film analysis, as well as 
fictional multimedia e-books, are 
transformative and thus fair. Proponents 
also argued that expansion will not 
negatively impact the market for or 
value of copyrighted works. Proponents 
asserted that screen capture is an 
inadequate alternative to circumvention 
and that licensing remains an 
unworkable alternative due to high fees, 
difficulties in locating the rightsholders, 
and the delays caused by protracted 
negotiations. 
In response, opponents argued that 
the record lacked evidence of actual use 
of a motion picture clip in a fictional e- 
book or in an ‘‘other nonfiction’’ e-book, 
and that in the absence of actual use, 
evaluating the proposal is all but 
impossible. Regarding nonfictional uses, 
opponents asserted that many of the 
alleged additional uses would qualify 
under the current ‘‘film analysis’’ 
limitation. As to fictional uses, 
opponents maintained that the creation 
of fan fiction multimedia 
e-books would frequently infringe the 
right to prepare derivative works. 
Opponents also asserted that as with the 
proposed filmmaking expansion, there 
will be harm to the clip licensing market 
if the proposed e-books uses are 
exempted. 
NTIA recommended expanding the 
exempted use to include all nonfiction 
multimedia e-books (i.e., eliminating the 
‘‘offering film analysis’’ limitation), but 
did not recommend expansion to 
fictional multimedia e-books. 
The Acting Register found that the 
record failed to establish that the 
proposed uses in fictional 
e-books would likely be noninfringing, 
and thus she did not recommend 
expanding the exemption to such works. 
She did find, however, that the record 
supported expansion to all nonfiction 
multimedia e-books. Such an expansion, 
she concluded, is unlikely to harm, and 
may increase, the availability of 
copyrighted works. In addition, the 
Acting Register found that the proposed 
uses will facilitate criticism, comment, 
teaching and/or scholarship, and that 
they are unlikely to substitute for the 
original work in the marketplace. 
f. Conclusion for Class 1 
Accordingly, the Acting Register 
recommends that the Librarian adopt 
the following exemption: 
Motion pictures (including television 
shows and videos), as defined in 17 U.S.C. 
101, where the motion picture is lawfully 
made and acquired on a DVD protected by 
the Content Scramble System, on a Blu-ray 
disc protected by the Advanced Access 
Content System, or via a digital transmission 
protected by a technological measure, and 
the person engaging in circumvention under 
paragraph (b)(1)(i) and (b)(1)(ii)(A) and (B) of 
this section reasonably believes that non- 
circumventing alternatives are unable to 
produce the required level of high-quality 
content, or the circumvention is undertaken 
using screen-capture technology that appears 
to be offered to the public as enabling the 
reproduction of motion pictures after content 
has been lawfully acquired and decrypted, 
where circumvention is undertaken solely in 
order to make use of short portions of the 
motion pictures in the following instances: 
(i) For the purpose of criticism or 
comment: 
(A) For use in documentary filmmaking, or 
other films where the motion picture clip is 
used in parody or for its biographical or 
historically significant nature; 
(B) For use in noncommercial videos 
(including videos produced for a paid 
commission if the commissioning entity’s use 
is noncommercial); or 
(C) For use in nonfiction multimedia e- 
books. 
(ii) For educational purposes: 
(A) By college and university faculty and 
students or kindergarten through twelfth- 
grade (K–12) educators and students (where 
the K–12 student is circumventing under the 
direct supervision of an educator), including 
of accredited general educational 
development (GED) programs, for the 
purpose of criticism, comment, teaching, or 
scholarship; 
(B) By faculty of massive open online 
courses (MOOCs) offered by accredited 
nonprofit educational institutions to 
officially enrolled students through online 
platforms (which platforms themselves may 
be operated for profit), in film studies or 
other courses requiring close analysis of film 
and media excerpts, for the purpose of 
criticism or comment, where the MOOC 
provider through the online platform limits 
transmissions to the extent technologically 
feasible to such officially enrolled students, 
institutes copyright policies and provides 
copyright informational materials to faculty, 
students, and relevant staff members, and 
applies technological measures that 
reasonably prevent unauthorized further 
dissemination of a work in accessible form to 
others or retention of the work for longer 
than the course session by recipients of a 
transmission through the platform, as 
contemplated by 17 U.S.C. 110(2); or 
(C) By educators and participants in 
nonprofit digital and media literacy programs 
offered by libraries, museums, and other 
nonprofit entities with an educational 
mission, in the course of face-to-face 
instructional activities, for the purpose of 
criticism or comment, except that such users 
may only circumvent using screen-capture 
technology that appears to be offered to the 
public as enabling the reproduction of 
motion pictures after content has been 
lawfully acquired and decrypted. 
2. Proposed Class 2: Audiovisual 
Works—Accessibility 45 
Proposed Class 2 would allow 
circumvention of technological 
measures protecting motion pictures 
(including television shows and videos) 
on DVDs, Blu-ray discs, and via digital 
transmissions, for disability services 
professionals at educational institutions 
to create accessible versions for students 
with disabilities by adding captions 
and/or audio description.
46 Proponents 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:06 Oct 25, 2018 Jkt 247001 PO 00000 Frm 00054 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1khammond on DSK30JT082PROD with RULES

[PAGE 10]
54019 Federal Register / Vol. 83, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2018 / Rules and Regulations 
Captioning?, NAD.ORG, https://www.nad.org/ 
resources/technology/captioning-for-access/what-is- 
captioning/ (last visited Oct. 2, 2018). By contrast, 
‘‘audio description’’ is a narration added to the 
soundtrack of audiovisual material, such as a 
motion picture, to describe significant visual details 
(e.g., descriptions of new scenes, settings, costumes, 
body language) for individuals with sight 
impairments. Am. Council of the Blind, The Audio 
Description Project, ACB.ORG, http://www.acb.org/ 
adp/ad.html (last visited Oct. 2, 2018). Audio 
description may also be referred to as ‘‘video 
description’’ or ‘‘descriptive narration.’’ Id. 
47 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the 
Recommendation at 145–63. 
48 Public Law 113–144, 128 Stat. 1751 (2014). 
explained that nearly all educational 
institutions are subject to disability laws 
such as the Americans With Disabilities 
Act (‘‘ADA’’), section 504 of the 
Rehabilitation Act (‘‘Section 504’’), and 
the Individuals With Disabilities 
Education Act (‘‘IDEA’’), which require 
accommodations for students with 
disabilities. Proponents maintained that 
creating accessible versions by adding 
captions and/or audio description is 
necessary because inaccessible motion 
pictures remain prevalent in the video 
industry, and copyright owners fail to 
retroactively make motion pictures 
accessible or grant permission to 
disability services offices to make those 
works accessible, even when contacted 
directly. 
Proponents asserted that adding 
captions and/or audio description to 
motion pictures for the purpose of 
making them accessible to students with 
disabilities constitutes fair use based on 
the legislative history of section 107. 
Proponents also argued that viable 
alternatives to circumvention do not 
exist, and that not allowing 
circumvention will negatively affect the 
market for the copyrighted motion 
pictures because educational 
institutions will not use content that 
they cannot easily convert into an 
accessible format. 
In response, opponents noted that 
while accessibility is an important 
issue, the proposed class was too broad 
because it did not take into account the 
extent to which DVDs and Blu-ray discs 
already include closed captions and 
audio description. They argued that the 
result of altering a motion picture—such 
as by adding captioning and/or audio 
description—is likely a derivative work 
that involves a creative interpretation of 
the underlying work. Opponents 
generally contended that the wide 
availability of versions with captioning 
and/or audio description already in the 
market constitutes a viable alternative to 
circumvention. 
NTIA recommended that the 
proposed exemption allow ‘‘disability 
services offices and equivalent units’’ to 
‘‘circumvent TPMs on audiovisual 
works in educational settings to add 
accessibility features’’ to motion 
pictures, including ‘‘through the 
provision of closed and open captions 
and audio description.’’ In agreement 
with the Acting Register, NTIA believes 
that the exemption should apply 
‘‘regardless of grade level’’ of the 
student, and apply to both nonprofit 
and for-profit educational institutions 
required to make motion pictures 
accessible to students under disability 
laws. 
The Acting Register concluded that an 
exemption should be granted, with a 
few adjustments to the language 
outlined in the petition. She 
recommended that the exemption 
permit circumvention where the 
accessible version is created as a 
necessary accommodation for a student 
or students with disabilities under a 
federal or state disability law, such as 
the ADA, IDEA, or Section 504. In 
addition, the Acting Register 
recommended that the exemption apply 
to for-profit and nonprofit educational 
institutions, as well as to K–12 
institutions, colleges, and universities, 
because they are subject to such 
disability laws. The Acting Register also 
recommended that the exemption allow 
circumvention only after the 
educational institution has conducted a 
reasonable market check and 
determined that an accessible version is 
not available, not available at a fair 
price, or not available in a timely way. 
The record suggested that these searches 
are already occurring, and that 
regardless of whether a decision is made 
to create an accessible version, 
outsource the creation of an accessible 
version, or purchase an accessible 
version, the educational institution 
would incur a cost. In this way, the 
market check requirement seeks to 
prevent copies being made of works 
already available in accessible formats, 
while encouraging the motion picture 
industry to further expand the 
availability of accessible versions in the 
marketplace. Finally, the recommended 
exemption requires the accessible 
versions to be provided to students and 
stored by the educational institution in 
a manner that reasonably prevents 
unauthorized further dissemination of 
the work. 
Accordingly, the Acting Register 
recommends that the Librarian adopt 
the following exemption: 
(i) Motion pictures (including television 
shows and videos), as defined in 17 U.S.C. 
101, where the motion picture is lawfully 
acquired on a DVD protected by the Content 
Scramble System, on a Blu-ray disc protected 
by the Advanced Access Content System, or 
via a digital transmission protected by a 
technological measure, where: 
(A) Circumvention is undertaken by a 
disability services office or other unit of a 
kindergarten through twelfth-grade 
educational institution, college, or university 
engaged in and/or responsible for the 
provision of accessibility services to 
students, for the purpose of adding captions 
and/or audio description to a motion picture 
to create an accessible version as a necessary 
accommodation for a student or students 
with disabilities under an applicable 
disability law, such as the Americans With 
Disabilities Act, the Individuals with 
Disabilities Education Act, or Section 504 of 
the Rehabilitation Act; 
(B) The educational institution unit in 
paragraph (b)(2)(i)(A) of this section has, after 
a reasonable effort, determined that an 
accessible version cannot be obtained at a fair 
price or in a timely manner; and 
(C) The accessible versions are provided to 
students or educators and stored by the 
educational institution in a manner intended 
to reasonably prevent unauthorized further 
dissemination of a work. 
(ii) For purposes of this paragraph (b)(2), 
‘‘audio description’’ means an oral narration 
that provides an accurate rendering of the 
motion picture. 
3. Proposed Class 5: Computer 
Programs—Unlocking 47 
Proposed Class 5 would expand an 
existing exemption for activity known 
as ‘‘unlocking,’’ that is, circumvention 
of access controls on computer 
programs for the purpose of enabling a 
wireless device to connect to a different 
mobile network provider. The Copyright 
Office has received petitions to permit 
the unlocking of cellphones since 2006. 
In 2015, as directed by the Unlocking 
Consumer Choice and Wireless 
Competition Act (‘‘Unlocking Act’’),
48 
the Register considered whether to 
expand the exemption to additional 
categories of wireless devices. Based on 
the record in that proceeding, the 
Register recommended, and the 
Librarian granted, an exemption 
covering cellphones, all-purpose tablet 
computers, portable mobile connectivity 
devices such as mobile hotspots, and 
wearable devices such as smartwatches 
or fitness devices. 
The current exemption also is limited 
to used devices, i.e. those previously 
activated on a wireless carrier. First 
adopted in 2010, this limitation was 
implemented in response to concerns 
raised by wireless carriers engaged in 
the business of selling cellphones at 
substantially discounted prices and 
recouping that investment through the 
sale of prepaid wireless service. These 
companies feared that including new 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:06 Oct 25, 2018 Jkt 247001 PO 00000 Frm 00055 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1khammond on DSK30JT082PROD with RULES

[PAGE 11]
54020 Federal Register / Vol. 83, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2018 / Rules and Regulations 
49 2015 Recommendation at 145. 50 37 CFR 201.40(c) (2016). 
51 The Acting Register’s analysis and conclusions 
for this class, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Recommendation at 163–85. 
phones in the class could foster illegal 
trafficking activity, which involves ‘‘the 
bulk purchase of unused handsets that 
have been offered for sale at subsidized 
prices . . . and then unlocking and 
reselling those unlocked handsets for a 
profit.’’
49 
In this proceeding, ISRI petitioned for 
expansions that would (1) remove the 
enumerated device categories and 
instead permit circumvention to unlock 
‘‘any wireless device’’; and (2) eliminate 
the requirement that a wireless device 
be ‘‘used.’’ As to the limitation on 
devices, proponents argued that the 
owner of any connected device should 
be able to transfer it to the carrier of his 
or her choice. Proponents warned that 
the rapid pace of innovation within the 
Internet of Things industry makes it 
impossible to predict the specific 
categories of wireless devices that 
consumers may need to unlock. 
Regarding the ‘‘used’’ limitation, 
proponents argued that illegal 
trafficking does not implicate copyright 
interests and that concerns about such 
activity therefore are outside the proper 
scope of this rulemaking. Proponents 
further suggested that, in contrast to 
2015, there now exists a need to unlock 
unused devices, offering examples of 
corporations acquiring excess devices 
that are never activated but that they 
later seek to recycle. The Office received 
no comments opposing either of these 
requested expansions. 
NTIA recommended granting both 
aspects of the petition. As it did in 2015, 
NTIA concluded that ‘‘proponents have 
provided sufficient evidence to 
demonstrate that circumvention of 
TPMs on all lawfully acquired wireless 
devices is a noninfringing use.’’ In its 
view, the statutory prohibition ‘‘limits 
consumer choice of wireless network 
providers, limits recyclers’ ability to 
recycle or resell wireless devices, and 
limits competition between wireless 
network providers.’’ NTIA also 
concluded that proponents met their 
burden with respect to unused devices, 
pointing to evidence that since 2015, 
‘‘business practices have changed, 
resulting in a need for bulk and 
individual unlocking of new wireless 
devices.’’ NTIA proposes replacing the 
term ‘‘used’’ in the exemption with the 
phrase ‘‘lawfully acquired.’’ 
The Acting Register recommended 
expanding the exemption to unused 
devices falling within the categories 
listed in the current exemption. She 
concluded that unlocking such devices 
is likely noninfringing under section 
117(a) of the Copyright Act for the same 
reasons noted in the 2015 
Recommendation with respect to used 
devices. She further found that 
unlocking such devices is likely a fair 
use, regardless of whether the devices 
are new or used. With respect to 
potential cellphone trafficking, the 
Acting Register found that although 
such activity limits the network 
provider’s ability to sell devices at a 
discount, there were no allegations 
relating to trafficking raised in this 
proceeding, and it is not clear that the 
economic harm caused by that activity 
affects the value of the computer 
programs allowing devices to connect to 
wireless networks. She further noted 
that other causes of action, such as 
unfair competition or unjust 
enrichment, may be available to address 
injury to non-copyright interests. In 
addition, the Acting Register concluded 
that absent an exemption, users are 
likely to be adversely affected in their 
ability to unlock unused devices of 
these types. She found that extending 
the exemption to such devices will 
increase the availability of the software 
within them and that the record lacked 
evidence that doing so would harm the 
market for copyrighted works. 
The Acting Register therefore 
recommended removal of the provision 
in the current exemption requiring that 
a covered device be ‘‘used.’’ Consistent 
with NTIA’s recommendation, she 
proposed adding language requiring that 
such a device be ‘‘lawfully acquired.’’ 
Because the regulations implementing 
the Unlocking Act already require that 
circumvention under this exemption be 
initiated by the ‘‘owner’’ of the relevant 
device or by a person or service 
provider at the direction of the owner, 
the Acting Register views this as a 
technical, rather than a substantive, 
change.
50 
The Acting Register determined, 
however, that the record was 
insufficient to support expanding the 
exemption to additional types of 
wireless devices. As in 2015, she found 
the record too sparse to support a 
finding that unlocking wireless devices 
of all types is likely to be a fair use. 
Proponents did provide evidence 
regarding three specific categories of 
devices: Home security devices, 
agricultural equipment, and vehicle GPS 
trackers. Based on the record, the Acting 
Register concluded that these devices 
are similar to those covered by the 
current exemption in relevant respects, 
and that unlocking them therefore is 
likely to be a fair use. But she concluded 
that proponents failed to establish that 
they are, or are likely to be, adversely 
affected by section 1201 in their ability 
to unlock these types of devices. 
Proponents did not demonstrate that it 
would be possible to connect these 
devices to an alternate wireless network 
even if an exemption were granted. The 
Acting Register thus found that they 
failed to carry their burden to show 
actual or likely adverse effects resulting 
from the bar on circumvention. She 
therefore declined to recommend 
removal of the exemption’s enumerated 
device categories. 
Accordingly, the Acting Register 
recommends that the Librarian adopt 
the following exemption: 
Computer programs that enable the 
following types of lawfully acquired wireless 
devices to connect to a wireless 
telecommunications network, when 
circumvention is undertaken solely in order 
to connect to a wireless telecommunications 
network and such connection is authorized 
by the operator of such network: 
(i) Wireless telephone handsets (i.e., 
cellphones); 
(ii) All-purpose tablet computers; 
(iii) Portable mobile connectivity devices, 
such as mobile hotspots, removable wireless 
broadband modems, and similar devices; and 
(iv) Wearable wireless devices designed to 
be worn on the body, such as smartwatches 
or fitness devices. 
4. Proposed Class 6: Computer 
Programs—Jailbreaking 51 
Proposed Class 6 would expand an 
existing exemption for activity known 
as ‘‘jailbreaking’’—that is, the process of 
gaining access to the operating system of 
a computing device to install and 
execute software that could not 
otherwise be installed or run on that 
device, or to remove pre-installed 
software that could not otherwise be 
uninstalled. An existing exemption 
permits the jailbreaking of smartphones 
and portable all-purpose mobile 
computing devices. In this proceeding, 
EFF filed a petition seeking to expand 
the current exemption by: (1) Adding 
voice assistant devices, such as the 
Amazon Echo and Google Home, to the 
categories of devices covered by the 
exemption; and (2) allowing jailbreaking 
not only to install, run, or remove 
software, but also for the purpose of 
enabling or disabling hardware features 
of the relevant device. 
In proponents’ view, the fair use 
analysis relied upon by the Register in 
recommending the previous jailbreaking 
exemptions is equally applicable in the 
context of voice assistant devices. 
Moreover, regarding the 1201 statutory 
factors, proponents argued that a 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:06 Oct 25, 2018 Jkt 247001 PO 00000 Frm 00056 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1khammond on DSK30JT082PROD with RULES

[PAGE 12]
54021 Federal Register / Vol. 83, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2018 / Rules and Regulations 
52 The Acting Register’s analysis and conclusions 
for these classes, including citations to the record 
and relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Recommendation at 185–231. 
jailbreaking exemption will have either 
no effect or a positive effect on the 
availability of copyrighted firmware and 
application software. 
Opponents principally argued that 
jailbreaking is likely to enable voice 
assistant devices to access pirated 
content. Opponents asserted that piracy 
concerns are greater in the context of 
voice assistant devices than in that of 
other devices, as the former are 
relatively simple devices that do not 
incorporate the same ‘‘hardware and 
software complexity’’ that exists in 
personal computers, and therefore they 
provide more limited security options. 
Opponents further suggested that 
jailbreaking would facilitate the 
installation of counterfeit apps and apps 
that enable unauthorized access to 
copyrighted content. Opponents 
challenged the contention that 
jailbreaking is necessary to promote the 
development of new applications. 
NTIA recommended granting the 
exemption in the form requested by 
proponents. 
It agreed that jailbreaking voice 
assistant devices is unlikely to harm the 
market for copyrighted works, noting 
that there is no evidence of market harm 
for the devices covered by the current 
exemption. NTIA rejected opponents’ 
argument about unauthorized access to 
entertainment content on the ground 
that it ‘‘fail[s] to explain why 
infringement is more likely on voice 
assistant platforms than on 
smartphones, tablets, and other devices 
already subject to the exemption.’’ NTIA 
further concluded that proponents had 
demonstrated that users in this class are 
adversely affected by the statutory 
prohibition. 
The Acting Register found that 
proponents met their burden of showing 
that jailbreaking voice assistant devices 
within the meaning of the current 
exemption is likely to be a fair use. She 
concluded that the record failed to show 
that the prior jailbreaking exemptions 
have harmed the market for firmware in 
smartphones or all-purpose mobile 
devices, and that nothing in the record 
suggests that a different conclusion is 
warranted for voice assistant devices. 
Additionally, the Acting Register found 
the record insufficient to establish that 
an expanded exemption is likely to 
harm the market for copyrighted works 
streamed to voice assistant devices. 
While acknowledging that piracy of 
streamed content is a highly significant 
concern, the evidence was insufficient 
to conclude that allowing jailbreaking of 
voice assistant devices created a greater 
risk of unauthorized access to streaming 
content than exists with respect to other 
devices, and suggested that subscription 
streaming services typically control 
access to their content with TPMs 
separate from those protecting the 
firmware. The Acting Register thus 
recommended adoption of an exemption 
authorizing the jailbreaking of voice 
assistant devices, which must be 
‘‘designed to take user input primarily 
by voice.’’ The recommended 
exemption excludes video game 
consoles, set-top boxes, DVD and Blu- 
Ray players, and similar devices that 
typically are operated using buttons. To 
address opponents’ serious concerns 
over the potential use of jailbroken 
devices as platforms for unauthorized 
content, the Acting Register 
recommended including language 
expressly excluding circumvention 
undertaken for purpose of accessing 
such material. 
Accordingly, the Acting Register 
recommends that the Librarian adopt 
the following exemption: 
Computer programs that enable voice 
assistant devices to execute lawfully obtained 
software applications, where circumvention 
is accomplished for the sole purpose of 
enabling interoperability of such applications 
with computer programs on the device, or to 
permit removal of software from the device, 
and is not accomplished for the purpose of 
gaining unauthorized access to other 
copyrighted works. For purposes of this 
paragraph (b)(8), a ‘‘voice assistant device’’ is 
a device that is primarily designed to run a 
wide variety of programs rather than for 
consumption of a particular type of media 
content, is designed to take user input 
primarily by voice, and is designed to be 
installed in a home or office. 
5. Proposed Class 7: Computer 
Programs—Repair 52 
Several organizations petitioned to 
expand the current exemption allowing 
for circumvention of access controls 
controlling the functioning of motorized 
land vehicles for purposes of diagnosis, 
repair, or lawful modification of a 
vehicle function to allow an additional 
range of activities. The Office 
synthesized these suggestions into 
Proposed Class 7. Although the 
commenters’ proposals varied in scope, 
and there was no singular unified 
proposed exemption, the Acting 
Register grouped them into the 
following four categories: 
(1) Removing the current limitation 
prohibiting circumvention of TPMs to access 
computer programs primarily designed for 
the control of vehicle telematics and 
entertainment systems; 
(2) expanding the exemption to apply to 
other types of software-enabled devices, 
including appliances, computers, toys, and 
other Internet of Things devices; 
(3) extending the exemption to allow 
circumvention by third-party service 
providers, and in particular, independent 
vehicle repair shops, for purposes of 
diagnosis, repair, and lawful modification; 
and 
(4) allowing the acquisition, use, and 
dissemination of circumvention tools in 
furtherance of diagnosis, repair, and 
modification. 
The Acting Register first considered 
proposed expansions within the context 
of motorized land vehicles, and then 
addressed expansion of the exemption 
to other types of devices. 
Regarding motorized land vehicles, 
proponents asserted that diagnosis, 
repair, and lawful modification of 
vehicle telematics and entertainment 
systems are fair uses and noninfringing 
under section 117. Proponents 
contended that, because these systems 
are increasingly integrated with 
functional vehicle firmware, access is 
necessary to engage in diagnosis, repair, 
and lawful modification of vehicle 
functions—activities the Register found 
to be likely noninfringing in 
recommending the existing exemption. 
Proponents sought access to telematics 
systems in order to obtain diagnostic 
data for the same purposes. Proponents 
asserted that vehicle firmware is 
‘‘effectively useless’’ outside of the 
vehicle, with essentially no separate 
market for the software apart from the 
vehicles. In addition, proponents 
suggested users should be permitted to 
access ‘‘storage capacity’’ in vehicle 
entertainment systems, and to repair 
infotainment/entertainment modules. 
In response, opponents contended 
that the proposed activities are not 
favored under fair use because access to 
entertainment and telematics systems 
could allow unauthorized access to 
expressive content. Opponents asserted 
that telematics and entertainment 
firmware have value apart from a 
vehicle, and may be paid for on a 
continuing basis separate from the 
vehicle purchase. Opponents also 
argued that circumvention of telematics 
is unnecessary because diagnostic data 
is still available through the onboard 
diagnostics port and, further, a 
nationwide Memorandum of 
Understanding requires manufacturers 
to make this data available to vehicle 
owners and independent repair shops. 
Commenters seeking to expand the 
exemption to allow diagnosis, repair, 
and modification of other software- 
enabled devices likewise asserted that 
these activities are noninfringing under 
the fair use doctrine and section 117. 
The Acting Register considered these 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:06 Oct 25, 2018 Jkt 247001 PO 00000 Frm 00057 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1khammond on DSK30JT082PROD with RULES

[PAGE 13]
54022 Federal Register / Vol. 83, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2018 / Rules and Regulations 
arguments for those types of devices 
cognizably reflected in the record, 
namely home appliances, smartphones, 
video game consoles, computers and 
ancillary or peripheral computing 
devices, and consumables, plus a few 
examples of specific additional devices. 
Opponents maintained that repair of 
these devices is not a transformative use 
because it merely causes a device to be 
used for the same purpose for which it 
was originally intended. In some cases, 
opponents also suggested that once the 
firmware on some devices is accessed, 
even for repair, it is compromised such 
that it can no longer prevent piracy; and 
consequently, these uses diminish the 
value of and market for the devices and 
other creative works. Regarding repair of 
video game consoles specifically, 
opponents expressed concern that 
circumvention of TPMs creates the risk 
of unauthorized access to content and 
piracy. 
Concerning third-party assistance, 
several proponents requested that the 
exemption specifically permit third 
parties, such as repair services, to assist 
owners in carrying out the authorized 
activities. Alternatively, proponents 
suggested removing the current 
exemption language requiring that 
circumvention be ‘‘undertaken by the 
authorized owner’’ of the vehicle. 
Regarding circumvention tools, 
proponents asked the Office to 
recommend language that would allow 
exemption beneficiaries, including third 
parties, to not only make, use, and 
acquire tools, but also to distribute 
them. Opponents contended that the 
proposals concerning third-party 
assistance and circumvention tools 
would impermissibly expand the 
exemption to activity that would 
constitute unlawful trafficking in 
violation of sections 1201(a)(2) and (b). 
NTIA supported expanding the 
exemption to a ‘‘new definable sub- 
class’’ of home appliances and mobile 
handsets (such as cell phones) ‘‘when 
circumvention is a necessary step to 
allow the diagnosis, repair, or lawful 
modification of a device function.’’ 
NTIA concluded that these are 
noninfringing fair uses, in part because 
‘‘diagnosis is a critical component of 
repairing a device’’ and subsequent 
modification of devices is 
transformative. With respect to vehicles, 
NTIA supported expanding the existing 
exemption to allow ‘‘use of telematics 
data for diagnostic purposes.’’ It 
recommended, however, ‘‘limiting use 
to obtaining the diagnostic data from the 
telematics module for purposes of repair 
and modification of the vehicle, and not 
repair or modification to the module 
itself.’’ As to vehicle entertainment 
systems, NTIA ‘‘continue[d] to have 
reservations about the strength of [the] 
record and the potential for 
infringement’’ and did not recommend 
an expansion to permit access for the 
proposed uses, including ‘‘storage 
capacity.’’ 
NTIA further recommended removing 
the current exemption’s reference to 
‘‘the authorized owner of the vehicle’’— 
a change that it characterizes as 
‘‘extending the current exemption to 
allow third-party service providers to 
diagnose, repair and modify software- 
enabled vehicles on behalf of owners.’’ 
But NTIA recommended denying the 
proposals to ‘‘permit third-party 
commercialization of software repair 
tools for vehicles in this class,’’ 
concluding that such activity is ‘‘likely 
to constitute trafficking.’’ 
The Acting Register recommended 
expanding the current exemption in 
areas where there was sufficient record 
support for such a change, while 
retaining language to ensure that both 
the class of works and the permitted 
uses are appropriately defined. As a 
result, the Acting Register 
recommended two separate exemptions, 
one relating to motorized land vehicles, 
and one related to the repair and 
maintenance of additional categories of 
devices. 
Regarding motor vehicles, the 
recommended exemption removes the 
requirement that circumvention be 
‘‘undertaken by the authorized owner’’ 
of the vehicle, instead providing that it 
apply where such items are ‘‘lawfully 
acquired.’’ This change responds to 
proponents’ concerns that the language 
of the existing exemption improperly 
excludes other users with a legitimate 
interest in engaging in noninfringing 
diagnosis, repair, or modification 
activities. The Acting Register expressed 
no view on whether particular types of 
third-party assistance may or may not 
implicate the anti-trafficking provisions. 
Those provisions, found in section 
1201(a)(2) and (b), are unchanged and 
must be separately analyzed to 
determine whether third-party 
assistance would be permissible. 
The Acting Register also 
recommended removing the language 
excluding access to computer programs 
designed for the control of telematics or 
entertainment systems. The Acting 
Register was persuaded that, due to 
increasing integration of vehicle 
computer systems since the 2015 
rulemaking, retaining this limitation 
may impede noninfringing uses that can 
only be accomplished by incidentally 
accessing these systems. Nonetheless, 
the Acting Register credited opponents’ 
concerns about unauthorized access to 
expressive works through subscription 
services unrelated to vehicle 
functioning, and accordingly the 
recommended exemption specifically 
excludes access to ‘‘programs accessed 
through a separate subscription 
service.’’ While the broadened 
exemption permits incidental access to 
a vehicle infotainment system, it 
provides that such access is allowed 
only to the extent it is ‘‘a necessary step 
to allow the diagnosis, repair or lawful 
modification of a vehicle function’’ and 
includes the additional requirement that 
circumvention may not be 
‘‘accomplished for the purpose of 
gaining unauthorized access to other 
copyrighted works.’’ Because the Acting 
Register found the record insufficient to 
support expanding the exemption to 
permit diagnosis, repair, or lawful 
modification of the telematics and 
infotainment systems themselves, the 
regulatory language does not extend to 
those activities. 
In addition, the Acting Register 
recommended a new exemption 
allowing for the circumvention of TPMs 
restricting access to firmware that 
controls smartphones and home 
appliances and home systems for the 
purposes of diagnosis, maintenance, or 
repair. In doing so, the Acting Register 
adopted the definitions of 
‘‘maintenance’’ and ‘‘repair’’ in section 
117(d). Here again, the recommended 
text includes the condition that 
circumvention not be ‘‘accomplished for 
the purpose of gaining unauthorized 
access to other copyrighted works.’’ The 
Acting Register did not recommend 
extending this exemption to 
circumvention for purposes of 
modifying a device function, concluding 
that ‘‘modification’’ was not defined 
with sufficient precision to conclude as 
a general category it is likely to be 
noninfringing. 
Accordingly, the Acting Register 
recommends that the Librarian adopt 
the following exemptions: 
(1) Computer programs that are contained 
in and control the functioning of a lawfully 
acquired motorized land vehicle such as a 
personal automobile, commercial vehicle or 
mechanized agricultural vehicle, except for 
programs accessed through a separate 
subscription service, when circumvention is 
a necessary step to allow the diagnosis, repair 
or lawful modification of a vehicle function, 
where such circumvention does not 
constitute a violation of applicable law, 
including without limitation regulations 
promulgated by the Department of 
Transportation or the Environmental 
Protection Agency, and is not accomplished 
for the purpose of gaining unauthorized 
access to other copyrighted works. 
(2) Computer programs that are contained 
in and control the functioning of a lawfully 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:06 Oct 25, 2018 Jkt 247001 PO 00000 Frm 00058 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1khammond on DSK30JT082PROD with RULES

[PAGE 14]
54023 Federal Register / Vol. 83, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2018 / Rules and Regulations 
53 Because the issues in this class are relevant to 
the analysis in Proposed Class 8, which pertains 
specifically to video games, the Acting Register 
addresses this class first. The Acting Register’s 
analysis and conclusions for this class, including 
citations to the record and relevant legal authority, 
can be found in the Recommendation at 231–56. 
54 See U.S. Copyright Office, Section 108 of Title 
17 51 (2017), https://www.copyright.gov/policy/ 
section108/discussion-document.pdf. 
55 The Acting Register’s analysis and conclusions 
for this class, including citations to the record and 
Continued 
acquired smartphone or home appliance or 
home system, such as a refrigerator, 
thermostat, HVAC or electrical system, when 
circumvention is a necessary step to allow 
the diagnosis, maintenance or repair of such 
a device or system, and is not accomplished 
for the purpose of gaining access to other 
copyrighted works. For purposes of this 
paragraph (b)(10): 
(i) The ‘‘maintenance’’ of a device or 
system is the servicing of the device or 
system in order to make it work in 
accordance with its original specifications 
and any changes to those specifications 
authorized for that device or system; and 
(ii) The ‘‘repair’’ of a device or system is 
the restoring of the device or system to the 
state of working in accordance with its 
original specifications and any changes to 
those specifications authorized for that 
device or system. 
6. Proposed Class 9: Computer 
Programs—Software Preservation 53 
Proposed Class 9 seeks to address 
concerns that TPMs applied to 
computer programs can interfere with 
legitimate preservation activities. The 
Software Preservation Network (‘‘SPN’’) 
and the LCA filed a petition that would 
allow ‘‘libraries, archives, museums, 
and other cultural heritage institutions’’ 
to circumvent TPMs on ‘‘lawfully 
acquired software for the purposes of 
preserving software and software- 
dependent materials.’’ SPN and LCA 
explained that the proposed exemption 
is intended to enable cultural heritage 
institutions to preserve both TPM- 
protected computer programs, as well as 
‘‘dependent’’ materials—‘‘writings, 
calculations, software programs, etc.’’ 
stored in digital formats that are 
inaccessible without running the 
underlying program. Although proposed 
Class 9 constitutes a new exemption, 
proponents noted that the Register 
recommended, and the Librarian 
granted, exemptions for software 
preservation in 2003 and 2006, which 
allowed circumvention of access 
controls on computer programs and 
video games distributed in formats that 
have become obsolete and that require 
the original media or hardware as a 
condition of access. Proponents 
advanced three bases for finding their 
proposed activities to be noninfringing: 
(1) The fair use doctrine, (2) the section 
108(c) exception for library and archival 
replacement copies, and (3) the section 
117(a) exception for archival copies of 
computer programs. 
Opponents contended that the 
proposal is overbroad because (1) the 
exemption would improperly allow 
circumvention for activities beyond 
those provided for in the section 108 
exceptions for libraries and archives; (2) 
the term ‘‘computer program-dependent 
materials’’ might be read to sweep in 
any category of copyrightable work; and 
(3) the term ‘‘other cultural heritage 
institutions’’ within the class of 
beneficiaries is undefined. Although 
opponents did not directly contest 
proponents’ fair use arguments, they did 
assert that section 117(a)(2) does not 
protect proponents’ activities. 
NTIA supported adopting the 
proposed exemption. In its view, the 
class was appropriately defined because 
it was limited to ‘‘computer programs, 
to preservation uses, and to 
preservation-oriented institutional 
users.’’ It agreed with proponents that 
the exemption should expressly refer to 
preservation of ‘‘computer program- 
dependent materials,’’ concluding that 
‘‘a user would not be able to access 
those materials without preserving the 
software protected by a TPM.’’ It also 
agreed that the exemption should 
include video games, noting that 
proponents provided specific examples 
of games that may not be covered by the 
current preservation exemption. In 
addition, it found that there were no 
reasonable alternatives to 
circumvention, as the use of software 
with backwards compatibility ‘‘is 
inadequate and can distort the original 
work.’’ 
The Acting Register recommended 
granting an exemption that incorporates 
most of the substance of proponents’ 
request, with certain changes to address 
opponents’ concerns. First, the 
recommended language limits the 
eligible users to libraries, archives, and 
museums, as defined according to the 
criteria proposed in the Office’s recent 
Section 108 Discussion Document.
54 
The Acting Register declined to 
recommend including ‘‘other cultural 
heritage institutions’’ within the class of 
beneficiaries, finding that term to be 
undefined and potentially far-reaching. 
In addition, the Acting Register 
recommended that the exemption 
incorporate proponents’ suggestion that 
the class be defined as computer 
programs ‘‘that have been lawfully 
acquired and that are no longer 
reasonably available in the commercial 
marketplace.’’ The Acting Register also 
recommended that in lieu of including 
the phrase ‘‘computer program- 
dependent materials’’ as a defined term, 
the recommended exemption simply 
provide that circumvention is permitted 
for the purpose of ‘‘lawful preservation 
. . . of digital materials dependent upon 
a computer program as a condition of 
access.’’ Finally, in response to concerns 
over having video game preservation 
governed by two separate exemptions, 
the Acting Register recommended that 
the portion of this class pertaining to 
video games be codified in the existing 
video game preservation exemption. 
Thus, the recommended exemption for 
Class 9 will cover computer programs 
other than video games, while an 
addition to the prior exemption for 
video games will provide for 
preservation of the video games 
addressed by this class (i.e., those that 
do not require an external server for 
gameplay). Preservation of server-based 
games will continue to be governed by 
the recommended exemption for 
Class 8. 
Accordingly, the Acting Register 
recommends that the Librarian adopt 
the following exemption: 
(i) Computer programs, except video 
games, that have been lawfully acquired and 
that are no longer reasonably available in the 
commercial marketplace, solely for the 
purpose of lawful preservation of a computer 
program, or of digital materials dependent 
upon a computer program as a condition of 
access, by an eligible library, archives, or 
museum, where such activities are carried 
out without any purpose of direct or indirect 
commercial advantage and the program is not 
distributed or made available outside of the 
physical premises of the eligible library, 
archives, or museum. 
(ii) For purposes of the exemption in 
paragraph (b)(13)(i) of this section, a library, 
archives, or museum is considered ‘‘eligible’’ 
if— 
(A) The collections of the library, archives, 
or museum are open to the public and/or are 
routinely made available to researchers who 
are not affiliated with the library, archives or 
museum; 
(B) The library, archives, or museum has a 
public service mission; 
(C) The library, archives, or museum’s 
trained staff or volunteers provide 
professional services normally associated 
with libraries, archives, or museums; 
(D) The collections of the library, archives, 
or museum are composed of lawfully 
acquired and/or licensed materials; and 
(E) The library, archives, or museum 
implements reasonable digital security 
measures as appropriate for the activities 
permitted by this paragraph (b)(13). 
8. Proposed Class 8: Computer 
Programs—Video Game Preservation 55 
Class 8 proponents sought expansion 
of the provisions in the existing 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:06 Oct 25, 2018 Jkt 247001 PO 00000 Frm 00059 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1khammond on DSK30JT082PROD with RULES

[PAGE 15]
54024 Federal Register / Vol. 83, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2018 / Rules and Regulations 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Recommendation at 256–84. 
exemption that allows eligible 
institutions to circumvent access 
controls to preserve video games for 
which external server support has been 
discontinued. As explained in the 2015 
rulemaking, some video games require a 
network connection to a remote server 
operated by the game’s developer before 
the video game can be accessed and 
played. When the developer takes such 
a server offline, a game can be rendered 
unplayable or limited to certain 
functions, such as single-player play or 
multiplayer play on a local network. 
The current exemption allows an 
eligible library, archives, or museum to 
circumvent this type of authentication 
mechanism to preserve lawfully 
acquired games in ‘‘complete’’ form, i.e., 
those that can be played without 
accessing or reproducing copyrightable 
content stored or previously stored on 
an external computer server. The 
exemption requires that such games not 
be distributed or made available outside 
of the physical premises of the eligible 
institution. 
The Museum of Art and Digital 
Entertainment (‘‘MADE’’) filed a 
petition seeking to expand the 
exemption to allow for circumvention of 
access controls on video games that 
need to access creative content stored 
on a remote server, which MADE refers 
to as ‘‘online’’ games. MADE contended 
that the current exemption, while 
helpful, does not allow it to preserve the 
growing number of online video games 
for future generations to study. 
Proponents explained that libraries, 
archives, and museums cannot engage 
in certain preservation activities 
involving online games without either 
copying the game’s server code or 
reconstructing that server’s 
functionality, which would also require 
an exemption to circumvent TPMs on 
these works. MADE also sought to 
broaden the class of users of the 
exemption to include volunteer 
‘‘affiliate archivists,’’ who wish to 
circumvent access controls off-premises, 
but under the supervision of 
preservation entities. 
Opponents objected to the proposed 
expansions, arguing that proponents’ 
intended use of the video games is not 
a true preservation use. Instead, 
opponents contended that proponents 
wish to engage in recreational play that 
could function as a market substitute. In 
addition, the Entertainment Software 
Association expressed concern that the 
server copy proponents wish to recreate 
is an unpublished work that has never 
been distributed to the public. Overall, 
opponents contend that the proposed 
uses are infringing. Opponents also 
objected to the use of affiliate archivists, 
contending that there is a heightened 
risk of market harm if the public can 
circumvent access controls on video 
games in their own homes. 
NTIA supported the adoption of an 
expanded exemption, but one narrower 
than that requested by proponents. It 
proposed an expansion to allow 
preservation ‘‘where the user uses the 
server component—while still not 
providing any substantial expressive 
content—for administrative tasks 
beyond authentication, including 
command and control functions such as 
tracking player progress, facilitating 
communications between players, or 
storing high scores.’’ To accommodate 
these uses, it recommended regulatory 
language that would apply in situations 
where ‘‘all or nearly all of the 
audiovisual content and gameplay 
mechanics reside on the player or 
institution’s lawfully acquired local 
copy of the game.’’ NTIA did not, 
however, support adding an ‘‘affiliate 
archivist’’ user class, concluding that 
adding such a provision risks 
‘‘introducing confusing language or 
suggesting that any such 
preservationists may not need to be 
answerable to the institutions for which 
they are volunteering.’’ 
The Acting Register found that the 
record supported granting an expansion 
in the relatively discrete circumstances 
where a preservation institution legally 
possesses a copy of a video game’s 
server code and the game’s local code. 
She concluded that in such 
circumstances, the preservation 
activities described by proponents are 
likely to be fair uses. She further found 
that proponents demonstrated that such 
uses would be adversely affected by the 
statutory prohibition absent an 
exemption. The record indicated that an 
exemption would enable future 
scholarship by enabling researchers to 
experience games as they were 
originally played and thereby better 
understand their design or construction. 
The Acting Register additionally found 
such activity unlikely to harm the 
market for video games. 
The Acting Register did not, however, 
recommend an exemption to allow for 
instances where the preservation 
institution lacks lawful possession of 
the server software. She found the 
record insufficient to support a finding 
that the recreation of video game server 
software as described by proponents is 
likely to be a fair use. A number of 
scenarios described by proponents do 
not involve preserving server software 
that is already in an institution’s 
collections, but instead appear to 
involve something more akin to 
reconstructing the remote server. She 
found that this activity distinguishes 
proponents’ request from the 
preservation activity at issue in the case 
law upon which they relied. Moreover, 
she noted, the reconstruction of a work 
implicates copyright owners’ exclusive 
right to prepare derivative works. 
Additionally, the Acting Register 
concluded that the record did not 
support the addition of an ‘‘affiliate 
archivist’’ user class to the exemption, 
finding such activity unlikely to 
constitute fair use. She noted that both 
the proposed exemption language and 
the proponents’ institutions’ practices 
seemed to lack appropriate protective 
guidelines to govern such volunteers’ 
use of copyrighted materials. 
In light of the foregoing, the Acting 
Register recommended an exemption for 
‘‘server-dependent games,’’ defined as 
video games that can be played by users 
who lawfully possess both a copy of a 
game intended for a personal computer 
or video game console and a copy of the 
game’s code that is stored or was 
previously stored on an external 
computer server. The Acting Register 
continues to recommend an exemption 
for ‘‘complete games,’’ but proposed 
revising the exemption language to 
reflect that the exemption for ‘‘complete 
games’’ applies to both gamers and 
preservation uses, but the exemption for 
‘‘server dependent games’’ applies only 
to preservation uses. In addition, for the 
reasons explained above in the 
discussion of Proposed Class 9, the 
Acting Register recommended adding a 
paragraph to the exemption in this class 
to accommodate preservation of non- 
server-based video games. 
Accordingly, the Acting Register 
recommends that the Librarian adopt 
the following exemption: 
(i) Video games in the form of computer 
programs embodied in physical or 
downloaded formats that have been lawfully 
acquired as complete games, when the 
copyright owner or its authorized 
representative has ceased to provide access to 
an external computer server necessary to 
facilitate an authentication process to enable 
gameplay, solely for the purpose of: 
(A) Permitting access to the video game to 
allow copying and modification of the 
computer program to restore access to the 
game for personal, local gameplay on a 
personal computer or video game console; or 
(B) Permitting access to the video game to 
allow copying and modification of the 
computer program to restore access to the 
game on a personal computer or video game 
console when necessary to allow 
preservation of the game in a playable form 
by an eligible library, archives, or museum, 
where such activities are carried out without 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:06 Oct 25, 2018 Jkt 247001 PO 00000 Frm 00060 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1khammond on DSK30JT082PROD with RULES

[PAGE 16]
54025 Federal Register / Vol. 83, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2018 / Rules and Regulations 
56 The Acting Register’s analysis and conclusions 
for this class, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Recommendation at 284–315. 
any purpose of direct or indirect commercial 
advantage and the video game is not 
distributed or made available outside of the 
physical premises of the eligible library, 
archives, or museum. 
(ii) Video games in the form of computer 
programs embodied in physical or 
downloaded formats that have been lawfully 
acquired as complete games, that do not 
require access to an external computer server 
for gameplay, and that are no longer 
reasonably available in the commercial 
marketplace, solely for the purpose of 
preservation of the game in a playable form 
by an eligible library, archives, or museum, 
where such activities are carried out without 
any purpose of direct or indirect commercial 
advantage and the video game is not 
distributed or made available outside of the 
physical premises of the eligible library, 
archives, or museum. 
(iii) Computer programs used to operate 
video game consoles solely to the extent 
necessary for an eligible library, archives, or 
museum to engage in the preservation 
activities described in paragraph (b)(12)(i)(B) 
or (b)(12)(ii) of this section. 
(iv) For purposes of this paragraph (b)(12), 
the following definitions shall apply: 
(A) For purposes of paragraph (b)(12)(i)(A) 
and (b)(12)(ii) of this section, ‘‘complete 
games’’ means video games that can be 
played by users without accessing or 
reproducing copyrightable content stored or 
previously stored on an external computer 
server. 
(B) For purposes of paragraph (b)(12)(i)(B) 
of this section, ‘‘complete games’’ means 
video games that meet the definition in 
paragraph (b)(12)(iv)(A) of this section, or 
that consist of both a copy of a game 
intended for a personal computer or video 
game console and a copy of the game’s code 
that was stored or previously stored on an 
external computer server. 
(C) ‘‘Ceased to provide access’’ means that 
the copyright owner or its authorized 
representative has either issued an 
affirmative statement indicating that external 
server support for the video game has ended 
and such support is in fact no longer 
available or, alternatively, server support has 
been discontinued for a period of at least six 
months; provided, however, that server 
support has not since been restored. 
(D) ‘‘Local gameplay’’ means gameplay 
conducted on a personal computer or video 
game console, or locally connected personal 
computers or consoles, and not through an 
online service or facility. 
(E) A library, archives, or museum is 
considered ‘‘eligible’’ when the collections of 
the library, archives, or museum are open to 
the public and/or are routinely made 
available to researchers who are not affiliated 
with the library, archives, or museum. 
7. Proposed Class 10: Computer 
Programs—Security Research 56 
The Office received multiple petitions 
to expand the existing exemption 
allowing circumvention for the purpose 
of conducting good-faith security 
research on certain types of software- 
enabled devices and machines. 
Proponents argued that the current 
language contains limitations that 
unnecessarily restrict its scope, as well 
as ambiguities that chill legitimate 
research. These include: (1) A provision 
limiting the exemption to specified 
categories of devices (‘‘Device 
Limitation’’); (2) a requirement that a 
device be ‘‘lawfully acquired’’ 
(‘‘Lawfully Acquired Limitation’’); (3) a 
requirement that circumvention be 
‘‘solely’’ for the purpose of good-faith 
security research, and the definition of 
such research as accessing a program 
‘‘solely’’ for purposes of good-faith 
testing, investigation, and/or correction 
(‘‘Access Limitation’’); (4) a requirement 
that the research be ‘‘carried out in a 
controlled environment designed to 
avoid any harm to individuals or the 
public’’ (‘‘Controlled Environment 
Limitation’’); (5) a requirement that ‘‘the 
information derived from the activity 
[be] used primarily to promote the 
security or safety of the class of devices 
or machines . . . or those who use such 
devices or machines, and is not used or 
maintained in a manner that facilitates 
copyright infringement’’ (‘‘Use 
Limitation’’); and (6) a requirement that 
the circumvention ‘‘not violate any 
applicable law’’ (‘‘Other Laws 
Limitation’’). Proponents maintained 
that the proposed activity is 
noninfringing on one or both grounds 
relied upon by the Register in 2015— 
section 117 and fair use. 
Opponents objected to removal of 
each of these provisions, arguing that 
the current language appropriately 
balances the interests of security 
researchers, copyright owners, and the 
general public. In their view, the 
adverse effects asserted by proponents 
are unsupported by the record and are 
based on unreasonable readings of the 
relevant text. Opponents also variously 
argued that removing the limitations 
would render the class impermissibly 
broad, give rise to infringing uses, and 
jeopardize public safety and national 
security. 
Following the close of the public 
comment period and the completion of 
the public hearings, the Office received 
a letter concerning this class from 
CCIPS. The CCIPS letter stated that 
‘‘[m]any of the changes sought in the 
petition appear likely to promote 
productive cybersecurity research, and 
CCIPS supports them,’’ subject to 
certain limitations. With respect to the 
Device Limitation, CCIPS advised that it 
would support eliminating the language 
confining the exemption to devices 
‘‘primarily designed for use by 
individual consumers.’’ It recommended 
clarification of the Controlled 
Environment Limitation and said that it 
‘‘would not object to its removal.’’ As to 
the Lawfully Acquired Limitation, 
CCIPS stated concluded that the current 
language is preferable to conditioning 
the exemption on ownership of a 
particular copy of software. CCIPS also 
addressed the Other Laws Limitation, 
stating that it would not object to 
removal of the phrase ‘‘any applicable 
law’’ were it standing alone, but 
recommending retaining the express 
reference to the Computer Fraud and 
Abuse Act of 1986. 
NTIA recommended granting the 
proposed expansion and proposed the 
same regulatory text it offered in 2015. 
That language would allow 
circumvention ‘‘in order to conduct 
good faith security research’’ on 
computer programs, ‘‘regardless of the 
device on which they are run.’’ NTIA 
further recommended that the Other 
Laws Limitation be replaced with a 
statement that the exemption ‘‘does not 
obviate the need to comply with all 
other applicable laws and regulations.’’ 
In addition, NTIA recommended 
removal of the Controlled Environment, 
Access, and Use Limitations, largely 
agreeing with proponents that those 
provisions may chill legitimate research. 
The Acting Register found that good- 
faith security research involving devices 
beyond those covered by the current 
exemption is likely to be a fair use. As 
the Register found in 2015, the Acting 
Register concluded that good-faith 
security research promotes several of 
the activities identified in section 107 as 
examples of favored purposes, including 
criticism, comment, teaching, 
scholarship, and research. In contrast to 
2015, the current rulemaking record 
contained many additional examples of 
activities security researchers wished to 
engage in but for the Device Limitation. 
But the Acting Register did not find that 
section 117 provides an additional basis 
for finding such activity to be 
noninfringing. She found the record 
insufficient to support the conclusion 
that security researchers as a general 
matter are likely to own the copies of 
the device software, as is required under 
section 117. 
Ultimately, the Acting Register 
recommended that the exemption 
remove the Device Limitation, and 
include a provision allowing 
circumvention to be undertaken on a 
‘‘computer, computer system, or 
computer network on which the 
computer program operates.’’ The latter 
provision is intended to address 
situations in which a researcher seeks 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:06 Oct 25, 2018 Jkt 247001 PO 00000 Frm 00061 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1khammond on DSK30JT082PROD with RULES

[PAGE 17]
54026 Federal Register / Vol. 83, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2018 / Rules and Regulations 
57 The Acting Register’s analysis and conclusions 
for this class, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Recommendation at 319–31. 
58 The Acting Register’s analysis and conclusions 
for this class, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Recommendation at 111–28. 
access to a structure, such as a building 
automation system, that cannot be 
‘‘acquired’’ in the sense of obtaining 
physical possession of it, in contrast to 
instances where the researcher can 
lawfully acquire a device or machine. 
The exemption requires that 
circumvention in these circumstances 
be undertaken ‘‘with the authorization 
of the owner or operator of such 
computer, computer system, or 
computer network.’’ In addition, to 
address proponents’ concerns over 
potential ambiguity in the Controlled 
Environment Limitation, the exemption 
removes the term ‘‘controlled,’’ so that 
it simply would require the research to 
be ‘‘carried out in an environment 
designed to avoid any harm to 
individuals or the public.’’ The Acting 
Register did not recommend removal of 
the other limitations challenged by 
proponents, finding that proponents had 
failed to demonstrate that those 
provisions are causing, or are likely to 
cause, any adverse effect on 
noninfringing security research. 
Accordingly, the Acting Register 
recommends that the Librarian adopt 
the following exemption: 
(i) Computer programs, where the 
circumvention is undertaken on a lawfully 
acquired device or machine on which the 
computer program operates, or is undertaken 
on a computer, computer system, or 
computer network on which the computer 
program operates with the authorization of 
the owner or operator of such computer, 
computer system, or computer network, 
solely for the purpose of good-faith security 
research and does not violate any applicable 
law, including without limitation the 
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986. 
(ii) For purposes of this paragraph (b)(11), 
‘‘good-faith security research’’ means 
accessing a computer program solely for 
purposes of good-faith testing, investigation, 
and/or correction of a security flaw or 
vulnerability, where such activity is carried 
out in an environment designed to avoid any 
harm to individuals or the public, and where 
the information derived from the activity is 
used primarily to promote the security or 
safety of the class of devices or machines on 
which the computer program operates, or 
those who use such devices or machines, and 
is not used or maintained in a manner that 
facilitates copyright infringement. 
8. Proposed Class 12: Computer 
Programs—3D Printing 57 
3D printing—also known as 
‘‘additive’’ manufacturing—is a 
technology that translates digital files 
into physical objects by adding 
successive layers of material. Some 3D 
printer manufacturers use TPMs to limit 
the types of material—or ‘‘feedstock’’— 
that can be used in their 3D printers to 
manufacturer-approved feedstock. 
Proponents sought to expand a 
current exemption that permits the 
circumvention of access controls on 
computer programs in 3D printers to 
enable the use of non- manufacturer- 
approved feedstock. Michael Weinberg 
filed a petition to eliminate the 
following language at the end of the 
exemption: ‘‘provided, however, that 
the exemption shall not extend to any 
computer program on a 3D printer that 
produces goods or materials for use in 
commerce the physical production of 
which is subject to legal or regulatory 
oversight or a related certification 
process, or where the circumvention is 
otherwise unlawful.’’ 
Proponents put forth two arguments 
as to why the Acting Register should 
broaden the exemption by dropping this 
language: (1) The clause creates 
ambiguity such that the exemption itself 
cannot be applied or used in the 
majority of circumstances, and (2) the 
concerns that the clause seeks to 
address are more suitably addressed by 
other agencies. Stratasys, an opponent 
to the exemption, contended that this 
expanded range of activities is less 
likely to constitute fair use and should 
remain prohibited for reasons of public 
policy. 
NTIA supported renewing the 
exemption as well as expanding the 
exemption by removing the relevant 
limiting language. NTIA’s proposed 
language differed from the current 
regulatory language in additional ways. 
For example, NTIA proposed 
incorporating the restriction that 
‘‘circumvention is undertaken for the 
purpose of enabling interoperability of 
feedstock or filament with the device.’’ 
NTIA, however, did not provide specific 
support for altering the regulatory text 
beyond removing the qualifying 
language. 
The 2015 rulemaking identified fair 
use as the noninfringing basis for this 
exemption, and the proposed expansion 
was evaluated on the same grounds. 
Because the record indicated that the 
state of the 3D printing market appears 
to be substantially the same as in 2015, 
and case law has not significantly 
altered the relevant fair use issues, the 
Acting Register concluded that the 
copying or modifying of printer software 
to accept non-manufacturer-approved 
feedstock is likely to be a fair use. 
Because the first four statutory factors 
do not fit neatly onto this situation, the 
Acting Register focused most of her 
analysis on the fifth factor to consider 
these related concerns. The Acting 
Register determined that the expanded 
record now shows that there are 
situations in which an individual may 
be complying with relevant law or 
regulations but still be at risk of 
violating section 1201 due to the 
exemption’s qualifying language (e.g., 
individual sellers of homemade wares). 
The Acting Register concluded that the 
record established that the qualifying 
language in the existing exemption may 
be inhibiting otherwise beneficial or 
innovative uses of alternate feedstock, 
which is contrary to the intention of that 
exemption—and moreover, that there 
are safeguards outside of the current 
exemption addressing health and safety 
concerns associated with 3D printing. 
Accordingly, the Acting Register 
recommends that the Librarian adopt 
the following exemption: 
Computer programs that operate 3D 
printers that employ microchip-reliant 
technological measures to limit the use of 
feedstock, when circumvention is 
accomplished solely for the purpose of using 
alternative feedstock and not for the purpose 
of accessing design software, design files, or 
proprietary data. 
C. Classes Considered but Not 
Recommended 
Based upon the record in this 
proceeding, the Acting Register of 
Copyrights recommended that the 
Librarian determine that the following 
classes of works shall not be exempt 
from the prohibition against 
circumvention of technological 
measures set forth in section 1201(a)(1): 
1. Proposed Class 3: Audiovisual 
Works—Space-Shifting
58 
Proposed Class 3 would allow 
circumvention of technical measures 
protecting motion pictures and other 
audiovisual works to engage in ‘‘space- 
shifting.’’ As the 2015 rulemaking 
described, the Copyright Office’s 
understanding is that space-shifting 
occurs when a work is transferred from 
one storage medium to another, such as 
from a DVD to a computer hard drive. 
Chris De Pretis petitioned for an 
exemption to allow circumvention by 
individuals to create a personal digital 
backup of content for private use, a 
proposal similar to those sought and 
rejected in previous rulemakings. The 
Office also received a petition from 
OmniQ, a corporate entity, proposing an 
exemption to allow so-called ‘‘non- 
reproductive’’ space-shifting, including 
for commercial uses. A third proponent, 
SolaByte Corporation, filed a one-page 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:06 Oct 25, 2018 Jkt 247001 PO 00000 Frm 00062 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1khammond on DSK30JT082PROD with RULES

[PAGE 18]
54027 Federal Register / Vol. 83, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2018 / Rules and Regulations 
59 The Acting Register’s analysis and conclusions 
for this class, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Recommendation at 128– 45. 
comment in support of OmniQ and 
testified at the public hearing. 
OmniQ primarily argued that its 
proposed technology did not result in a 
reproduction of a copyrighted work, and 
thus fair use analysis was unnecessary. 
Proponents also argued that the overall 
availability of works for public use is 
shrinking because the hardware and 
software needed to play disc media are 
becoming less available in the 
marketplace. They argued that online 
content distribution platforms, taken in 
the aggregate, only offer a small and 
always-changing fraction of the titles 
historically available on DVD and Blu- 
ray disc, and that the costs of these 
services are unacceptable, especially 
when users already own the content in 
disc form. 
In response, opponents argued that 
OmniQ’s technology would reproduce 
works because they would constitute 
entirely new things (i.e., a copy). 
Opponents also contended that recent 
case law developments further 
demonstrate that space-shifting is not a 
fair use. In addition, opponents 
provided evidence of alternatives to 
circumvention in the form of a 
substantial number of online 
distribution platforms for accessing 
copyrighted audiovisual works, the vast 
majority of which they claim exist as 
viable business models only because of 
the ability to employ TPMs to protect 
the content from unauthorized uses. 
Unlike in prior rulemakings where 
NTIA ‘‘supported limited versions of a 
noncommercial space-shifting 
exemption . . . mainly in the interest of 
consumer protection,’’ NTIA did not 
support an exemption for this class in 
the present rulemaking. NTIA 
acknowledged that the ‘‘legal status of 
the concept of space-shifting remains a 
matter of dispute among copyright 
experts’’ and that it ‘‘has not been 
explicitly established as non-infringing 
on the basis of the fair use doctrine.’’ 
NTIA added that ‘‘proponents ha[d] not 
established in this proceeding that their 
specific proposal would be non- 
infringing.’’ Moreover, NTIA recognized 
that ‘‘[p]roponents failed to demonstrate 
that the ‘prevalence of [encrypted digital 
content] is diminishing the ability of 
individuals to use these works in ways 
that are otherwise lawful.’ ’’ 
The Acting Register found that under 
current law, OmniQ’s self-described 
process is likely to result in an 
unauthorized reproduction in violation 
of section 106(1), and that, as in 2015, 
the case law maintains that transferring 
digital files from one location to another 
implicates the reproduction right and is 
therefore infringing, even where the 
original copy is contemporaneously or 
subsequently deleted. With regard to 
personal space-shifting, in light of the 
lack of record and in the absence of 
clear supporting precedent, the Acting 
Register found no basis to depart from 
the fair use analysis and ultimate 
conclusion reached in the 2015 
proceeding, where the Register was 
unable to determine that the proposed 
uses were noninfringing. She noted that 
the commercial nature and potential 
market effects of the OmniQ and 
SolaByte business models complicate 
the fair use analysis, and not in their 
favor. For example, the record included 
substantial evidence of extensive 
markets for internet-based distribution 
services for copyrighted audiovisual 
works, including digital rentals, online 
streaming and over-the-top services, on- 
demand cable and satellite television 
offerings, disc-to-digital services, and 
digital locker services, which could be 
negatively impacted by the proposed 
exemption. These markets also served as 
sufficient alternatives to circumvention, 
as they demonstrated a wide availability 
of easily accessible copyrighted works 
that could potentially be negatively 
affected by an exemption that allowed 
unauthorized copies to compete with 
these authorized access models. Based 
on the record in this proceeding, the 
Acting Register did not find that the 
statutory factors supported the proposed 
exemption. 
2. Proposed Class 4: Audiovisual 
Works—HDCP/HDMI
59 
Proposed Class 4 would allow 
circumvention ‘‘to make noninfringing 
uses of audiovisual works that are 
subjected to High-bandwidth Digital 
Content Protection (HDCP).’’ Petitioner 
Andrew ‘‘bunnie’’ Huang described 
HDCP as ‘‘a protocol used to restrict 
content sent over High-Definition 
Multimedia Interface (HDMI) cables,’’ or 
‘‘a standard for video transport from one 
device to another.’’ He explained that 
many devices that play video discs and 
video game software encode their 
output using HDCP, and that this 
interferes with capturing the output for 
subsequent noninfringing uses. 
Multiple participants opposed this 
exemption, arguing that section 1201 
does not permit such a broad 
exemption, noting that HDCP is the 
industry standard for protecting 
audiovisual works in transit to a display 
device and that past Registers have 
rejected exemptions for ‘‘all 
noninfringing uses.’’ They characterized 
Huang’s discussion of the proposed uses 
as ‘‘cursory,’’ and suggested it was not 
possible to evaluate the proposed uses 
under the exemption without further 
detail. Opponents also suggested that 
multiple proposed uses would actually 
be infringing, and highlighted what they 
see as a significant online infringement 
risk if the exemption permitted in-the- 
clear copies of entire works. In addition, 
opponents set forth a large number of 
concrete examples of potential 
alternatives to circumvention that the 
petitioner failed to meaningfully 
challenge. Finally, they asserted that 
‘‘HDCP is a critically important 
component of the secure ecosystem 
through which content is delivered for 
home entertainment’’ and noted that 
section 1201 was intended to encourage 
copyright owners to make their works 
available digitally and foster new means 
of distribution by providing reasonable 
assurances against fears of piracy. 
NTIA recommended against this 
exemption, stating that ‘‘[p]roponents 
did not provide sufficient evidence on 
the record about the alleged non- 
infringing uses,’’ and that ‘‘[w]hile there 
are several examples of potential non- 
infringing uses that could serve as the 
basis for an exemption, the proponents 
[had] not developed the argument in the 
record . . . .’’ NTIA also observed that 
the proposed exemption ‘‘appear[ed] to 
be for the HDCP TPM itself, which is 
not appropriate for this rulemaking 
process.’’ 
The Acting Register also 
recommended against the exemption, 
largely agreeing with many of the bases 
advanced by opponents. Specifically, 
the Acting Register concluded that the 
proposed exemption was overly broad, 
as HDCP is the industry standard for 
protecting audiovisual works in transit 
to a display device, and thus limiting 
the proposal this way did not very 
meaningfully focus the scope beyond 
the starting point of all audiovisual 
works. The Acting Register also 
determined that some of the proposed 
uses may potentially be fair use 
depending upon factual circumstances, 
but that the record lacked the requisite 
detail and legal support for the Acting 
Register to conclude that the proposed 
uses are or are not likely to be 
noninfringing. Based upon the record, 
the Acting Register could not conclude 
that the overall availability for use of 
copyrighted works has been diminished 
or is likely to be in the next three years 
absent an exemption, noting that the 
proposed activities may well have a 
negative effect on the market for or 
value of copyrighted works. Finally, she 
concluded that the request was an 
individual case of de minimis impact, as 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:06 Oct 25, 2018 Jkt 247001 PO 00000 Frm 00063 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1khammond on DSK30JT082PROD with RULES

[PAGE 19]
54028 Federal Register / Vol. 83, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2018 / Rules and Regulations 
60 The Acting Register’s analysis and conclusions 
for this class, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Recommendation at 315–19. 
it was largely made upon a single 
request of an individual who resides in 
Singapore for which there appeared to 
be myriad alternative ways to achieve 
the proposed uses. 
3. Proposed Class 11: Computer 
Programs—Avionics
60 
Proposed Class 11 would permit 
circumvention of access controls on 
electronic systems used in aircraft, i.e., 
avionics, to enable access to aircraft 
flight, operations, maintenance and 
security bulk data collected by third 
parties upon authorization of the aircraft 
owner or operator in the course of 
complying with Federal Aviation 
Administration (‘‘FAA’’) standards, 
rules, and regulations. Due to reliance 
upon these electronic systems, 
proponents asserted that aircraft 
‘‘operators have faced a . . . rise in the 
complexity and scope of work needed to 
keep their fleet secure and operating 
efficiently,’’ and that the FAA ‘‘has 
mandated the review of the data, 
information, logs[,] and other 
information [by aircraft owners or 
operators] as a means to ensure safety, 
security[,] and regulatory compliance.’’ 
In NTIA’s view, ‘‘[p]roponents failed 
to demonstrate that the proposed class 
includes copyrighted works protected 
by TPMs.’’ Moreover, NTIA continued, 
‘‘Air Informatics failed to identify 
clearly the proposed users of the 
exemption,’’ suggesting that ‘‘the 
prohibition on circumvention does not 
adversely affect and is not likely to 
adversely affect users.’’ Lastly, NTIA 
maintained that ‘‘[r]easonable 
alternatives to circumvention seem to 
exist,’’ noting that ‘‘the two relevant 
parties can come to an agreement for 
access to and use of the data.’’ 
The Acting Register found that the 
record suggested that the data collected 
by aircrafts at issue consist of facts, 
which are not copyrightable. According 
to the petitioner, the information 
represents objective details about 
aircraft, such as flight operations and 
fuel economy. As Public Knowledge 
explained, the data inputs and outputs 
‘‘are not classifiable as a ‘work’ 
protected under Title 17’’ and such 
‘‘access does not implicate any colorable 
copyright concerns.’’ The Acting 
Register also concluded that the 
collected information would not qualify 
as a copyrightable compilation, because 
it is formatted and compiled in 
accordance with an industry-wide 
standard. The Acting Register 
accordingly concluded that proponents 
have not alleged that the data or data 
compilations they are seeking to access 
are copyrightable, and thus subject to 
the prohibition on circumvention. 
Although petitioner raised some 
concerns regarding attempts by airplane 
manufacturers to control the aftermarket 
for the data in security research and 
analytics, the Acting Register 
determined that it was not clear that 
section 1201 is facilitating those actions, 
and noted that the security research 
exemption may potentially be utilized 
to cover such activities, to the extent 
applicable. 
C. Conclusion 
Having considered the evidence in the 
record, the contentions of the 
commenting parties, and the statutory 
objectives, the Acting Register of 
Copyrights has recommended that the 
Librarian of Congress publish certain 
classes of works, as designated above, so 
that the prohibition against 
circumvention of technological 
measures that effectively control access 
to copyrighted works shall not apply to 
persons who engage in noninfringing 
uses of those particular classes of works. 
Dated: October 19, 2018. 
Karyn A. Temple, 
Acting Register of Copyrights and Director 
of the U.S. Copyright Office. 
Determination of the Librarian of 
Congress 
Having duly considered and accepted 
the Recommendation of the Acting 
Register of Copyrights, which 
Recommendation is hereby incorporated 
by reference, the Librarian of Congress, 
pursuant to 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C) and 
(D), hereby publishes as a new rule the 
classes of copyrighted works that shall 
for a three-year period be subject to the 
exemption provided in 17 U.S.C. 
1201(a)(1)(B) from the prohibition 
against circumvention of technological 
measures that effectively control access 
to copyrighted works set forth in 17 
U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(A). 
List of Subjects in 37 CFR Part 201 
Copyright, Exemptions to prohibition 
against circumvention. 
Final Regulations 
For the reasons set forth in the 
preamble, 37 CFR part 201 is amended 
as follows: 
PART 201—GENERAL PROVISIONS 
■ 1. The authority citation for part 201 
continues to read as follows: 
Authority: 17 U.S.C. 702. 
■ 2. Section 201.40 is amended by 
revising paragraphs (b) and (c) to read 
as follows: 
§ 201.40 Exemptions to prohibition against 
circumvention. 
* * * * * 
(b) Classes of copyrighted works. 
Pursuant to the authority set forth in 17 
U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C) and (D), and upon 
the recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights, the Librarian has 
determined that the prohibition against 
circumvention of technological 
measures that effectively control access 
to copyrighted works set forth in 17 
U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(A) shall not apply to 
persons who engage in noninfringing 
uses of the following classes of 
copyrighted works: 
(1) Motion pictures (including 
television shows and videos), as defined 
in 17 U.S.C. 101, where the motion 
picture is lawfully made and acquired 
on a DVD protected by the Content 
Scramble System, on a Blu-ray disc 
protected by the Advanced Access 
Content System, or via a digital 
transmission protected by a 
technological measure, and the person 
engaging in circumvention under 
paragraph (b)(1)(i) and (b)(1)(ii)(A) and 
(B) of this section reasonably believes 
that non-circumventing alternatives are 
unable to produce the required level of 
high-quality content, or the 
circumvention is undertaken using 
screen-capture technology that appears 
to be offered to the public as enabling 
the reproduction of motion pictures 
after content has been lawfully acquired 
and decrypted, where circumvention is 
undertaken solely in order to make use 
of short portions of the motion pictures 
in the following instances: 
(i) For the purpose of criticism or 
comment: 
(A) For use in documentary 
filmmaking, or other films where the 
motion picture clip is used in parody or 
for its biographical or historically 
significant nature; 
(B) For use in noncommercial videos 
(including videos produced for a paid 
commission if the commissioning 
entity’s use is noncommercial); or 
(C) For use in nonfiction multimedia 
e-books. 
(ii) For educational purposes: 
(A) By college and university faculty 
and students or kindergarten through 
twelfth-grade (K–12) educators and 
students (where the K–12 student is 
circumventing under the direct 
supervision of an educator), including 
of accredited general educational 
development (GED) programs, for the 
purpose of criticism, comment, 
teaching, or scholarship; 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:06 Oct 25, 2018 Jkt 247001 PO 00000 Frm 00064 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1khammond on DSK30JT082PROD with RULES

[PAGE 20]
54029 Federal Register / Vol. 83, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2018 / Rules and Regulations 
(B) By faculty of massive open online 
courses (MOOCs) offered by accredited 
nonprofit educational institutions to 
officially enrolled students through 
online platforms (which platforms 
themselves may be operated for profit), 
in film studies or other courses 
requiring close analysis of film and 
media excerpts, for the purpose of 
criticism or comment, where the MOOC 
provider through the online platform 
limits transmissions to the extent 
technologically feasible to such 
officially enrolled students, institutes 
copyright policies and provides 
copyright informational materials to 
faculty, students, and relevant staff 
members, and applies technological 
measures that reasonably prevent 
unauthorized further dissemination of a 
work in accessible form to others or 
retention of the work for longer than the 
course session by recipients of a 
transmission through the platform, as 
contemplated by 17 U.S.C. 110(2); or 
(C) By educators and participants in 
nonprofit digital and media literacy 
programs offered by libraries, museums, 
and other nonprofit entities with an 
educational mission, in the course of 
face-to-face instructional activities, for 
the purpose of criticism or comment, 
except that such users may only 
circumvent using screen-capture 
technology that appears to be offered to 
the public as enabling the reproduction 
of motion pictures after content has 
been lawfully acquired and decrypted. 
(2)(i) Motion pictures (including 
television shows and videos), as defined 
in 17 U.S.C. 101, where the motion 
picture is lawfully acquired on a DVD 
protected by the Content Scramble 
System, on a Blu-ray disc protected by 
the Advanced Access Content System, 
or via a digital transmission protected 
by a technological measure, where: 
(A) Circumvention is undertaken by a 
disability services office or other unit of 
a kindergarten through twelfth-grade 
educational institution, college, or 
university engaged in and/or 
responsible for the provision of 
accessibility services to students, for the 
purpose of adding captions and/or 
audio description to a motion picture to 
create an accessible version as a 
necessary accommodation for a student 
or students with disabilities under an 
applicable disability law, such as the 
Americans With Disabilities Act, the 
Individuals with Disabilities Education 
Act, or Section 504 of the Rehabilitation 
Act; 
(B) The educational institution unit in 
paragraph (b)(2)(i)(A) of this section has, 
after a reasonable effort, determined that 
an accessible version cannot be obtained 
at a fair price or in a timely manner; and 
(C) The accessible versions are 
provided to students or educators and 
stored by the educational institution in 
a manner intended to reasonably 
prevent unauthorized further 
dissemination of a work. 
(ii) For purposes of this paragraph 
(b)(2), ‘‘audio description’’ means an 
oral narration that provides an accurate 
rendering of the motion picture. 
(3) Literary works, distributed 
electronically, that are protected by 
technological measures that either 
prevent the enabling of read-aloud 
functionality or interfere with screen 
readers or other applications or assistive 
technologies: 
(i) When a copy of such a work is 
lawfully obtained by a blind or other 
person with a disability, as such a 
person is defined in 17 U.S.C. 121; 
provided, however, that the rights 
owner is remunerated, as appropriate, 
for the price of the mainstream copy of 
the work as made available to the 
general public through customary 
channels; or 
(ii) When such work is a nondramatic 
literary work, lawfully obtained and 
used by an authorized entity pursuant to 
17 U.S.C. 121. 
(4) Literary works consisting of 
compilations of data generated by 
medical devices that are wholly or 
partially implanted in the body or by 
their corresponding personal monitoring 
systems, where such circumvention is 
undertaken by a patient for the sole 
purpose of lawfully accessing the data 
generated by his or her own device or 
monitoring system and does not 
constitute a violation of applicable law, 
including without limitation the Health 
Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996, the 
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986 
or regulations of the Food and Drug 
Administration, and is accomplished 
through the passive monitoring of 
wireless transmissions that are already 
being produced by such device or 
monitoring system. 
(5) Computer programs that enable the 
following types of lawfully acquired 
wireless devices to connect to a wireless 
telecommunications network, when 
circumvention is undertaken solely in 
order to connect to a wireless 
telecommunications network and such 
connection is authorized by the operator 
of such network: 
(i) Wireless telephone handsets (i.e., 
cellphones); 
(ii) All-purpose tablet computers; 
(iii) Portable mobile connectivity 
devices, such as mobile hotspots, 
removable wireless broadband modems, 
and similar devices; and 
(iv) Wearable wireless devices 
designed to be worn on the body, such 
as smartwatches or fitness devices. 
(6) Computer programs that enable 
smartphones and portable all-purpose 
mobile computing devices to execute 
lawfully obtained software applications, 
where circumvention is accomplished 
for the sole purpose of enabling 
interoperability of such applications 
with computer programs on the 
smartphone or device, or to permit 
removal of software from the 
smartphone or device. For purposes of 
this paragraph (b)(6), a ‘‘portable all- 
purpose mobile computing device’’ is a 
device that is primarily designed to run 
a wide variety of programs rather than 
for consumption of a particular type of 
media content, is equipped with an 
operating system primarily designed for 
mobile use, and is intended to be 
carried or worn by an individual. 
(7) Computer programs that enable 
smart televisions to execute lawfully 
obtained software applications, where 
circumvention is accomplished for the 
sole purpose of enabling interoperability 
of such applications with computer 
programs on the smart television. 
(8) Computer programs that enable 
voice assistant devices to execute 
lawfully obtained software applications, 
where circumvention is accomplished 
for the sole purpose of enabling 
interoperability of such applications 
with computer programs on the device, 
or to permit removal of software from 
the device, and is not accomplished for 
the purpose of gaining unauthorized 
access to other copyrighted works. For 
purposes of this paragraph (b)(8), a 
‘‘voice assistant device’’ is a device that 
is primarily designed to run a wide 
variety of programs rather than for 
consumption of a particular type of 
media content, is designed to take user 
input primarily by voice, and is 
designed to be installed in a home or 
office. 
(9) Computer programs that are 
contained in and control the functioning 
of a lawfully acquired motorized land 
vehicle such as a personal automobile, 
commercial vehicle, or mechanized 
agricultural vehicle, except for programs 
accessed through a separate 
subscription service, when 
circumvention is a necessary step to 
allow the diagnosis, repair, or lawful 
modification of a vehicle function, 
where such circumvention does not 
constitute a violation of applicable law, 
including without limitation regulations 
promulgated by the Department of 
Transportation or the Environmental 
Protection Agency, and is not 
accomplished for the purpose of gaining 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:06 Oct 25, 2018 Jkt 247001 PO 00000 Frm 00065 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1khammond on DSK30JT082PROD with RULES

[PAGE 21]
54030 Federal Register / Vol. 83, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2018 / Rules and Regulations 
unauthorized access to other 
copyrighted works. 
(10) Computer programs that are 
contained in and control the functioning 
of a lawfully acquired smartphone or 
home appliance or home system, such 
as a refrigerator, thermostat, HVAC, or 
electrical system, when circumvention 
is a necessary step to allow the 
diagnosis, maintenance, or repair of 
such a device or system, and is not 
accomplished for the purpose of gaining 
access to other copyrighted works. For 
purposes of this paragraph (b)(10): 
(i) The ‘‘maintenance’’ of a device or 
system is the servicing of the device or 
system in order to make it work in 
accordance with its original 
specifications and any changes to those 
specifications authorized for that device 
or system; and 
(ii) The ‘‘repair’’ of a device or system 
is the restoring of the device or system 
to the state of working in accordance 
with its original specifications and any 
changes to those specifications 
authorized for that device or system. 
(11)(i) Computer programs, where the 
circumvention is undertaken on a 
lawfully acquired device or machine on 
which the computer program operates, 
or is undertaken on a computer, 
computer system, or computer network 
on which the computer program 
operates with the authorization of the 
owner or operator of such computer, 
computer system, or computer network, 
solely for the purpose of good-faith 
security research and does not violate 
any applicable law, including without 
limitation the Computer Fraud and 
Abuse Act of 1986. 
(ii) For purposes of this paragraph 
(b)(11), ‘‘good-faith security research’’ 
means accessing a computer program 
solely for purposes of good-faith testing, 
investigation, and/or correction of a 
security flaw or vulnerability, where 
such activity is carried out in an 
environment designed to avoid any 
harm to individuals or the public, and 
where the information derived from the 
activity is used primarily to promote the 
security or safety of the class of devices 
or machines on which the computer 
program operates, or those who use 
such devices or machines, and is not 
used or maintained in a manner that 
facilitates copyright infringement. 
(12)(i) Video games in the form of 
computer programs embodied in 
physical or downloaded formats that 
have been lawfully acquired as 
complete games, when the copyright 
owner or its authorized representative 
has ceased to provide access to an 
external computer server necessary to 
facilitate an authentication process to 
enable gameplay, solely for the purpose 
of: 
(A) Permitting access to the video 
game to allow copying and modification 
of the computer program to restore 
access to the game for personal, local 
gameplay on a personal computer or 
video game console; or 
(B) Permitting access to the video 
game to allow copying and modification 
of the computer program to restore 
access to the game on a personal 
computer or video game console when 
necessary to allow preservation of the 
game in a playable form by an eligible 
library, archives, or museum, where 
such activities are carried out without 
any purpose of direct or indirect 
commercial advantage and the video 
game is not distributed or made 
available outside of the physical 
premises of the eligible library, archives, 
or museum. 
(ii) Video games in the form of 
computer programs embodied in 
physical or downloaded formats that 
have been lawfully acquired as 
complete games, that do not require 
access to an external computer server 
for gameplay, and that are no longer 
reasonably available in the commercial 
marketplace, solely for the purpose of 
preservation of the game in a playable 
form by an eligible library, archives, or 
museum, where such activities are 
carried out without any purpose of 
direct or indirect commercial advantage 
and the video game is not distributed or 
made available outside of the physical 
premises of the eligible library, archives, 
or museum. 
(iii) Computer programs used to 
operate video game consoles solely to 
the extent necessary for an eligible 
library, archives, or museum to engage 
in the preservation activities described 
in paragraph (b)(12)(i)(B) or (b)(12)(ii) of 
this section. 
(iv) For purposes of this paragraph 
(b)(12), the following definitions shall 
apply: 
(A) For purposes of paragraph 
(b)(12)(i)(A) and (b)(12)(ii) of this 
section, ‘‘complete games’’ means video 
games that can be played by users 
without accessing or reproducing 
copyrightable content stored or 
previously stored on an external 
computer server. 
(B) For purposes of paragraph 
(b)(12)(i)(B) of this section, ‘‘complete 
games’’ means video games that meet 
the definition in paragraph (b)(12)(iv)(A) 
of this section, or that consist of both a 
copy of a game intended for a personal 
computer or video game console and a 
copy of the game’s code that was stored 
or previously stored on an external 
computer server. 
(C) ‘‘Ceased to provide access’’ means 
that the copyright owner or its 
authorized representative has either 
issued an affirmative statement 
indicating that external server support 
for the video game has ended and such 
support is in fact no longer available or, 
alternatively, server support has been 
discontinued for a period of at least six 
months; provided, however, that server 
support has not since been restored. 
(D) ‘‘Local gameplay’’ means 
gameplay conducted on a personal 
computer or video game console, or 
locally connected personal computers or 
consoles, and not through an online 
service or facility. 
(E) A library, archives, or museum is 
considered ‘‘eligible’’ when the 
collections of the library, archives, or 
museum are open to the public and/or 
are routinely made available to 
researchers who are not affiliated with 
the library, archives, or museum. 
(13)(i) Computer programs, except 
video games, that have been lawfully 
acquired and that are no longer 
reasonably available in the commercial 
marketplace, solely for the purpose of 
lawful preservation of a computer 
program, or of digital materials 
dependent upon a computer program as 
a condition of access, by an eligible 
library, archives, or museum, where 
such activities are carried out without 
any purpose of direct or indirect 
commercial advantage and the program 
is not distributed or made available 
outside of the physical premises of the 
eligible library, archives, or museum. 
(ii) For purposes of the exemption in 
paragraph (b)(13)(i) of this section, a 
library, archives, or museum is 
considered ‘‘eligible’’ if— 
(A) The collections of the library, 
archives, or museum are open to the 
public and/or are routinely made 
available to researchers who are not 
affiliated with the library, archives, or 
museum; 
(B) The library, archives, or museum 
has a public service mission; 
(C) The library, archives, or museum’s 
trained staff or volunteers provide 
professional services normally 
associated with libraries, archives, or 
museums; 
(D) The collections of the library, 
archives, or museum are composed of 
lawfully acquired and/or licensed 
materials; and 
(E) The library, archives, or museum 
implements reasonable digital security 
measures as appropriate for the 
activities permitted by this paragraph 
(b)(13). 
(14) Computer programs that operate 
3D printers that employ microchip- 
reliant technological measures to limit 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:06 Oct 25, 2018 Jkt 247001 PO 00000 Frm 00066 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1khammond on DSK30JT082PROD with RULES

[PAGE 22]
54031 Federal Register / Vol. 83, No. 208 / Friday, October 26, 2018 / Rules and Regulations 
the use of feedstock, when 
circumvention is accomplished solely 
for the purpose of using alternative 
feedstock and not for the purpose of 
accessing design software, design files, 
or proprietary data. 
(c) Persons who may initiate 
circumvention. To the extent authorized 
under paragraph (b) of this section, the 
circumvention of a technological 
measure that restricts wireless 
telephone handsets or other wireless 
devices from connecting to a wireless 
telecommunications network may be 
initiated by the owner of any such 
handset or other device, by another 
person at the direction of the owner, or 
by a provider of a commercial mobile 
radio service or a commercial mobile 
data service at the direction of such 
owner or other person, solely in order 
to enable such owner or a family 
member of such owner to connect to a 
wireless telecommunications network, 
when such connection is authorized by 
the operator of such network. 
Dated: October 19, 2018. 
Carla D. Hayden, 
Librarian of Congress 
[FR Doc. 2018–23241 Filed 10–25–18; 8:45 am] 
BILLING CODE 1410–30–P 
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
AGENCY 
40 CFR Parts 9 and 721 
[EPA–HQ–OPPT–2017–0464; FRL–9985–55] 
RIN 2070–AB27 
Significant New Use Rules on Certain 
Chemical Substances; Withdrawal 
AGENCY: Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA). 
ACTION: Withdrawal of direct final rule. 
SUMMARY: EPA is withdrawing 
significant new use rules (SNURs) 
promulgated under the Toxic 
Substances Control Act (TSCA) for 19 
chemical substances, which were the 
subject of premanufacture notices 
(PMNs). EPA published these SNURs 
using direct final rulemaking 
procedures, which requires EPA to take 
certain actions if an adverse comment is 
received. EPA received adverse 
comments and a request to extend the 
comment period regarding the SNURs 
identified in the direct final rule. 
Therefore, the Agency is withdrawing 
the direct final rule SNURs identified in 
this document, as required under the 
direct final rulemaking procedures. 
DATES: The direct final rule published at 
83 FR 43538 on August 27, 2018, is 
withdrawn effective October 26, 2018. 
ADDRESSES: The docket for this action, 
identified by docket identification (ID) 
number EPA–HQ–OPPT–2017–0464 is 
available at http://www.regulations.gov 
or at the Office of Pollution Prevention 
and Toxics Docket (OPPT Docket), 
Environmental Protection Agency 
Docket Center (EPA/DC), West William 
Jefferson Clinton Bldg., Rm. 3334, 1301 
Constitution Ave. NW, Washington, DC. 
The Public Reading Room is open from 
8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through 
Friday, excluding legal holidays. The 
telephone number for the Public 
Reading Room is (202) 566–1744, and 
the telephone number for the OPPT 
Docket is (202) 566–0280. Please review 
the visitor instructions and additional 
information about the docket available 
at http://www.epa.gov/dockets. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT : For 
technical information contact: Kenneth 
Moss, Chemical Control Division 
(7405M), Office of Pollution Prevention 
and Toxics, Environmental Protection 
Agency, 1200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW, 
Washington, DC 20460–0001; telephone 
number: (202) 564–9232; email address: 
moss.kenneth@epa.gov. 
For general information contact: The 
TSCA-Hotline, ABVI-Goodwill, 422 
South Clinton Ave., Rochester, NY 
14620; telephone number: (202) 554– 
1404; email address: TSCA-Hotline@
epa.gov. 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 
I. Does this action apply to me? 
A list of potentially affected entities is 
provided in the Federal Register of 
August 27, 2018 (83 FR 43538) (FRL– 
9982–24). If you have questions 
regarding the applicability of this action 
to a particular entity, consult the 
technical person listed under 
FOR 
FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT. 
II. What direct final SNURs are being 
withdrawn? 
In the Federal Register of August 27, 
2018 (83 FR 43538) (FRL–9982–24), 
EPA issued direct final SNURs for 19 
chemical substances that are identified 
in that document. Because the Agency 
received adverse comments and a 
request to extend the comment period 
regarding the SNURs identified in the 
document, EPA is withdrawing the 
direct final SNURS issued for these 19 
chemical substances, which were the 
subject of PMNs. In addition to the 
Direct Final SNURs, elsewhere in the 
same issue of the Federal Register of 
August 27, 2018 (83 FR 43538) (FRL– 
9982–24), EPA issued proposed SNURs 
covering these 19 chemical substances. 
EPA will address all adverse public 
comments in a subsequent final rule, 
based on the proposed rule. 
III. Good Cause Finding 
EPA determined that this document is 
not subject to the 30-day delay of 
effective date generally required by the 
Administrative Procedure Act (APA) (5 
U.S.C. 553(d)) because of the time 
limitations for publication in the 
Federal Register. This document must 
publish on or before the effective date 
of the direct final rule containing the 
direct final SNURs being withdrawn. 
IV. Statutory and Executive Order 
Reviews 
This action withdraws regulatory 
requirements that have not gone into 
effect and which contain no new or 
amended requirements and reopens a 
comment period. As such, the Agency 
has determined that this action will not 
have any adverse impacts, economic or 
otherwise. The statutory and Executive 
Order review requirements applicable to 
the direct final rules were discussed in 
the August 27, 2018 Federal Register 
(83 FR 43538). Those review 
requirements do not apply to this action 
because it is a withdrawal and does not 
contain any new or amended 
requirements. 
V. Congressional Review Act (CRA) 
Pursuant to the Congressional Review 
Act (5 U.S.C. 801 et seq.), EPA will 
submit a report containing this rule and 
other required information to the U.S. 
Senate, the U.S. House of 
Representatives, and the Comptroller 
General of the United States prior to 
publication of the rule in the Federal 
Register. This action is not a ‘‘major 
rule’’ as defined by 5 U.S.C. 804(2). 
Section 808 of the CRA allows the 
issuing agency to make a rule effective 
sooner than otherwise provided by CRA 
if the agency makes a good cause 
finding that notice and public procedure 
is impracticable, unnecessary, or 
contrary to the public interest. As 
required by 5 U.S.C. 808(2), this 
determination is supported by a brief 
statement in Unit III. 
List of Subjects 
40 CFR Part 9 
Environmental protection, Reporting 
and recordkeeping requirements. 
40 CFR Part 721 
Environmental protection, Chemicals, 
Hazardous substances, Reporting and 
recordkeeping requirements. 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:06 Oct 25, 2018 Jkt 247001 PO 00000 Frm 00067 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\26OCR1.SGM 26OCR1khammond on DSK30JT082PROD with RULES