[PAGE 1]
59627 Federal Register / Vol. 86, No. 206 / Thursday, October 28, 2021 / Rules and Regulations 
1 Staff of H. Comm. on the Judiciary, 105th Cong., 
Section-by-Section Analysis of H.R. 2281 as Passed 
by the United States House of Representatives on 
August 4, 1998, at 6 (Comm. Print 1998). 
2 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(3)(A). 
3 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(3)(B). 
4 See H.R. Rep. No. 105–551, pt. 2, at 36 (1998). 
5 See 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1). 
6 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C). 
7 Id. 
8 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(2). 
9 17 U.S.C. 1201(b). 
10 See 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(E) (‘‘Neither the 
exception under subparagraph (B) from the 
applicability of the prohibition contained in 
subparagraph (A), nor any determination made in 
a rulemaking conducted under subparagraph (C), 
may be used as a defense in any action to enforce 
any provision of this title other than this 
paragraph.’’). 
in its place the citation ‘‘34 CFR 
668.23(b)’’. 
■ b. In the parenthetical OMB control 
number at the end of the section, 
removing the words ‘‘control number 
1840–0688’’ and adding in their place 
the words ‘‘control number 1845–0039’’. 
■ c. Removing the parenthetical 
authority citation at the end of the 
section 
PART 691 [Removed and Reserved] 
■ 18. Under the authority of 20 U.S.C. 
1221e–3, part 691 is removed and 
reserved. 
[FR Doc. 2021–23423 Filed 10–27–21; 8:45 am] 
BILLING CODE 4000–01–P 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 
Copyright Office 
37 CFR Part 201 
[Docket No. 2020–11] 
Exemption to Prohibition on 
Circumvention of Copyright Protection 
Systems for Access Control 
Technologies 
AGENCY: U.S. Copyright Office, Library 
of Congress. 
ACTION: Final rule. 
SUMMARY: In this final rule, the Librarian 
of Congress adopts exemptions to the 
provision of the Digital Millennium 
Copyright Act (‘‘DMCA’’) that prohibits 
circumvention of technological 
measures that control access to 
copyrighted works. As required under 
the statute, the Register of Copyrights, 
following a public proceeding, 
submitted a recommendation 
concerning proposed exemptions to the 
Librarian of Congress (‘‘Register’s 
Recommendation’’). After careful 
consideration, the Librarian adopts final 
regulations based upon the Register’s 
Recommendation. 
DATES: Effective October 28, 2021. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT : 
Kevin R. Amer, Acting General Counsel 
and Associate Register of Copyrights, by 
email at kamer@copyright.gov, or Mark 
Gray, Attorney-Advisor, by email at 
mgray@copyright.gov. Each can be 
contacted by telephone by calling (202) 
707–8350. 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The 
Librarian of Congress, pursuant to 
section 1201(a)(1) of title 17, United 
States Code, has determined in this 
eighth triennial rulemaking proceeding 
that the prohibition against 
circumvention of technological 
measures that effectively control access 
to copyrighted works shall not apply for 
the next three years to persons who 
engage in certain noninfringing uses of 
certain classes of such works. This 
determination is based upon the 
Register’s Recommendation. 
The below discussion summarizes the 
rulemaking proceeding and the 
Register’s recommendations, announces 
the Librarian’s determination, and 
publishes the regulatory text specifying 
the exempted classes of works. A more 
complete discussion of the rulemaking 
process, the evidentiary record, and the 
Register’s analysis with respect to each 
proposed exemption can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation, which is 
posted at www.copyright.gov/1201/ 
2021/. 
I. Background 
A. Statutory Requirements 
Congress enacted the DMCA in 1998 
to implement certain provisions of the 
WIPO Copyright and WIPO 
Performances and Phonograms Treaties. 
Among other things, title I of the DMCA, 
which added a new chapter 12 to title 
17 of the U.S. Code, prohibits 
circumvention of technological 
measures employed by or on behalf of 
copyright owners to protect access to 
their works. In enacting this aspect of 
the law, Congress observed that 
technological protection measures 
(‘‘TPMs’’) can ‘‘support new ways of 
disseminating copyrighted materials to 
users, and . . . safeguard the 
availability of legitimate uses of those 
materials by individuals.’’
1 
Section 1201(a)(1) provides in 
pertinent part that ‘‘[n]o person shall 
circumvent a technological measure that 
effectively controls access to a work 
protected under [title 17].’’ Under the 
statute, to ‘‘circumvent a technological 
measure’’ means ‘‘to descramble a 
scrambled work, to decrypt an 
encrypted work, or otherwise to avoid, 
bypass, remove, deactivate, or impair a 
technological measure, without the 
authority of the copyright owner.’’
2 A 
technological measure that ‘‘effectively 
controls access to a work’’ is one that 
‘‘in the ordinary course of its operation, 
requires the application of information, 
or a process or a treatment, with the 
authority of the copyright owner, to gain 
access to the work.’’
3 
Section 1201(a)(1) also includes what 
Congress characterized as a ‘‘fail-safe’’ 
mechanism,4 which requires the 
Librarian of Congress, following a 
rulemaking proceeding, to exempt any 
class from the prohibition for a three- 
year period if she has determined that 
noninfringing uses by persons who are 
users of copyrighted works in that class 
are, or are likely to be, adversely 
affected by the prohibition against 
circumvention during that period.
5 The 
Librarian’s determination to grant an 
exemption is based upon the 
recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights, who conducts the 
rulemaking proceeding.
6 The Register 
consults with the Assistant Secretary for 
Communications and Information of the 
Department of Commerce, who oversees 
the National Telecommunications and 
Information Administration (‘‘NTIA’’), 
in the course of formulating her 
recommendations.
7 
Exemptions adopted by rule under 
section 1201(a)(1) apply only to the 
conduct of circumventing a 
technological measure that controls 
access to a copyrighted work. Other 
parts of section 1201 address the 
manufacture and provision of—or 
‘‘trafficking’’ in—products and services 
designed for purposes of circumvention. 
Section 1201(a)(2) bars trafficking in 
products and services that are used to 
circumvent technological measures that 
control access to copyrighted works (for 
example, a password needed to open a 
media file),
8 while section 1201(b) bars 
trafficking in products and services used 
to circumvent technological measures 
that protect the exclusive rights of the 
copyright owner (for example, 
technology that prevents the work from 
being reproduced).
9 The Librarian has 
no authority to adopt exemptions for the 
anti-trafficking prohibitions contained 
in section 1201(a)(2) or (b).
10 
The statute contains certain 
permanent exemptions to permit 
specified uses. These include section 
1201(d), which exempts certain 
activities of nonprofit libraries, archives, 
and educational institutions; section 
1201(e), which exempts ‘‘lawfully 
authorized investigative, protective, 
information security, or intelligence 
activity’’ of a state or the federal 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:25 Oct 27, 2021 Jkt 256001 PO 00000 Frm 00019 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1jspears on DSK121TN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 2]
59628 Federal Register / Vol. 86, No. 206 / Thursday, October 28, 2021 / Rules and Regulations 
11 Register of Copyrights, Section 1201 
Rulemaking: Eighth Triennial Proceeding to 
Determine Exemptions to the Prohibition on 
Circumvention, Recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights (Oct. 2021), https://cdn.loc.gov/ 
copyright/1201/2021/2021_Section_1201_Registers_
Recommendation.pdf (Register’s 
Recommendation’’). 
12 Register’s Recommendation at section II.C; U.S. 
Copyright Office, Section 1201 of Title 17 111–12 
(2017), https://www.copyright.gov/policy/1201/ 
section-1201-full-report.pdf (‘‘Section 1201 
Report’’). 
13 Section 1201 Report at 111–12; accord Register 
of Copyrights, Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh 
Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to 
the Prohibition on Circumvention, 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 
12–13 (Oct. 2018). References to the Register’s 
recommendations in prior rulemakings are cited by 
the year of publication followed by 
‘‘Recommendation’’ (e.g., ‘‘2018 
Recommendation’’). Prior Recommendations are 
available on the Copyright Office website at https:// 
www.copyright.gov/1201/. 
14 Section 1201 Report at 112. 
15 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(B). 
16 2006 Recommendation at 19. 
17 Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access 
Controls on Copyrighted Works, 85 FR 37399 (June 
22, 2020). 
18 Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access 
Controls on Copyrighted Works, 85 FR 37399, 
37400–02 (June 22, 2020); Exemptions to Permit 
Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted 
Works, 85 FR 65293, 65294–95 (Oct. 15, 2020). 
19 Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access 
Controls on Copyrighted Works, 85 FR 37399, 
37401–02 (June 22, 2020); Exemptions to Permit 
Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted 
Works, 85 FR 65293, 65295 (Oct. 15, 2020). 
20 Register’s Recommendation at III.D & IV. 
21 The submissions received in response to the 
NOI are available at https://www.copyright.gov/ 
1201/2021/. References to these submissions are by 
party and class name (abbreviated where 
appropriate) followed by ‘‘Renewal Pet.,’’ ‘‘Renewal 
Comment,’’ or party name and class number 
followed by ‘‘Pet.,’’ ‘‘Initial,’’ ‘‘Opp’n,’’ or ‘‘Reply’’ 
for comments submitted in the first, second, or 
third round, as applicable. 
22 Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access 
Controls on Copyrighted Works, 85 FR 65293, 
65293 (Oct. 15, 2020). 
government; section 1201(f), which 
exempts certain ‘‘reverse engineering’’ 
activities to facilitate interoperability; 
section 1201(g), which exempts certain 
types of research into encryption 
technologies; section 1201(h), which 
exempts certain activities to prevent the 
‘‘access of minors to material on the 
internet’’; section 1201(i), which 
exempts certain activities ‘‘solely for the 
purpose of preventing the collection or 
dissemination of personally identifying 
information’’; and section 1201(j), 
which exempts certain acts of ‘‘security 
testing’’ of computers and computer 
systems. 
B. Rulemaking Standards 
In adopting the DMCA, Congress 
imposed legal and evidentiary 
requirements for the section 1201 
rulemaking proceeding, as discussed in 
greater detail in the Register’s 
Recommendation
11 and the Copyright 
Office’s 2017 policy study on section 
1201.
12 The Register will recommend 
granting an exemption only ‘‘when the 
preponderance of the evidence in the 
record shows that the conditions for 
granting an exemption have been 
met.’’
13 The evidence must show ‘‘that 
it is more likely than not that users of 
a copyrighted work will, in the 
succeeding three-year period, be 
adversely affected by the prohibition on 
circumvention in their ability to make 
noninfringing uses of a particular class 
of copyrighted works.’’
14 
The Librarian must assess whether the 
implementation of access controls 
impairs the ability of individuals to 
make noninfringing uses of copyrighted 
works within the meaning of section 
1201(a)(1). To aid in this process, the 
Register develops a comprehensive 
administrative record using information 
submitted by interested members of the 
public, and makes recommendations to 
the Librarian concerning whether 
exemptions are warranted based on that 
record. 
To establish the need for an 
exemption, proponents must show, at a 
minimum, (1) that uses affected by the 
prohibition on circumvention are or are 
likely to be noninfringing; and (2) that 
as a result of a technological measure 
controlling access to a copyrighted 
work, the prohibition is causing, or in 
the next three years is likely to cause, 
an adverse impact on those uses. In 
addition, the Librarian must examine 
the statutory factors listed in section 
1201(a)(1): (1) The availability for use of 
copyrighted works; (2) the availability 
for use of works for nonprofit archival, 
preservation, and educational purposes; 
(3) the impact that the prohibition on 
the circumvention of technological 
measures applied to copyrighted works 
has on criticism, comment, news 
reporting, teaching, scholarship, or 
research; (4) the effect of circumvention 
of technological measures on the market 
for or value of copyrighted works; and 
(5) such other factors as the Librarian 
considers appropriate. 
Finally, section 1201(a)(1) specifies 
that any exemption adopted as part of 
this rulemaking must be defined based 
on ‘‘a particular class of works.’’
15 
Among other things, the determination 
of the appropriate scope of a ‘‘class of 
works’’ recommended for exemption 
may take into account the adverse 
effects an exemption may have on the 
market for or value of copyrighted 
works. Accordingly, ‘‘it can be 
appropriate to refine a class by reference 
to the use or user in order to remedy the 
adverse effect of the prohibition and to 
limit the adverse consequences of an 
exemption.’’
16 
II. History of the Eighth Triennial 
Proceeding 
The Office initiated the eighth 
triennial rulemaking proceeding 
through a Notice of Inquiry (‘‘NOI’’) on 
June 22, 2020.
17 The NOI requested 
petitions for renewal of exemptions 
adopted in the 2018 rulemaking, 
petitions in opposition to renewal, and 
any petitions for new exemptions, 
including proposals to expand a current 
exemption. The Office received twenty- 
six petitions for new exemptions, 
including thirteen comments seeking to 
expand certain current exemptions. 
As in the prior rulemaking, the Office 
employed a streamlined process for 
renewing existing exemptions in this 
proceeding, detailing the renewal 
process in its public notices.
18 
Streamlined renewal is based upon a 
determination that, due to a lack of 
legal, marketplace, or technological 
changes, the factors that led the Register 
to recommend adoption of the 
exemption in the prior rulemaking are 
expected to continue into the 
forthcoming triennial period.
19 That is, 
the same material facts and 
circumstances underlying the 
previously-adopted regulatory 
exemption may be relied on to renew 
the exemption. Because the statute 
requires that exemptions be adopted 
upon a new determination concerning 
the next three-year period, the fact that 
the Librarian previously adopted an 
exemption creates no presumption that 
readoption is appropriate. 
The Register’s Recommendation 
provides a detailed description of the 
process the Office used to create a 
record for each renewal petition.
20 In 
brief, the Office first solicited renewal 
petitions as well as comments from 
participants opposing the readoption of 
the exemption. The Office received 
thirty-two renewal petitions and fifteen 
comments in response to those 
petitions. Seven comments supported 
renewal of a current exemption, and 
eight comments raised discrete concerns 
with specific petitions, but did not 
oppose readoption of the relevant 
exemption.
21 
On October 15, 2020, the Office 
issued its notice of proposed rulemaking 
(‘‘NPRM’’) identifying the existing 
exemptions for which the Register 
intended to recommend renewal, and 
outlined the proposed classes for new 
exemptions, for which three rounds of 
public comments were initiated.
22 
Those proposals were organized into 
seventeen classes of works. Six of the 
seventeen proposed exemptions sought 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:25 Oct 27, 2021 Jkt 256001 PO 00000 Frm 00020 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1jspears on DSK121TN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 3]
59629 Federal Register / Vol. 86, No. 206 / Thursday, October 28, 2021 / Rules and Regulations 
23 Participants’ post-hearing letter responses are 
available at https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2021/ 
post-hearing/. 
24 All ex parte letters in the eighth triennial 
rulemaking can be found at https://
www.copyright.gov/1201/2021/ex-parte- 
communications.html. 
25 Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access 
Controls on Copyrighted Works, 85 FR 65293, 
65295 (Oct. 15, 2020); see also Exemptions to 
Permit Circumvention of Access Controls on 
Copyrighted Works, 85 FR 37399, 37402 (June 22, 
2020) (describing ‘‘meaningful opposition’’ 
standard). 
26 See 37 CFR 201.40(b)(1). In the 2018 
rulemaking, this recommended regulatory language 
was the result of consideration of one proposed 
class of works that grouped together five petitions. 
See 2018 Recommendation at 31–34. 
27 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.A.1. 
28 The individuals and organizations include 
Peter Decherney, Katherine Sender, John L. Jackson, 
Int’l Commc’n Ass’n, Soc’y for Cinema and Media 
Studies, Console-ing Passions, Library Copyright 
All., and Am. Ass’n of Univ. Professors. 
29 Joint Educators AV Educ. Renewal Pet. at 3. 
30 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.A.2. 
31 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.A.3. 
32 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.A.4. 
expansions of existing exemptions, 
seven proposed entirely new 
exemptions, and four contained a 
combination of both expansions and 
new exemptions. The Office then held 
seven days of public hearings in which 
it heard testimony from numerous 
participants. After the hearings, the 
Office issued written questions to 
hearing participants regarding certain 
proposed classes.
23 Finally, the Office 
held several ex parte meetings with 
participants concerning ten proposed 
classes.
24 
As required by section 1201(a)(1), the 
Register consulted with NTIA during 
this rulemaking. NTIA provided input at 
various stages and participated in the 
virtual public hearings. NTIA formally 
communicated its views on each of the 
proposed exemptions to the Register on 
October 1, 2021. The Office addresses 
NTIA’s substantive views on the 
proposed classes below. NTIA’s 
recommendations can be viewed at 
https://cdn.loc.gov/copyright/1201/ 
2021/2021_NTIA_DMCA_Letter.pdf. 
III. Summary of Register’s 
Recommendation 
A. Renewal Recommendations 
As set forth in the NPRM, the Register 
received petitions to renew each of the 
exemptions adopted pursuant to the 
seventh triennial rulemaking. Eight 
comments in response to renewal 
petitions raised discrete concerns with 
specific petitions, but none opposed the 
verbatim readoption of an existing 
regulatory exemption or disputed the 
reliability of the previously analyzed 
administrative record.
25 The Register 
recommends renewal of these 
exemptions based on the information 
provided in the renewal petitions and 
the lack of meaningful opposition, 
finding that the conditions that led to 
adoption of the exemptions are likely to 
continue during the next triennial 
period. The existing exemptions, and 
the bases for the recommendation to 
readopt each exemption in accordance 
with the streamlined renewal process, 
are discussed in detail in the 
Recommendation and summarized 
briefly below. Where noted, these 
exemptions serve as a baseline in 
considering requests for expansion. 
1. Audiovisual Works—Educational and 
Derivative Uses 
Multiple individuals and 
organizations petitioned to renew the 
exemption covering the use of short 
portions of motion pictures for various 
educational and derivative uses.
26 The 
Office did not receive meaningful 
opposition to readoption of these 
exemptions. Petitions to renew the 
various subparts of the exemption are 
discussed below. The existing 
exemption and its various subparts 
collectively serve as the baseline in 
assessing whether to recommend any 
expansions in Class 1. 
a. Audiovisual Works—Criticism and 
Comment, Teaching, or Scholarship— 
Universities and K–12 Educational 
Institutions.
27 
Multiple individuals and 
organizations petitioned to renew the 
exemption for motion pictures for 
educational purposes by college and 
university or K–12 faculty and students. 
The Office did not receive substantive 
opposition to readoption of this 
exemption. The petitions demonstrated 
that educators and students continue to 
rely on excerpts from digital media for 
class presentations and coursework. For 
example, a collective of individuals and 
organizations provided several 
examples of professors using DVD clips 
in the classroom. A group of individual 
educators and educational 
organizations
28 broadly suggested that 
the ‘‘entire field’’ of video essays or 
multimedia criticism ‘‘could not have 
existed in the United States without fair 
use and the 1201 educational 
exemption.’’
29 Petitioners demonstrated 
personal knowledge and experience 
with regard to this exemption based on 
their representation of thousands of 
digital and literacy educators and/or 
members supporting educators and 
students, combined with past 
participation in the section 1201 
triennial rulemaking. The Register finds 
that petitioners demonstrated a 
continuing need and justification for the 
exemption. 
b. Audiovisual Works—Criticism and 
Comment—Massive Open Online 
Courses (‘‘MOOCs’’).
30 
A collective of individuals and 
organizations and Brigham Young 
University (‘‘BYU’’) petitioned to renew 
the exemption for educational uses of 
motion pictures in MOOCs. The Office 
did not receive meaningful opposition 
to readoption of this exemption. The 
petitions demonstrated the continuing 
need and justification for the 
exemption, stating that instructors 
continue to rely on the exemption to 
develop, provide, and improve MOOCs, 
as well as to increase the number of 
(and therefore access to) MOOCs in the 
field of film and media studies. 
c. Audiovisual Works—Criticism and 
Comment—Digital and Media Literacy 
Programs
31 
Library Copyright Alliance (‘‘LCA’’) 
and Renee Hobbs petitioned to renew 
the exemption for motion pictures for 
educational uses in nonprofit digital 
and media literacy programs offered by 
libraries, museums, and other 
organizations. No oppositions were filed 
against readoption of this exemption. 
The petition stated that librarians across 
the country have relied on the current 
exemption and will continue to do so 
for their digital and media literacy 
programs, thereby demonstrating the 
continuing need and justification for the 
exemption. 
d. Audiovisual Works—Criticism and 
Comment—Multimedia E-books
32 
Multiple petitioners jointly sought to 
renew the exemption for the use of 
motion picture excerpts in nonfiction 
multimedia e-books. The Office did not 
receive meaningful opposition to 
readoption of this exemption. The 
petition demonstrated the continuing 
need and justification for the 
exemption. In addition, the petitioners 
demonstrated personal knowledge 
through Bobette Buster’s continued 
work on an e-book series based on her 
lecture series, ‘‘Deconstructing Master 
Filmmakers: The Uses of Cinematic 
Enchantment,’’ which ‘‘relies on the 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:25 Oct 27, 2021 Jkt 256001 PO 00000 Frm 00021 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1jspears on DSK121TN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 4]
59630 Federal Register / Vol. 86, No. 206 / Thursday, October 28, 2021 / Rules and Regulations 
33 Bobette Buster, Authors All. & Am. Ass’n of 
Univ. Professors Nonfiction Multimedia E-Books 
Renewal Pet. at 3. 
34 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.A.5. 
35 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.A.6. 
36 OTW Noncommercial Videos Renewal Pet. at 3. 
37 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the Register’s 
Recommendation at IV.B. 
38 BYU Captioning Renewal Pet. at 3. 
39 Accessibility Petitioners Captioning Renewal 
Pet. at 3. 
40 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the Register’s 
Recommendation at IV.C. 
41 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the Register’s 
Recommendation at IV.D. 
42 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the Register’s 
Recommendation at IV.E. 
43 Competitive Carriers Ass’n Unlocking Renewal 
Pet.; Inst. of Scrap Recycling Indus., Inc. Unlocking 
Renewal Pet. 
44 ISRI Unlocking Renewal Pet. at 3. 
45 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the Register’s 
Recommendation at IV.F. 
availability of high-resolution video not 
available without circumvention of 
TPMs.’’
33 
e. Audiovisual Works—Criticism and 
Comment—Filmmaking
34 
Multiple organizations petitioned to 
renew the exemption for motion 
pictures for uses in documentary films 
or other films where the use is a parody 
or based on the work’s biographical or 
historically significant nature. The 
Office did not receive meaningful 
opposition to readoption of this 
exemption. Petitioners stated that they 
personally know many filmmakers who 
have found it necessary to rely on this 
exemption and will continue to do so. 
The petitions summarized the 
continuing need and justification for the 
exemption. 
f. Audiovisual Works—Criticism and 
Comment—Noncommercial Videos
35 
Two organizations petitioned to 
renew the exemption for motion 
pictures for uses in noncommercial 
videos. The Office did not receive 
meaningful opposition to readoption of 
this exemption. Petitioners stated that 
they had personal knowledge that video 
creators have relied on this exemption 
and anticipate needing to continue to 
use the exemption in the future. The 
Organization for Transformative Works 
(‘‘OTW’’) included an account from an 
academic who stated that footage ripped 
from DVDs and Blu-ray is preferred for 
‘‘vidders’’ (noncommercial remix artists) 
because ‘‘it is high quality enough to 
bear up under the transformations that 
vidders make to it.’’
36 The petitions 
therefore demonstrated the continuing 
need and justification for the 
exemption. 
2. Audiovisual Works—Accessibility
37 
Multiple organizations petitioned to 
renew the exemption for motion 
pictures for the provision of captioning 
and/or audio description by disability 
services offices or similar units at 
educational institutions for students 
with disabilities. No oppositions were 
filed in connection with readoption of 
this exemption. The petitions 
demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption, and the 
petitioners demonstrated personal 
knowledge and experience as to the 
exemption. For example, BYU asserted 
that its disability services offices 
‘‘sometimes need to create accessible 
versions of motion pictures’’ to 
accommodate its students with 
disabilities.
38 The petitions stated that 
there is a need for the exemption going 
forward; indeed, one group of 
petitioners stated that ‘‘the need is 
likely to increase significantly in light of 
the ongoing COVID–19 pandemic as 
many educational institutions shift to 
online learning and the use of digital 
multimedia by faculty increases.’’
39 
This existing exemption serves as the 
baseline in assessing whether to 
recommend any expansions in Class 3. 
3. Literary Works Distributed 
Electronically—Accessibility
40 
Multiple organizations petitioned to 
renew the exemption for literary works 
distributed electronically (i.e., e-books), 
for use with assistive technologies for 
persons who are blind, visually 
impaired, or have print disabilities. No 
oppositions were filed against 
readoption of this exemption. The 
petitions demonstrated the continuing 
need and justification for the 
exemption, stating that individuals who 
are blind, visually impaired, or print 
disabled have difficulty obtaining 
accessible e-book content because TPMs 
interfere with the use of assistive 
technologies. Petitioners noted that their 
members frequently cite accessibility of 
e-books as a top priority. Finally, 
petitioners demonstrated personal 
knowledge and experience with regard 
to the assistive technology exemption 
because they are all organizations that 
advocate for the blind, visually 
impaired, and print disabled. This 
existing exemption serves as the 
baseline in assessing whether to 
recommend any expansions in Class 8. 
4. Literary Works—Medical Device 
Data
41 
Hugo Campos petitioned to renew the 
exemption covering access to patient 
data on networked medical devices. No 
oppositions were filed against 
readoption of this exemption, and 
Consumer Reports submitted a comment 
in support of the renewal petition. Mr. 
Campos’s petition demonstrated the 
continuing need and justification for the 
exemption, stating that patients 
continue to need access to data output 
from their medical devices to manage 
their health. Mr. Campos demonstrated 
personal knowledge and experience 
with regard to this exemption, as he is 
a patient needing access to the data 
output from his medical device and a 
member of a coalition whose members 
research the effectiveness of networked 
medical devices. This existing 
exemption serves as the baseline in 
assessing whether to recommend any 
expansions in Class 9. 
5. Computer Programs—Unlocking
42 
Multiple organizations petitioned to 
renew the exemption for computer 
programs that operate cellphones, 
tablets, mobile hotspots, or wearable 
devices (e.g., smartwatches) to allow 
connection of a new or used device to 
an alternative wireless network 
(‘‘unlocking’’).
43 No oppositions were 
filed against readoption of this 
exemption, and Consumer Reports 
submitted a comment in support of the 
renewal petition. The petitions 
demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption, stating 
that consumers of the enumerated 
products continue to need to be able to 
unlock the devices so they can switch 
network providers. For example, the 
Institute of Scrap Recycling Industries, 
Inc. (‘‘ISRI’’) stated that its members 
continue to purchase or acquire donated 
cell phones, tablets, and other wireless 
devices and try to reuse them, but that 
wireless carriers lock devices to prevent 
them from being used on other 
carriers.
44 In addition, petitioners 
demonstrated personal knowledge and 
experience with regard to this 
exemption. This existing exemption 
serves as the baseline in assessing 
whether to recommend any expansions 
in Class 10. 
6. Computer Programs—Jailbreaking
45 
Multiple organizations petitioned to 
renew the exemptions for computer 
programs that operate smartphones, 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:25 Oct 27, 2021 Jkt 256001 PO 00000 Frm 00022 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1jspears on DSK121TN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 5]
59631 Federal Register / Vol. 86, No. 206 / Thursday, October 28, 2021 / Rules and Regulations 
46 SFC Jailbreaking Renewal Pet. at 3. 
47 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the Register’s 
Recommendation at IV.G. 
48 MEMA Vehicle Repair Renewal Pet. at 3. 
49 ACA Vehicle Repair Renewal Pet. at 3. 
50 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the Register’s 
Recommendation at IV.H. 
51 EFF Device Repair Renewal Pet. at 3; EFF, 
Repair Ass’n & iFixit Device Repair Renewal Pet. at 
3. 
52 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the Register’s 
Recommendation at IV.I. 
53 J. Alex Halderman, CDT & ACM Security 
Research Renewal Pet. at 4. 
54 MEMA Security Research Renewal Pet. at 3. 
55 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the Register’s 
Recommendation at IV.J. 
56 SPN & LCA Software Preservation Renewal Pet. 
at 3. 
tablets and other portable all-purpose 
mobile computing devices, smart TVs, 
or voice assistant devices to allow the 
device to interoperate with or to remove 
software applications (‘‘jailbreaking’’). 
No oppositions were filed against 
readoption of this exemption, and 
Consumer Reports submitted a comment 
in support of the renewal petition. The 
petitions demonstrated the continuing 
need and justification for the 
exemption, and that petitioners have 
personal knowledge and experience 
with regard to this exemption. For 
example, regarding smart TVs 
specifically, the Software Freedom 
Conservancy (‘‘SFC’’) asserted that it has 
‘‘reviewed the policies and product 
offerings of major Smart TV 
manufacturers (Sony, LG, Samsung, etc.) 
and they are substantially the same as 
those examined during the earlier 
rulemaking process.’’
46 The petitions 
stated that, absent an exemption, TPMs 
applied to the enumerated products 
would have an adverse effect on 
noninfringing uses, such as being able to 
install third-party applications on a 
smartphone or download third-party 
software on a smart TV to enable 
interoperability. This existing 
exemption serves as the baseline in 
assessing whether to recommend any 
expansions in Class 11. 
7. Computer Programs—Repair of 
Motorized Land Vehicles
47 
Multiple organizations petitioned to 
renew the exemption for computer 
programs that control motorized land 
vehicles, including farm equipment, for 
purposes of diagnosis, repair, or 
modification of a vehicle function. The 
Office did not receive meaningful 
opposition to readoption of this 
exemption, and Consumer Reports 
submitted a comment in support of the 
renewal petition. The petitions 
demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption. For 
example, the Motor & Equipment 
Manufacturers Association (‘‘MEMA’’) 
stated that over the past three years, its 
membership ‘‘has seen firsthand that the 
exemption is helping protect consumer 
choice and a competitive market, while 
mitigating risks to intellectual property 
and vehicle safety.’’
48 Similarly, the 
Auto Care Association (‘‘ACA’’) stated 
that ‘‘[u]nless this exemption is 
renewed, the software measures 
manufacturers deploy for the purpose of 
controlling access to vehicle software 
will prevent Auto Care members from 
lawfully assisting consumers in the 
maintenance, repair, and upgrade of 
their vehicles.’’
49 The petitioners 
demonstrated personal knowledge and 
experience with regard to this 
exemption; each either represents or 
gathered information from individuals 
or businesses that perform vehicle 
service and repair. This existing 
exemption, as well as the existing 
exemption pertaining to repair of 
smartphones, home appliances, and 
home systems, serve as the baseline in 
assessing whether to recommend any 
expansions in Class 12. 
8. Computer Programs—Repair of 
Smartphones, Home Appliances, and 
Home Systems
50 
Multiple organizations petitioned to 
renew the exemption for computer 
programs that control smartphones, 
home appliances, or home systems, for 
diagnosis, maintenance, or repair of the 
device or system. The Office did not 
receive meaningful opposition to 
readoption of this exemption, and 
Consumer Reports submitted a comment 
in support of the renewal petition. The 
petitions demonstrated the continuing 
need and justification for the 
exemption. For example, the Electronic 
Frontier Foundation (‘‘EFF’’), the Repair 
Association, and iFixit asserted that 
‘‘[m]anufacturers of these devices 
continue to implement [TPMs] that 
inhibit lawful repairs, maintenance, and 
diagnostics, and they show no sign of 
changing course.’’
51 This existing 
exemption, as well as the existing 
exemption pertaining to repair of 
motorized land vehicles, serve as the 
baseline in assessing whether to 
recommend any expansions in Class 12. 
9. Computer Programs—Security 
Research
52 
Multiple organizations and security 
researchers petitioned to renew the 
exemption permitting circumvention for 
purposes of good-faith security research. 
No oppositions were filed against 
readoption of this exemption, and 
Consumer Reports submitted a comment 
in support of the renewal petition. The 
petitioners demonstrated the continuing 
need and justification for the 
exemption, as well as personal 
knowledge and experience with regard 
to this exemption. For example, J. Alex 
Halderman, the Center for Democracy 
and Technology (‘‘CDT’’), and the U.S. 
Technology Policy Committee of the 
Association for Computing Machinery 
(‘‘ACM’’) highlighted the need to find 
and detect vulnerabilities in voting 
machines and other election systems in 
response to increasing aggressiveness on 
the part of threat actors, including other 
nation states.
53 MEMA stated that its 
membership ‘‘experienced firsthand that 
the exemption is helping encourage 
innovation in the automotive industry 
while mitigating risks to intellectual 
property and vehicle safety,’’ and 
opined that the current exemption 
strikes an ‘‘appropriate balance.’’
54 This 
existing exemption serves as the 
baseline in assessing whether to 
recommend any expansions in Class 13. 
10. Computer Programs—Software 
Preservation
55 
The Software Preservation Network 
(‘‘SPN’’) and LCA petitioned to renew 
the exemption for computer programs, 
other than video games, for the 
preservation of computer programs and 
computer program-dependent materials 
by libraries, archives, and museums. No 
oppositions were filed against 
readoption of this exemption. The 
petition stated that libraries, archives, 
and museums continue to need the 
exemption to preserve and curate 
software and materials dependent on 
software. For example, the petition 
explained that researchers at the 
University of Virginia designed a project 
in order to access a collection of 
drawings and plans from a local 
Charlottesville architecture firm, and 
that without the exemption, the 
outdated Computer Aided Design 
software used to create many of the 
designs ‘‘may have remained 
inaccessible to researchers, rendering 
the designs themselves inaccessible, 
too.’’
56 In addition, petitioners 
demonstrated personal knowledge and 
experience with regard to this 
exemption through past participation in 
the section 1201 triennial rulemaking 
relating to access controls on software, 
and/or representing major library 
associations with members who have 
relied on this exemption. This existing 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:25 Oct 27, 2021 Jkt 256001 PO 00000 Frm 00023 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1jspears on DSK121TN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 6]
59632 Federal Register / Vol. 86, No. 206 / Thursday, October 28, 2021 / Rules and Regulations 
57 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the Register’s 
Recommendation at IV.K. 
58 SPN & LCA Abandoned Video Game Renewal 
Pet. at 3. 
59 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the Register’s 
Recommendation at IV.L. 
60 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for 
these classes, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at V.A. 
61 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the Register’s 
Recommendation at V.C. 
exemption, as well as the exemption 
pertaining to video game preservation, 
serve as the baseline in assessing 
whether to recommend any expansions 
in Class 14. 
11. Computer Programs—Video Game 
Preservation
57 
SPN and LCA petitioned to renew the 
exemption for preservation of video 
games for which outside server support 
has been discontinued. No oppositions 
were filed against readoption of this 
exemption, and Consumer Reports 
submitted a comment in support of the 
renewal petition. The petition stated 
that libraries, archives, and museums 
continue to need the exemption to 
preserve and curate video games in 
playable form. For example, the petition 
highlighted Georgia Tech University 
Library’s Computing Lab, retroTECH, 
which has made a significant collection 
of recovered video game consoles 
accessible for research and teaching 
uses pursuant to the exemption.
58 
Petitioners demonstrated personal 
knowledge and experience with regard 
to this exemption through past 
participation in the section 1201 
triennial rulemaking, and/or through 
their representation of members who 
have relied on this exemption. This 
existing exemption, as well as the above 
exemption pertaining to software 
preservation, serve as the baseline in 
assessing whether to recommend any 
expansions in Class 14. 
12. Computer Programs—3D Printers
59 
Michael Weinberg petitioned to renew 
the exemption for computer programs 
that operate 3D printers to allow use of 
alternative feedstock. No oppositions 
were filed against readoption of this 
exemption. The petition demonstrated 
the continuing need and justification for 
the exemption, and petitioner 
demonstrated personal knowledge and 
experience regarding the exemption. 
Specifically, Mr. Weinberg declared that 
he is a member of the 3D printing 
community and previously participated 
in the section 1201 triennial 
rulemaking. In addition, the petition 
stated that manufacturers of 3D printers 
continue to limit the types of materials 
that may be used with the devices. This 
existing exemption serves as the 
baseline in assessing whether to 
recommend any expansions in Class 15. 
B. New or Expanded Designations of 
Classes 
Based upon the record in this 
proceeding regarding proposed 
expansions to existing exemptions or 
newly proposed exemptions, the 
Register recommends that the Librarian 
determine that the following classes of 
works be exempt from the prohibition 
against circumvention of technological 
measures set forth in section 1201(a)(1): 
1. Proposed Class 1: Audiovisual 
Works—Criticism and Comment
60 
Proposed Class 1 sought to expand the 
existing exemption that permits 
circumvention of access controls 
protecting excerpts of motion pictures 
on DVDs, Blu-ray discs, and digitally 
transmitted video for the purposes of 
criticism and comment, including for 
educational purposes by certain users. 
Three different petitions were filed in 
this class. OTW’s proposed exemption 
sought to eliminate multiple limitations, 
including the requirement that a user 
consider whether screen capture 
technology is a viable alternative before 
circumvention. BYU’s proposed 
exemption would permit circumvention 
by college or university employees or 
students or by K–12 educators or 
students acting under the direct 
supervision of an educator, and would 
significantly alter the language of the 
current exemption regarding the 
purpose of the circumvention. A group 
of individual educators and educational 
organizations (‘‘Joint Educators’’) 
proposed an exemption that would 
permit circumvention by ‘‘educators 
and preparers of online learning 
materials’’ to be used on online learning 
platforms. All three proposals sought to 
remove the reference to screen capture 
from the existing exemption. OTW and 
Joint Educators’ proposals sought to use 
short portions of motion pictures; the 
BYU proposal sought use of full-length 
works. The proposals addressed several 
uses of motion pictures that proponents 
contended are noninfringing and that 
they argued are adversely affected by 
TPMs. NTIA supported the proposed 
exemption, but proposed some 
amendments to the text. 
Opponents argued that the proposed 
changes were unwarranted or 
unnecessary. The Motion Picture 
Association, the Alliance for Recorded 
Music, and the Entertainment Software 
Association (collectively, ‘‘Joint 
Creators’’) and the DVD Copy Control 
Association (‘‘DVD CCA’’) and the 
Advanced Access Content System 
Licensing Administrator, LLC (‘‘AACS 
LA’’) argued that screen capture 
technology has improved and remains 
an adequate alternative in some 
circumstances. Joint Creators also 
argued that the Joint Educators’ 
proposal to expand the exemption to 
‘‘educators and preparers of online 
learning materials’’ could permit 
circumvention by businesses and 
threaten the market for licensed clips. 
DVD CCA and AACS LA contended that 
expanding the exemption to cover 
employees of a qualifying MOOC was 
unnecessary for online educators to 
prepare materials. 
For the reasons detailed in the 
Register’s Recommendation, the Register 
recommended expanding the exemption 
to permit employees of colleges and 
universities to circumvent at the 
direction of a faculty member for the 
purpose of teaching a course, and also 
to cover similar uses by both faculty and 
employees acting at the direction of 
faculty members of accredited nonprofit 
educational institutions for the purposes 
of offering MOOCs. The Register further 
recommended retaining the screen 
capture provision in the exemption to 
anticipate the possibility that screen 
capture technology could be found to 
involve circumvention. The Register 
concluded that the exemption should 
not be expanded or amended to cover 
copying for the purpose of performing 
full-length motion pictures for 
educational purposes; to replace the 
phrase ‘‘short portions’’ with 
‘‘reasonable and limited portions’’; to 
enable circumvention by for-profit and/ 
or unaccredited educational companies 
and organizations; or to cover the 
broadly defined ‘‘educators and 
preparers of online learning materials’’ 
of ‘‘online learning platforms.’’ 
2. Proposed Class 3: Audiovisual 
Works—Accessibility
61 
Class 3 proponents sought to expand 
several provisions of the current 
exemption for adding captions or audio 
description to motion pictures for the 
benefit of students with disabilities. 
Proponents requested expanding the 
exemption to include faculty and staff 
with disabilities at educational 
institutions as beneficiaries, explicitly 
permitting reuse of previously 
remediated materials, allowing for 
proactive remediation in advance of a 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:25 Oct 27, 2021 Jkt 256001 PO 00000 Frm 00024 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1jspears on DSK121TN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 7]
59633 Federal Register / Vol. 86, No. 206 / Thursday, October 28, 2021 / Rules and Regulations 
62 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the Register’s 
Recommendation at V.E. 
63 Space-shifting occurs when a work is 
transferred from one storage medium to another, 
such as from a DVD to a computer hard drive. See 
2015 Recommendation at 107. 
64 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the Register’s 
Recommendation at V.G. 
65 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for 
these classes, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at V.H. 
specific request for accessible material, 
and clarifying the market-check 
requirement to encompass only works 
on the market that are of ‘‘sufficient 
quality.’’ Joint Creators and DVD CCA & 
AACS LA filed oppositions. NTIA 
supported the proposed exemption. 
For the reasons discussed in the 
Register’s Recommendation, the Register 
concluded that expanding the 
exemption to faculty and staff with 
disabilities, allowing reuse of previously 
remediated material, and permitting 
proactive remediation are likely fair 
uses because they are directed towards 
adding captions or audio descriptions in 
compliance with disability law, the 
same purpose found fair in the 
Register’s 2018 Recommendation. 
Additionally, the Register concluded 
that proponents had provided sufficient 
evidence that they would be adversely 
affected if the exemption were not 
expanded. 
3. Proposed Class 5: Audiovisual 
Works—Preservation and 
Replacement
62 
Class 5 proponents sought to permit 
circumvention of TPMs on motion 
pictures (including television shows 
and videos) stored on DVDs or Blu-ray 
discs that are no longer reasonably 
available in the marketplace to enable 
libraries, archives, and museums to 
make preservation and replacement 
copies of those works. The proposed 
exemption would permit qualifying 
institutions to make copies of discs that 
are damaged or deteriorating, as well as 
discs that have not yet begun to 
deteriorate; to make physical or digital 
copies of the motion pictures; and to 
make any digital copies available 
outside the premises of the institution. 
NTIA supported the proposed 
exemption. 
Joint Creators and DVD CCA and 
AACS LA opposed the exemption, 
arguing that it would enable institutions 
to space-shift
63 their film collections 
and launch online streaming services. 
Opponents contended that, should an 
exemption be granted, it should apply 
only to damaged or deteriorating discs; 
it should prohibit off-premises access to 
the copied works; and the market check 
should include a requirement that 
institutions determine if the motion 
picture is available for streaming 
through a licensed source. 
For the reasons detailed in the 
Register’s Recommendation, the Register 
concluded that it was likely to be a fair 
use for qualifying institutions to copy 
motion pictures from discs that are 
damaged or deteriorating if the motion 
pictures on those discs are not 
reasonably available in the marketplace 
for purchase or streaming. The Register 
concluded that proponents had not 
demonstrated that providing off- 
premises access to the replacement 
copies of motion pictures is likely to be 
noninfringing. The Register concluded 
that proponents had provided 
substantial evidence that granting the 
exemption would benefit preservation, 
education, and scholarship by making 
available motion pictures that might 
otherwise be lost to history and that the 
exemption is unlikely to adversely affect 
the market for or value of the motion 
pictures. 
4. Proposed Classes 7(a): Motion 
Pictures and 7(b): Literary Works—Text 
and Data Mining
64 
Authors Alliance, the American 
Association of University Professors, 
and LCA jointly filed a petition 
proposing Classes 7(a) and 7(b), seeking 
to permit circumvention of TPMs on 
motion pictures and literary works 
stored on DVDs or Blu-ray discs or made 
available for digital download to enable 
researchers to perform text and data 
mining (‘‘TDM’’) techniques for the 
purpose of scholarly research and 
teaching. Proponents argued that 
copying literary works and motion 
pictures to create large collections on 
which to perform TDM research is a fair 
use, and that requirements to use 
security measures to protect the corpora 
from public access or further 
distribution should afford qualifying 
institutions flexibility to tailor the 
measures to the size and content of the 
corpus. NTIA supported the proposed 
exemptions. 
Joint Creators and DVD CCA and 
AACS LA opposed the proposed 
exemption for class 7(a), and the 
American Association for Publishers 
(‘‘AAP’’) and the Software and 
Information Industry Association 
opposed the proposed exemption for 
class 7(b). They argued that TDM 
research would interfere with the 
licensing market for collections of 
literary works and motion pictures and 
that researchers’ ability to view the 
entirety of the works in a corpus would 
create a risk of substitutional use. They 
also argued that any exemption must 
require specific, robust security 
measures. 
As discussed in greater detail in the 
Register’s Recommendation, the Register 
found that the prohibition on 
circumvention adversely affects 
researchers’ ability to conduct TDM 
research projects, which are likely to be 
noninfringing with the addition of 
several limitations. Most importantly, 
the Register recommended requiring the 
institution of higher education storing 
or hosting a corpus of copyrighted 
works to implement either security 
measures that have been agreed upon by 
copyright owners and institutions of 
higher education, or, in the absence of 
such measures, those measures that the 
institution uses to keep its own highly 
confidential information secure. The 
Register also recommended adding a 
limitation that the person undertaking 
the circumvention view or listen to the 
contents of the copyrighted works in the 
corpus solely for the purpose of 
verification of the research findings, not 
for the works’ expressive purposes. The 
Register concluded that existing 
alternatives to circumvention do not 
meet researchers’ needs. 
5. Proposed Class 8: Literary Works— 
Accessibility
65 
Class 8 proponents sought to modify 
the current exemption for e-book 
accessibility to align with recent 
changes to the Copyright Act as a result 
of the Marrakesh Treaty Implementation 
Act. Proponents requested expanding 
the class of beneficiaries to ‘‘eligible 
persons’’ as defined in section 121 of 
the Copyright Act, expanding the 
exemption to cover previously 
published musical works, and replacing 
references to a ‘‘mainstream copy’’ in 
the remuneration requirement with the 
term ‘‘inaccessible copy.’’ Proponents 
also sought guidance on whether import 
and export activity under section 121A 
was implicated by the prohibition on 
circumvention. Joint Creators stated that 
they did not oppose the exemption to 
the extent it is consistent with sections 
121 and 121A. AAP filed a reply 
comment in support of this class, and 
NTIA supported the proposed 
exemption. 
For the reasons discussed in the 
Register’s Recommendation, the Register 
concluded that without the proposed 
modifications, print-disabled 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:25 Oct 27, 2021 Jkt 256001 PO 00000 Frm 00025 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1jspears on DSK121TN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 8]
59634 Federal Register / Vol. 86, No. 206 / Thursday, October 28, 2021 / Rules and Regulations 
66 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for 
these classes, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at V.I. 
67 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the Register’s 
Recommendation at V.J. 
68 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the Register’s 
Recommendation at V.K. 
69 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the Register’s 
Recommendation at V.L. 
individuals would be adversely affected 
in their ability to engage in the proposed 
noninfringing uses. The Register also 
determined that replacement of the 
reference to a ‘‘mainstream copy’’ with 
an ‘‘inaccessible copy’’ is a non- 
substantive change. Finally, the Register 
declined to recommend language 
regarding import and export of 
accessible works because the record did 
not indicate that such activity 
implicates the prohibition on 
circumvention. Proponents and Joint 
Creators filed a joint post-hearing 
submission proposing regulatory 
language that excludes sound recordings 
of performances of musical works from 
the exemption, which the Register 
recommended including. 
6. Proposed Class 9: Literary Works— 
Medical Device Data
66 
Class 9 proponents sought to expand 
several provisions of the current 
exemption that permits the 
circumvention of TPMs on medical 
devices to access their data outputs. 
Proponents filed a petition seeking to 
eliminate the current limitation of the 
exemption to ‘‘wholly or partially 
implanted’’ devices; permit authorized 
third parties to perform the 
circumvention on behalf of a patient; 
extend the exemption to non-passive 
monitoring; and remove the condition 
that circumvention not violate other 
applicable laws. ACT | The App 
Association opposed the proposed 
exemption. NTIA supported adopting 
the proposed exemption, with some 
modification. 
For the reasons detailed in the 
Register’s Recommendation, the Register 
concluded that accessing medical data 
outputs likely qualifies as a fair use and 
that expanding the exemption to 
include non-implanted medical devices 
and non-passive monitoring would not 
alter the fair use analysis. Additionally, 
the Register concluded that proponents 
set forth sufficient evidence that the 
‘‘wholly or partially implanted’’ 
language and the passive monitoring 
limitation are causing, or are likely to 
cause, adverse effects on these 
noninfringing uses. The Register also 
recommended expanding the exemption 
to permit circumvention ‘‘by or on 
behalf of a patient.’’ After consultation 
with the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration, the Register 
recommended removing the language 
requiring compliance with other laws, 
and replacing it with a statement that 
eligibility for the exemption does not 
preclude liability from other applicable 
laws. 
7. Proposed Class 10: Computer 
Programs—Unlocking
67 
ISRI petitioned to expand the existing 
exemption for unlocking to either (1) 
add a new device category for laptop 
computers or (2) remove enumerated 
device categories from the current 
exemption and permit unlocking of all 
wireless devices. It argued that the 
proposed uses are noninfringing based 
on the Register’s previous findings that 
unlocking of certain types of devices is 
a fair use, contending that the legal 
analysis does not differ depending on 
the type of device that is unlocked. The 
only opposition comment was filed by 
MEMA, which opposed expanding the 
exemption to permit unlocking cellular- 
enabled vehicles. NTIA supported 
expanding the exemption to permit 
unlocking all lawfully-acquired devices. 
For the reasons discussed in the 
Register’s Recommendation, the Register 
concluded that proponents established 
that unlocking is likely to be a fair use 
regardless of the type of device 
involved. Proponents offered unrebutted 
evidence that many different types of 
wireless devices share the same wireless 
modem. Because the Register concluded 
that unlocking those modems is likely a 
fair use, she determined that users of 
these devices experience the same 
adverse effects from the prohibition on 
circumvention. 
8. Proposed Class 11: Computer 
Programs—Jailbreaking
68 
Two petitions were filed for new or 
expanded exemptions relating to the 
circumvention of computer programs for 
jailbreaking purposes. EFF filed a 
petition seeking to clarify and expand 
the current exemption pertaining to 
jailbreaking smart TVs to include video 
streaming devices. SFC filed a petition 
for a new exemption to allow 
jailbreaking of routers and other 
networking devices to enable the 
installation of alternative firmware. 
ACT | The App Association, DVD CCA 
and AACS LA, and Joint Creators 
opposed this proposed class. NTIA 
supported adopting both proposed 
exemptions. 
In supporting comments, EFF 
clarified that its proposed exemption 
would cover devices whose primary 
purpose is to run applications that 
stream video from the internet for 
display on a screen, and would not 
extend to DVD or Blu-ray players or 
video game consoles. The Register 
concluded that jailbreaking video 
streaming devices likely constitutes a 
fair use. Additionally, the Register 
concluded that the prohibition on 
circumvention is likely to adversely 
affect proponents’ ability to engage in 
such activities. She recommended that 
the regulatory language contain certain 
limitations to address opponents’ 
concerns over potential market harm. 
With respect to SFC’s petition, the 
Register concluded that jailbreaking 
routers and other networking devices is 
likely to qualify as a fair use. 
Additionally, the Register concluded 
that the prohibition on circumvention is 
likely to prevent users from installing 
free and open source software (‘‘FOSS’’) 
on routers and other networking devices 
and that there are no viable alternatives 
to circumvention to accomplish that 
purpose. 
9. Proposed Class 12: Computer 
Programs—Repair
69 
Several organizations submitted 
petitions for new or expanded 
exemptions relating to the diagnosis, 
maintenance, repair, and modification 
of software-enabled devices. EFF and, 
jointly, iFixit and the Repair 
Association filed petitions seeking to 
merge and expand the two existing 
exemptions to cover all devices and 
vehicles and permit ‘‘modification’’ of 
all devices. Opponents objected that the 
proposed expansion to cover all devices 
was overbroad and that proponents 
failed to develop a record demonstrating 
sufficient commonalities among the 
various types of software-enabled 
devices. In addition, they argued that 
specific types of devices for which 
circumvention of TPMs raises piracy 
and safety concerns should be excluded 
from the proposed class. Opponents also 
contended that the term ‘‘modification’’ 
is so broad that it could implicate 
infringing activities, including violating 
copyright owners’ exclusive right to 
prepare derivative works. 
Separately, Public Knowledge and 
iFixit jointly petitioned for an 
exemption to repair optical drives in 
video game consoles and to replace 
damaged hardware in such devices. 
They asserted that authorized repair 
services are inadequate, particularly for 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:25 Oct 27, 2021 Jkt 256001 PO 00000 Frm 00026 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1jspears on DSK121TN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 9]
59635 Federal Register / Vol. 86, No. 206 / Thursday, October 28, 2021 / Rules and Regulations 
70 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the Register’s 
Recommendation at V.M. 
71 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the Register’s 
Recommendation at V.N. 
certain legacy consoles that 
manufacturers no longer support. 
Opponents argued that the proposed 
exemption would create a risk of market 
harm for these devices and that 
adequate alternatives to circumvention 
exist. 
NTIA recommended expanding the 
current exemptions by merging them 
into a single exemption that would 
permit circumvention for the diagnosis, 
maintenance, and repair of all software- 
enabled devices, machines, and 
systems. In addition, NTIA 
recommended allowing ‘‘lawful 
modification that is necessary for a 
repair or maintenance’’ and software 
modifications relating to device 
functionality. 
For the reasons discussed in the 
Register’s Recommendation, the Register 
recommended expanding the existing 
exemption for diagnosis, maintenance, 
and repair of certain categories of 
devices to cover any software-enabled 
device that is primarily designed for use 
by consumers. For video game consoles, 
the Register concluded that an 
exemption is warranted solely for the 
repair of optical drives. 
The proposals to merge the two 
existing repair exemptions would also 
effectively broaden the existing vehicle 
exemption by: (1) No longer limiting the 
class to ‘‘motorized land vehicles’’; and 
(2) removing other limitations in the 
exemption, including that users comply 
with other laws. Opponents did not 
object to including marine vessels in the 
vehicle exemption, but opposed 
removing language requiring 
compliance with other laws. For the 
reasons discussed in the Register’s 
Recommendation, the Register 
recommended that the exemption for 
land vehicles be expanded to cover 
marine vessels and to remove the 
condition requiring compliance with 
other laws. 
Finally, Summit Imaging, Inc. and 
Transtate Equipment Co., Inc. petitioned 
to exempt circumvention of TPMs on 
software-enabled medical devices and 
systems for purposes of diagnosis, 
maintenance, and repair. Petitioners 
also sought access to related data files 
stored on medical devices and systems, 
including manuals and servicing 
materials. Opponents argued that this 
exemption is unnecessary because 
adequate authorized repair services are 
available. They also contended that the 
proposed uses are commercial in nature, 
would harm the market for medical 
devices and systems, may undermine 
patient safety and create cybersecurity 
risks, and would interfere with 
manufacturers’ regulatory compliance 
obligations. For the reasons discussed in 
the Register’s Recommendation, the 
Register recommended a new exemption 
allowing circumvention of TPMs 
restricting access to firmware and 
related data files on medical devices 
and systems for the purposes of 
diagnosis, maintenance, and repair. 
10. Proposed Class 13: Computer 
Programs—Security Research
70 
Two petitions sought to expand the 
current exemption that permits 
circumvention of TPMs on computer 
programs for good-faith security 
research. Together, the petitions sought 
to eliminate several limitations within 
the exemption and to explicitly extend 
the exemption to privacy research. 
Proponents generally argued that the 
limitations have chilled valuable 
security research, primarily by creating 
uncertainty about whether conducting 
or reporting security research could 
result in liability under section 1201. 
Six parties opposed class 13 at least in 
part; they argued that the existing 
exemption has sufficiently enabled 
good-faith security research and that the 
record did not justify removing the 
limitations. NTIA supported the 
elimination of several limitations, but 
did not recommend modifying the 
existing exemption to address privacy- 
related research activities explicitly. 
For the reasons discussed in the 
Register’s Recommendation, the Register 
concluded that because the exemption 
is broadly defined and is not limited to 
specific issues or subjects relating to 
security flaws or vulnerabilities, 
expanding it to expressly cover privacy 
research is unnecessary. Regarding the 
specific limitations, the Register 
recommended removing the condition 
that circumvention not violate ‘‘other 
laws’’ and instead clarifying that the 
exemption does not provide a safe 
harbor from liability under other laws. 
The Department of Justice submitted 
comments supporting this change. The 
Register declined to recommend 
removal of limitations pertaining to 
access to and use of computer programs, 
finding a lack of specific evidence 
establishing adverse effects resulting 
from those provisions. The Register also 
did not recommend removal of the 
requirement that devices be lawfully 
acquired. 
11. Proposed Class 14(a): Computer 
Programs and 14(b) Video Games— 
Preservation
71 
Proposed Classes 14(a) and 14(b) seek 
to amend the existing exemptions 
permitting libraries, archives, and 
museums to circumvent TPMs on 
computer programs and video games, 
respectively, for the purpose of 
preservation activities. Specifically, 
proponents seek to remove the 
requirement that the preserved 
computer program or video game must 
not be distributed or made available 
outside of the physical premises of the 
institution. Proposed Class 14(b) would 
also incorporate the current eligibility 
requirements for the software 
preservation exemption into the video 
game preservation exemption. 
Proponents argued that enabling 
remote access to the works is likely to 
be a fair use, based in part on a general 
federal policy favoring remote access to 
preservation materials, as reflected in 
various provisions of the Copyright Act. 
They also argued that the proposed uses 
would not affect the potential market for 
or value of the copyrighted works 
because only works that are no longer 
reasonably available in the commercial 
marketplace would be subject to the 
exemption. NTIA supported the removal 
of the premises limitation in both 
exemptions. 
Joint Creators and the Entertainment 
Software Association opposed removing 
the premises limitation, with most 
arguments directed to the video game 
class. They expressed concern that, 
because the proposed exemption did not 
limit beneficiaries of the exemption to 
authenticated educators or researchers, 
if preserved video games were made 
available outside the premises of an 
institution, they would become 
accessible to the general public, thereby 
adversely affecting the existing market 
for older video games. 
For the reasons discussed in the 
Register’s Recommendation, the Register 
concluded that off-premises access to 
software as described in the proposal is 
likely to be noninfringing, with the 
limitation that the work be accessible to 
only one user at a time and for a limited 
time. With respect to video games, the 
Register concluded that proponents 
failed to carry their burden to show that 
the uses are likely noninfringing, and 
noted the greater risk of market harm in 
this context given the market for legacy 
video games. The Register therefore 
recommends that the Librarian amend 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:25 Oct 27, 2021 Jkt 256001 PO 00000 Frm 00027 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1jspears on DSK121TN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 10]
59636 Federal Register / Vol. 86, No. 206 / Thursday, October 28, 2021 / Rules and Regulations 
72 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the Register’s 
Recommendation at V.O. 
73 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the Register’s 
Recommendation at V.P. 
74 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the Register’s 
Recommendation at V.Q. 
75 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for 
these classes, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at V.B. 
the exemption for Class 14(a) to address 
the eligibility requirements for libraries, 
archives, and museums, but not to 
remove the premises limitation. The 
Register recommends removing the 
premises limitation in the exemption for 
Class 14(a). 
12. Proposed Class 15: Computer 
Programs—3D Printing
72 
Class 15 seeks to expand two 
provisions of the current exemption that 
permits the circumvention of access 
controls on computer programs in 3D 
printers to enable the use of non- 
manufacturer approved feedstock. 
Michael Weinberg filed a petition to 
replace the term ‘‘feedstock’’ with the 
term ‘‘material,’’ stating that the latter is 
more commonly used within the 
industry and that the two terms are 
interchangeable. Additionally, Mr. 
Weinberg sought to eliminate the phrase 
‘‘microchip-reliant’’ from the 
exemption, arguing that 3D printers may 
use technology other than microchips to 
verify 3D printing materials. Mr. 
Weinberg provided evidence that 
manufacturers are increasingly moving 
beyond microchip-based verification 
techniques, such as using optical 
scanners. No parties opposed proposed 
class 15. NTIA supported the proposed 
exemption. 
For the reasons discussed in greater 
detail in the Register’s 
Recommendation, the Register 
concluded that changing the word 
‘‘feedstock’’ to ‘‘material’’ is not a 
substantive change, and found that the 
removal of the term ‘‘microchip-reliant’’ 
does not alter the fair use analysis 
because the expansion is directed at the 
same uses the Office previously 
concluded were fair. 
13. Proposed Class 16: Computer 
Programs—Copyright License 
Investigation
73 
SFC petitioned for a new exemption 
that would permit investigating whether 
a particular computer program includes 
FOSS, and if so, whether the use of the 
program complies with applicable 
license terms. SFC, supported by the 
Free Software Foundation, subsequently 
agreed to add limitations to require that 
the circumvention be undertaken on a 
lawfully acquired device or machine; 
that it be solely for the purpose of 
investigating potential copyright 
infringement; that it be performed by, or 
at the direction of, a party that has 
standing to bring a breach of license 
claim; and that it otherwise comply 
with applicable law. NTIA supported 
the proposed exemption as modified. 
Opponents—DVD CCA and AACS LA; 
the Equipment Dealers Association, and 
its regional affiliates, and Associated 
Equipment Distributors; Joint Creators; 
and Marcia Wilbur—argued that FOSS 
licensors could obtain the information 
they seek by other means. They objected 
to application of the proposed 
exemption to a broad category of 
devices, and requested exclusion of 
DVD and Blu-ray players, video game 
consoles, set-top boxes, and vehicles. 
They argued that any exemption should 
be limited to investigating potential 
violations of FOSS licenses, rather than 
infringement of any proprietary 
software, and that the investigation 
must be based on a good-faith, 
reasonable belief that the device may 
violate FOSS license terms. Finally, 
opponents expressed concerns about 
devices being left exposed to piracy or 
unauthorized access after 
circumvention. 
For the reasons discussed in the 
Register’s Recommendation, the Register 
recommended adopting an exemption 
with several limitations. First, the 
purpose of the investigation must be 
limited to investigating whether a 
computer program potentially infringes 
FOSS, and the user must have a good- 
faith, reasonable belief in the need for 
the investigation. Second, 
circumvention must be undertaken by, 
or at the direction of, a party that would 
have standing to bring either a breach of 
license claim or a copyright 
infringement claim. Third, the copy of 
a computer program made pursuant to 
the exemption, or the device or machine 
on which it operates, cannot be used in 
a manner that facilitates copyright 
infringement. Finally, video game 
consoles should be excluded from the 
types of devices on which TPMs may be 
circumvented. 
14. Proposed Class 17: All Works— 
Accessibility Uses
74 
Petitioners, a coalition of accessibility 
groups, requested a new exemption to 
create accessible versions of any 
copyrighted works that are inaccessible 
to individuals with disabilities. They 
argued that the Librarian has the 
authority to define a class of works that 
share the attribute of being inaccessible 
to individuals with disabilities and that 
creating accessible versions of 
inaccessible works is unquestionably a 
fair use. Proponents argued that a broad 
exemption is warranted to prevent 
individuals with disabilities from being 
forced to make piecemeal requests every 
three years when new accessibility 
issues arise. NTIA supported the 
proposed exemption. 
Joint Creators, DVD CCA and AACS 
LA, and AAP filed comments opposing 
the proposed exemption, focusing 
primarily on the ground that the statute 
does not give the Librarian the authority 
to adopt a class consisting of ‘‘all 
works’’ sharing a particular attribute. 
Joint Creators also raised concerns about 
the lack of limitations on the use of 
copies, such as prohibiting further 
distribution to individuals without 
disabilities. 
As discussed in greater detail in the 
Register’s Recommendation, although 
the Register supports the policy goals 
that underpin the proposed exemption, 
the statute requires proponents to 
provide evidence of actual or likely 
adverse effects resulting from the 
prohibition on circumvention with 
respect to ‘‘particular class[es]’’ of 
works. Here, the Register determined 
that proponents submitted insufficient 
evidence of such adverse effects as to 
most types of works. Proponents did, 
however, provide evidence to support 
an exemption to enable individuals with 
disabilities to use alternate input 
devices to play video games. 
C. Classes Considered but Not 
Recommended 
Based upon the record in this 
proceeding, the Register recommended 
that the Librarian determine that the 
following classes of works shall not be 
exempt during the next three-year 
period from the prohibition against 
circumvention of technological 
measures set forth in section 1201(a)(1): 
1. Proposed Class 2: Audiovisual 
Works—Texting
75 
Proposed Class 2 would allow 
circumvention of technological 
measures protecting motion pictures 
and other audiovisual works to create 
short audiovisual clips for expressive 
purposes in text messages. Petitioner 
did not provide legal arguments or 
evidence in support of its petition and 
did not participate in the public 
hearings. Petitioner failed to explain 
how the proposed uses were 
noninfringing and why an exemption is 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 17:16 Oct 27, 2021 Jkt 256001 PO 00000 Frm 00028 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1jspears on DSK121TN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 11]
59637 Federal Register / Vol. 86, No. 206 / Thursday, October 28, 2021 / Rules and Regulations 
76 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for 
these classes, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at V.D. 
77 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the Register’s 
Recommendation at V.F. 
necessary. NTIA recommended denying 
the proposed exemption. As discussed 
more fully in the Register’s 
Recommendation, due to the de minimis 
showing provided by proponents, the 
Register does not recommend the 
adoption of an exemption for proposed 
Class 2. 
2. Proposed Class 4: Audiovisual 
Works—Livestream Recording
76 
Proposed Class 4 would allow 
circumvention of HTTP Live Streaming 
technology for the purpose of recording 
audiovisual works originating as 
livestreams. Petitioner did not provide 
legal arguments or evidence to support 
its petition and did not participate in 
the public hearings. Petitioner first 
described the exemption as 
encompassing sports and other 
competitive events, but elsewhere stated 
that the class includes ‘‘any and all 
works’’ where audiovisual recordings 
may be made, including individual 
school performances. NTIA 
recommended denying the proposed 
exemption. As discussed more fully in 
the Register’s Recommendation, the 
Register does not recommend the 
adoption of an exemption for proposed 
Class 4. 
3. Proposed Class 6: Audiovisual 
Works—Space-Shifting
77 
Proposed Class 6 would allow 
circumvention of TPMs protecting 
motion pictures and other audiovisual 
works to engage in space-shifting. 
Petitioner failed to provide legal 
arguments or evidence to demonstrate 
that space-shifting is a noninfringing 
use. Additionally, petitioner did not 
participate in the public hearings to 
support its petition or clarify whether 
the proposed exemption would extend 
to commercial services. Opponents 
argued that petitioner did not provide 
the evidence necessary to support an 
exemption, citing several substantive 
and procedural deficiencies. NTIA 
recommended denying the proposed 
exemption. As discussed more fully in 
the Register’s Recommendation, the 
Register does not recommend the 
adoption of an exemption for proposed 
Class 6. 
D. Conclusion 
Having considered the evidence in the 
record, the contentions of the 
commenting parties, and the statutory 
objectives, the Register of Copyrights 
has recommended that the Librarian of 
Congress publish certain classes of 
works, as designated above, so that the 
prohibition against circumvention of 
technological measures that effectively 
control access to copyrighted works 
shall not apply for the next three years 
to persons who engage in noninfringing 
uses of those particular classes of works. 
Dated: October 20, 2021. 
Shira Perlmutter, 
Register of Copyrights and Director of the 
U.S. Copyright Office. 
Determination of the Librarian of 
Congress 
Having duly considered and accepted 
the recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights, the Librarian of Congress, 
pursuant to 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C) and 
(D), hereby publishes as a new rule the 
classes of copyrighted works that shall 
for a three-year period be subject to the 
exemption provided in 17 U.S.C. 
1201(a)(1)(B) from the prohibition 
against circumvention of technological 
measures that effectively control access 
to copyrighted works set forth in 17 
U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(A). 
List of Subjects in 37 CFR Part 201 
Copyright, Exemptions to prohibition 
against circumvention. 
Final Regulations 
For the reasons set forth in the 
preamble, 37 CFR part 201 is amended 
as follows: 
PART 201—GENERAL PROVISIONS 
■ 1. The authority citation for part 201 
continues to read as follows: 
Authority: 17 U.S.C. 702. 
■ 2. Section 201.40 is amended by 
revising paragraph (b) to read as follows: 
§ 201.40 Exemption to prohibition against 
circumvention. 
* * * * * 
(b) Classes of copyrighted works. 
Pursuant to the authority set forth in 17 
U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C) and (D), and upon 
the recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights, the Librarian has 
determined that the prohibition against 
circumvention of technological 
measures that effectively control access 
to copyrighted works set forth in 17 
U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(A) shall not apply to 
persons who engage in noninfringing 
uses of the following classes of 
copyrighted works: 
(1) Motion pictures (including 
television shows and videos), as defined 
in 17 U.S.C. 101, where the motion 
picture is lawfully made and acquired 
on a DVD protected by the Content 
Scramble System, on a Blu-ray disc 
protected by the Advanced Access 
Content System, or via a digital 
transmission protected by a 
technological measure, and the person 
engaging in circumvention under 
paragraphs (b)(1)(i) and (b)(1)(ii)(A) and 
(B) of this section reasonably believes 
that non-circumventing alternatives are 
unable to produce the required level of 
high-quality content, or the 
circumvention is undertaken using 
screen-capture technology that appears 
to be offered to the public as enabling 
the reproduction of motion pictures 
after content has been lawfully acquired 
and decrypted, where circumvention is 
undertaken solely in order to make use 
of short portions of the motion pictures 
in the following instances: 
(i) For the purpose of criticism or 
comment: 
(A) For use in documentary 
filmmaking, or other films where the 
motion picture clip is used in parody or 
for its biographical or historically 
significant nature; 
(B) For use in noncommercial videos 
(including videos produced for a paid 
commission if the commissioning 
entity’s use is noncommercial); or 
(C) For use in nonfiction multimedia 
e-books. 
(ii) For educational purposes: 
(A) By college and university faculty 
and students or kindergarten through 
twelfth-grade (K–12) educators and 
students (where the K–12 student is 
circumventing under the direct 
supervision of an educator), or 
employees acting at the direction of 
faculty of such educational institutions 
for the purpose of teaching a course, 
including of accredited general 
educational development (GED) 
programs, for the purpose of criticism, 
comment, teaching, or scholarship; 
(B) By faculty of accredited nonprofit 
educational institutions and employees 
acting at the direction of faculty 
members of those institutions, for 
purposes of offering massive open 
online courses (MOOCs) to officially 
enrolled students through online 
platforms (which platforms themselves 
may be operated for profit), in film 
studies or other courses requiring close 
analysis of film and media excerpts, for 
the purpose of criticism or comment, 
where the MOOC provider through the 
online platform limits transmissions to 
the extent technologically feasible to 
such officially enrolled students, 
institutes copyright policies and 
provides copyright informational 
materials to faculty, students, and 
relevant staff members, and applies 
technological measures that reasonably 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:25 Oct 27, 2021 Jkt 256001 PO 00000 Frm 00029 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1jspears on DSK121TN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 12]
59638 Federal Register / Vol. 86, No. 206 / Thursday, October 28, 2021 / Rules and Regulations 
prevent unauthorized further 
dissemination of a work in accessible 
form to others or retention of the work 
for longer than the course session by 
recipients of a transmission through the 
platform, as contemplated by 17 U.S.C. 
110(2); or 
(C) By educators and participants in 
nonprofit digital and media literacy 
programs offered by libraries, museums, 
and other nonprofit entities with an 
educational mission, in the course of 
face-to-face instructional activities, for 
the purpose of criticism or comment, 
except that such users may only 
circumvent using screen-capture 
technology that appears to be offered to 
the public as enabling the reproduction 
of motion pictures after content has 
been lawfully acquired and decrypted. 
(2)(i) Motion pictures (including 
television shows and videos), as defined 
in 17 U.S.C. 101, where the motion 
picture is lawfully acquired on a DVD 
protected by the Content Scramble 
System, on a Blu-ray disc protected by 
the Advanced Access Content System, 
or via a digital transmission protected 
by a technological measure, where: 
(A) Circumvention is undertaken by a 
disability services office or other unit of 
a kindergarten through twelfth-grade 
educational institution, college, or 
university engaged in and/or 
responsible for the provision of 
accessibility services for the purpose of 
adding captions and/or audio 
description to a motion picture to create 
an accessible version for students, 
faculty, or staff with disabilities; 
(B) The educational institution unit in 
paragraph (b)(2)(i)(A) of this section has 
a reasonable belief that the motion 
picture will be used for a specific future 
activity of the institution and, after a 
reasonable effort, has determined that 
an accessible version of sufficient 
quality cannot be obtained at a fair 
market price or in a timely manner, 
including where a copyright holder has 
not provided an accessible version of a 
motion picture that was included with 
a textbook; and 
(C) The accessible versions are 
provided to students or educators and 
stored by the educational institution in 
a manner intended to reasonably 
prevent unauthorized further 
dissemination of a work. 
(ii) For purposes of paragraph (b)(2) of 
this section, 
(A) ‘‘Audio description’’ means an 
oral narration that provides an accurate 
rendering of the motion picture; 
(B) ‘‘Accessible version of sufficient 
quality’’ means a version that in the 
reasonable judgment of the educational 
institution unit has captions and/or 
audio description that are sufficient to 
meet the accessibility needs of students, 
faculty, or staff with disabilities and are 
substantially free of errors that would 
materially interfere with those needs; 
and 
(C) Accessible materials created 
pursuant to this exemption and stored 
pursuant to paragraph (b)(2)(i)(C) of this 
section may be reused by the 
educational institution unit to meet the 
accessibility needs of students, faculty, 
or staff with disabilities pursuant to 
paragraphs (b)(2)(i)(A) and (B) of this 
section. 
(3)(i) Motion pictures (including 
television shows and videos), as defined 
in 17 U.S.C. 101, where the motion 
picture is lawfully acquired on a DVD 
protected by the Content Scramble 
System, or on a Blu-ray disc protected 
by the Advanced Access Content 
System, solely for the purpose of lawful 
preservation or the creation of a 
replacement copy of the motion picture, 
by an eligible library, archives, or 
museum, where: 
(A) Such activity is carried out 
without any purpose of direct or 
indirect commercial advantage; 
(B) The DVD or Blu-ray disc is 
damaged or deteriorating; 
(C) The eligible institution, after a 
reasonable effort, has determined that 
an unused and undamaged replacement 
copy cannot be obtained at a fair price 
and that no streaming service, download 
service, or on-demand cable and 
satellite service makes the motion 
picture available to libraries, archives, 
and museums at a fair price; and 
(D) The preservation or replacement 
copies are not distributed or made 
available outside of the physical 
premises of the eligible library, archives, 
or museum. 
(ii) For purposes of paragraph (b)(3)(i) 
of this section, a library, archives, or 
museum is considered ‘‘eligible’’ if— 
(A) The collections of the library, 
archives, or museum are open to the 
public and/or are routinely made 
available to researchers who are not 
affiliated with the library, archives, or 
museum; 
(B) The library, archives, or museum 
has a public service mission; 
(C) The library, archives, or museum’s 
trained staff or volunteers provide 
professional services normally 
associated with libraries, archives, or 
museums; 
(D) The collections of the library, 
archives, or museum are composed of 
lawfully acquired and/or licensed 
materials; and 
(E) The library, archives, or museum 
implements reasonable digital security 
measures as appropriate for the 
activities permitted by paragraph 
(b)(3)(i) of this section. 
(4)(i) Motion pictures, as defined in 
17 U.S.C. 101, where the motion picture 
is on a DVD protected by the Content 
Scramble System, on a Blu-ray disc 
protected by the Advanced Access 
Content System, or made available for 
digital download where: 
(A) The circumvention is undertaken 
by a researcher affiliated with a 
nonprofit institution of higher 
education, or by a student or 
information technology staff member of 
the institution at the direction of such 
researcher, solely to deploy text and 
data mining techniques on a corpus of 
motion pictures for the purpose of 
scholarly research and teaching; 
(B) The copy of each motion picture 
is lawfully acquired and owned by the 
institution, or licensed to the institution 
without a time limitation on access; 
(C) The person undertaking the 
circumvention views or listens to the 
contents of the motion pictures in the 
corpus solely for the purpose of 
verification of the research findings; and 
(D) The institution uses effective 
security measures to prevent further 
dissemination or downloading of 
motion pictures in the corpus, and to 
limit access to only the persons 
identified in paragraph (b)(4)(i)(A) of 
this section or to researchers affiliated 
with other institutions of higher 
education solely for purposes of 
collaboration or replication of the 
research. 
(ii) For purposes of paragraph (b)(4)(i) 
of this section: 
(A) An institution of higher education 
is defined as one that: 
(1) Admits regular students who have 
a certificate of graduation from a 
secondary school or the equivalent of 
such a certificate; 
(2) Is legally authorized to provide a 
postsecondary education program; 
(3) Awards a bachelor’s degree or 
provides not less than a two-year 
program acceptable towards such a 
degree; 
(4) Is a public or other nonprofit 
institution; and 
(5) Is accredited by a nationally 
recognized accrediting agency or 
association. 
(B) The term ‘‘effective security 
measures’’ means security measures that 
have been agreed to by interested 
copyright owners of motion pictures 
and institutions of higher education; or, 
in the absence of such measures, those 
measures that the institution uses to 
keep its own highly confidential 
information secure. If the institution 
uses the security measures it uses to 
protect its own highly confidential 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:25 Oct 27, 2021 Jkt 256001 PO 00000 Frm 00030 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1jspears on DSK121TN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 13]
59639 Federal Register / Vol. 86, No. 206 / Thursday, October 28, 2021 / Rules and Regulations 
information, it must, upon a reasonable 
request from a copyright owner whose 
work is contained in the corpus, provide 
information to that copyright owner 
regarding the nature of such measures. 
(5)(i) Literary works, excluding 
computer programs and compilations 
that were compiled specifically for text 
and data mining purposes, distributed 
electronically where: 
(A) The circumvention is undertaken 
by a researcher affiliated with a 
nonprofit institution of higher 
education, or by a student or 
information technology staff member of 
the institution at the direction of such 
researcher, solely to deploy text and 
data mining techniques on a corpus of 
literary works for the purpose of 
scholarly research and teaching; 
(B) The copy of each literary work is 
lawfully acquired and owned by the 
institution, or licensed to the institution 
without a time limitation on access; 
(C) The person undertaking the 
circumvention views the contents of the 
literary works in the corpus solely for 
the purpose of verification of the 
research findings; and 
(D) The institution uses effective 
security measures to prevent further 
dissemination or downloading of 
literary works in the corpus, and to limit 
access to only the persons identified in 
paragraph (b)(5)(i)(A) of this section or 
to researchers or to researchers affiliated 
with other institutions of higher 
education solely for purposes of 
collaboration or replication of the 
research. 
(ii) For purposes of paragraph (b)(5)(i) 
of this section: 
(A) An institution of higher education 
is defined as one that: 
(1) Admits regular students who have 
a certificate of graduation from a 
secondary school or the equivalent of 
such a certificate; 
(2) Is legally authorized to provide a 
postsecondary education program; 
(3) Awards a bachelor’s degree or 
provides not less than a two-year 
program acceptable towards such a 
degree; 
(4) Is a public or other nonprofit 
institution; and 
(5) Is accredited by a nationally 
recognized accrediting agency or 
association. 
(B) The term ‘‘effective security 
measures’’ means security measures that 
have been agreed to by interested 
copyright owners of literary works and 
institutions of higher education; or, in 
the absence of such measures, those 
measures that the institution uses to 
keep its own highly confidential 
information secure. If the institution 
uses the security measures it uses to 
protect its own highly confidential 
information, it must, upon a reasonable 
request from a copyright owner whose 
work is contained in the corpus, provide 
information to that copyright owner 
regarding the nature of such measures. 
(6)(i) Literary works or previously 
published musical works that have been 
fixed in the form of text or notation, 
distributed electronically, that are 
protected by technological measures 
that either prevent the enabling of read- 
aloud functionality or interfere with 
screen readers or other applications or 
assistive technologies: 
(A) When a copy or phonorecord of 
such a work is lawfully obtained by an 
eligible person, as such a person is 
defined in 17 U.S.C. 121; provided, 
however, that the rights owner is 
remunerated, as appropriate, for the 
market price of an inaccessible copy of 
the work as made available to the 
general public through customary 
channels; or 
(B) When such a work is lawfully 
obtained and used by an authorized 
entity pursuant to 17 U.S.C. 121. 
(ii) For the purposes of paragraph 
(b)(6)(i) of this section, a ‘‘phonorecord 
of such a work’’ does not include a 
sound recording of a performance of a 
musical work unless and only to the 
extent the recording is included as part 
of an audiobook or e-book. 
(7) Literary works consisting of 
compilations of data generated by 
medical devices or by their personal 
corresponding monitoring systems, 
where such circumvention is 
undertaken by or on behalf of a patient 
for the sole purpose of lawfully 
accessing data generated by a patient’s 
own medical device or monitoring 
system. Eligibility for this exemption is 
not a safe harbor from, or defense to, 
liability under other applicable laws, 
including without limitation the Health 
Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996, the 
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986, 
or regulations of the Food and Drug 
Administration. 
(8) Computer programs that enable 
wireless devices to connect to a wireless 
telecommunications network, when 
circumvention is undertaken solely in 
order to connect to a wireless 
telecommunications network and such 
connection is authorized by the operator 
of such network. 
(9) Computer programs that enable 
smartphones and portable all-purpose 
mobile computing devices to execute 
lawfully obtained software applications, 
where circumvention is accomplished 
for the sole purpose of enabling 
interoperability of such applications 
with computer programs on the 
smartphone or device, or to permit 
removal of software from the 
smartphone or device. For purposes of 
this paragraph (b)(9), a ‘‘portable all- 
purpose mobile computing device’’ is a 
device that is primarily designed to run 
a wide variety of programs rather than 
for consumption of a particular type of 
media content, is equipped with an 
operating system primarily designed for 
mobile use, and is intended to be 
carried or worn by an individual. 
(10) Computer programs that enable 
smart televisions to execute lawfully 
obtained software applications, where 
circumvention is accomplished for the 
sole purpose of enabling interoperability 
of such applications with computer 
programs on the smart television, and is 
not accomplished for the purpose of 
gaining unauthorized access to other 
copyrighted works. For purposes of this 
paragraph (b)(10), ‘‘smart televisions’’ 
includes both internet-enabled 
televisions, as well as devices that are 
physically separate from a television 
and whose primary purpose is to run 
software applications that stream 
authorized video from the internet for 
display on a screen. 
(11) Computer programs that enable 
voice assistant devices to execute 
lawfully obtained software applications, 
where circumvention is accomplished 
for the sole purpose of enabling 
interoperability of such applications 
with computer programs on the device, 
or to permit removal of software from 
the device, and is not accomplished for 
the purpose of gaining unauthorized 
access to other copyrighted works. For 
purposes of this paragraph (b)(11), a 
‘‘voice assistant device’’ is a device that 
is primarily designed to run a wide 
variety of programs rather than for 
consumption of a particular type of 
media content, is designed to take user 
input primarily by voice, and is 
designed to be installed in a home or 
office. 
(12) Computer programs that enable 
routers and dedicated network devices 
to execute lawfully obtained software 
applications, where circumvention is 
accomplished for the sole purpose of 
enabling interoperability of such 
applications with computer programs 
on the router or dedicated network 
device, and is not accomplished for the 
purpose of gaining unauthorized access 
to other copyrighted works. For the 
purposes of this paragraph (b)(12), 
‘‘dedicated network device’’ includes 
switches, hubs, bridges, gateways, 
modems, repeaters, and access points, 
and excludes devices that are not 
lawfully owned. 
(13) Computer programs that are 
contained in and control the functioning 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:25 Oct 27, 2021 Jkt 256001 PO 00000 Frm 00031 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1jspears on DSK121TN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 14]
59640 Federal Register / Vol. 86, No. 206 / Thursday, October 28, 2021 / Rules and Regulations 
of a lawfully acquired motorized land 
vehicle or marine vessel such as a 
personal automobile or boat, 
commercial vehicle or vessel, or 
mechanized agricultural vehicle or 
vessel, except for programs accessed 
through a separate subscription service, 
when circumvention is a necessary step 
to allow the diagnosis, repair, or lawful 
modification of a vehicle or vessel 
function, where such circumvention is 
not accomplished for the purpose of 
gaining unauthorized access to other 
copyrighted works. Eligibility for this 
exemption is not a safe harbor from, or 
defense to, liability under other 
applicable laws, including without 
limitation regulations promulgated by 
the Department of Transportation or the 
Environmental Protection Agency. 
(14) Computer programs that are 
contained in and control the functioning 
of a lawfully acquired device that is 
primarily designed for use by 
consumers, when circumvention is a 
necessary step to allow the diagnosis, 
maintenance, or repair of such a device, 
and is not accomplished for the purpose 
of gaining access to other copyrighted 
works. For purposes of this paragraph 
(b)(14): 
(i) The ‘‘maintenance’’ of a device is 
the servicing of the device in order to 
make it work in accordance with its 
original specifications and any changes 
to those specifications authorized for 
that device; and 
(ii) The ‘‘repair’’ of a device is the 
restoring of the device to the state of 
working in accordance with its original 
specifications and any changes to those 
specifications authorized for that 
device. For video game consoles, 
‘‘repair’’ is limited to repair or 
replacement of a console’s optical drive 
and requires restoring any technological 
protection measures that were 
circumvented or disabled. 
(15) Computer programs that are 
contained in and control the functioning 
of a lawfully acquired medical device or 
system, and related data files, when 
circumvention is a necessary step to 
allow the diagnosis, maintenance, or 
repair of such a device or system. For 
purposes of this paragraph (b)(15): 
(i) The ‘‘maintenance’’ of a device or 
system is the servicing of the device or 
system in order to make it work in 
accordance with its original 
specifications and any changes to those 
specifications authorized for that device 
or system; and 
(ii) The ‘‘repair’’ of a device or system 
is the restoring of the device or system 
to the state of working in accordance 
with its original specifications and any 
changes to those specifications 
authorized for that device or system. 
(16)(i) Computer programs, where the 
circumvention is undertaken on a 
lawfully acquired device or machine on 
which the computer program operates, 
or is undertaken on a computer, 
computer system, or computer network 
on which the computer program 
operates with the authorization of the 
owner or operator of such computer, 
computer system, or computer network, 
solely for the purpose of good-faith 
security research. 
(ii) For purposes of paragraph 
(b)(16)(i) of this section, ‘‘good-faith 
security research’’ means accessing a 
computer program solely for purposes of 
good-faith testing, investigation, and/or 
correction of a security flaw or 
vulnerability, where such activity is 
carried out in an environment designed 
to avoid any harm to individuals or the 
public, and where the information 
derived from the activity is used 
primarily to promote the security or 
safety of the class of devices or 
machines on which the computer 
program operates, or those who use 
such devices or machines, and is not 
used or maintained in a manner that 
facilitates copyright infringement. 
(iii) Good-faith security research that 
qualifies for the exemption under 
paragraph (b)(16)(i) of this section may 
nevertheless incur liability under other 
applicable laws, including without 
limitation the Computer Fraud and 
Abuse Act of 1986, as amended and 
codified in title 18, United States Code, 
and eligibility for that exemption is not 
a safe harbor from, or defense to, 
liability under other applicable laws. 
(17)(i) Video games in the form of 
computer programs embodied in 
physical or downloaded formats that 
have been lawfully acquired as 
complete games, when the copyright 
owner or its authorized representative 
has ceased to provide access to an 
external computer server necessary to 
facilitate an authentication process to 
enable gameplay, solely for the purpose 
of: 
(A) Permitting access to the video 
game to allow copying and modification 
of the computer program to restore 
access to the game for personal, local 
gameplay on a personal computer or 
video game console; or 
(B) Permitting access to the video 
game to allow copying and modification 
of the computer program to restore 
access to the game on a personal 
computer or video game console when 
necessary to allow preservation of the 
game in a playable form by an eligible 
library, archives, or museum, where 
such activities are carried out without 
any purpose of direct or indirect 
commercial advantage and the video 
game is not distributed or made 
available outside of the physical 
premises of the eligible library, archives, 
or museum. 
(ii) Video games in the form of 
computer programs embodied in 
physical or downloaded formats that 
have been lawfully acquired as 
complete games, that do not require 
access to an external computer server 
for gameplay, and that are no longer 
reasonably available in the commercial 
marketplace, solely for the purpose of 
preservation of the game in a playable 
form by an eligible library, archives, or 
museum, where such activities are 
carried out without any purpose of 
direct or indirect commercial advantage 
and the video game is not distributed or 
made available outside of the physical 
premises of the eligible library, archives, 
or museum. 
(iii) Computer programs used to 
operate video game consoles solely to 
the extent necessary for an eligible 
library, archives, or museum to engage 
in the preservation activities described 
in paragraph (b)(17)(i)(B) or (b)(17)(ii) of 
this section. 
(iv) For purposes of this paragraph 
(b)(17), the following definitions shall 
apply: 
(A) For purposes of paragraphs 
(b)(17)(i)(A) and (b)(17)(ii) of this 
section, ‘‘complete games’’ means video 
games that can be played by users 
without accessing or reproducing 
copyrightable content stored or 
previously stored on an external 
computer server. 
(B) For purposes of paragraph 
(b)(17)(i)(B) of this section, ‘‘complete 
games’’ means video games that meet 
the definition in paragraph (b)(17)(iv)(A) 
of this section, or that consist of both a 
copy of a game intended for a personal 
computer or video game console and a 
copy of the game’s code that was stored 
or previously stored on an external 
computer server. 
(C) ‘‘Ceased to provide access’’ means 
that the copyright owner or its 
authorized representative has either 
issued an affirmative statement 
indicating that external server support 
for the video game has ended and such 
support is in fact no longer available or, 
alternatively, server support has been 
discontinued for a period of at least six 
months; provided, however, that server 
support has not since been restored. 
(D) ‘‘Local gameplay’’ means 
gameplay conducted on a personal 
computer or video game console, or 
locally connected personal computers or 
consoles, and not through an online 
service or facility. 
(E) A library, archives, or museum is 
considered ‘‘eligible’’ if— 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:25 Oct 27, 2021 Jkt 256001 PO 00000 Frm 00032 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1jspears on DSK121TN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 15]
59641 Federal Register / Vol. 86, No. 206 / Thursday, October 28, 2021 / Rules and Regulations 
1 In the April 24, 2020, SIP revision SC DHEC also 
submitted to EPA changes to Regulations 61–62.1, 
Continued 
(1) The collections of the library, 
archives, or museum are open to the 
public and/or are routinely made 
available to researchers who are not 
affiliated with the library, archives, or 
museum; 
(2) The library, archives, or museum 
has a public service mission; 
(3) The library, archives, or museum’s 
trained staff or volunteers provide 
professional services normally 
associated with libraries, archives, or 
museums; 
(4) The collections of the library, 
archives, or museum are composed of 
lawfully acquired and/or licensed 
materials; and 
(5) The library, archives, or museum 
implements reasonable digital security 
measures as appropriate for the 
activities permitted by this paragraph 
(b)(17). 
(18)(i) Computer programs, except 
video games, that have been lawfully 
acquired and that are no longer 
reasonably available in the commercial 
marketplace, solely for the purpose of 
lawful preservation of a computer 
program, or of digital materials 
dependent upon a computer program as 
a condition of access, by an eligible 
library, archives, or museum, where 
such activities are carried out without 
any purpose of direct or indirect 
commercial advantage. Any electronic 
distribution, display, or performance 
made outside of the physical premises 
of an eligible library, archives, or 
museum of works preserved under this 
paragraph may be made to only one user 
at a time, for a limited time, and only 
where the library, archives, or museum 
has no notice that the copy would be 
used for any purpose other than private 
study, scholarship, or research. 
(ii) For purposes of the exemption in 
paragraph (b)(18)(i) of this section, a 
library, archives, or museum is 
considered ‘‘eligible’’ if— 
(A) The collections of the library, 
archives, or museum are open to the 
public and/or are routinely made 
available to researchers who are not 
affiliated with the library, archives, or 
museum; 
(B) The library, archives, or museum 
has a public service mission; 
(C) The library, archives, or museum’s 
trained staff or volunteers provide 
professional services normally 
associated with libraries, archives, or 
museums; 
(D) The collections of the library, 
archives, or museum are composed of 
lawfully acquired and/or licensed 
materials; and 
(E) The library, archives, or museum 
implements reasonable digital security 
measures as appropriate for the 
activities permitted by this paragraph 
(b)(18). 
(19) Computer programs that operate 
3D printers that employ technological 
measures to limit the use of material, 
when circumvention is accomplished 
solely for the purpose of using 
alternative material and not for the 
purpose of accessing design software, 
design files, or proprietary data. 
(20) Computer programs, solely for 
the purpose of investigating a potential 
infringement of free and open source 
computer programs where: 
(i) The circumvention is undertaken 
on a lawfully acquired device or 
machine other than a video game 
console, on which the computer 
program operates; 
(ii) The circumvention is performed 
by, or at the direction of, a party that has 
a good-faith, reasonable belief in the 
need for the investigation and has 
standing to bring a breach of license or 
copyright infringement claim; 
(iii) Such circumvention does not 
constitute a violation of applicable law; 
and 
(iv) The copy of the computer 
program, or the device or machine on 
which it operates, is not used or 
maintained in a manner that facilitates 
copyright infringement. 
(21) Video games in the form of 
computer programs, embodied in 
lawfully acquired physical or 
downloaded formats, and operated on a 
general-purpose computer, where 
circumvention is undertaken solely for 
the purpose of allowing an individual 
with a physical disability to use 
software or hardware input methods 
other than a standard keyboard or 
mouse. 
* * * * * 
Dated: October 21, 2021. 
Carla D. Hayden, 
Librarian of Congress. 
[FR Doc. 2021–23311 Filed 10–27–21; 8:45 am] 
BILLING CODE 1410–30–P 
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
AGENCY 
40 CFR Part 52 
[EPA–R04–OAR–2020–0445; FRL–8779–02– 
R4] 
Air Plan Approval; SC; Revisions to 
Definitions 
AGENCY: Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA). 
ACTION: Final rule. 
SUMMARY: The Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) is finalizing approval of 
a State Implementation Plan (SIP) 
revision submitted by the State of South 
Carolina, through the South Carolina 
Department of Health and 
Environmental Control (SC DHEC or 
Department), on April 24, 2020. The SIP 
revision updates the definition of ‘‘Spec. 
Oil (Specification Oil)’’ and makes 
minor updates to formatting and 
numbering. EPA is finalizing approval 
of these changes pursuant to the Clean 
Air Act (CAA or Act) and implementing 
federal regulations. 
DATES: This rule is effective November 
29, 2021. 
ADDRESSES: EPA has established a 
docket for this action under Docket 
Identification No. EPA–R04–OAR– 
2020–0445. All documents in the docket 
are listed on the www.regulations.gov 
website. Although listed in the index, 
some information may not be publicly 
available, i.e., Confidential Business 
Information or other information whose 
disclosure is restricted by statute. 
Certain other material, such as 
copyrighted material, is not placed on 
the internet and will be publicly 
available only in hard copy form. 
Publicly available docket materials are 
available either electronically through 
www.regulations.gov or in hard copy at 
the Air Regulatory Management Section, 
Air Planning and Implementation 
Branch, Air and Radiation Division, 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 
Region 4, 61 Forsyth Street SW, Atlanta, 
Georgia 30303–8960. EPA requests that 
if at all possible, you contact the person 
listed in the 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION 
CONTACT section to schedule your 
inspection. The Regional Office’s 
official hours of business are Monday 
through Friday 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., 
excluding Federal holidays. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT : 
Andres Febres, Air Regulatory 
Management Section, Air Planning and 
Implementation Branch, Air and 
Radiation Division, U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, Region 4, 61 Forsyth 
Street SW, Atlanta, Georgia 30303–8960. 
The telephone number is (404) 562– 
8966. Mr. Febres can also be reached via 
electronic mail at febres- 
martinez.andres@epa.gov. 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 
I. Background 
On April 24, 2020, SC DHEC 
submitted a SIP revision to EPA for 
approval that includes changes to South 
Carolina Regulation 61–62.1, Section I— 
Definitions.
1 First, SC DHEC’s April 24, 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 16:25 Oct 27, 2021 Jkt 256001 PO 00000 Frm 00033 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1jspears on DSK121TN23PROD with RULES1