[PAGE 1]
85437 Federal Register / Vol. 89, No. 208 / Monday, October 28, 2024 / Rules and Regulations 
1 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(A). 
2 Id. at 1201(a)(1)(B)–(D). 
3 Id. at 1201(a)(1)(C). 
4 The Office has provided detailed analyses of the 
statutory requirements in its 2017 policy study on 
section 1201 and elsewhere. See U.S. Copyright 
Office, Section 1201 of Title 17 at 105–127 (2017), 
https://www.copyright.gov/policy/1201/section- 
1201-full-report.pdf (‘‘Section 1201 Report’’). 
5 Register of Copyrights, Section 1201 
Rulemaking: Ninth Triennial Proceeding to 
Determine Exemptions to the Prohibition on 
Circumvention, Recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights (Oct. 2024), https://cdn.loc.gov/ 
copyright/1201/2024/2024_Section_1201_Registers_
Recommendation.pdf (‘‘Register’s 
Recommendation’’). 
6 Section 1201 Report at 111–12. 
7 Id.; accord Register of Copyrights, Section 1201 
Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding to 
Determine Exemptions to the Prohibition on 
Circumvention, Recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights 12–13 (Oct. 2018). References to the 
Register’s recommendations in prior rulemakings 
Continued 
and/or the post-registration 
maintenance documents exhibit certain 
attributes that call into question 
whether a mark is in use in commerce 
in the ordinary course of trade. Among 
other things, these audits will focus on 
registration files in which it appears that 
a specimen accepted during 
examination or submitted with a section 
8 or 71 affidavit or declaration was 
digitally altered, consistent with the 
parameters set forth in Examination 
Guide 3–19, or comprised printouts 
from a website determined to be a 
specimen farm. Under the directed audit 
program, the initial office action may 
request proof of use for all or some of 
the goods or services covered by the 
registration, in addition to other 
information deemed relevant to the 
USPTO to determine whether the mark 
is in use in commerce in the ordinary 
course of trade or whether the elements 
of excusable nonuse apply. The 
procedures will otherwise follow those 
for random audits. 
After considering any public 
comments received in response to this 
notice, the USPTO will publish 
information about the program on its 
Post Registration Audit Program web 
page at www.uspto.gov/trademarks/ 
maintain/post-registration-audit- 
program. The USPTO will likewise 
publish future changes to the post- 
registration audit program on its 
website. 
These changes will better position the 
audit program to address obvious issues 
with registration, thus protecting the 
integrity of the federal trademark 
registration system and improving the 
overall accuracy of the trademark 
register. 
Katherine K. Vidal, 
Under Secretary of Commerce for Intellectual 
Property and Director of the United States 
Patent and Trademark Office. 
[FR Doc. 2024–24755 Filed 10–25–24; 8:45 am] 
BILLING CODE 3510–16–P 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 
Copyright Office 
37 CFR Part 201 
[Docket No. 2023–5] 
Exemption to Prohibition on 
Circumvention of Copyright Protection 
Systems for Access Control 
Technologies 
AGENCY: U.S. Copyright Office, Library 
of Congress. 
ACTION: Final rule. 
SUMMARY: In this final rule, the Librarian 
of Congress adopts exemptions to the 
provision of the Digital Millennium 
Copyright Act (‘‘DMCA’’) that prohibits 
circumvention of technological 
measures that control access to 
copyrighted works. As required under 
the statute, the Register of Copyrights, 
following a public proceeding, 
submitted a recommendation to the 
Librarian of Congress (‘‘Register’s 
Recommendation’’) regarding proposed 
exemptions. After careful consideration, 
the Librarian adopts final regulations 
based on the Register’s 
Recommendation. 
DATE: Effective October 28, 2024. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT : 
Rhea Efthimiadis, Assistant to the 
General Counsel, by email at meft@
copyright.gov or telephone at 202–707– 
8350. 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The 
Librarian of Congress, pursuant to 
section 1201(a)(1) of title 17, United 
States Code, has determined in this 
ninth triennial rulemaking proceeding 
that the prohibition against 
circumvention of technological 
measures that effectively control access 
to copyrighted works shall not apply for 
the next three years to persons who 
engage in certain noninfringing uses of 
specified classes of such works. This 
determination is based on the Register’s 
Recommendation. 
The discussion below summarizes the 
rulemaking proceeding and the 
Register’s recommendations, states the 
Librarian’s determination, and adopts 
the regulatory text specifying the 
exempted classes of works. A more 
complete discussion of the rulemaking 
process, the evidentiary record, and the 
Register’s analysis with respect to each 
proposed exemption can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at 
www.copyright.gov/1201/2024/. 
I. Background 
A. Statutory Requirements 
In 1998, as part of the Digital 
Millenium Copyright Act (‘‘DMCA’’), 
Congress added section 1201 to title 17 
to provide greater legal protection for 
copyright owners in the emerging digital 
environment. Section 1201 generally 
makes it unlawful to ‘‘circumvent a 
technological measure that effectively 
controls access to’’ a copyrighted work.
1 
Congress established a set of 
permanent exemptions to the 
prohibition on circumvention, as well a 
procedure to put in place limited 
temporary exemptions. Every three 
years, the Librarian of Congress, upon 
the recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights, is authorized to adopt 
temporary exemptions, with respect to 
certain classes of copyrighted works, to 
remain in effect for the ensuing 
three-year period. Congress established 
this rulemaking as a ‘‘‘fail-safe’ 
mechanism’’ to ensure that the 
prohibition on circumvention would not 
adversely affect the public’s ability to 
make lawful uses of copyrighted works, 
including activities protected by the fair 
use doctrine.
2 
The triennial rulemaking occurs 
through a formal public process 
administered by the Register, who 
consults with the Assistant Secretary for 
Communications and Information of the 
Department of Commerce.
3 Participants 
must meet specific legal and evidentiary 
requirements in order to qualify for a 
temporary exemption. The Register’s 
recommendations are based on her 
conclusions as to whether each 
proposed exemption meets those 
statutory requirements.
4 As prescribed 
by the statute, she considers whether 
the prohibition on circumvention is 
having, or is likely to have, adverse 
effects on users’ ability to make 
noninfringing uses of a particular class 
of copyrighted works. Petitioners must 
provide evidence sufficient to allow the 
Register to draw such a conclusion. 
B. Rulemaking Standards 
Congress has specified the legal and 
evidentiary requirements for the section 
1201 rulemaking proceeding; these 
standards are discussed in greater detail 
in the Register’s Recommendation
5 and 
the Copyright Office’s 2017 policy study 
on section 1201.
6 The Register will 
recommend granting an exemption only 
‘‘when the preponderance of the 
evidence in the record shows that the 
conditions for granting an exemption 
have been met.’’
7 The evidence must 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:57 Oct 25, 2024 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00015 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1lotter on DSK11XQN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 2]
85438 Federal Register / Vol. 89, No. 208 / Monday, October 28, 2024 / Rules and Regulations 
are cited by the year of publication followed by 
‘‘Recommendation’’ (e.g., ‘‘2018 
Recommendation’’). Prior Recommendations are 
available on the Copyright Office website at https:// 
www.copyright.gov/1201/. 
8 Section 1201 Report at 112. 
9 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(B). 
10 2006 Recommendation at 19. 
11 Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access 
Controls on Copyrighted Works, 88 FR 37486, 
37487 (June 8, 2023). 
12 Id. See Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of 
Access Controls on Copyrighted Works, 82 FR 
29804, 29806 (June 30, 2017) (petitions to expand 
a current exemption are treated as petitions for new 
exemptions) (‘‘Renewal may only be sought for 
current exemptions as they are currently 
formulated, without modification. This means that 
if a proponent seeks to engage in any activities not 
currently permitted by an existing exemption, a 
petition for a new exemption must be submitted.’’). 
13 88 FR 37486, 37486; Exemptions to Permit 
Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted 
Works: Notice and Request for Public Comment, 88 
FR 42891 (July 5, 2023). References to renewal 
petitions and comments in response are by party 
and class name (abbreviated where appropriate) 
followed by ‘‘Renewal Pet.,’’ ‘‘Renewal Opp’n,’’ and 
‘‘Renewal Supp.’’ References to petitions for new 
exemptions and comments in response are by party 
name and class number followed by ‘‘Pet.,’’ 
‘‘Initial,’’ ‘‘Opp’n,’’ or ‘‘Reply’’ for comments 
submitted in the first, second, or third round, as 
applicable. 
14 Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access 
Controls on Copyrighted Works, 88 FR 72013 (Oct. 
19, 2023). 
15 Comments received in this rulemaking are 
available on the Office’s website. See Ninth 
Triennial Section 1201 Proceeding, 2024 Cycle, U.S. 
Copyright Office, https://www.copyright.gov/1201/ 
2024/ (last visited Oct. 17, 2024); see also Late Filed 
Comments, U.S. Copyright Office, https://
www.copyright.gov/1201/2024/late-filings/ (last 
visited Oct. 17, 2024). 
16 Video recordings of these hearings are available 
on the Office’s website and YouTube pages. See 
Ninth Triennial Section 1201 Rulemaking Public 
Hearings, U.S. Copyright Office, https://
www.copyright.gov/1201/2024/hearings.html (last 
visited Oct. 17, 2024); U.S. Copyright Office, 
Youtube, https://www.youtube.com/uscopyright
office/ (last visited Oct. 17, 2024). Under each 
proposed class, citations to hearing transcripts refer 
to that particular class. Hearing transcripts for each 
individual class are available on the Office’s web 
page. Transcripts of Public Hearings in the Ninth 
Triennial Section 1201 Rulemaking, U.S. Copyright 
Office, https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2024/ 
hearing-transcripts/ (last visited Oct. 17, 2024). 
17 Participants’ post-hearing letter responses are 
available on the Office’s website. Post-Hearing 
Questions, U.S. Copyright Office, https://
www.copyright.gov/1201/2024/post-hearing/ (last 
visited Oct. 17, 2024). 
18 Ex Parte Communications, U.S. Copyright 
Office, https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2024/ex- 
parte-communications/ (last visited Oct.17, 2024). 
The Office required participants to comply with its 
ex parte regulation, codified at 37 CFR 205.24. This 
regulation requires that parties submit a meeting 
request and summary to the Office after an ex parte 
meeting, which is substantially the same process 
employed in prior section 1201 rulemakings. 
Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access 
Controls on Copyrighted Works, 85 FR 65293, 
65310 (Oct. 15, 2020). 
19 The letters are available on the Office’s website. 
Letters Between the U.S. Copyright Office, Other 
Agencies, and Other Government Officials, U.S. 
Copyright Office, https://www.copyright.gov/1201/ 
2024/USCO-letters/ (last visited Oct. 17, 2024). 
20 Letter from Alan Davidson, Assistant Sec’y for 
Commc’ns & Info. Adm’r, Nat’l Telecomms. & Info. 
Admin., U.S. Dep’t of Commerce, to Shira 
Perlmutter, Register of Copyrights and Dir., U.S. 
Copyright Office (Sept. 24, 2024) (‘‘NTIA Letter’’). 
21 A renewal petition was not filed for the 
exemption permitting circumvention of video 
games in the form of computer programs for the 
purpose of allowing an individual with a physical 
disability to use alternative software or hardware 
input methods. See 37 CFR 201.40(b)(21) (2023); 88 
FR 72013, 72015 n.19. 
22 See 85 FR 65293, 65295 (describing that there 
was no ‘‘meaningful opposition’’ to renewing 
exemptions when the Office had ‘‘not received 
comments actually disputing whether there [wa]s a 
continued basis for any exemptions’’); see also 
Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access 
Controls on Copyrighted Works, 85 FR 37399, 
show ‘‘that it is more likely than not 
that users of a copyrighted work will, in 
the succeeding three-year period, be 
adversely affected by the prohibition on 
circumvention in their ability to make 
noninfringing uses of a particular class 
of copyrighted works.’’
8 The Register 
develops a comprehensive 
administrative record to support her 
recommendation. 
Section 1201(a)(1) enumerates five 
factors that guide the Register’s 
Recommendation and the Librarian’s 
determination regarding proposed 
exemptions: (1) the availability for use 
of copyrighted works; (2) the availability 
for use of works for nonprofit archival, 
preservation, and educational purposes; 
(3) the impact that the prohibition on 
the circumvention of technological 
measures applied to copyrighted works 
has on criticism, comment, news 
reporting, teaching, scholarship, or 
research; (4) the effect of circumvention 
of technological measures on the market 
for or value of copyrighted works; and 
(5) such other factors as the Librarian 
considers appropriate. The statute 
mandates that any exemption to be 
defined based on ‘‘a particular class of 
works.’’
9 Among other things, the 
determination of the appropriate scope 
of a ‘‘class of works’’ recommended for 
exemption can take into account the 
adverse effects an exemption may have 
on the market for or value of 
copyrighted works. Accordingly, ‘‘it can 
be appropriate to refine a class by 
reference to the use or user in order to 
remedy the adverse effect of the 
prohibition and to limit the adverse 
consequences of an exemption.’’
10 
II. History of the Ninth Triennial 
Proceeding 
The Copyright Office initiated the 
ninth triennial rulemaking proceeding 
by issuing a notice of inquiry (‘‘NOI’’) 
on June 8, 2023.
11 The NOI requested 
petitions for renewal, comments in 
response to petitions for renewal, and 
petitions for new exemptions, including 
proposals to expand current 
exemptions.
12 These public submissions 
were due between July 7, 2023 and 
August 25, 2023.13 The Office received 
thirty-eight petitions for renewal of 
existing exemptions and eleven 
petitions for new and expanded 
exemptions. It grouped the petitions for 
new and expanded exemptions into 
seven classes. 
On October 19, 2023, the Office 
issued a notice of proposed rulemaking 
(‘‘NPRM’’) identifying the existing 
exemptions that the Register intended to 
recommend for renewal, and providing 
a description of the proposed classes for 
new and expanded exemptions.
14 
Public submissions were due between 
December 22, 2023 and March 19, 2024. 
The Office received approximately 50 
submissions in response to the NPRM.
15 
After analyzing the written comments 
regarding proposed new and expanded 
exemptions, the Office held three days 
of public hearings from April 16–18, 
2024, via Zoom.
16 Forty-one individuals 
representing nineteen stakeholder 
groups offered their views on specific 
proposed exemptions, and an additional 
four individuals took part in an 
audience participation session. After the 
hearings, the Office issued written 
questions to participants regarding two 
of the proposed classes and received 
seven responses.
17 It then held three ex 
parte meetings with participants 
concerning three proposed classes.18 In 
addition, it received three letters about 
the rulemaking from other federal 
agencies and government officials.
19 
The Register consulted with the 
National Telecommunications and 
Information Administration (‘‘NTIA’’), 
in the Department of Commerce, as 
required by section 1201(a)(1). NTIA 
actively participated in the rulemaking 
process, providing input at key stages in 
meetings convened by the Office, and 
participated in the virtual public 
hearings where it engaged directly by 
asking questions. NTIA communicated 
its views on each of the proposed 
exemptions in writing to the Register on 
September 24, 2024.
20 The Office 
summarizes NTIA’s views below. 
NTIA’s full recommendation is available 
at https://cdn.loc.gov/copyright/1201/ 
2024/2024_NTIA_DMCA_Letter.pdf. 
III. Summary of Register’s 
Recommendation 
A. Renewal Recommendations 
The Register received petitions to 
renew all but one of the exemptions 
adopted pursuant to the eighth triennial 
rulemaking,
21 and recommends renewal 
of all exemptions for which petitions 
were filed.
22 She finds that the reasons 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:57 Oct 25, 2024 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00016 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1lotter on DSK11XQN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 3]
85439 Federal Register / Vol. 89, No. 208 / Monday, October 28, 2024 / Rules and Regulations 
37402 (June 22, 2020) (describing ‘‘meaningful 
opposition’’ standard). 
23 See 37 CFR 201.40(b)(1). 
24 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.A.1. 
25 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.A.2. 
26 Opposition to the Organization for 
Transformative Works’ (‘‘OTW’) requested changes 
is addressed as Class 1 below. Commenters objected 
only to OTW’s request for changes to the 
exemption, not to renewal of the exemption as-is. 
27 OTW Noncom. Videos Renewal Pet. at 3. 
28 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.A.3. 
29 Buster, Authors All. & Am. Ass’n of Univ. 
Professors (‘‘AAUP’’) Nonfiction Multimedia E- 
Books Renewal Pet. at 3. 
30 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.A.4. 
31 The individuals and organizations include 
Peter Decherney, Michael Delli Carpini, Library 
Copyright Alliance (‘‘LCA’’), and the Society for 
Cinema and Media Studies (‘‘SCMS’’) (collectively, 
‘‘Joint Educators I’’). 
32 Joint Educators I AV Educ. Renewal Pet. at 3. 
33 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.A.5. 
34 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.A.6. 
for the Librarian’s prior adoption of the 
exemptions are likely to continue 
during the next three-year period. The 
existing exemptions, and the bases for 
the recommendation to renew each 
exemption in accordance with the 
streamlined renewal process, are 
summarized below. 
1. Audiovisual Works—Educational and 
Derivative Uses 
Multiple individuals and 
organizations petitioned to renew the 
exemption covering the use of short 
portions of motion pictures for various 
educational and derivative uses.
23 The 
Office did not receive meaningful 
opposition to renewal. Renewal of each 
of this exemption’s subparts was 
unopposed, except for noncommercial 
videos, as discussed below. The existing 
exemption and its various subparts 
collectively serve as the baseline in 
assessing whether to recommend any 
expansion to Classes 1 and 2. 
a. Audiovisual Works—Criticism and 
Comment—Filmmaking
24 
Two organizations petitioned to 
renew the exemption for motion 
pictures for uses in documentary films 
or other films where the use is in a 
parody or for the work’s biographical or 
historically significant nature. No 
oppositions to the renewal were filed. 
Petitioners stated that they personally 
know many filmmakers who have found 
it necessary to rely on this exemption 
and will continue to do so. The 
petitions summarized the continuing 
need and justification for the 
exemption. 
b. Audiovisual Works–Criticism and 
Comment–Noncommercial Videos
25 
Two organizations petitioned to 
renew the exemption for motion 
pictures for uses in noncommercial 
videos. The Office did not receive 
meaningful opposition to renewal of 
this exemption.
26 Petitioners stated that 
they had personal knowledge that video 
creators have relied on this exemption 
and anticipate needing to do so in the 
future. The Organization for 
Transformative Works (‘‘OTW’’) 
included an account from an academic 
who stated that footage ripped from 
DVDs and Blu-ray is preferred for 
‘‘vidders’’ (noncommercial remix artists) 
because ‘‘it is high quality enough to 
bear up under the transformations that 
vidders make to it.’’
27 The petitioners 
demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption. 
c. Audiovisual Works—Criticism and 
Comment—Multimedia E-books
28 
Petitioners also sought renewal of the 
exemption for the use of motion picture 
excerpts in nonfiction multimedia e- 
books. No oppositions were filed against 
renewal. The petition demonstrated the 
continuing need and justification for the 
exemption. In addition, the petitioners 
demonstrated personal knowledge that 
high-resolution video is not available 
without circumvention of technological 
protection measures (‘‘TPMs’’). They 
provided, as an example, Bobette 
Buster’s continued work on an e-book 
series based on her lecture series, 
‘‘Deconstructing Master Filmmakers: 
The Uses of Cinematic Enchantment.’’
29 
d. Audiovisual Works—Criticism, 
Comment, Teaching, or Scholarship— 
Universities and K–12 Educational 
Institutions
30 
Multiple individuals and 
organizations petitioned to renew the 
exemption for motion pictures for 
educational purposes by college and 
university or K–12 faculty and students. 
No oppositions were filed against 
renewal. The petitions demonstrated the 
continuing need and justification for the 
exemption, indicating that educators 
and students continue to rely on 
excerpts from digital media for class 
presentations and coursework. For 
instance, a collective of individuals and 
organizations provided several 
examples of professors using DVD clips 
in the classroom. A group of individual 
educators and educational 
organizations
31 broadly suggested that 
the ‘‘entire field’’ of video essays or 
multimedia criticism ‘‘could not have 
existed in the United States without fair 
use and the 1201 educational 
exemption.’’
32 Petitioners demonstrated 
personal knowledge and experience 
with this exemption based on their past 
participation in the section 1201 
triennial rulemaking and the experience 
of their members—thousands of digital 
and literacy educators and other 
members supporting educators and 
students. The Register finds that 
petitioners demonstrated a continuing 
need and justification for the 
exemption. 
e. Audiovisual Works—Criticism and 
Comment—Massive Open Online 
Courses (‘‘MOOCs’’)
33 
A collective of individuals and 
organizations petitioned to renew the 
exemption for educational uses of 
motion pictures in Massive Open 
Online Courses (‘‘MOOCs’’). No 
oppositions were filed against renewal. 
The petitions demonstrated the 
continuing need and justification for the 
exemption, stating that instructors 
continue to rely on the exemption to 
develop, provide, and improve MOOCs, 
as well as to increase the number of 
(and therefore access to) MOOCs in the 
field of film and media studies. As 
teachers and proponents of MOOCs— 
most of whom have advocated for this 
exemption in prior rulemakings— 
petitioners demonstrated personal 
experience with and knowledge of this 
exemption. 
f. Audiovisual Works—Criticism and 
Comment—Digital and Media Literacy 
Programs
34 
The Library Copyright Alliance 
(‘‘LCA’’) and Renee Hobbs petitioned to 
renew the exemption for motion 
pictures for educational uses in 
nonprofit digital and media literacy 
programs offered by libraries, museums, 
and other organizations. No oppositions 
were filed against renewal. The petition 
stated that librarians across the country 
have relied on the current exemption 
and will continue to do so for their 
digital and media literacy programs, 
thereby demonstrating the continuing 
need and justification for the 
exemption. Petitioners have personal 
experience with this exemption, as they 
engage with institutions and individuals 
offering these programs. 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:57 Oct 25, 2024 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00017 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1lotter on DSK11XQN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 4]
85440 Federal Register / Vol. 89, No. 208 / Monday, October 28, 2024 / Rules and Regulations 
35 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.B. 
36 ATSP & LCA Captioning Renewal Pet. at 3. 
37 Id. 
38 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.C. 
39 LCA Preservation Renewal Pet. at 3. 
40 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.D. 
41 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.E. 
42 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.F. 
43 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.G. 
44 Coalition Medical Devices Renewal Pet. at 3. 
45 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.H. 
2. Audiovisual Works—Accessibility 35 
The Association of Transcribers and 
Speech-to-Text Providers (‘‘ATSP’’) and 
LCA petitioned to renew the exemption 
for motion pictures for the provision of 
captioning and/or audio description by 
disability services offices or similar 
units at educational institutions for 
students, faculty, or staff with 
disabilities. No oppositions were filed 
against renewal. The petitioners 
demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption, and, as 
‘‘represent[atives of] disability services 
professionals and supporting entities 
collectively responsible for the regular 
provision of captioning and audio 
description services for thousands of 
students,’’ personal knowledge and 
experience with the exemption.
36 
Petitioners stated that the ‘‘exemption 
enables disability services offices and 
similar units to ensure that students 
with disabilities have access to the same 
advantages as their peers in the pursuit 
of education.’’
37 
3. Audiovisual works—Preservation or 
Replacement—Library, Archives, and 
Museum
38 
LCA petitioned to renew the 
exemption for motion pictures for 
preservation or the creation of a 
replacement copy by an eligible library, 
archives, or museum. No oppositions 
were filed against renewal. LCA 
petitioned for the exemption’s adoption 
in the eighth triennial rulemaking and 
demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption.
39 For 
example, it asserted that institutions 
across the country have relied on the 
exemption to make preservation and 
replacement copies of movies in their 
collections, many of which are not 
available for purchase or streaming. 
LCA indicated that as DVD and Blu-ray 
discs deteriorate, institutions like 
libraries and museums will continue to 
need to circumvent technological 
protections to make such copies. LCA 
also demonstrated its personal 
knowledge of the exemption. 
4. Audiovisual Works—Text and Data 
Mining—Scholarly Research and 
Teaching
40 
Multiple organizations jointly 
petitioned to renew the exemption for 
text and data mining of motion pictures 
by researchers affiliated with a 
nonprofit institution of higher 
education, or at the direction of such 
researchers, for the purpose of scholarly 
research and teaching. Petitioners 
demonstrated the continuing need for 
this exemption, citing researchers who 
rely on it, such as professors using DVD 
clips in their classrooms and in their 
research. They also demonstrated their 
personal experience with this 
exemption, having advocated for its 
adoption in the eighth triennial 
rulemaking proceeding. Although two 
organizations jointly objected to renewal 
of this exemption, the comments 
seemed to have misunderstood the 
Register’s prior findings and did not 
demonstrate that the previous 
rulemaking record was no longer 
reliable. Petitioners asserted that there 
have not been any legal changes or 
market developments that would 
disturb the Office’s previous analysis or 
materially impact the record on which 
the Register had relied. This existing 
exemption serves as the baseline in 
assessing whether to recommend any 
expansions in Class 3(a). 
5. Literary Works—Text and Data 
Mining—Scholarly Research and 
Teaching
41 
Multiple organizations jointly 
petitioned to renew the exemption for 
text and data mining of literary works 
that were distributed electronically, by 
researchers affiliated with a nonprofit 
institution of higher education, or at the 
direction of such researchers, for the 
purpose of scholarly research and 
teaching. No oppositions were filed 
against renewal. The petitions 
demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption, 
highlighting various professors’ ongoing 
and developing research projects 
dependent on it. Petitioners also 
demonstrated personal knowledge of the 
exemption based on their ongoing 
relationships with researchers using it. 
This existing exemption serves as the 
baseline in assessing whether to 
recommend any expansions in Class 
3(b). 
6. Literary Works—Text and Data 
Mining—Assistive Technologies
42 
Multiple organizations jointly 
petitioned to renew the exemption for 
literary works or previously published 
musical works that have been fixed in 
the form of text or notation, distributed 
electronically, and include access 
controls that interfere with assistive 
technologies. No oppositions were filed 
against renewal. The petitioners 
demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption, stating 
that individuals who are blind, visually 
impaired, or print-disabled are 
significantly disadvantaged with respect 
to obtaining accessible e-book content 
because TPMs interfere with the use of 
assistive technologies. Additionally, 
they demonstrated personal knowledge 
and extensive experience with the 
assistive technology exemption, as they 
are all organizations that advocate for 
the blind, visually impaired, and print- 
disabled. 
7. Literary Works—Medical Device 
Data
43 
The Coalition of Medical Device 
Patients and Researchers (‘‘the 
Coalition’’) petitioned to renew the 
exemption covering access to patient 
data on medical devices or monitoring 
systems. No oppositions were filed 
against renewal. The Coalition 
demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption, stating 
that ‘‘the exemption is vital to patients’ 
ability to monitor the data output of 
medical devices that monitor and 
maintain their health’’ and to medical 
research.
44 It also demonstrated 
personal knowledge and experience 
with this exemption, citing member 
Hugo Campos’s experiences as a patient 
who has needed access data from his 
implanted defibrillator, and its research 
regarding medical devices. 
8. Computer Programs—Unlocking
45 
The Institute of Scrap Recycling 
Industries, Inc. (‘‘ISRI’’) petitioned to 
renew the exemption for computer 
programs that operate wireless devices, 
to allow connection of a new or used 
device to an alternative wireless 
network (‘‘unlocking’’). No oppositions 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:57 Oct 25, 2024 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00018 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1lotter on DSK11XQN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 5]
85441 Federal Register / Vol. 89, No. 208 / Monday, October 28, 2024 / Rules and Regulations 
46 ISRI Unlocking Renewal Pet. at 3. 
47 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.I. 
48 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.J. 
49 MEMA Vehicle Repair Renewal Pet. at 3. 
50 2021 Recommendation at 223. 
51 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.K. 
52 Although Author Services filed a comment 
opposing renewal of the exemption ‘‘in its present 
form,’’ the comment only addressed devices outside 
the scope of the existing exemption. See 88 FR 
72013, 72020–21. 
53 EFF Device Repair Renewal Pet. at 3. 
54 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.L. 
55 Avante Health Sols., Avante Diagnostic 
Imaging, and Avante Ultrasound Medical Device 
Repair Renewal Pet. at 5. 
56 598 U.S. 508 (2023). 
57 2021 Recommendation at 229. 
were filed against renewal. The petition 
demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption, stating 
that users ‘‘continue to purchase or 
acquire donated cell phones, tablets, 
laptops, and a variety of other wireless 
devices no longer needed by their 
original owners and try to make the best 
possible use of them through resale or 
recycling,’’ which requires unlocking 
the devices so they may be used on 
other carriers.
46 ISRI demonstrated 
personal knowledge and experience 
with the exemption based on its 
involvement in previous triennial 
rulemakings and its representation of 
nearly 1,600 companies that process, 
broker, and consume scrap 
commodities. 
9. Computer Programs—Jailbreaking
47 
Multiple organizations petitioned to 
renew the four exemptions for computer 
programs that enable electronic devices 
to interoperate with or to remove 
software applications (‘‘jailbreaking’’). 
These exemptions permit circumvention 
for the purpose of jailbreaking (1) 
smartphones and other portable all- 
purpose computing devices, (2) smart 
televisions, (3) voice assistant devices, 
and (4) routers and dedicated 
networking devices. No oppositions 
were filed against renewal. The 
petitions demonstrated the continuing 
need and justification for the exemption 
and that petitioners have personal 
knowledge and experience with regard 
to this exemption. Petitioners described 
how users of a variety products in each 
of these categories rely on this 
exemption to maintain functionality and 
security of older devices, to install 
alternative operation systems, and to 
customize software applications on 
electronic devices. Collectively, the 
petitions demonstrated that without this 
exemption, TPMs installed on the 
enumerated products would have an 
adverse effect on various noninfringing 
uses. 
10. Computer Programs—Repair of 
Motorized Land Vehicles, Marine 
Vessels, or Mechanized Agricultural 
Vehicles or Vessels
48 
iFixit and MEMA, The Vehicle 
Suppliers Association (‘‘MEMA’’), 
petitioned to renew the exemption for 
computer programs that control 
motorized land vehicles, marine vessels, 
or mechanized agricultural vehicles or 
vessels for purposes of diagnosis, repair, 
or modification of a vehicle or vessel 
function. No oppositions were filed 
against renewal. The petitioners each 
represent or advise individuals and 
businesses that perform vehicle service 
and repair and have personal experience 
with this exemption through those 
activities. They demonstrated the 
continuing need and justification for the 
exemption. For example, MEMA stated 
that its membership ‘‘continues to see 
firsthand that the exemption is helping 
protect consumer choice and a 
competitive market, while mitigating 
risks to intellectual property and vehicle 
safety’’—particularly as ‘‘every year 
vehicle computer programs become 
more important and essential to today’s 
motor vehicles.’’
49 In the 2021 
rulemaking, the Register concluded that 
the ‘‘prohibition against circumvention 
. . . [was] likely to adversely affect 
diagnosis, repair, and lawful 
modification of a vessel function for 
marine vessels,’’ as well as functions for 
land vehicles, including agricultural 
land vehicles such as tractors.
50 The 
Office did not receive any evidence 
indicating that these categories of 
vehicles and vessels should be treated 
differently in this proceeding. 
11. Computer Programs—Repairs of 
Devices Designed Primarily for Use by 
Consumers
51 
The Electronic Frontier Foundation 
(‘‘EFF’’) petitioned to renew the 
exemption for computer programs that 
control devices designed primarily for 
use by consumers for diagnosis, 
maintenance, or repair of the device. 
The Office did not receive meaningful 
opposition to renewal.
52 The petitioners 
demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption. For 
example, EFF asserted that 
‘‘[m]anufacturers of these devices 
continue to implement technological 
protection measures that inhibit lawful 
repairs, maintenance, and diagnostics, 
and they show no sign of changing 
course.’’
53 EFF has personal knowledge 
of this exemption, as it has been 
involved with the section 1201 
rulemaking process since its inception 
and has specifically advocated for 
device repair exemptions. 
12. Computer Programs—Repair of 
Medical Devices and Systems
54 
Multiple organizations petitioned to 
renew the exemption to access 
computer programs that are contained 
in and control the functioning of 
medical devices or systems, and related 
data files, for purposes of diagnosis, 
maintenance, or repair. The petitioners 
repair, maintain, service, or sell medical 
systems and devices and thus have 
personal experience with this 
exemption. The petitions demonstrated 
the continuing need and justification for 
the exemption, for example stating that 
‘‘the use of TPMs in medical systems 
and devices is widespread’’ and that 
manufacturers ‘‘have developed new 
systems that further restrict access to 
use of necessary software tools.’’
55 
Petitioners also emphasized that this 
exemption makes possible device repair 
and maintenance services that ensure 
continuity and efficiency of patient care. 
Three organizations submitted timely 
opposition comments. Opponents 
asserted that the exemption undermines 
the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration’s (‘‘FDA’’) maintenance 
and repair standards for the intricate 
equipment used in patient care and 
conflicts with other congressional 
policies. They also argued that the 
Supreme Court’s decision in Andy 
Warhol Found. for the Visual Arts v. 
Goldsmith
56 undermined the validity of 
the previous rulemaking’s analysis. As 
in the Register’s 2021 Recommendation, 
in this rulemaking the Register again 
emphasizes that the Office ‘‘generally 
does not consider other regulatory 
schemes as part of the . . . analysis 
because the focus of this proceeding is 
on copyright-related considerations,’’
57 
and notes that granting an exemption 
under section 1201 does not absolve any 
user from compliance with other 
relevant laws and regulations. The 
Register further concludes that the 
Warhol decision does not substantially 
change the Office’s analysis of the uses 
at issue in this exemption. 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:57 Oct 25, 2024 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00019 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1lotter on DSK11XQN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 6]
85442 Federal Register / Vol. 89, No. 208 / Monday, October 28, 2024 / Rules and Regulations 
58 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.M. 
59 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.N. 
60 SPN and LCA Abandoned Video Game 
Renewal Pet. at 3. 
61 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.O. 
62 SPN & LCA Software Preservation Renewal Pet. 
at 3. 
63 Id. 
64 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.P. 
65 Weinberg 3D Printers Renewal Pet. at 3. 
66 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.Q. 
67 SFC Copyright License Investigation Renewal 
Pet. at 3. 
68 Id. 
69 Id. 
70 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at IV.R. 
71 2021 Recommendation at 315. 
13. Computer Programs—Security 
Research 58 
Multiple organizations and security 
researchers petitioned to renew the 
exemption permitting circumvention for 
purposes of good-faith security research. 
No oppositions were filed against 
renewal, and one group of security and 
policy professionals submitted a 
comment in support of the petition. The 
petitioners demonstrated the continuing 
need and justification for the 
exemption, as well as personal 
knowledge of and experience with this 
exemption. They highlighted professors’ 
critical research regarding 
vulnerabilities in voting machines, 
devices underpinning the financial 
industry, smart phones, and other 
devices. They also stated that this 
exemption enables security testing that 
is vital to ensure device users’ privacy 
is protected and security issues are 
corrected. 
14. Video Games—Preservation and 
Abandoned Video Games
59 
The Software Preservation Network 
(‘‘SPN’’) and LCA jointly petitioned to 
renew the exemption for individual play 
by gamers and preservation of video 
games by a library, archives, or museum 
for which outside server support has 
been discontinued, and preservation by 
a library, archives, or museum, of 
discontinued video games that never 
required server support. No oppositions 
were filed against renewal, and one 
individual filed a comment in support. 
Petitioners demonstrated that there is a 
continuing need and justification for the 
exemption. They stated that video game 
collection librarians report an ongoing 
need to preserve TPM-encumbered 
video games in their collections and that 
the ‘‘[section] 1201 exemption has 
become a crucial tool in their ongoing 
efforts to save digital game culture 
before it disappears.’’
60 They 
demonstrated personal knowledge and 
experience through past participation in 
section 1201 rulemakings and through 
their representation of members who 
have relied on this exemption. 
This existing exemption serves as the 
baseline in assessing whether to 
recommend any expansions in Class 
6(b). 
15. Computer Programs—Preservation
61 
SPN and LCA jointly petitioned to 
renew the exemption for the 
preservation of computer programs 
other than video games, and computer 
program-dependent materials, by 
libraries, archives, and museums. No 
oppositions were filed against renewal, 
and one individual filed a comment in 
support. Petitioners demonstrated that 
there is a continuing need and 
justification for this exemption. For 
example, they asserted that remotely 
accessing preserved computer programs 
‘‘fulfill[s] cultural heritage institutions’ 
missions to support research, analysis, 
and other scholarly re-use of the 
historical record (and to do so equitably 
and inclusively).’’
62 In addition, they 
demonstrated personal knowledge and 
experience through past participation in 
section 1201 rulemakings relating to 
access controls on software and through 
representing major library associations 
with members who have relied on this 
exemption.
63 
This existing exemption serves as the 
baseline in assessing whether to 
recommend any expansions in Class 
6(a). 
16. Computer Programs—3D Printers
64 
Michael Weinberg petitioned to renew 
the exemption for computer programs 
that operate 3D printers to allow use of 
alternative material. No oppositions 
were filed against renewal. The petition 
demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption, and the 
petitioner demonstrated personal 
knowledge and experience. Specifically, 
Mr. Weinberg declared that he is a 
member of the 3D printing community 
and has been involved with this 
exemption’s renewal and modification 
in each section 1201 rulemaking it has 
been considered. Additionally, he stated 
that while 3D printer manufacturers 
‘‘continue to use TPMs to limit the types 
of materials used in printers,’’ since the 
last rulemaking proceeding, there has 
been ‘‘an expansion of third-party 
materials available for 3D printers’’ due 
to the current exemption, which has 
assured manufacturers and users that 
their uses would not violate section 
1201.
65 
17. Computer Programs—Copyright 
License Investigation
66 
The Software Freedom Conservancy 
(‘‘SFC’’) petitioned to renew the 
exemption for computer programs, for 
the purpose of investigating potential 
infringement of free and open-source 
computer programs. No oppositions 
were filed against renewal. The petition 
demonstrated the continuing need and 
justification for the exemption, 
including through discussion of how 
TPMs, such as encryption, ‘‘prevent[ ] 
the investigation of computer programs’’ 
within various devices, such as laptops, 
IP-enabled doorbells, baby monitors, 
and thermostats, that use free and open 
source software (‘‘FOSS’’) to operate.
67 
SFC indicated that barriers to 
investigating FOSS will ‘‘continue to 
exist . . . [and would] prevent . . . 
users from obtaining access to the 
relevant copyrighted works’’ without 
the exemption.
68 As a participant in the 
previous rulemaking and ‘‘the nonprofit 
home for dozens of FOSS projects 
representing well over a thousand 
volunteer contributors,’’ SFC 
demonstrated personal knowledge and 
experience regarding the exemption.
69 
18. Computer Programs—Videogame 
Accessibility
70 
In 2021, the Register found that the 
record ‘‘support[ed] an exemption to 
enable individuals with disabilities to 
use alternate input devices to play video 
games.’’
71 The Office previously noted 
the strong justifications for the 
exemption and recommended that 
Congress enact a permanent exemption 
to enable such accessibility. It did not, 
however, receive a petition to renew 
this exemption and, given the 
constraints of the rulemaking process, 
the Register is not able to recommend 
renewal. 
B. New or Expanded Designations of 
Classes 
Based upon the record in this 
proceeding regarding proposed 
expansions to existing exemptions or 
newly proposed exemptions, the 
Register recommends that the Librarian 
grant the following additional 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:57 Oct 25, 2024 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00020 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1lotter on DSK11XQN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 7]
85443 Federal Register / Vol. 89, No. 208 / Monday, October 28, 2024 / Rules and Regulations 
72 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the Register’s 
Recommendation at V.C. 
73 37 CFR 201.40(b)(4)–(5). 
74 Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3(a) Pet. at 
2; Authors All., AAUP & LCA Class 3(b) Pet. at 2. 
75 Motion Picture Association (‘‘MPA’’), News 
Media Alliance, and the Recording Industry 
Association of America (‘‘RIAA’’) (collectively, 
‘‘Joint Creators III’’) Class 3(a) Opp’n at 5; see Ass’n 
of Am. Publishers (‘‘AAP’’) Class 3(b) Opp’n at 2– 
3; DVD Copy Control Ass’n (‘‘DVD CCA’’) and 
Advanced Access Content Sys. Licensing Adm’r, 
LLC (‘‘AACS LA’’) Class 3(a) Opp’n at 12–13, 19– 
20. 
76 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the Register’s 
Recommendation at V.E. 
77 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the Register’s 
Recommendation at V.G. 
exemptions from the prohibition against 
circumvention of technological 
measures set forth in section 1201(a)(1): 
1. Proposed Classes 3(a) and 3(b): 
Audiovisual Works and Literary 
Works—Text and Data Mining
72 
Authors Alliance, the American 
Association of University Professors 
(‘‘AAUP’’), and LCA petitioned to 
expand the existing exemptions that 
permit circumvention of technological 
protection measures on copies of 
copyrighted audiovisual and literary 
works that were lawfully acquired, to 
enable researchers to perform text and 
data mining for the purpose of scholarly 
research and teaching. The current 
exemptions permit access to the corpora 
to outside researchers ‘‘solely for 
purposes of collaboration or replication 
of the research.’’
73 Petitioners stated 
that additional research based on text 
and data mining techniques is stymied 
by uncertainty surrounding whether and 
when the corpora at issue may be used 
by researchers at outside institutions. 
Proposed Classes 3(a) and 3(b) would 
provide an exemption to allow 
academic researchers to share copies of 
corpora with researchers affiliated with 
other nonprofit institutions of higher 
education ‘‘for purposes of conducting 
independent text [and] data mining 
research and teaching, where those 
researchers are in compliance with the 
exemption.’’
74 
Association of American Publishers 
(‘‘AAP’’); Motion Picture Association 
(‘‘MPA’’), News Media Alliance, and the 
Recording Industry Association of 
America (‘‘RIAA’’) (collectively, ‘‘Joint 
Creators III’’); DVD Copy Control 
Association (‘‘DVD CCA’’) and the 
Advanced Access Content System 
Licensing Administrator, LLC (‘‘AACS 
LA’’); and the International Association 
of Scientific, Technical and Medical 
Publishers opposed the proposed 
expansions for classes 3(a) and 3(b). 
They argued that the ‘‘proposed new 
language would dramatically enlarge the 
scope of the exemptions adopted in 
2021’’ and could lead to ‘‘a wide range 
of potentially infringing uses’’ of 
copyrighted works.
75 They also raised 
issues with the existing exemptions’ 
security measures and viewing 
provisions. 
As discussed in the Register’s 
Recommendation, absent modifications 
to the current exemptions for text and 
data mining, researchers at other 
academic institutions will face adverse 
effects in their ability to make 
noninfringing use of copyrighted 
audiovisual and literary works. The 
Register recommends that the current 
exemptions be modified to permit 
researchers affiliated with other 
nonprofit institutions of higher 
education to access corpora solely for 
the purposes of text and data mining 
research or teaching. ‘‘Access’’ in this 
context means that an institution may 
provide outside researchers with 
credentials for security and 
authentication to use a corpus that is 
hosted on its servers; it does not mean 
that an institution or a researcher may 
disseminate a copy of a corpus (or 
copyrighted works included therein) to 
outside researchers or give outside 
researchers the ability to download, 
make copies of, or distribute any 
copyrighted works. 
The Register also recommends 
amending the existing exemptions to 
clarify the security measures provisions 
and the viewing provisions to bring the 
regulatory text in line with the fair use 
analysis in the 2021 Recommendation. 
These amendments do not require a new 
fair use analysis. Specifically, she 
recommends amending the security 
measures provisions to: (1) include 
reasonable requests from trade 
associations; (2) permit inquiries into 
security measures regardless of whether 
they are based on individual agreements 
or the institution’s own standards; and 
(3) allow those inquiries when the 
copyright owners reasonably believe 
that their works are in the corpus. The 
Register also recommends amending the 
viewing provision to permit researchers 
to view the contents of copyrighted 
works as part of their research, provided 
that viewing takes place in furtherance 
of research objectives (e.g., processing or 
annotating works to prepare them for 
analysis) and not for the works’ 
expressive value. 
2. Proposed Class 5: Computer 
Programs—Repair of Commercial 
Industrial Equipment
76 
Public Knowledge and iFixit jointly 
petitioned for an expanded repair 
exemption that would permit 
circumvention for the purposes of 
diagnosis, maintenance, and repair of 
commercial and industrial equipment. 
The U.S. Department of Justice Antitrust 
Division and the Federal Trade 
Commission filed comments in support 
of the petition. Proponents asserted that 
that there were sufficient commonalities 
to support a broad class by providing 
four representative examples, including 
commercial food preparation 
equipment. Opponents ACT √ The App 
Association; Associated Equipment 
Distributors; Entertainment Software 
Association (‘‘ESA’’), MPA, and RIAA 
(‘‘collectively, ‘‘Joint Creators I’’); 
Philips North America, LLC; and the 
Association of Home Appliance 
Manufacturers primarily argued that the 
scope of the class was overly broad and 
unsupported by the record. NTIA 
supported the proposed exemption. 
The Register recommends adopting a 
new exemption covering diagnosis, 
maintenance, and repair of retail-level 
commercial food preparation equipment 
because proponents sufficiently 
showed, by a preponderance of the 
evidence, adverse effects on the 
proposed noninfringing uses of such 
equipment. However, she declines to 
recommend an exemption for a broader 
class of software-enabled commercial 
and industrial devices in the absence of 
a sufficient showing of adverse effects 
on the record presented in this 
rulemaking. 
3. Proposed Class 7: Computer 
Programs—Vehicle Operational Data
77 
Class 7 proponents sought a new 
exemption to permit lawful owners and 
lessees, or those acting on their behalf, 
to access, store, and share vehicle 
operational and telematics data 
generated by motorized land vehicles 
and marine vessels. They argued that 
the proposed exemption would allow 
vehicle owners and lessees to make 
productive, noninfringing uses of that 
data, such as monitoring vehicle use 
and streamlining the vehicle repair 
process. In subsequent comments and at 
the public hearing, proponents agreed 
that any exemption should include 
limitations, such as the continued 
applicability of other laws. 
Alliance for Automotive Innovation, 
Association of Equipment 
Manufacturers, National Association of 
Manufacturers, and the Joint Creators I 
opposed the exemption. They argued 
that consumers already have sufficient 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:57 Oct 25, 2024 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00021 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1lotter on DSK11XQN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 8]
85444 Federal Register / Vol. 89, No. 208 / Monday, October 28, 2024 / Rules and Regulations 
78 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
subpart, including citations to the record and 
relevant legal authority, can be found in the 
Register’s Recommendation at V.A. 
79 OTW submitted a petition for renewal, which 
the Office construed as a request for expansion 
since petitioner requested alterations to the existing 
exemption. 
80 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the 
Recommendation at V.B. 
81 Peter Decherney, Sarah Banet-Weiser, Shiv 
Gaglani & SCMS (collectively, ‘‘Joint Educators II’’) 
Class 2 Reply at 2–3. 
82 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the 
Recommendation at V.D. 
access under current laws and market 
practices, particularly the existing 
vehicle repair exemption found in 
section 37 CFR 201.40(b)(13) (‘‘Repair 
Exemption’’). They further contended 
that the proposed exemption was 
overbroad and would raise issues 
related to safety, privacy, and trade 
secrets. 
NTIA supported the proposed 
exemption and recommended that it 
operate as a ‘‘standalone’’ exemption, 
separate from the Repair Exemption. In 
addition, NTIA recommended including 
the term ‘‘analyze’’ within the proposed 
regulatory language, as furthering the 
intended goals of the exemption. 
For the reasons detailed in the 
Register’s Recommendation, the Register 
concludes that the prohibition on 
circumvention adversely affects the 
ability of lawful owners and lessees, or 
those acting on their behalf, to access, 
store, and share operational and 
telematics data, which are likely to be 
noninfringing. She further finds that 
such uses would not adversely affect the 
market for or value of computer 
programs integrated into vehicles and 
vessels and that the purported 
alternatives do not sufficiently mitigate 
any adverse effects. She also 
recommends adopting regulatory 
provisions mirroring those within the 
Repair Exemption regarding the 
applicability of the exemption to other 
laws, separate subscription services, and 
unauthorized access to other 
copyrighted works. 
C. Classes Considered but Not 
Recommended 
Based upon the record in this 
proceeding, the Register recommends 
that the Librarian determine that the 
following classes of works shall not be 
exempt during the next three-year 
period from the prohibition against 
circumvention of technological 
measures set forth in section 1201(a)(1): 
1. Proposed Class 1: Audiovisual 
Works—Noncommercial Videos
78 
Proposed Class 1 proponents sought 
to expand the existing exemption that 
permits circumvention of access 
controls protecting excerpts of motion 
pictures on DVDs, Blu-ray discs, and 
digitally transmitted video for the 
purposes of criticism and comment, 
including for educational purposes by 
certain users. The Office received one 
petition from OTW seeking an 
amendment to the language of the 
existing exemption.
79 Specifically, OTW 
proposed rewriting the text of the 
current exemption related to 
noncommercial videos, which is being 
renewed, by reverting to language used 
in the 2010 rulemaking, when the 
exemption was initially adopted. OTW 
maintained that its proposed changes 
would not substantively alter the 
exemption but would render it more 
understandable to users. It made 
essentially the same request in the 2021 
proceeding, which the Register did not 
recommend adopting. 
The Office received no comments in 
support of the proposal, no requests 
from OTW or other parties to participate 
in the public hearings, and no other 
evidence in support of the proposal. 
Two groups, however, filed opposition 
comments. These groups opposed the 
language changes that OTW proposed, 
but did not oppose renewal of the 
exemption as currently written. 
Opponents highlighted the Register’s 
previous findings in the 2021 
rulemaking that OTW’s proposed 
changes were not warranted, as well as 
OTW’s failure in this proceeding to 
submit any evidence supporting its 
petition. NTIA acknowledged that 
petitioner did not submit its request in 
a procedurally proper manner, but 
supported petitioner’s proposed 
modifications to the class and structural 
alterations to the way exemptions are 
written in general. The Register does not 
recommend the expansion proposed as 
Class 1, which does not include 
substantive changes. 
2. Proposed Class 2: Audiovisual 
Works—Online Learning
80 
Proposed Class 2 would expand the 
existing exemption for circumvention of 
access controls protecting motion 
pictures on DVDs, Blu-ray discs, and 
digitally transmitted video for 
educational purposes in massive open 
online courses (‘‘MOOCs’’) by faculty 
and employees acting at the direction of 
faculty of accredited nonprofit 
educational institutions. Petitioner 
sought to expand the scope of the 
exemption for ‘‘educators . . . and 
preparers of online learning materials 
acting at the direction of educators’’ of 
‘‘qualified online educational entities,’’ 
including for-profit entities and 
unaccredited educational institutions, to 
use short portions of motion pictures 
‘‘for the purpose of teaching registered 
learners . . . in courses requiring close 
analysis of film and media excerpts 
when the transformative fair use of the 
excerpts contributes significantly to 
learning, for the purpose of criticism, 
comment, illustration, or 
explanation.’’
81 Proponents argued that 
these entities should have free and 
efficient ways of accessing high-quality 
motion picture excerpts to educate 
nontraditional learners. Opponents 
argued against the proposed expansion, 
contending that proponents failed to 
meet their evidentiary burden, 
including that the conduct at issue 
would be noninfringing. Finally, AACS 
LA argued that screen capture 
technology has improved and remains 
an adequate alternative in some 
circumstances. 
NTIA supported the proposed 
exemption with some modifications to 
address opponents’ concerns. 
The Register finds that the record 
lacks support to expand the existing 
exemption to for-profit and/or 
unaccredited educational entities. She 
therefore does not recommend adopting 
the proposed exemption. 
3. Proposed Class 4: Computer 
Programs—Generative AI Research
82 
Class 4 proponents sought an 
exemption for the purpose of 
conducting ‘‘trustworthiness’’ research 
on AI systems. Specifically, they sought 
to conduct research on harmful or 
undesirable outputs from generative AI 
systems, including content that is 
biased, is sexually explicit, or infringes 
copyrights. They asserted that section 
1201 inhibits this research by 
prohibiting the circumvention of 
various safeguards on online platforms, 
including account authentication 
systems. 
Opponents asserted that the proposed 
language was overbroad, arguing that a 
broad exemption could damage all 
software markets and sweep in a variety 
of systems and products, such as Blu- 
ray disc players. They also contended 
that proponents failed to provide 
sufficient information about the TPMs at 
issue and whether they would be 
circumvented for the proposed research. 
Finally, they argued that an exemption 
would be premature, and that the 
rulemaking was not the appropriate 
venue to establish new law, given the 
nascent technology involved and 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:57 Oct 25, 2024 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00022 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1lotter on DSK11XQN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 9]
85445 Federal Register / Vol. 89, No. 208 / Monday, October 28, 2024 / Rules and Regulations 
83 37 CFR 201.40(b)(16) (2023). The current 
security research exemption is being renewed 
during this rulemaking proceeding. 
84 The Register’s analysis and conclusions for this 
class, including citations to the record and relevant 
legal authority, can be found in the 
Recommendation at V.F. 
ongoing legislative and policy work on 
generative AI. 
NTIA supported an exemption 
modeled after the current security 
research exemption,
83 but without the 
requirement that research be conducted 
on lawfully acquired devices, or with 
the authorization of the system owner or 
operator. Although NTIA concluded 
that section 1201 would not apply to 
most of the activities identified by 
proponents, it believed that the use of 
certain prompts could implicate the 
prohibition on circumvention. NTIA 
also found sufficient evidence of 
adverse effects, crediting statements 
from academic researchers describing 
the ‘‘chilling effect’’ of section 1201 on 
their work. 
The Register recommends denying the 
proposed exemption. She acknowledges 
the importance of AI trustworthiness 
research as a policy matter and notes 
that Congress and other agencies may be 
best positioned to act on this emerging 
issue. She narrowed the proposed class 
to generative AI systems made available 
via software as a service based on the 
rulemaking record. She finds, however, 
that the adverse effects identified by 
proponents arise from third-party 
control of online platforms rather than 
the operation of section 1201, so that an 
exemption would not ameliorate their 
concerns. 
4. Proposed Classes 6(a) and 6(b): 
Computer Programs and Video Games— 
Preservation
84 
Proposed Classes 6(a) and 6(b) would 
amend the existing exemptions 
permitting libraries, archives, and 
museums to circumvent TPMs on 
computer programs and video games, 
respectively, for the purpose of 
preservation activities. The proposed 
amendment to Class 6(a) would remove 
the limitation that a preserved computer 
program must be accessible to only one 
user at a time (the ‘‘single-user 
limitation’’). Petitioners sought 
clarification of the single-user 
limitation, arguing that it is currently 
open to two different interpretations. 
The existing exemption, they 
contended, could be read to allow 
multiple users to access circumvented 
copies at once, so long as the number of 
users does not exceed the number of 
copies the institution owns; or to mean 
that only one user at a time may access 
a copy of the circumvented work 
regardless of how many copies the 
institution owns. Proposed Class 6(b) 
would also remove the current 
exemption’s limitation that a video 
game must not be distributed or made 
available outside of the physical 
premises of the institution (the 
‘‘premises limitation’’). 
Proponents argued that researchers 
could make noninfringing uses of the 
exemption even if the single-user 
limitation and the premises limitation 
were removed. This position was based 
in part on their view that proposed uses 
would be transformative, and would not 
affect the potential market for or value 
of the copyrighted works because only 
works that are no longer reasonably 
available in the commercial marketplace 
would be subject to the exemption. 
DVD CCA and AACS LA and Joint 
Creators I opposed removing the single- 
user limitation. They argued if a 
preservation institution were to allow 
multiple simultaneous uses of a 
preserved program, users’ conduct 
would not be fair use and would cause 
market harm. 
DVD CCA and AACS LA, Joint 
Creators I, and ESA opposed removing 
the premises limitation. They contended 
that there would be a significant risk 
that preserved video games would be 
used for recreational purposes. They 
further argued that the expanded 
exemption would give preservation 
institutions too much discretion 
regarding how they provide remote 
users access to preserved works; and 
that it did not contain appropriately 
tailored restrictions to ensure that uses 
would be limited to teaching, research, 
or scholarship uses. They believe that 
removing the premises limitation would 
also adversely affect the existing market 
for older video games. 
NTIA supported the removal of each 
limitation. 
The Register concludes that 
proponents did not show that removing 
the single-user limitation for preserved 
computer programs or permitting off- 
premises access to video games are 
likely to be noninfringing. She also 
notes the greater risk of market harm 
with removing the video game 
exemption’s premises limitation, given 
the market for legacy video games. She 
recommends clarifying the single copy 
restriction language to reflect that 
preservation institutions can allow a 
copy of a computer program to be 
accessed by as many individuals as 
there are circumvented copies legally 
owned. This clarifying text will address 
the perceived ambiguity in the current 
exemption, while maintaining the 
single-user limitation’s intended 
purpose to minimize the risk of 
substitutional uses of preserved 
computer programs. 
D. Conclusion 
Having considered the evidence in the 
record, the comments of proponents and 
opponents of the exemptions, and the 
objectives of section 1201, the Register 
recommends that the Librarian of 
Congress exempt for the next three years 
certain classes of works, as described 
above, from the prohibition against 
circumvention of technological 
measures that effectively control access 
to copyrighted works. 
Dated: October 18, 2024. 
Shira Perlmutter, 
Register of Copyrights and Director of the 
U.S. Copyright Office. 
Determination of the Librarian of 
Congress 
Having duly considered the 
recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights as summarized above, which 
recommendation is hereby incorporated 
by reference, the Librarian of Congress 
accepts that recommendation with 
respect to all the classes of works under 
consideration. The Librarian, exercising 
her authority pursuant to 17 U.S.C. 
1201(a)(1)(C) and (D), hereby publishes 
as a new rule the classes of copyrighted 
works that shall for a three-year period 
be subject to the exemption found in 17 
U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(B) from the 
prohibition against circumvention of 
technological measures that effectively 
control access to copyrighted works set 
forth in 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(A). 
The Librarian is aware that the 
Register and her legal staff have 
invested a great deal of time over the 
past two years in analyzing the many 
issues underlying the 1201 process and 
proposed exemptions. 
Through this work, the Register has 
come to believe that the issue of 
research on artificial intelligence 
security and trustworthiness warrants 
more general Congressional and 
regulatory attention. The Librarian 
agrees with the Register in this 
assessment. As a regulatory process 
focused on technological protection 
measures for copyrighted content, 
section 1201 is ill-suited to address 
fundamental policy issues with new 
technologies. 
The Librarian is further aware of the 
policy and legal issues involving a 
generalized ‘‘right to repair’’ equipment 
with embedded software. These issues 
have now occupied the White House, 
Congress, state legislatures, federal 
agencies, the Copyright Office, and the 
general public through multiple rounds 
of 1201 rulemaking. 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:57 Oct 25, 2024 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00023 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1lotter on DSK11XQN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 10]
85446 Federal Register / Vol. 89, No. 208 / Monday, October 28, 2024 / Rules and Regulations 
Copyright is but one piece in a 
national framework for ensuring the 
security, trustworthiness, and reliability 
of embedded software, and other 
copyright-protected technology that 
affects our daily lives. Issues such as 
these extend beyond the reach of 1201 
and may require a broader solution, as 
noted by the NTIA. 
The Librarian fully supports the 
Register in her examination of these 
issues and urges Congress to work with 
the Copyright Office and other federal 
agencies to consider these issues beyond 
the contours of this 1201 rulemaking. 
List of Subjects in 37 CFR Part 201 
Copyright, Exemptions to prohibition 
against circumvention. 
Final Regulations 
For the reasons set forth in the 
preamble, 37 CFR part 201 is amended 
as follows: 
PART 201—GENERAL PROVISIONS 
■ 1. The authority citation for part 201 
continues to read as follows: 
Authority: 17 U.S.C. 702. 
■ 2. Section 201.40 is amended by 
revising paragraph (b) to read as follows: 
§ 201.40 Exemption to prohibition against 
circumvention. 
* * * * * 
(b) Classes of copyrighted works. 
Pursuant to the authority set forth in 17 
U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C) and (D), and upon 
the recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights, the Librarian has 
determined that the prohibition against 
circumvention of technological 
measures that effectively control access 
to copyrighted works set forth in 17 
U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(A) shall not apply to 
persons who engage in noninfringing 
uses of the following classes of 
copyrighted works: 
(1) Motion pictures (including 
television shows and videos), as defined 
in 17 U.S.C. 101, where the motion 
picture is lawfully made and acquired 
on a DVD protected by the Content 
Scramble System, on a Blu-ray disc 
protected by the Advanced Access 
Content System, or via a digital 
transmission protected by a 
technological measure, and the person 
engaging in circumvention under 
paragraphs (b)(1)(i) and (b)(1)(ii)(A) and 
(B) of this section reasonably believes 
that non-circumventing alternatives are 
unable to produce the required level of 
high-quality content, or the 
circumvention is undertaken using 
screen-capture technology that appears 
to be offered to the public as enabling 
the reproduction of motion pictures 
after content has been lawfully acquired 
and decrypted, where circumvention is 
undertaken solely in order to make use 
of short portions of the motion pictures 
in the following instances: 
(i) For the purpose of criticism or 
comment: 
(A) For use in documentary 
filmmaking, or other films where the 
motion picture clip is used in parody or 
for its biographical or historically 
significant nature; 
(B) For use in noncommercial videos 
(including videos produced for a paid 
commission if the commissioning 
entity’s use is noncommercial); or 
(C) For use in nonfiction multimedia 
e-books. 
(ii) For educational purposes: 
(A) By college and university faculty 
and students or kindergarten through 
twelfth-grade (K–12) educators and 
students (where the K–12 student is 
circumventing under the direct 
supervision of an educator), or 
employees acting at the direction of 
faculty of such educational institutions 
for the purpose of teaching a course, 
including of accredited general 
educational development (GED) 
programs, for the purpose of criticism, 
comment, teaching, or scholarship; 
(B) By faculty of accredited nonprofit 
educational institutions and employees 
acting at the direction of faculty 
members of those institutions, for 
purposes of offering massive open 
online courses (MOOCs) to officially 
enrolled students through online 
platforms (which platforms themselves 
may be operated for profit), in film 
studies or other courses requiring close 
analysis of film and media excerpts, for 
the purpose of criticism or comment, 
where the MOOC provider through the 
online platform limits transmissions to 
the extent technologically feasible to 
such officially enrolled students, 
institutes copyright policies and 
provides copyright informational 
materials to faculty, students, and 
relevant staff members, and applies 
technological measures that reasonably 
prevent unauthorized further 
dissemination of a work in accessible 
form to others or retention of the work 
for longer than the course session by 
recipients of a transmission through the 
platform, as contemplated by 17 U.S.C. 
110(2); or 
(C) By educators and participants in 
nonprofit digital and media literacy 
programs offered by libraries, museums, 
and other nonprofit entities with an 
educational mission, in the course of 
face-to-face instructional activities, for 
the purpose of criticism or comment, 
except that such users may only 
circumvent using screen-capture 
technology that appears to be offered to 
the public as enabling the reproduction 
of motion pictures after content has 
been lawfully acquired and decrypted. 
(2)(i) Motion pictures (including 
television shows and videos), as defined 
in 17 U.S.C. 101, where the motion 
picture is lawfully acquired on a DVD 
protected by the Content Scramble 
System, on a Blu-ray disc protected by 
the Advanced Access Content System, 
or via a digital transmission protected 
by a technological measure, where: 
(A) Circumvention is undertaken by a 
disability services office or other unit of 
a kindergarten through twelfth-grade 
educational institution, college, or 
university engaged in and/or 
responsible for the provision of 
accessibility services for the purpose of 
adding captions and/or audio 
description to a motion picture to create 
an accessible version for students, 
faculty, or staff with disabilities; 
(B) The educational institution unit in 
paragraph (b)(2)(i)(A) of this section has 
a reasonable belief that the motion 
picture will be used for a specific future 
activity of the institution and, after a 
reasonable effort, has determined that 
an accessible version of sufficient 
quality cannot be obtained at a fair 
market price or in a timely manner, 
including where a copyright holder has 
not provided an accessible version of a 
motion picture that was included with 
a textbook; and 
(C) The accessible versions are 
provided to students or educators and 
stored by the educational institution in 
a manner intended to reasonably 
prevent unauthorized further 
dissemination of a work. 
(ii) For purposes of this paragraph 
(b)(2): 
(A) ‘‘Audio description’’ means an 
oral narration that provides an accurate 
rendering of the motion picture; 
(B) ‘‘Accessible version of sufficient 
quality’’ means a version that in the 
reasonable judgment of the educational 
institution unit has captions and/or 
audio description that are sufficient to 
meet the accessibility needs of students, 
faculty, or staff with disabilities and are 
substantially free of errors that would 
materially interfere with those needs; 
and 
(C) Accessible materials created 
pursuant to this exemption and stored 
pursuant to paragraph (b)(2)(i)(C) of this 
section may be reused by the 
educational institution unit to meet the 
accessibility needs of students, faculty, 
or staff with disabilities pursuant to 
paragraphs (b)(2)(i)(A) and (B) of this 
section. 
(3)(i) Motion pictures (including 
television shows and videos), as defined 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:57 Oct 25, 2024 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00024 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1lotter on DSK11XQN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 11]
85447 Federal Register / Vol. 89, No. 208 / Monday, October 28, 2024 / Rules and Regulations 
in 17 U.S.C. 101, where the motion 
picture is lawfully acquired on a DVD 
protected by the Content Scramble 
System, or on a Blu-ray disc protected 
by the Advanced Access Content 
System, solely for the purpose of lawful 
preservation or the creation of a 
replacement copy of the motion picture, 
by an eligible library, archives, or 
museum, where: 
(A) Such activity is carried out 
without any purpose of direct or 
indirect commercial advantage; 
(B) The DVD or Blu-ray disc is 
damaged or deteriorating; 
(C) The eligible institution, after a 
reasonable effort, has determined that 
an unused and undamaged replacement 
copy cannot be obtained at a fair price 
and that no streaming service, download 
service, or on-demand cable and 
satellite service makes the motion 
picture available to libraries, archives, 
and museums at a fair price; and 
(D) The preservation or replacement 
copies are not distributed or made 
available outside of the physical 
premises of the eligible library, archives, 
or museum. 
(ii) For purposes of paragraph (b)(3)(i) 
of this section, a library, archives, or 
museum is considered ‘‘eligible’’ if— 
(A) The collections of the library, 
archives, or museum are open to the 
public and/or are routinely made 
available to researchers who are not 
affiliated with the library, archives, or 
museum; 
(B) The library, archives, or museum 
has a public service mission; 
(C) The library, archives, or museum’s 
trained staff or volunteers provide 
professional services normally 
associated with libraries, archives, or 
museums; 
(D) The collections of the library, 
archives, or museum are composed of 
lawfully acquired and/or licensed 
materials; and 
(E) The library, archives, or museum 
implements reasonable digital security 
measures as appropriate for the 
activities permitted by paragraph 
(b)(3)(i) of this section. 
(4)(i) Motion pictures, as defined in 
17 U.S.C. 101, where the motion picture 
is on a DVD protected by the Content 
Scramble System, on a Blu-ray disc 
protected by the Advanced Access 
Content System, or made available for 
digital download where: 
(A) The circumvention is undertaken 
by a researcher affiliated with a 
nonprofit institution of higher 
education, or by a student or 
information technology staff member of 
the institution at the direction of such 
researcher, solely to deploy text and 
data mining techniques on a corpus of 
motion pictures for the purpose of 
scholarly research and teaching; 
(B) The copy of each motion picture 
is lawfully acquired and owned by the 
institution, or licensed to the institution 
without a time limitation on access; 
(C) The person undertaking the 
circumvention or conducting research 
or teaching under this exemption views 
or listens to the contents of the motion 
pictures in the corpus solely to conduct 
text and data mining research or 
teaching; 
(D) The institution uses effective 
security measures to prevent 
dissemination or downloading of 
motion pictures in the corpus, and upon 
a reasonable request from a copyright 
owner who reasonably believes that 
their work is contained in the corpus, or 
a trade association representing such 
author, provide information to that 
copyright owner or trade association 
regarding the nature of such measures; 
and 
(E) The institution limits access to the 
corpus to only the persons identified in 
paragraph (b)(4)(i)(A) of this section or 
to researchers affiliated with other 
nonprofit institutions of higher 
education, with all access provided only 
through secure connections and on the 
condition of authenticated credentials, 
solely for purposes of text and data 
mining research or teaching. 
(ii) For purposes of paragraph (b)(4)(i) 
of this section: 
(A) An institution of higher education 
is defined as one that: 
(1) Admits regular students who have 
a certificate of graduation from a 
secondary school or the equivalent of 
such a certificate; 
(2) Is legally authorized to provide a 
postsecondary education program; 
(3) Awards a bachelor’s degree or 
provides not less than a two-year 
program acceptable towards such a 
degree; 
(4) Is a public or other nonprofit 
institution; and 
(5) Is accredited by a nationally 
recognized accrediting agency or 
association. 
(B) The term ‘‘effective security 
measures’’ is defined as: 
(1) Security measures that have been 
agreed to by all interested copyright 
owners of motion pictures and 
institutions of higher education; or 
(2) Security measures that the 
institution uses to keep its own highly 
confidential information secure. 
(5)(i) Literary works, excluding 
computer programs and compilations 
that were compiled specifically for text 
and data mining purposes, distributed 
electronically where: 
(A) The circumvention is undertaken 
by a researcher affiliated with a 
nonprofit institution of higher 
education, or by a student or 
information technology staff member of 
the institution at the direction of such 
researcher, solely to deploy text and 
data mining techniques on a corpus of 
literary works for the purpose of 
scholarly research and teaching; 
(B) The copy of each literary work is 
lawfully acquired and owned by the 
institution, or licensed to the institution 
without a time limitation on access; 
(C) The person undertaking the 
circumvention or conducting research 
or teaching under this exemption views 
the contents of the literary works in the 
corpus solely to conduct text and data 
mining research or teaching; 
(D) The institution uses effective 
security measures to prevent 
dissemination or downloading of 
literary works in the corpus, and upon 
a reasonable request from a copyright 
owner who reasonably believes that 
their work is contained in the corpus, or 
a trade association representing such 
author, provide information to that 
copyright owner or trade association 
regarding the nature of such measures; 
and 
(E) The institution limits access to the 
corpus to only the persons identified in 
paragraph (b)(5)(i)(A) of this section or 
to researchers affiliated with other 
nonprofit institutions of higher 
education, with all access provided only 
through secure connections and on the 
condition of authenticated credentials, 
solely for purposes of text and data 
mining research or teaching. 
(ii) For purposes of paragraph (b)(5)(i) 
of this section: 
(A) An institution of higher education 
is defined as one that: 
(1) Admits regular students who have 
a certificate of graduation from a 
secondary school or the equivalent of 
such a certificate; 
(2) Is legally authorized to provide a 
post secondary education program; 
(3) Awards a bachelor’s degree or 
provides not less than a two-year 
program acceptable towards such a 
degree; 
(4) Is a public or other nonprofit 
institution; and 
(5) Is accredited by a nationally 
recognized accrediting agency or 
association. 
(B) The term ‘‘effective security 
measures’’ is defined as: 
(1) Security measures that have been 
agreed to by all interested copyright 
owners of literary works and 
institutions of higher education; or 
(2) Security measures that the 
institution uses to keep its own highly 
confidential information secure. 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:57 Oct 25, 2024 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00025 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1lotter on DSK11XQN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 12]
85448 Federal Register / Vol. 89, No. 208 / Monday, October 28, 2024 / Rules and Regulations 
(6)(i) Literary works or previously 
published musical works that have been 
fixed in the form of text or notation, 
distributed electronically, that are 
protected by technological measures 
that either prevent the enabling of read- 
aloud functionality or interfere with 
screen readers or other applications or 
assistive technologies: 
(A) When a copy or phonorecord of 
such a work is lawfully obtained by an 
eligible person, as such a person is 
defined in 17 U.S.C. 121; provided, 
however, that the rights owner is 
remunerated, as appropriate, for the 
market price of an inaccessible copy of 
the work as made available to the 
general public through customary 
channels; or 
(B) When such a work is lawfully 
obtained and used by an authorized 
entity pursuant to 17 U.S.C. 121. 
(ii) For the purposes of paragraph 
(b)(6)(i) of this section, a ‘‘phonorecord 
of such a work’’ does not include a 
sound recording of a performance of a 
musical work unless and only to the 
extent the recording is included as part 
of an audiobook or e-book. 
(7) Literary works consisting of 
compilations of data generated by 
medical devices or by their personal 
corresponding monitoring systems, 
where such circumvention is 
undertaken by or on behalf of a patient 
for the sole purpose of lawfully 
accessing data generated by a patient’s 
own medical device or monitoring 
system. Eligibility for this exemption is 
not a safe harbor from, or defense to, 
liability under other applicable laws, 
including without limitation the Health 
Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996, the 
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986, 
or regulations of the Food and Drug 
Administration. 
(8) Computer programs that enable 
wireless devices to connect to a wireless 
telecommunications network, when 
circumvention is undertaken solely in 
order to connect to a wireless 
telecommunications network and such 
connection is authorized by the operator 
of such network. 
(9) Computer programs that enable 
smartphones and portable all-purpose 
mobile computing devices to execute 
lawfully obtained software applications, 
where circumvention is accomplished 
for the sole purpose of enabling 
interoperability of such applications 
with computer programs on the 
smartphone or device, or to permit 
removal of software from the 
smartphone or device. For purposes of 
this paragraph (b)(9), a ‘‘portable all- 
purpose mobile computing device’’ is a 
device that is primarily designed to run 
a wide variety of programs rather than 
for consumption of a particular type of 
media content, is equipped with an 
operating system primarily designed for 
mobile use, and is intended to be 
carried or worn by an individual. 
(10) Computer programs that enable 
smart televisions to execute lawfully 
obtained software applications, where 
circumvention is accomplished for the 
sole purpose of enabling interoperability 
of such applications with computer 
programs on the smart television, and is 
not accomplished for the purpose of 
gaining unauthorized access to other 
copyrighted works. For purposes of this 
paragraph (b)(10), ‘‘smart televisions’’ 
includes both internet-enabled 
televisions, as well as devices that are 
physically separate from a television 
and whose primary purpose is to run 
software applications that stream 
authorized video from the internet for 
display on a screen. 
(11) Computer programs that enable 
voice assistant devices to execute 
lawfully obtained software applications, 
where circumvention is accomplished 
for the sole purpose of enabling 
interoperability of such applications 
with computer programs on the device, 
or to permit removal of software from 
the device, and is not accomplished for 
the purpose of gaining unauthorized 
access to other copyrighted works. For 
purposes of this paragraph (b)(11), a 
‘‘voice assistant device’’ is a device that 
is primarily designed to run a wide 
variety of programs rather than for 
consumption of a particular type of 
media content, is designed to take user 
input primarily by voice, and is 
designed to be installed in a home or 
office. 
(12) Computer programs that enable 
routers and dedicated network devices 
to execute lawfully obtained software 
applications, where circumvention is 
accomplished for the sole purpose of 
enabling interoperability of such 
applications with computer programs 
on the router or dedicated network 
device, and is not accomplished for the 
purpose of gaining unauthorized access 
to other copyrighted works. For the 
purposes of this paragraph (b)(12), 
‘‘dedicated network device’’ includes 
switches, hubs, bridges, gateways, 
modems, repeaters, and access points, 
and excludes devices that are not 
lawfully owned. 
(13) Computer programs that are 
contained in and control the functioning 
of a lawfully acquired motorized land 
vehicle or marine vessel such as a 
personal automobile or boat, 
commercial vehicle or vessel, or 
mechanized agricultural vehicle or 
vessel, except for programs accessed 
through a separate subscription service, 
when circumvention is a necessary step 
to allow the diagnosis, repair, or lawful 
modification of a vehicle or vessel 
function, where such circumvention is 
not accomplished for the purpose of 
gaining unauthorized access to other 
copyrighted works. Eligibility for this 
exemption is not a safe harbor from, or 
defense to, liability under other 
applicable laws, including without 
limitation regulations promulgated by 
the Department of Transportation or the 
Environmental Protection Agency. 
(14) Computer programs that are 
contained in and control the functioning 
of a lawfully acquired motorized land 
vehicle or marine vessel such as a 
personal automobile or boat, 
commercial vehicle or vessel, or 
mechanized agricultural vehicle or 
vessel, except for programs accessed 
through a separate subscription service, 
to allow vehicle or vessel owners and 
lessees, or those acting on their behalf, 
to access, store, and share operational 
data, including diagnostic and 
telematics data, where such 
circumvention is not accomplished for 
the purpose of gaining unauthorized 
access to other copyrighted works. 
Eligibility for this exemption is not a 
safe harbor from, or defense to, liability 
under other applicable laws, including 
without limitation regulations 
promulgated by the Department of 
Transportation or the Environmental 
Protection Agency. 
(15) Computer programs that are 
contained in and control the functioning 
of a lawfully acquired device that is 
primarily designed for use by 
consumers, when circumvention is a 
necessary step to allow the diagnosis, 
maintenance, or repair of such a device, 
and is not accomplished for the purpose 
of gaining access to other copyrighted 
works. For purposes of this paragraph 
(b)(15): 
(i) The ‘‘maintenance’’ of a device is 
the servicing of the device in order to 
make it work in accordance with its 
original specifications and any changes 
to those specifications authorized for 
that device; and 
(ii) The ‘‘repair’’ of a device is the 
restoring of the device to the state of 
working in accordance with its original 
specifications and any changes to those 
specifications authorized for that 
device. For video game consoles, 
‘‘repair’’ is limited to repair or 
replacement of a console’s optical drive 
and requires restoring any technological 
protection measures that were 
circumvented or disabled. 
(16) Computer programs that are 
contained in and control the functioning 
of lawfully acquired equipment that is 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:57 Oct 25, 2024 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00026 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1lotter on DSK11XQN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 13]
85449 Federal Register / Vol. 89, No. 208 / Monday, October 28, 2024 / Rules and Regulations 
primarily designed for use in retail-level 
commercial food preparation when 
circumvention is a necessary step to 
allow the diagnosis, maintenance, or 
repair of such a device, and is not 
accomplished for the purpose of gaining 
access to other copyrighted works. For 
purposes of this paragraph (b)(16): 
(i) The ‘‘maintenance’’ of a device is 
the servicing of the device in order to 
make it work in accordance with its 
original specifications and any changes 
to those specifications authorized for 
that device; and 
(ii) The ‘‘repair’’ of a device is the 
restoring of the device to the state of 
working in accordance with its original 
specifications and any changes to those 
specifications authorized for that 
device. 
(17) Computer programs that are 
contained in and control the functioning 
of a lawfully acquired medical device or 
system, and related data files, when 
circumvention is a necessary step to 
allow the diagnosis, maintenance, or 
repair of such a device or system. For 
purposes of this paragraph (b)(17): 
(i) The ‘‘maintenance’’ of a device or 
system is the servicing of the device or 
system in order to make it work in 
accordance with its original 
specifications and any changes to those 
specifications authorized for that device 
or system; and 
(ii) The ‘‘repair’’ of a device or system 
is the restoring of the device or system 
to the state of working in accordance 
with its original specifications and any 
changes to those specifications 
authorized for that device or system. 
(18)(i) Computer programs, where the 
circumvention is undertaken on a 
lawfully acquired device or machine on 
which the computer program operates, 
or is undertaken on a computer, 
computer system, or computer network 
on which the computer program 
operates with the authorization of the 
owner or operator of such computer, 
computer system, or computer network, 
solely for the purpose of good-faith 
security research. 
(ii) For purposes of paragraph 
(b)(18)(i) of this section, ‘‘good-faith 
security research’’ means accessing a 
computer program solely for purposes of 
good-faith testing, investigation, and/or 
correction of a security flaw or 
vulnerability, where such activity is 
carried out in an environment designed 
to avoid any harm to individuals or the 
public, and where the information 
derived from the activity is used 
primarily to promote the security or 
safety of the class of devices or 
machines on which the computer 
program operates, or those who use 
such devices or machines, and is not 
used or maintained in a manner that 
facilitates copyright infringement. 
(iii) Good-faith security research that 
qualifies for the exemption under 
paragraph (b)(18)(i) of this section may 
nevertheless incur liability under other 
applicable laws, including without 
limitation the Computer Fraud and 
Abuse Act of 1986, as amended and 
codified in title 18, United States Code, 
and eligibility for that exemption is not 
a safe harbor from, or defense to, 
liability under other applicable laws. 
(19)(i) Video games in the form of 
computer programs embodied in 
physical or downloaded formats that 
have been lawfully acquired as 
complete games, when the copyright 
owner or its authorized representative 
has ceased to provide access to an 
external computer server necessary to 
facilitate an authentication process to 
enable gameplay, solely for the purpose 
of: 
(A) Permitting access to the video 
game to allow copying and modification 
of the computer program to restore 
access to the game for personal, local 
gameplay on a personal computer or 
video game console; or 
(B) Permitting access to the video 
game to allow copying and modification 
of the computer program to restore 
access to the game on a personal 
computer or video game console when 
necessary to allow preservation of the 
game in a playable form by an eligible 
library, archives, or museum, where 
such activities are carried out without 
any purpose of direct or indirect 
commercial advantage and the video 
game is not distributed or made 
available outside of the physical 
premises of the eligible library, archives, 
or museum. 
(ii) Video games in the form of 
computer programs embodied in 
physical or downloaded formats that 
have been lawfully acquired as 
complete games, that do not require 
access to an external computer server 
for gameplay, and that are no longer 
reasonably available in the commercial 
marketplace, solely for the purpose of 
preservation of the game in a playable 
form by an eligible library, archives, or 
museum, where such activities are 
carried out without any purpose of 
direct or indirect commercial advantage 
and the video game is not distributed or 
made available outside of the physical 
premises of the eligible library, archives, 
or museum. 
(iii) Computer programs used to 
operate video game consoles solely to 
the extent necessary for an eligible 
library, archives, or museum to engage 
in the preservation activities described 
in paragraph (b)(19)(i)(B) or (b)(19)(ii) of 
this section. 
(iv) For purposes of this paragraph 
(b)(19), the following definitions shall 
apply: 
(A) For purposes of paragraphs 
(b)(19)(i)(A) and (b)(19)(ii) of this 
section, ‘‘complete games’’ means video 
games that can be played by users 
without accessing or reproducing 
copyrightable content stored or 
previously stored on an external 
computer server. 
(B) For purposes of paragraph 
(b)(19)(i)(B) of this section, ‘‘complete 
games’’ means video games that meet 
the definition in paragraph (b)(19)(iv)(A) 
of this section, or that consist of both a 
copy of a game intended for a personal 
computer or video game console and a 
copy of the game’s code that was stored 
or previously stored on an external 
computer server. 
(C) ‘‘Ceased to provide access’’ means 
that the copyright owner or its 
authorized representative has either 
issued an affirmative statement 
indicating that external server support 
for the video game has ended and such 
support is in fact no longer available or, 
alternatively, server support has been 
discontinued for a period of at least six 
months; provided, however, that server 
support has not since been restored. 
(D) ‘‘Local gameplay’’ means 
gameplay conducted on a personal 
computer or video game console, or 
locally connected personal computers or 
consoles, and not through an online 
service or facility. 
(E) A library, archives, or museum is 
considered ‘‘eligible’’ if— 
(1) The collections of the library, 
archives, or museum are open to the 
public and/or are routinely made 
available to researchers who are not 
affiliated with the library, archives, or 
museum; 
(2) The library, archives, or museum 
has a public service mission; 
(3) The library, archives, or museum’s 
trained staff or volunteers provide 
professional services normally 
associated with libraries, archives, or 
museums; 
(4) The collections of the library, 
archives, or museum are composed of 
lawfully acquired and/or licensed 
materials; and 
(5) The library, archives, or museum 
implements reasonable digital security 
measures as appropriate for the 
activities permitted by this paragraph 
(b)(19). 
(20)(i) Computer programs, except 
video games, that have been lawfully 
acquired and that are no longer 
reasonably available in the commercial 
marketplace, solely for the purpose of 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:57 Oct 25, 2024 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00027 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1lotter on DSK11XQN23PROD with RULES1

[PAGE 14]
85450 Federal Register / Vol. 89, No. 208 / Monday, October 28, 2024 / Rules and Regulations 
lawful preservation of a computer 
program, or of digital materials 
dependent upon a computer program as 
a condition of access, by an eligible 
library, archives, or museum, where 
such activities are carried out without 
any purpose of direct or indirect 
commercial advantage. Any electronic 
distribution, display, or performance 
made outside of the physical premises 
of an eligible library, archives, or 
museum of works preserved under this 
paragraph may be made to only one user 
at a time, for a limited time, and only 
where the library, archives, or museum 
has no notice that the copy would be 
used for any purpose other than private 
study, scholarship, or research. 
(ii) For purposes of the exemption in 
paragraph (b)(20)(i) of this section, a 
library, archives, or museum is 
considered ‘‘eligible’’ if— 
(A) The collections of the library, 
archives, or museum are open to the 
public and/or are routinely made 
available to researchers who are not 
affiliated with the library, archives, or 
museum; 
(B) The library, archives, or museum 
has a public service mission; 
(C) The library, archives, or museum’s 
trained staff or volunteers provide 
professional services normally 
associated with libraries, archives, or 
museums; 
(D) The collections of the library, 
archives, or museum are composed of 
lawfully acquired and/or licensed 
materials; and 
(E) The library, archives, or museum 
implements reasonable digital security 
measures as appropriate for the 
activities permitted by this paragraph 
(b)(20). 
(iii) For purposes of paragraph (b)(20) 
of this section, the phrase ‘‘one user at 
a time’’ means that for each copy of a 
work lawfully owned by an eligible 
library, archives, or museum and 
preserved under paragraph (b)(20)(i) of 
this section, such library, archives, or 
museum may make an electronic 
distribution, display, or performance of 
that work outside of its physical 
premises. An eligible library, archives, 
or museum may make each copy of such 
lawfully owned and preserved work 
available to different users 
simultaneously. This provision does not 
permit an eligible library, archives, or 
museum to make multiple, 
simultaneous copies of the same copy of 
a work for the purposes of providing 
users access to the work. 
(21) Computer programs that operate 
3D printers that employ technological 
measures to limit the use of material, 
when circumvention is accomplished 
solely for the purpose of using 
alternative material and not for the 
purpose of accessing design software, 
design files, or proprietary data. 
(22) Computer programs, solely for 
the purpose of investigating a potential 
infringement of free and open source 
computer programs where: 
(i) The circumvention is undertaken 
on a lawfully acquired device or 
machine other than a video game 
console, on which the computer 
program operates; 
(ii) The circumvention is performed 
by, or at the direction of, a party that has 
a good-faith, reasonable belief in the 
need for the investigation and has 
standing to bring a breach of license or 
copyright infringement claim; 
(iii) Such circumvention does not 
constitute a violation of applicable law; 
and 
(iv) The copy of the computer 
program, or the device or machine on 
which it operates, is not used or 
maintained in a manner that facilitates 
copyright infringement. 
* * * * * 
Dated: October 18, 2024. 
Carla D. Hayden, 
Librarian of Congress. 
[FR Doc. 2024–24563 Filed 10–25–24; 8:45 am] 
BILLING CODE 1410–30–P 
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION 
Federal Railroad Administration 
49 CFR Part 225 
[Docket No. FRA–2024–0034] 
RIN 2130–AC98 
Federal Railroad Administration 
Accident/Incident Investigation Policy 
for Gathering Information and 
Consulting With Stakeholders; 
Correction 
AGENCY: Federal Railroad 
Administration (FRA), Department of 
Transportation (DOT). 
ACTION: Final rule; correction. 
SUMMARY: On October 1, 2024, FRA 
published a final rule amending its 
Accident/Incident Regulations 
governing reporting, classification, and 
investigations to codify FRA’s policy for 
gathering information from, and 
consulting with, stakeholders during an 
accident/incident investigation. The 
published final rule contains errors in 
the preamble text. FRA is correcting 
those errors so that the final rule 
conforms to FRA’s intent. 
DATES: Effective on November 15, 2024. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT : 
Senya Waas, Senior Attorney, Office of 
the Chief Counsel, FRA, telephone: 202– 
875–4158 or email: senyaann.waas@
dot.gov. 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: In FR 
document 2024–22326 beginning on 
page 79767 in the Federal Register of 
October 1, 2024, make the following 
corrections: 
1. On page 79767, in the first and 
second columns, correct the 
DATES 
section to read: 
DATES: Effective date: This final rule is 
effective on November 15, 2024, unless 
FRA receives adverse, substantive 
comment by October 31, 2024. If no 
adverse, substantive comments are 
received, FRA will publish a notice in 
the Federal Register indicating that no 
adverse comment was received and 
confirming that the rule will become 
effective on November 15, 2024. 
2. On page 79768, in the first column, 
correct the first paragraph to read: 
FRA is publishing this rule without a 
prior proposed rule under FRA’s direct 
final rulemaking procedures in 49 CFR 
211.33 because it views this as a 
noncontroversial action that generally 
codifies FRA’s current process for 
accident/incident investigations. Under 
the Administrative Procedure Act 
(APA), an agency may waive the normal 
notice and comment procedures if the 
action is a rule of agency organization, 
procedure, or practice. 5 U.S.C. 
553(b)(3)(A). Additionally, under the 
APA, an agency may waive notice and 
comment procedures when the agency 
for good cause finds that notice and 
public procedure are impracticable, 
unnecessary, or contrary to the public 
interest. 5 U.S.C. 553(b)(3)(B). As noted 
above, this rule would codify FRA’s 
procedures for accident/incident 
investigations and FRA has already 
worked with stakeholders (both labor 
and the rail organizations) to develop 
the Policy Document which is posted on 
FRA’s website. Accordingly, FRA finds 
that notice and comment are 
unnecessary and anticipates no adverse, 
substantive comment on any of the 
provisions of the rule. If FRA receives 
an adverse, substantive comment on any 
of the provisions, it will publish in the 
Federal Register a timely withdrawal, 
informing the public that the direct final 
rule will not take effect. 
3. In the Section-by-Section Analysis, 
on page 79769, in the 2nd column, 
correct the fourth paragraph to read: 
Previous paragraphs (b), (c), (d), (e), 
and (f) remain substantively unchanged 
but are being redesignated as paragraphs 
(a)(2) through (6). 
4. Under Regulatory Impact and 
Notices, on page 79770, correct table 1 
to read as follows: 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 15:57 Oct 25, 2024 Jkt 265001 PO 00000 Frm 00028 Fmt 4700 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28OCR1.SGM 28OCR1lotter on DSK11XQN23PROD with RULES1