[PAGE 1]
 
 
ITEM A.  COMMENTER INFORMATION  
 
This Comment has been submitted by the UCI Intellectual Property, Arts, and Technology Clinic 
and Donaldson + Callif, LLP on behalf of Film Independent, the International Documentary 
Association, Kartemquin Films, Independent Filmmaker Project, University of Film and Video 
Association, and The Alliance for Media Arts + Culture.  
 
 
Commenters:  
Film Independent is an organization that helps filmmakers make their movies, build an 
audience for their projects, and diversify the film industry. Film Independent puts on over 250 
annual screenings and events to unite like-minded artists. These events include the Film 
Independent Spirit Awards, which recognizes the finest achievements of American independent 
filmmakers and the LA Film Festival, which showcases select new works from emerging and 
established independent storytellers. Film Independent also offers an artist development program 
to foster the careers of talented filmmakers. 
International Documentary Association is an organization that seeks to assist the growth and 
development of documentary films and the overall documentary culture. IDA provides 
educational programs and resources to documentary makers of various skill levels. IDA’s grant 
programs help filmmakers attain the financing necessary to create documentary films. IDA also 
advocates for major issues that affect documentary filmmakers, including free speech and fair 
use. 
Kartemquin Films is a not-for-profit media arts organization and collaborative center for 
documentary media makers who seek to foster a more engaged and empowered society. In 2016 
Kartemquin celebrated 50 years of sparking democracy through documentary. A revered 
resource on issues of fair use, ethics, storytelling and civic discourse, Kartemquin is 
internationally recognized for crafting quality documentaries backed by innovative community 
engagement, and for its filmmaker development programs and media advocacy. The organization 
has won every major critical and journalistic prize, including multiple Emmy, Peabody, 
DuPont-Columbia and Robert F. Kennedy journalism awards, Independent Spirit, IDA, PGA and 
DGA awards, and an Oscar nomination. 
 
Independent Filmmaker Project champions the future of storytelling by connecting artists with 
essential resources at all stages of development and distribution. IFP fosters a vibrant and 
sustainable independent storytelling community, represents a growing network of 10,000 
[PAGE 2]
 
 
2 
 
storytellers around the world, and plays a key role in developing 350 new feature and 
documentary works each year. During its 35-year history, IFP has supported over 8,000 projects 
and offered resources to more than 20,000 filmmakers. IFP guides storytellers through the 
process of making and distributing their work through creative, technological and business 
support through year-round programming. Through its programming—which also includes 
seminars, conferences, and mentorships—IFP creates exciting opportunities for promising new 
voices from a diverse range of racial, ethnic, religious, ideological and sexual perspectives. 
University of Film and Video Association (UFVA) aims to develop the potentialities of the 
motion picture and television media for purposes of instruction and communication throughout 
the world. UFVA works primarily in educational institutions with the goal of serving, 
encouraging, and assisting individuals who teach arts and sciences of motion picture and 
television production techniques, history, criticism and related subjects. 
The Alliance for Media Arts + Culture (AMAC) consists of 225 organizations that serve over 
335,000 artists and media professionals nationwide. Members include community-based media 
production centers and facilities, university based programs, museums, media presenters and 
exhibitors, film festivals, distributors, film archives, youth media programs, community access 
television, and digital arts and online groups. AMAC’s mission is to foster and fortify the culture 
and business of the independent media arts. AMAC believes that all Americans deserve access to 
create, participate in, and experience art. AMAC co-authored the Documentary Filmmakers’ 
Statement of Best Practices in Fair Use and has long been an advocate for orphan works reform. 
 
Representatives 
UCI Intellectual Property, Arts, and 
Technology Clinic 
Jack I. Lerner, Director 
Lauren Wertheimer and Shaia Araghi, 
Certified Law Students 
UCI School of Law 
401 East Peltason Drive 
Irvine, CA 92697 
(949) 824-7684 
 
 
Michael C. Donaldson 
Christopher Perez 
Donaldson & Callif LLP 
400 S Beverly Dr. # 400 
Beverly Hills, CA 90212 
(310) 277-8394 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To contact the commenters, please email dmcafilm@law.uci.edu. 
 
 
[PAGE 3]
 
 
3 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
ITEM A.  COMMENTER INFORMATION .............................................................................................. 1 
ITEM B.  PROPOSED CLASS ADDRESSED: Class 1—Audiovisual Works—Criticism and    
Comment ................................................................................................................................... 4 
ITEM C.  OVERVIEW ......................................................................................................................... 4 
ITEM D.  TECHNOLOGICAL PROTECTION MEASURE(S) AND METHOD(S) OF CIRCUMVENTION ......... 9 
1. Content Scramble System (“CSS”) on DVDs ............................................................................ 9 
2. Advanced Access Content System (“AACS”) on Blu-ray Discs................................................ 9 
3. Encryption Measures on Digitally Transmitted Video ............................................................... 9 
ITEM E.  ASSERTED ADVERSE EFFECTS ON NONINFRINGING USES ................................................ 10 
Statutory Factors ........................................................................................................................... 22 
i.  Availability for use of copyrighted works ........................................................................ 22 
ii. Availability of use of works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational  
     purposes ........................................................................................................................... 24 
iii. Impact that the prohibition on the circumvention of technological measures applied  
     to copyrighted works has on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching,  
     scholarship, or research .................................................................................................... 25 
iv. Effect of circumvention of TPMs on the market for, or value of, copyrighted    
     works ................................................................................................................................ 25 
Conclusion .................................................................................................................................... 27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
[PAGE 4]
 
 
4 
 
ITEM B.  PROPOSED CLASS ADDRESSED:  
Class 1—Audiovisual Works—Criticism and Comment 
 
Filmmaker commenters propose the following exemption:  
Motion pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in  17 U.S.C. 
101, where circumvention is undertaken solely in order to make use of short 
portions of the motion pictures for the purpose of criticism or comment for use in 
filmmaking, where the m otion picture is lawfully made and acquired on a DVD 
protected by the Content Scramble System, on a Blu -ray disc protected by the 
Advanced Access Control System, or via a digital transmission protected by a 
technological measure. 
As set forth in the Petition for Modification submitted September 13, 2017,1 the proposed 
exemption is a modification of the exemption now in effect and codified at 37 CFR § 
201.40(b)(1), and provisionally recommend for renewal. 
ITEM C.  OVERVIEW 
 
Scholars have tried. Filmmakers have tried. Even the International Documentary Association has 
tried. They all failed. No one has ever been able to craft a definition that draws a clear line 
between the films that are labeled documentary on one hand and films that are commonly 
referred to as feature films, fictional films, or scripted films on the other hand. This 
lexicographical failure does not hamper the marketing of films, nor the audiences who attend 
them, nor the robust community of filmmakers who identify themselves using this term. But 
when one is drawing a line between identical conduct by a group of people, in this case 
filmmakers, dividing conduct which is criminal from conduct which is not criminal, one must be 
extremely careful that the line is reliable, and does not frustrate any constitutionally based rights. 
Language that works well among a loose community or in the marketing department is simply 
insufficient for the task at hand in these triennial § 1201 rulemaking proceedings. 
For a number of reasons, the commenters herein have come to you in the past with requests to 
decriminalize conduct for a select group that we have labeled as documentary filmmakers. The 
Register of Copyrights and the Librarian of Congress have used that label in granting our 
requests. But filmmakers who do not label themselves as documentary filmmakers are 
increasingly using or wanting to use fair use in their films—and they, too, are finding that the 
Digital Millennium Copyright Act’s prohibition on circumvention is preventing them from doing 
so.  
                                                      
1 Film Independent and International Documentary Association’s Petition for New Exemption Under 17 U.S.C. § 
1201, U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, Sep. 14, 2017. 
 
 
[PAGE 5]
 
 
5 
 
In short, the division has gone from problematic to unacceptable. We come to you today, in this 
brand-new proceeding, to request that you apply this exemption not just to the group we have 
called documentary filmmakers, but to all filmmakers. 
The term “documentary” was first applied to film in 1926 in the New York Sun by John Grierson. 
His original definition of documentary— “the creative treatment of actuality”2—was made in 
reference to Robert Flaherty’s Nanook of the North, which famously staged many scenes and 
employed actors in costumes to stage events and practices that Flaherty witnessed in real life 
while in the Arctic Circle—but which were no longer in common use.3 Every scholar, every 
written history of documentary film, and every article on the subject cites Nanook of the North as 
the first documentary. Grierson’s definition was instantly controversial, and he himself later 
declared, “documentary is a clumsy description, but let it stand.”4 
In the decades since Grierson proposed his definition, the struggle to define documentary 
filmmaking has reached legendary status. No fewer than 17 scholars and filmmakers (including 
Grierson himself) have proposed their own competing definitions:  
1936: Documentary film is “the use of the film medium to interpret creatively and in 
social terms the life of the people as it exists in reality,” and is the “intellectual ability” to 
draw out the “meaning behind the thing and the significance underlying the person.”5 –
Paul Rotha  
1946: “The documentary is the branch of film production which goes to the actual, and 
photographs it and edits it and shapes it. It attempts to give form and pattern to the 
complex of direct observation.”6 –John Grierson  
1950: Documentary is “a dramatized presentation of man's relation to his institutional 
life.”7 –Raymond Spottiswoode  
1950: “A documentary film, then, is basically a non-studio or non-theatrical film of any 
kind other than a cartoon or abstract film.”8 –Hugh Gray  
1951: “The documentary film is an original art form. It has come to grips with facts-on its 
own original level. It covers the rational side of our lives, from the scientific experiment 
to the poetic landscape-study, but never moves away from the factual.”9 –Hans Richter  
                                                      
2 John Grierson, The First Principles of Documentary, in GRIERSON ON DOCUMENTARY 147 (Forsythe Hardy ed., 
1966). 
3 Ann S. Utterback, The Voices of the Documentarist, Journal of the University Film Association, Summer 1977, at 
31, 34–35.  
4 John Grierson, First Principles of Documentary (1932–1934), in NONFICTION FILM: THEORY AND CRITICISM 19 
(Richard Meran Barsam ed., 1976). 
5 PAUL ROTHA, DOCUMENTARY FILM 132 (1936). 
6 John Grierson, Postwar Patterns, 1 HOLLYWOOD QUARTER 159 (1946). 
7 RAYMOND SPOTTISWOODE, A GRAMMAR OF THE FILM 284 (1950). 
8 Hugh Gray, Robert Flaherty and the Naturalistic Documentary, 5 Hollywood Quarterly 1, 45 (1950). 
9 Hans Richter, Film as an Original Art Form, 10 College Art Journal 157, 159 (1951). 
[PAGE 6]
 
 
6 
 
1965: “The term documentary is used in its broadest sense to refer to films that possess 
truth and project reality, and are intended primarily for non-theatrical use.”10 –William J. 
Sloan  
1973: A documentary film is a “film with a message.” –Richard Meran Barsam  
1973: A documentary is “the communication, not of imagined things, but of real things 
only,”11 and “the presentation of actual facts in a way that makes them credible and 
telling to people at the time.”12  –William Stott  
1980: “[T]he function of the documentary is to clarify choices, interpret history and 
promote human understanding.”13 –Alan Rosenthal  
1985: Documentaries are films that give up control of the events being filmed.14 –Robert 
C. Allen & Douglas Gomery  
1990: A documentary “takes real people and real problems from the real world and deals 
with them.”15 –Trinh T. Minh-Ha  
1995: “A documentary is any motion picture that is susceptible to the question ‘Might it 
be lying?’”16 –Dirk Eitzen  
1997: “Documentary is purposive; it is intended to achieve something in addition to 
entertaining audiences and making money.”17 –William Rothman  
1999: “[A] documentary […] tells something about the reality of our world - shows us 
the real world.”18 –Kees Bakker  
2005: Documentary filmmaking is “the pursuit of truth.”19 –Regina Austin  
                                                      
10 William J. Sloan, The Documentary Film and the Negro: The Evolution of the Integration Film , JOURNAL OF THE 
SOCIETY OF CINEMATOLOGISTS, January 1, 1965, at 66. 
11 RICHARD MERAN BARSAM, NONFICTION FILM: THEORY AND CRITICISM 4 (1976). 
12 WILLIAM STOTT, DOCUMENTARY EXPRESSION AND THIRTIES AMERICA xi, 73 (1976). 
13 ALAN ROSENTHAL, THE DOCUMENTARY CONSCIENCE: A CASEBOOK IN FILM MAKING 1 (1980). 
14 ROBERT C. ALLEN & DOUGLAS GOMERY, FILM HISTORY: THEORY & PRACTICE 216 (1985). 
15 Trinh T. Minh-Ha, Documentary Is/Not a Name, OCTOBER, Spring, 1990, at 76, 79. 
16 Dirk Eitzen, When is a Documentary? Documentary as a Mode of Reception, Cinema Journal, Vol. 35, No. 1, 
University of Texas Press on behalf of the Society for Cinema & Media Studies (1995) .  
17 WILLIAM ROTHMAN, DOCUMENTARY FILM CLASSICS 4 (1997). 
18 KEES BAKKER, JORIS IVENS AND THE DOCUMENTARY CONTEXT (1999). 
19 Regina Austin, The Next NewWave: Law-Genre Documentaries, Lawyering in Support of the Creative Process, 
and Visual Legal Advocacy,16 FORDHAM INTELL. PROP. MEDIA & ENT. L.J. 809 (2005-06) 
[PAGE 7]
 
 
7 
 
2007: “A documentary film tells a story about real life, with claims to truthfulness.”20 –
Pat Aufderheide 
2008: A documentary is “a form of democratic and social pedagogy,” and “an essentially 
transitional medium: it carries fragments of social reality from one place or one group or 
one time to another, and in transporting them, translates them from a local dialect to a 
lingua franca.”21 –Jonathan Kahana  
2014: “[D]ocumentary films often purport to portray ‘events, occurrences, or histories 
which are taken from real life, and which may be voiced or enacted wholly or in part, by 
the real-life participants in the event.’”22 –Stephen Daly  
For each of the definitions listed above, there are examples of films that were not labeled or 
marketed as documentaries, but fit one or more of these definitions. Consider Dunkirk (in which 
the allied invasion of Europe is graphically presented without dialogue, praised by experts for its 
accuracy), Snowden (Oliver Stone’s biopic of Edward Snowden, accurate even in details of his 
hotel room as previously seen in the Oscar-winning documentary Citizenfour), The Crown (a TV 
series about Queen Elizabeth, with some unsupported conjectures but painfully accurate on 
episodes such as the Suez Canal crisis), and Darkest Hour (a historically accurate Winston 
Churchill biopic). Films about to come out include The Post, The Greatest Showman, The Man 
with the Iron Heart, and Shock and Awe. These films cover topics from the birth of show 
business, to the rise of the country’s first female new publisher, to George Bush’s planned 
invasion of Iraq in 2003, respectively. 
The fact that documentary is one of the most confusing and perplexing genre classifications in 
film has not gone unnoticed. It has been called “the most familiar, but most abused and most 
understood term in the film lexicon.”23 Many have concluded that it is simply impossible to 
define documentary film in any consistent way. In 1990, Trinh Minh-Ha wrote,  
There is no such thing as documentary—whether the term designates a category 
of material, a genre, an approach, or a set of techniques. This assertion—as old 
and as fundamental as the antagonism between names and reality—needs 
                                                      
20 PAT AUFDERHEIDE, DOCUMENTARY FILM: A VERY SHORT INTRODUCTION 2 (2007). 
21 JONATHAN KAHANA, INTELLIGENCE WORK: THE POLITICS OF AMERICAN DOCUMENTARY 1-2 (2008).  
22 Stephen Daly, REFRAIN FROM CRUDE BEHAVIOR: The Need for Journalism Standards in Documentary 
Filmmaking, 31 ENT. & SPORTS LAW. 1 (2014-15) (quoting Cynthia D. Bond, Documenting Law: Reality and 
Representation on Trial, 39 LINCOLN L. REV. 1 (2012)).  
23 BARSAM, supra note 23, at 1–3. See also Eitzen, supra note 16, at 81 (the definition of documentary film “remains 
a vexed and controversial issue, not just among film theorists but also among people who make and watch 
documentaries”); Annette Kuhn, Documentary: The Camera I Observations on Documentary, 19 SCREEN 71 (1978) 
(the many interpretations of documentary film have led to an “inevitable outcome of confusion: a collapsing of 
fiction and non-fiction resulting from attempts to describe documentary in terms of film language seen as a general 
cinematic sign system, for example, or a movement away from a questioning of naïve realism in the context of the 
documentary and onto the terrain of Truth.”). 
[PAGE 8]
 
 
8 
 
incessantly to be restated, despite the very visible existence of a documentary 
tradition.”24  
In fact, scholars and commentators have been pointing out for decades how much fiction and 
nonfiction overlap in filmmaking. As Carl Plantinga states in What a Documentary Is, After All, 
“[t]he question of how best to define the documentary film and video and to distinguish it from 
the fiction film continues to fascinate and baffle philosophers and film theorists. It is clear that 
the special nature of the film medium—and in particular its use of photographic images and 
sound recordings—has proven particularly difficult to conceptualize in relation to the 
fiction/nonfiction film distinction.”25 Michael Renov further states in Theorizing Documentary, 
“[I]n a number of ways, fictional and nonfictional forms are enmeshed in one another—
particularly reading semiotics, narrativity, and questions of performance.”26 Documentaries 
“borrow heavily from the narrative forms of fiction, and the documentary filmmaker will often 
creatively select shots, mix sounds, and juxtapose scenes to tell an entertaining story.”27 
If generations of people who analyze and study film for a living cannot draw a clear line between 
documentary and non-documentary films, then certainly the Copyright Office—and further, the 
courts—cannot either. As we discuss in this Comment,28 to do so raises serious constitutional 
concerns. The Supreme Court has instructed that a regulation cannot pass constitutional muster if 
persons “of common intelligence must necessarily guess the meaning and differ as to its 
application.”29 This is especially true when First Amendment freedoms are at risk,30 and the 
Supreme Court has specifically held that laws regulating film must be especially precise.  
In identifying only documentary films as exempt, the Librarian is leaving filmmakers unclear on 
which films fall under the exemption, causing the exemption to be unconstitutionally vague. 
Accordingly, we urge the Register not use “documentary filmmaking” in its recommended 
exemption, but rather simply to use the term “filmmaking.” This solution would be much clearer 
because it points to an activity rather than a marketing genre or an arbitrary classification based 
on claims of “reality” or other inherently subjective descriptions.  
In this Comment, we demonstrate that many films which may not traditionally be categorized as 
“documentary” regularly make fair use in the form of criticism and commentary. We further 
show that the creators of these films need high quality content in order to do so, and that such 
content is encrypted or otherwise protected by technological protection measures at every turn. 
As a result, many filmmakers are finding that their ability to make lawful criticism and 
commentary is being adversely effected by § 1201.  
We also address the continuing undue burden imposed by the screen capture requirement in the 
current exemption. As was true at the time of the last rulemaking process, there exists no screen 
                                                      
24 Minh-Ha, supra note 15, at 76.  
25 Carl Plantinga, What a Documentary Is, After All, 63 THE JOURNAL OF AESTHETICS AND ART CRITICISM, 105 
(2005) 
26 MICHAEL RENOV, THEORIZING DOCUMENTARY 2 (1993) 
27 Daly, supra note 22. 
28 See Supra at page 25-26 
29 Connally v. General Const. Co., 269 U.S. 385, 391 (1926). 
30 Scull v. Com. of Va. ex rel. Committee on Law Reform and Racial Activities , 359 U.S. 344, 353 (1959). 
[PAGE 9]
 
 
9 
 
capture programs that will render content in quality that is even close to meeting the stringent 
requirements that filmmakers face today. We therefore we request that the Register recommend 
this exemption be modified so as to remove this burden. 
ITEM D.  TECHNOLOGICAL PROTECTION MEASURE(S) AND METHOD(S) OF CIRCUMVENTION 
 
The TPMs that are at issue in this proposal are the same as those at issue in the current 
exemption that the Register has provisionally recommended for renewal.31 Filmmakers need to 
access motion picture material on (1) DVDs, (2) Blu-ray discs, and (3) digitally transmitted 
video to make criticism and commentary in their films.  
1. Content Scramble System (“CSS”) on DVDs 
 
Like the current exemption, the modified exemption will permit circumvention, in certain 
circumstances, of CSS on DVDs.32 CSS utilizes a mix of access and use controls to protect the 
content of DVDs from being copied by, distributed by, and viewed from unauthorized devices. 
The Register has previously concluded33 that CSS qualifies as a TPM subject to the DMCA’s 
anticircumvention provisions because it “effectively controls access” to content by requiring the 
“application of information”—namely, encryption keys—to gain access to the work.34 Software 
that allows users to access content on DVDs has been available for well over a decade. 
2. Advanced Access Content System (“AACS”) on Blu-ray Discs 
 
Like the current exemption, the modified exemption will permit circumvention, in certain 
circumstances, of AACS on Blu-ray discs. Like CSS, AACS is also a mixed access and use 
control, and has also been previously recognized by the Register35 as a TPM subject to the 
DMCA because it “effectively controls access” to content by requiring the “application of 
information”—namely, encryption keys—to gain access to the work.36 To the best of our 
knowledge, there exists software which allows users to access digital files on AACS-protected 
Blu-ray.  
3. Encryption Measures on Digitally Transmitted Video 
 
Like the current exemption, the modified exemption will permit circumvention, in certain 
circumstances, of TPMs on digitally transmitted video. Much like CSS and AACS, the protection 
measures found on digitally transmitted video seek to control access through encryption and 
other mechanisms, and thus qualify as a TPM within the meaning of § 1201(a)(3) by requiring 
the “application of information”—namely, encryption keys—in order to gain access to the 
                                                      
31 Exemption to Permit Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted Works, 82 Fe d. Reg., 49,557 (Oct. 26, 
2017). 
32 See 37 C.F.R. § 201.40 (2010). 
33  Register of Copyrights, Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the 
Prohibition on Circumvention at 216 (Oct. 8, 2015). 
34 17 U.S.C § 1201(a)(3) (2016) 
35 Register of Copyrights, Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the 
Prohibition on Circumvention at 126 (Oct. 8, 2015). 
36 17 U.S.C § 1201(a)(3) (2016) 
[PAGE 10]
 
 
10 
 
work.37 The Register reached the same conclusion in her 2015 recommendation, determining that 
a “significant number of platforms that offer digitally transmitted motion pictures, both for 
digital downloads and for streaming, constitute technological measures controlling access to 
those works under § 1201(a)(1).”38 The same is true today.  
 
In general, protection measures on digitally transmitted video operate by utilizing a combination 
of (i) client verification, which ensures that an authorized client is receiving the content; (ii) 
encryption, which ensures that the content is delivered securely only to authorized client; and 
(iii) access controls, which ensure that the client cannot export the content for redistribution. 39 
For example, Netflix content streamed to a laptop through a web browser plug-in is protected by 
both encryption and other protocols.40 The most popular of these are Microsoft Silverlight and 
Adobe Flash. A client requests media usage rights from a rights server online and downloads a 
DRM license or key so that he or she can play the content.41 In addition, cable set-top boxes, 
DVR machines, Hulu, and Netflix are often protected by hardware encryption through High 
Definition Multimedia Interface (“HDMI”) cable outputs as well as encryption and other 
protocols active within DVR and cable boxes. 42 The systems that use DRM protocols such as 
these are diverse and in a state of constant flux. It is clear, however, that virtually all of the 
digital systems in use today seek to control access through a combination of encryption and other 
mechanisms that easily qualify as TPMs within the meaning of § 1201(a)(3). 
ITEM E.  ASSERTED ADVERSE EFFECTS ON NONINFRINGING USES  
 
1. The proposed class includes many works protected by copyright. 
The class as modified utilizes motion pictures as defined at 17 U.S.C. § 101, which are a defined 
category of authorship under §102(6). The overwhelming majority of motion pictures are 
protected by copyright and have not fallen into the public domain. In addition, a massive 
proportion are protected by TPMs and thus unavailable to a significant portion of filmmakers for 
criticism and commentary. 
2. The use contemplated in this exemption—excerpting short portions of motion pictures 
for the purposes of criticism and commentary—is a quintessentially noninfringing use. 
All types of films have long relied on fair use and arguably could not function without it. Fair 
use in filmmaking has been recognized by the Register, Librarian, and in over 90 judicial 
opinions since the Copyright Act of 1978 went into effect. Criticism and commentary is an 
archetypical form of fair use, so much so that it was identified as such by Congress in § 107 of 
the copyright statute.43 The Register has previously recognized that documentary filmmaking 
relies heavily on fair use and documentary filmmakers routinely exercise their rights under the 
                                                      
37 Register of Copyrights, Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the 
Prohibition on Circumvention, Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights at  126 (Oct. 2012). 
38 Id. at 73. 
39 Memorandum from Alex Podobas, Appendix U. 
40 Id. 
41 Id. 
42 Id.  
43 17 U.S.C. § 107 (2016) 
[PAGE 11]
 
 
11 
 
fair use doctrine safely and responsibly. The same is true for all filmmakers, not just those who 
market themselves as documentary filmmakers or consider themselves as a part of the 
documentary film community.  
Since the beginning of film, all genres of filmmaking have conducted criticism and commentary 
of copyrighted works, using techniques such as parody, reference, pastiche, or simple 
commentary whether by narrators, interviewees, or invented characters. For example, “biopics,” 
films “based on a true story,” and other fact-based films present information and commentary 
meant to educate and analyze real events. In the film Chavez, the filmmakers exercised their 
right to fair use by utilizing news clips from the time period of Hugo Chavez to strengthen the 
historical integrity of the film.44 In the 2015 film Steve Jobs, Universal Studios was unable to get 
permission to use the well-known “1984” Apple computer advertisement, which played a key 
role in the film.45 The permission was denied because the Jobs family “hated” the direction that 
the film was taking.46 As one of the filmmakers at Universal said at the time, “there is a need for 
responsible people to be able to say what they really want to say, and not to be prevented from 
doing that.”47 Leaving this clip out was not an option, so Universal Studios exercised its right to 
fair use and used the commercial.48  
Many courts have, in fact, upheld fair use in fictional works,49 and filmmaking is no exception. 
For example, in Sofa Entertainment v. Dodger Productions, Dodger used a short clip of the “Ed 
Sullivan Show” in the biographical musical “Jersey Boys.”50 The court held that the use of this 
clip fell squarely within Dodger’s fair use rights because the use was clearly transformative.51 
After the case was decided, the play was made into a film.52 Another example comes out of 
Adjimi v DLT Entmt’t Ltd., where the court concluded that a Broadway play parodying Three’s 
Company was considered fair use. In addition, in Jackson v. Warner Bros. Inc., the court granted 
                                                      
44 Comment of International Documentary Association, et. al., In the Matter of Exemption to Prohibition on 
Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies  (2014) (Docket No. 2014-07). 
45 The Wrap, How ‘Steve Jobs’ Used Apple’s Super Bowl Ad without Permission, (Oct. 13, 2015), 
http://m.startribune.com/variety/movies/332251172.html?section=/variety.  
46 Id. 
47 Id. 
48 See Appendix S, Lerner, Jack I., and Michael C. Donaldson. “Docket No. 2014 -7 Exemptions to Prohibition 
Against Circumvention of Technological Measures Protecting Copyrighted Works Proposed Class 6 - Audiovisual 
Works – Derivative Uses – Filmmaking Uses.” Received by Maria Pallante, 15 Oct. 2015; E-mail from Stephen 
Ruwe, Assistant Gen. Counsel, U.S. Copyright Office, to Jack Lerner, Assistant Clinical Professor of Law, Univ. of 
CA, Irvine School of Law, Michael Donaldson, Donaldson + Callif (Oct. 15, 2015, 01 :01PM EST) (explaining 
that “the record for the current rulemaking on Exemptions to Prohibition Against Circumvention of Technological 
Measures Protecting Copyrighted Works has been closed for some time. As such, the information you provided will 
not be considered in the current rulemaking.”).  
49 See, e.g., Suntrust Bank v. Houghton Mifflin Co., 268 F.3d 1257, 1260 (11th Cir. 2001); Campbell v. Acuff- Rose 
Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 569-70 (1994). Cf. MCA, Inc. v. Wilson, 677 F.2d 180, 185 (2d Cir. 1981) (permissible 
parody should target the original, but may also reflect on life in general). 
50 SOFA Entm't, Inc. v. Dodger Prods., Inc., 709 F.3d 1273, 1276 (9th Cir. 2013). 
51 id. 
52 Jersey Boys Official Movie Site, Jersey Boys, http://www.jerseyboysmovie.com (last visited Dec. 17, 2017).  
[PAGE 12]
 
 
12 
 
summary judgment in favor of defendant who claimed fair use when making a romantic 
comedy.53 Many other examples exist.54 
Today, more and more independent films that would not traditionally be considered documentary 
are making fair use. As Michael Donaldson explains in his letter attached hereto as Appendix A, 
this trend is the result of “mobility within the independent film community. Independent 
filmmakers work on a documentary one week and a narrative film the next week.” Within the 
independent film community, “[t]his intermingling between these two types of work was 
inspiring filmmakers to take what they had learned to be their rights in making a documentary 
and use it when they worked on scripted films.” Furthermore, films from genres outside 
documentary now routinely obtain fair use endorsements on media liability insurance.   
The use of short portions of motion pictures for the purpose of making criticism or commentary 
is clearly a noninfringing use no matter how the film is categorized. The noninfringing nature of 
the use does not change just because of the film’s marketing designation or genre classification. 
The mere fact that a film is marketed as a documentary does not make that film’s criticism or 
commentary any less deserving of fair use protection—and there is no reason to think 
filmmakers would act more or less responsibly depending on how their film is categorized.  
Indeed, application of the four statutory factors set forth in § 107 firmly supports the conclusion 
that the use of short portions of motion pictures for purposes of criticism and commentary is 
highly likely to be fair use no matter how one classifies the film.  
Factor 1: Purpose and character of work 
For the first factor set forth in § 107, the court must look to the purpose and character of the use, 
including whether such use is of a commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational purposes. As 
the Register has determined in numerous previous rulemakings,55 while many films are 
commercial in nature, they still can—and do—make fair use for the purpose of criticism and 
commentary, among other uses.56  
When applying the fair use factors to any given case, courts have consistently rejected bright line 
assessments as to a work’s overall purpose, and rather, focused more so on whether the work in 
question was transformative. For example, in Wade Williams Distribution, Inc. v. Am. Broad. 
Co., Inc., the court considered whether use of video clips in an entertaining morning talk show 
                                                      
53 Jackson v. Warner Bros. Inc., 993 F. Supp. 585, 592 (E.D. Mich. 1997). 
54 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 580; Arrow Prods. v. The Weinstein Co., No. 13-Civ.-5488 (S.D.N.Y. 2014). 
55 Register of Copyrights, Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the 
Prohibition on Circumvention, Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights at  72 (Oct. 2015); Register of 
Copyrights, Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fourth Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the Prohibition on 
Circumvention, Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights at 126 (Oct. 2012); Register of Copyrights, Section 
1201 Rulemaking: Third Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention, 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights at 126 (Oct. 2010). 
56 Wade Williams Distrib., Inc. v. Am. Broad. Co., No. 00 CIV. 5002(LMM), 2005 WL 774275 at *9 (S.D.N.Y. Apr. 
5, 2005); Hofheinz v. Discovery Comm’cns, Inc., No. 00 Civ. 3802, 2001 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 14752 at *13 (S.D.N.Y. 
2001). 
[PAGE 13]
 
 
13 
 
constituted fair use.57 The court rejected the argument that “there can be no fair use when 
copyrighted excerpts are used for entertainment,” and held, “what is most persuasive in this case 
is that...use of the films was clearly transformative.” 58 Similarly, the court in Hofheinz v. 
Discovery Communications, Inc. held that “[§] 107 does not explicitly distinguish between 
entertaining and serious, plausible and implausible, or weighty or frivolous commentaries.”59 
The focus in these cases, and the overwhelming majority of fair use decisions, is on the specific 
use in question, not general characteristics of the genre. The case law makes clear that there is no 
need for a distinction between genres; rather, courts decide on a case by case basis based on the 
specific use at issue. 
Many fair use decisions involving filmmaking rely heavily on the fact that the use of the 
underlying work is transformative. Parody is another example of transformative work where the 
courts uphold fair use in entertainment and commercial works.60  Films often use parody and 
although the work created may be commercial in nature and for the purpose of entertainment, 
courts have deemed it fair use. 61 In the seminal case on fair use in parody, Campbell v Acuff–
Rose, the United States Supreme Court rejected the idea that a work is presumptively unfair just 
because it is commercial in nature.62 In addition to recognizing the legitimacy of fair use in 
works with a commercial nature, the Court also recognized that a work created at least in part for 
the purpose of entertaining can still constitute fair use. Additionally, in Bourne v. Twentieth 
Century Fox Film Corp., the court concluded that a parody of the song “When You Wish Upon a 
Star” in the show Family Guy was also fair use. 63 Lastly, in Brownmark Films, LLC v. Comedy 
Partners, the Seventh Circuit upheld fair use where the television show South Park created a 
parody of a viral internet video. 64  
There should be no question that many films not traditionally classified as documentary make 
fair use. This statutory factor weighs heavily in favor of modifying the current exemption to 
include all filmmakers, not just those classified as “documentary filmmakers.”  
Factor 2: The Nature of the Copyrighted Work 
The second element requires an analysis of the nature of the copyrighted work. Although motion 
pictures are often highly creative, the use of motion pictures contemplated by the current 
exemption and proposed modification—short portions for criticism and commentary—is still 
highly transformative.  This fact strongly outweighs any concern regarding the nature of the 
copyrighted work.65 In fact, in the 2012 and 2015 Rulemakings, the Register noted that the 
second factor is not especially relevant when determining whether a use is fair. 66  
                                                      
57 Wade Williams, No. 00 CIV. 5002(LMM), 2005 WL 774275 at *9. 
58 Id. 
59 Hofheinz, No. 00 Civ. 3802, 2001 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 14752 at *13. 
60 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 565. 
61 Id. 
62 Id. at 570 
63 Bourne Co. v. Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp., 602 F. Supp. 2d 499, 511 (S.D.N.Y. 2009). 
64 Brownmark Films, LLC v. Comedy Partners, 82 F.3d 687 (7th Cir. 2012). 
65 Michael Donaldson, Refuge from the Storm: A fair Use Safe Harbor for Non-Fiction Film, 481 (Dec. 18, 2012 
66 See 2015 Recommendation at 74; See 2012 Recommendation at 128. 
[PAGE 14]
 
 
14 
 
In fact, the Second Circuit has said the second factor “may be of limited usefulness where the 
creative work of art is being used for a transformative purpose.”67 
Further, the second factor is not dispositive in the fair use analysis, and in fact, if one were to 
take out this factor from any given analysis, the outcome would almost always remain the same. 
Courts uniformly spend little time on this factor when discussing their reasoning in fair use 
cases, and there are endless examples of cases in which courts uphold fair use even when the 
works being used are highly creative and imaginative.68 Judge Leval recognized as much in 
Authors Guild v, Google, Inc. when he emphasized that the second factor has rarely played a 
significant role in the determination of a fair use dispute.69 In that case, the Second Circuit 
decided that the use in question was fair use not because of the nature of the work, but because 
the secondary use is transformative.70 
It cannot be disputed that films of every kind make criticism and commentary in the form of 
parody, symbolism, allusion, and many other transformative ways. And where transformative 
use exists, the second factor should be given relatively little weight.   
Factor 3: Amount Used 
The third element requires an analysis at the amount and substantiality of the portion used in 
relation to the copyrighted work as a whole. This element need not be discussed in detail because 
the proposed modification still permits use of short portions. Further, fair use resources for 
filmmakers and counseling to filmmakers encourage use of only a reasonable amount of content. 
Counsel for Commenters use the following approach as recommended in Michael Donaldson’s 
article Refuge from the Storm: A Fair Use Safe Harbor for Non-Fiction Film: ask “whether the 
amount of material used by the filmmaker [is] limited to no more than that which is reasonably 
in service of the point he or she is trying to make.”71 In our experience, this works well for all 
kinds of filmmakers. The same is true for the guidelines set out in the widely-accepted Statement 
of Best Practices in Fair Use for Documentary Filmmakers, which provides that “the use 
[should] [be] no more extensive than is necessary to make the point for which the material has 
been selected."72 
In fact, the “short portions” limitation in this exemption is actually more restrictive than 
traditional fair use, which on occasion might allow more than a short portion to be used (such as 
with a scene-by scene analysis, running commentary, mashup, or remix). On occasion, fair use 
even allows for an entire work to be used.73  
                                                      
67 Bill Graham Archives v. Dorling Kindersley Ltd., 448 F.3d 605, 612 (2d Cir. 2006). 
68 Amsinck v. Columbia Pictures Indus., Inc., 862 F. Supp. 1044, 1047 (S.D.N.Y. 1994). 
69 Authors Guild v. Google, Inc., 804 F.3d 202, 220 (2nd Cir. 2015).  
70 Id.; See Also Pierre N. Leval, Toward a Fair Use Standard, 103 HARV. L. REV. 1105 (1990). 
71 Michael Donaldson, Refuge from the Storm: A fair Use Safe Harbor for Non-Fiction Film, 482 Dec. 18, 2012. 
72  Association of Independent Video and Filmmakers, et al., Documentary Filmmakers’ Statement of Best Practices 
in Fair Use, CENTER FOR MEDIA & SOCIAL IMPACT (CMSI) (Nov. 18, 2005), 
http://www.cmsimpact.org/sites/default/files/fair_use_final.pdf. 
73 Bill Graham, 448 F.3d at 612. 
[PAGE 15]
 
 
15 
 
Nothing about the classification of the film being made changes the analysis of this element. 
Application of this factor favors fair use and it should also favor a finding that the use at issue 
here is non-infringing for purposes of § 1201, regardless of genre.  
Factor 4: Market 
Application of the fourth element depends on the effect of the use upon the potential market for 
or value of the copyrighted work. The Supreme Court has held that rightsholders do not have the 
right to the market for transformative uses of their works.74 This is because, among other 
reasons, rightsholders of underlying works likely do not want criticisms of their original work, 
and therefore would have no motive to develop such market. In other words, transformative uses 
do not affect a legitimate market and thus the proposed modification will have no effect on any 
clearance market.  
Additionally, with respect to documentary filmmaking, the Register has previously concluded 
 that “use of a motion picture clip for purposes of documentary commentary or criticism is 
unlikely to interfere with the primary or derivative markets for the underlying work.”75 There is 
no reason that this would be any different in a non-documentary context. Given that there is no 
right to a license to work made pursuant to fair use, there can be no market-based objection to an 
exemption that merely permits that fair use to go forward.76  
As in the previous rulemaking, we are not aware of any evidence, or even a single allegation, that 
the filmmakers’ exemption has resulted in any harm to the market for copyrighted motion 
pictures. Again, this makes intuitive sense, as filmmakers are rightsholders themselves, are 
already inclined to follow established best practices in fair use, and thus are very unlikely to use 
the exemption in a way that harms the market.  
3. Filmmakers are being adversely affected in their ability to make fair use of short 
portions of motion pictures for the purpose of criticism and commentary. 
 
a. Content Scramble System on Digital Video Discs 
Since 2010, exemptions applicable to documentary filmmaking have been in effect. This 
exemption has helped many filmmakers, and there has been neither evidence nor any allegation 
that this exemption has harmed rightsholders in any way. There is no reason this would change if 
the “documentary” limitation were removed. All filmmakers regularly need access to footage on 
DVDs and without an exemption to DVDs, many non-infringing uses simply cannot be made. 
Many filmmakers whose projects would not traditionally be classified as documentary seek to 
make fair use but have been stymied by § 1201’s anticircumvention provisions. Filmmakers 
Steve Boettcher and Mike Trinklein relate that they have refrained from making fair use for fear 
                                                      
74 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 591. 
75 See 2015 Recommendation. 
76 (Barring increased infringing uses--of which there have been no increase nor allegations of one in the future). 
[PAGE 16]
 
 
16 
 
of violating § 1201: 77 
Given the significant amount of drama in the film [we are working on], we decided 
early on that our storytelling toolbox could not include fair use of materials from 
DVD or Blu-ray, because the exemption did not cover accessing that material for 
use in a drama. Already, we were hindered in our ability to tell these stories. So, 
there is already a chilling effect in that a drama-heavy documentary might be seen 
as a drama outright, and thus under a different set of rules.  
Further, [we] urge the Copyright Office to consider the 2012 Ben Affleck movie 
Argo, which chronicled the freeing of the US hostages in Tehran. The film 
meticulously followed the facts of the rescue —and served as an important history 
lesson for those who saw it. One key to the story was Ted Koppel’s nightly reports 
on ABC about the continuing saga in 1979-80. That key element of the story could 
not have been acquired from a DVD —and used via fair use —because the 
exemption does not cover “drama.” 
 
An anonymous filmmaker provided the following statement regarding the DMCA: 
I’m an award-winning producer whose films have played at major festivals around 
the world and have had wide theatrical releases through major distributors.  I have 
previously relied on fair use in non -documentary films.  Going forward, I plan to 
make a hybrid documentary/narrative feature about a very famous film duo.   This 
film is mostly going to require the use of third party content that is protected by 
access controls.  The only way that I can get access to the high -quality clips that I 
need to make the film is to have the ability to circumvent the access 
controls.  Without this, my project doesn’t work. 
 
Robert Grant explained the following impediments that § 1201 poses for his current project: 78 
My most recent project, Fake Blood, uses an “outside the box” concept to examine 
the filmmaker’s responsibility in portraying violent imagery on screen and how 
audiences react to those images.  Fake Blood is most ac curately described as a 
documentary-thriller and blends nonfiction and fictional elements to tell the story.  
Through narration and various interviews, Fake Blood makes reference to my past 
horror films and well-known films that use violent imagery to tell their stories.  To 
accurately convey the points being made, it was necessary to show brief clips of 
each film under the protection of the fair use doctrine.   
 
Fake Blood is an independent film that was made with a limited budget.  Only 
through the film being labeled as a documentary was I able to take advantage of 
fair use due to the encrypted materials I needed to access.  Without being able to 
use these clips under fair  use, the clips would not have been used at all and  Fake 
Blood would not have been completed, which I think would be a shame with such 
                                                      
77 Letter from Boettcher/Trinklein Productions, Appendix C. 
78 Letter from Rob Grant, Appendix P. 
[PAGE 17]
 
 
17 
 
an important topic. As these examples illustrate, the current exemption has had a 
profound impact on filmmaking.  
 
In light of this evidence, it is clear that fair use in filmmaking will be adversely affected if 
filmmakers do not have the ability to legally circumvent CSS on DVDs. 
b. Advanced Access Content System on Blu-ray 
Blu-ray remains commonplace and since the last rulemaking, continues to further supplant 
DVDs as an important source of motion picture material. As was true in 2015, this bonus footage 
can often only be found on a Blu-ray, which makes it even more necessary for this exemption to 
be expanded to include all filmmakers that need to access this unique footage. 79 Further, many 
filmmakers need access to HD/the high-quality content found on Blu-ray to complete the story 
they are attempting to portray in their filmmaking.  
Roberto Miller, at Pure Grain Productions, has faced great difficulty with his current project 
because of § 1201’s anticircumvention provisions: 80  
I am developing a narrative feature film with Liz Holdship about a professor who, 
in the midst of a divided world, leads a team of international scientists on a unique 
experiment to facilitate a sense of unity in humans.  To truthfully illustrate  a 
politically, economically, and racially “divided world” that audiences can  readily 
relate to, our main characters will witness clips  of contemporary news cas ts and 
broadcast shows from major world networks such as CNN, Fox News, BBC, ABC 
news, PBS, etc. Some of our characters will see (or recall in their minds) clips from 
films that illustrate a  “divided world,” and the fight against it, such as  Mr. Smith 
Goes to Washington, which is digitally encrypted in 4K on a Blu-ray disk. Access 
to this digital content is the only way we can demonstrate the “divided world” 
which is essential to our film going forward.  
 
This use is virtually identical to use in a film styled as a “documentary” in which the clips are 
analyzed and explored to explain and illuminate the world around us. Filmmaker Gail Prensky 
faces a similar problem: 
I am a filmmaker and produce various  videos that capture factual accounts. 
Currently, I am wo rking on a project entitled The Jüdische Kulturbund Project, 
which explores the dilemmas that Jewish artists faced in Germany back in the 1930s 
and early 1940s and contemporary artists confront around the world today. I would 
categorize my project as both documentary and fiction because the project produces 
factual narratives such as live public presentations, but I am also developing a script 
for dramatic feature film and a multimedia play. Because so much of this project 
requires clips of the featured artists’ performances to comment on and illustrate the 
struggles they face, I would need to rip from sources like DVDs and Blu Ray. 
Access to media like DVDs and Blu Ray would help tell the artists' story. I couldn't 
                                                      
79 Letter from Jim Morrissette, Kartemquin Films (Dec. 4, 2017), Appendix B.  
80 Letter from Roberto Miller, Pure Grain Productions, Appendix K. 
[PAGE 18]
 
 
18 
 
afford to produce this material otherwise because much of  the material is not 
available online. I am unsure of whether my project would fall under the exemption 
because it is a combination of documentary and narrative, and my fear of a lawsuit 
once my project is publicly viewed and distributed sto ps me from ripping from 
these sources. 
 
Filmmaker Rachel Ward discusses how the roadblocks caused by the DMCA affected her 
creative process:81 
 
An example of [this issue] is a web series we sold to Universal called TESLA & 
TWAIN, which was a fictional exploration of the real historical friendship between 
the great writer Mark Twain and the genius inventor Nikola Tesla. We wanted to 
use a four second clip from Back to the Future as an analogous comedic touchstone. 
Due to the lack of an exemption for non-documentary films, we chose not to use a 
clip from the film even though we certainly thought it would quality as fair use. 
Licensing the material was not an option because it would have been too expensive. 
We ended up creating an audio sound -alike instead. Universal never released the 
series. 
 
As seen in the above examples from filmmakers, narrative filmmakers will continue to be 
adversely affected in their ability to make fair use if they are prohibited from legally accessing 
Blu-ray footage.  
c. Encryption measures on digitally transmitted video 
Digitally transmitted video has become the predominant distribution mechanism for motion 
pictures today. In the past few years, there has been a proliferation of digital streaming video 
services. In fact, some projections estimate that digital video and audio streaming may generate 
as much as 89% of web traffic by the end of 2018.82 Further, people are spending one hour and 
39 minutes a day consuming media on their phones this year, versus an hour and two minutes 
last year — a 60 percent jump.83 In addition, revenue from sales and rentals of movies and TV 
shows totaled $12 billion in 2016, according to data released by trade organization Digital 
Entertainment Group. 84  
Similar to CSS and AACS, the protection measures found on digitally transmitted video seek to 
control access through encryption and other mechanisms, and thus qualify as a TPM within the 
                                                      
81 Letter from Rachel Ward, Appendix N. 
82 Digital Media: Rise of On Demand Content, supra note 12, at 6.  
83 John Koblin, How Much Do We Love TV? Let Us Count the Ways, N.Y. Times (June 30, 2016), 
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/01/business/media/nielsen-survey-media-viewing.html       
84 Ryan Faughnder, Home Video Sales Shrank Again in 2016 as Americans Switched to Streaming , L.A. Times (Jan. 
6, 2017), http://www.latimes.com/business/hollywood/la-fi-ct-home-video-decline-20170106-story.html  
[PAGE 19]
 
 
19 
 
meaning of Section 1201(a)(3) by requiring the “application of information”—namely, 
encryption keys—in order to gain access to the work.85  
Most digitally transmitted video, including widely used services such as Netflix, Hulu, HBO-
GO, YouTube, cable and DVR, and systems that use HDMI, are protected by TPMs, which 
prevent filmmakers from being able to make fair use of materials that are not unavailable in other 
formats. Specifically, these streaming services are often the sole authorized providers of various 
forms of materials, whether feature-length motion pictures, television series, or advertisements. 
Because these unique materials are increasingly less available on any form of DVD or Blu-ray, 
filmmakers will be adversely affected in their ability to make fair use if they cannot access there 
is no circumvention to the various encryption measures on digitally transmitted video.  
For example, filmmaker Matthew Miller is working on a project that would be severely 
compromised without the use of footage available through digitally transmitted video:86  
We would like to push the boundaries of our parody even further and when 
appropriate and only in short, transformative uses, use footage actually ripped from 
physical or digital media.  In an upcoming episode we are planning a parody of The 
X Files and wou ld benefit greatly from being able to incorporate some of the 
footage from their opening animations and juxtapose that with our own footage. 
 
Filmmaker Alfred Spellman faces a similar problem with his next project:87 
 
Our first narrative feature film, whic h we plan to shoot in 2018, contemplates a 
present-day relationship between several historical figures. We hope to use the Fair 
Use Doctrine to establish the historical nature of the relationship as well as depict 
pop culture events that occurred over the course of the relationship. Many of the 
events we hope to portray are contained in films and other programs where the high-
quality clips we need are only available on Blu -ray and digital online sources. 
Without the fair use doctrine, it would be impossible to give the appropriate context 
to the historical figures and the world they inhabited. 
 
Additionally, many filmmakers have the need to use footage from news sites, which today are 
primarily or exclusively found on digitally transmitted formats. Filmmaker Tim Pedegana faces 
an issue with developing an upcoming project due to the DMCA: 88 
I am currently working on a narrative feature film about a young man who, in the 
days following 9/11, travels from Mexico to New York City to find his father, an 
undocumented worker at the World Trade Center’s famous Windows on the World 
restaurant. To truthfully illustrate the aftermath of 9/11 and the vast amount of 
people who were missing loved ones, we hope to use archival news clips from 
major world networks on screen as the main character travels across a continent to 
                                                      
85 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(3). 
86 Letter from Mathew Miller, Appendix G. 
87 Letter from Alfred Spellman, Appendix Q. 
88 Letter from Tim Pedegana, Appendix I. 
[PAGE 20]
 
 
20 
 
find his father among the rubble. These news clips are necessary to illustrate and 
support the magnitude of the main character’s experience and contextualize his 
fictional experience with one that many real families went through in September of 
2001…[a]ccess to this digital content is the only way we can illustrate the real-life 
impact of 9/11, which is essential to our film going forward. 
 
Filmmaker Lianne Halfon faces a similar problem:89  
Our company is currently developing a film based on the flooding of the Colorado 
River and a speed run down the river through the Grand Canyon.  The film is based 
on a non-fiction book, The Emerald Mile, by Kevin Fedarko. As part of our film, 
we would like to use news footage that documented the “El Nino” conditions during 
the weeks before the crisis at the damn. Having access to high quality versions of 
the news footage to use pursuant to fair use would allow us to tell the story more 
accurately. 
 
 
Filmmaker Joshua Louis faces problems regarding access to news clips as well:90 
 
I just completed my second feature film, Devils Tree: Rooted Evil and am currently 
starting pre-production on two other feature films. Devils Tree is inspired by events 
that have been reported on in real life about a tree in Florida where many horrible 
acts have occurred.  It is a fictional story about a journalist who decides to write a 
story about the haunted tree.  This film incorporated news clips and material that 
were used under fair u se.  This project would have benefited from the DMCA 
exemption, as I easily would have obtained quality content without being confined 
by the DMCA and access controls.  
 
My two new films will reference real events, and I would like to use local and 
national news clips in the films. One is a horror film which discusses paranormal 
activity in hospitals. Being able to use news clips that are directly on point, i.e. 
which show paranormal events in real hospitals, will greatly benefit my film.  The 
other film I am producing is a mob film, in which I’d like to incorporate news 
dealing with various criminal activity, including news clips of organized crime 
busts. The DMCA exemption would certainly help me create these films without 
the fear of being in violation of copyright law, and without the need to expend time 
and resources to use material that would otherwise fall within the exemption.  
 
 
As seen in the above examples, in order to make fair use, filmmakers need access to various 
forms of digitally transmitted video in order to make their film. As a result, fair use in 
filmmaking will be adversely affected if narrative filmmakers are unable to legally circumvent 
encryption measures that are found on numerous types of digitally transmitted video. 
                                                      
89 Letter from Lianne Halfon, Appendix F. 
90 Letter from Joshua Louis, Appendix L. 
[PAGE 21]
 
 
21 
 
The need for filmmakers to have access to high quality content from Blu-ray and online forms of 
video has never been more necessary than it is now. 4K production and distribution has become 
a dominating force in the video content industry, as over 70% of movie theaters in the US now 
use digital projection in 4K.91 Independent filmmakers need the ability to access high-quality 
content to meet the requirements of distributors.  
i. Alternatives to Circumvention 
We know of no alternatives to circumvention that would be feasible options for filmmakers who 
want to make fair use in the form of criticism and commentary in their films.  
Screen capture has never been feasible for filmmaking. Commenters presented substantial 
evidence in 2008-2009, 2011-2012, and 2014-2015 that screen capture is not a workable option 
for filmmakers. That is still the case today. The documentary and independent film communities 
comprise thousands of filmmakers, and none that we know of have ever found screen capture to 
be a viable alternative to circumvention where filmmakers need content for fair use and seek to 
have their film broadcast or distributed.  
As was the case in previous rulemakings, all screen capture software programs of which we are 
aware create dropped frames and loss of audio sync, among other defects.92 Although some 
screen capture software programs claim to be able to capture high-resolution video, it is not clear 
that these programs do so without circumventing TPMs, and in any event, they are not suitable 
for independent filmmakers. While they may be appropriate for video game play, they do not 
render acceptable images for high-quality filmmaking, as they require significant system 
resources, which is time-consuming and also leads to a significant loss in footage quality.93 In 
addition, they require a high-end PC rig and special graphics hardware,94 a problem for 
filmmakers given that film editors and producers almost universally use Mac systems. Such 
high-end systems are not financially feasible for many filmmakers. In short, it is simply not 
realistic to ask filmmakers to explore screen capture options given the high-quality footage and 
rigorous broadcast and distribution standards they must meet. 95 
Nor is licensing a reasonable alternative for filmmakers who seek to make fair use. Aside from 
the lengthy time it takes to license a clip and exorbitant licensing fees, many rightsholders, 
including all the major film studios, insist on thorough non-disparagement clauses in all clip 
licenses.  In Appendix T, we have included eight examples of such clauses used in standard 
licenses from a range of prominent studios.  
 
                                                      
91 Letter from Jim Morrissette, Kartemquin Films 1 (December 4, 2017), Appendix B. 
92 Id. at 3-4. 
93 Id. 
94 Id.  
95 Id. 
[PAGE 22]
 
 
22 
 
Statutory Factors 
 
In conducting the rulemaking, the Register must examine the following statutory factors listed in 
§ 1201(a)(1)(C): (i) the availability of copyrighted works; (ii) the availability for use of works 
for nonprofit archival, presentation, and educational purposes; (iii) the impact that the prohibition 
on the circumvention of Technological Protection Measures applied to copyrighted work has on 
criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research; (iv) the effects of 
circumvention of technological protection measures on the market for or value of copyrighted 
works; and (v) such other factors as the Librarian considers appropriate.96 An analysis of each of 
these statutory factors supports the granting of this proposed exemption. 
i. Availability for use of copyrighted works 
 
§ 1201’s prohibition on circumvention has severely reduced the availability of copyrighted 
works on which filmmakers may comment.   
a.  Whether the Availability of the Work in Protected Formats Enhances and/or 
Inhibits Public Use of Particular Works 
As we demonstrate above in Part E, Adverse Effects on Noninfringing Uses, § 1201 prohibits 
filmmakers from making fair use of works in a range of formats. The vast majority of works 
available today, especially the most popular works which are the subject of greater debate and 
analysis, are TPM protected. This inhibits the public’s use of particular works.  
In any event, the proposed modification would not harm public availability of the original work 
on DVD, Blu-ray, or digitally transmitted video. The Register has already considered this 
question in the documentary context for DVDs, Blu-ray, and digitally transmitted video, and 
determined that an exemption for certain non-infringing uses will not end their digital 
distribution.  There is no reason that this analysis would change for films not categorized as 
“documentary.”  
b.  Whether the work protected is available in other formats and whether those formats 
are protected by access controls 
No formats exist as viable alternatives to DVD, Blu-ray, and digitally transmitted video. The 
standards for quality are rising, and VHS quality, or even 720p resolution, is insufficient to meet 
the needs of filmmakers today.  
Each format in the proposed exemption is protected by TPMs that filmmakers fear are covered 
by §1201. With respect to Blu-ray, certain important material is only included on one particular 
format, which makes it even more necessary that filmmakers have the ability to access all three 
formats. When filmmakers need a certain piece of footage, such as bonus materials from a film, 
there is no alternative source for this material other than Blu-ray, and the main issue is there is no 
                                                      
96 17 U.S.C.A. § 1201 (2016). 
[PAGE 23]
 
 
23 
 
alternative that is not protected by TPMs.  
c.  If alternative formats are available, whether such formats are sufficient to 
accommodate non-infringing uses 
Some content is only available on a single format. As a result, no one format can satisfy the non-
infringing uses of filmmakers. While some older films may only be available through DVD, 
newer ones may only be available online, and others only on Blu-ray.  
d. Whether the format is part of a “use-facilitating” business model that offers the public 
access to work in a variety of new ways and whether the proposed exemption would 
prejudice this model 
There is no evidence that any filmmaker-related exemption has prejudiced a “use-facilitating 
business model” in any way. There has been no effect on sales, no link to privacy, no effect on a 
legitimate licensing market, and certainly no effect on public perception of the business model 
other than to make it seem less untenable.  
TPMs on DVDs, Blu-ray, and digital transmissions are use-limiting by nature. TPMs restrict the 
ability of the public to access material for a range of non-infringing uses, including criticism and 
commentary. These types of films need a fair use exemption.  
For example, These Amazing Shadows is a documentary film depicting the power of movies as a 
major cultural force. This film consisted of mainly clips of underlying works. By watching this 
film, the audience learned of underlying works and thus there was actually an increase in the 
market value of the original films.97  
When the fair use material that is necessary to create such works becomes inaccessible due to 
TPMs, the works themselves are not created, and audiences lose their ability to engage with both 
the fair use works and the original works in the method and manner that they would like. 
A well-known example of the impact of rightsholders and their power over the ability of 
filmmakers to access content and make fair use is found in the story of the film “Wanderlust,” 
which chronicles the genre of American road films. In the creation of this film, producer Alicia 
Sams ran into numerous issues with rightsholders and was even quoted to pay $450,000 to gain 
access to the clips that she wanted to use for the film. Rightsholders often only have the interest 
of protecting corporate assets, and the prohibitively expensive costs for using short clips are not 
feasible for some filmmakers. Such practices go on to this day, through the use of non-
disparagement clauses in contracts that an artist must sign when using content.98 These clauses 
often prohibit filmmakers from criticizing or parodying the underlying work.99  
                                                      
97 See 2015 Comment at Appendix E, Letter from Paul Mariano and Kurt Norton, Gravitas Docufilms.  
98 See Non-disparagement clauses, Appendix T. 
99 Id. 
[PAGE 24]
 
 
24 
 
ii. Availability of use of works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational 
purposes 
 
The proposed modification would greatly improve access to motion picture materials for these 
purposes.  Films not traditionally classified as “documentary” often serve educational purposes 
and serve an increasingly important role in educational and social commentary. These films 
serve as teaching tools in the classroom because of their portrayal of important historical and 
contemporary events, such as the feature film Selma, which chronicles Martin Luther King, Jr.’s 
march from Selma to Montgomery for voting rights in 1965.100  
There are countless other examples of films used to educate at every level. For example, My 
Cousin Vinny is often shown by law professors to students in evidence classes.101 Another 
example is the mini-series Roots, which is used in high school history classes to teach about 
slavery.102 This same is true for the Dead Poets Society in English class, The Diary of Anne 
Frank or Johnny Tremaine in history class, Lorenzo’s Oil in science class, and many others.103 
Films serve a critical role in education, and the proposed exemption would greatly expand access 
to motion picture materials for these purposes.   
Outside the classroom, films often serve as a conversation topic for the audience and can lead to 
conversations about sensitive topics that, without the film to spark the discussion, would never 
be discussed by the general public. For example, racism and race relations are very 
uncomfortable for Americans to talk about. But numerous films including 12 Years A Slave, 
Remember the Titans, Do the Right Thing and Django Unchained have spurred discussions about 
these movies that lead to a more general discussion about race relations. Popular culture is one of 
the key ways that we express ourselves and is one of the primary ways we engage in civil 
discourse in modern America.  
Further, films often educate the public on important moments in history that would otherwise 
remain relatively obscure. Millions of Americans who watched the film Dunkirk learned more 
about the German invasion onto the French beaches of Dunkirk than they would have ever 
known otherwise. This is the same for the Schindler’s List and the Holocaust, Lincoln and the 
end of the Civil War, The Imitation Game and the cracking of the Nazi codes during World War 
II, and many more. Films such as these teach about their respective subjects in a way that books 
cannot.  
The proposed modification would greatly expand access to motion picture materials for these 
purposes.   
                                                      
100 See generally Teach with Movies, http://www.teachwithmovies.org/ (last visited 12/10/2017). 
101 CBS Los Angeles, 25 Years Later, ‘My Cousin Vinny’ Keeps Laughs and Legal Lessons Coming , (Mar. 13, 2017, 
5:31PM),http://losangeles.cbslocal.com/2017/03/13/25-years-later-my-cousin-vinny-keeps-laughs-and-legal-
lessons-coming/. 
102 Teach With Movies, Roots Volume I, http://www.teachwithmovies.org/guides/roots-vol-i.html (last updated July 
21, 2011). 
103 See generally Teach with Movies, http://www.teachwithmovies.org/ (last visited 12/10/2017). 
[PAGE 25]
 
 
25 
 
iii. Impact that the prohibition on the circumvention of technological measures applied to 
copyrighted works has on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or 
research 
 
Countless films present poignant commentary on important social issues, including many 
acclaimed pictures from 2017 including Hidden Figures, Loving, and Hacksaw Ridge. Though 
none of these are generally thought of as documentaries, each depict the stories of real 
individuals who played pivotal roles in space exploration, the reversal of anti-miscegenation 
laws, and the Battle of Okinawa, respectively.104 A significant proportion of these can and do 
make fair use, including Steve Jobs.105 And many require access to TPM-protected material to do 
so.106 The DMCA’s prohibition on circumvention severely restricts filmmakers’ right to conduct 
criticism and commentary, among many other uses including education. The proper solution to 
this problem is a modification of the current exemption to include all filmmakers.  
iv. Effect of circumvention of TPMs on the market for, or value of, copyrighted works 
 
The Supreme Court has instructed rightsholders have no claim on the derivative market for 
criticism of their works because rightsholders are unlikely to desire an additional work criticizing 
the original work, and have no incentive to develop such markets.107 In addition, the Register has 
previously concluded that transformative uses will likely not affect the relevant markets for the 
original work.108 
We are unaware of any allegations that the filmmakers’ exemption has harmed the market for 
copyrighted motion pictures in any way.109 As creators and rightsholders themselves, the 
filmmakers who will be eligible for the modified exemption already have a propensity to follow 
the established best practices in fair use, and routinely do so. There is no reason to think that this 
group would begin to use the exemption in a way that would cause harm to existing markets.110  
v. Such other factors as the Librarian considers appropriate. 
i. Without the proposed modification removing the “documentary” limitation, the 
exemption will be unconstitutionally vague. 
As we discuss above, the definition of documentary film is notoriously difficult to define. Since 
the origins of the medium and through to the present, scholars and filmmakers have endlessly 
discussed and debated the definition—without resolution. We strongly urge the Register to 
consider the constitutional problems inherent in the difficulty of this definition.  
                                                      
104 Nominees – The 89th Academy Award Nominations for the 2017 Oscars, THE OSCARS Oscar.go.com/nominees 
(last visited Dec. 4, 2017). 
105 See Supra at page 9. 
106 See supra Part 3(c).  
107 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 564. 
108 Register of Copyrights, Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the 
Prohibition on Circumvention, Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights at 72 (Oct. 2015). 
109 See supra Part E (4). 
110 Id. 
[PAGE 26]
 
 
26 
 
A statute is unconstitutional when “[the] statute which either forbids or requires the doing of an 
act in terms so vague that men of common intelligence must necessarily guess the meaning and 
differ as to its application. . .”111 The void for vagueness doctrine is especially demanding when 
First Amendment freedoms are at risk. The Supreme Court has held that “[c]ertainty is all the 
more essential when vagueness might induce individuals to forego their rights of speech, press, 
and association for fear of violating an unclear law.”112 Additionally, the Court has held that 
“where a statute's literal scope . . . is capable of reaching expression sheltered by the First 
Amendment, the doctrine demands a greater degree of specificity than in other contexts.113  
Where filmmaking is concerned, the Court has repeatedly instructed that a government edict 
must be especially clear, because “expression by means of motion pictures is included within the 
free speech and free press guaranty of the First and Fourteenth Amendments”114 In Interstate 
Circuit, Inc. v. City of Dallas, the Supreme Court directed that “[…] one who wishes to convey 
his ideas through [a] medium, […] must consider whether what he proposes to film, and how he 
proposes to film it, is within the terms of classification schemes such as this.”115 Therefore, “[i]f 
he is unable to determine what the ordinance means, he runs the risk of being foreclosed, in 
practical effect, from a significant portion of the movie-going public,”116 and is not afforded his 
First Amendment freedom. That is exactly what the term “documentary filmmaking” does here.  
Further, because this statute is so vague, countless films may or may not be able to fit into the 
category it creates. These films can be considered “hybrid” films and do not fit nicely in any 
particular category of film. They are films that make use of fiction and nonfiction elements and 
can resemble a documentary and narrative at the same time. For example, the film The Story of 
the Weeping Camel was nominated for awards in over 7 film festivals in multiple categories, 
including “best documentary”, “best foreign film” and “best feature film.” There are countless 
films like this one that can fit into multiple categories. For example, films like Kate Plays 
Christine, Notes on Blindness, and All the Sleepless Nights all make claims to truth while still 
using actors and a script.  
As another example, the Cinema Eye Awards, which have grown into a well-respected award 
show, has given out the "Heterodox Award" for the last 8 years. This award is specifically 
designed to recognize and celebrate films that blur the line between narrative fiction and 
documentary film.  
                                                      
111 Connally v. General Const. Co., 269 U.S. 385, 391 (1926). 
112 Scull v. Com. of Va. ex rel. Committee on Law Reform and Racial Activities , 359 U.S. 344, 353 (1959). 
113 Smith v. Goguen, 415 U.S. 566, 573 (1974).  
114 Joseph Burstyn, Inc. v. Wilson, 343 U.S. 495, 502 (1952) (holding “sacrilegious” to be unconstitutionally vague 
in a New York statute regulating films); Gelling v. State of Tex., 343 U.S. 960 (1952) (holding “of such character as 
to be prejudicial to the best interest of the people of said City” unconstitutionally vague in Texas statute regulating 
films); Superior Films, Inc. v. Dep’t. of Educ. Of State of Ohio, Div. of Film Cens orship, 346 U.S. 587 (1954) 
(holding “moral educational or amusing and harmless unconstitutionally vague in Ohio statute regulating films); 
Rabe v. Washington, 405 U.S. 313 (1972)(reversing conviction for showing movie with sexually frank themes at a 
drive-in theater because the Washington obscenity statute was impermissibly vague).  
115 Id. at 683. 
116 Id. 
[PAGE 27]
 
 
27 
 
Given this vagueness, the creators of many films are left in the dark as to whether this exemption 
applies to them or not. Because the exemption tries to draw artificial line that is not able to 
actually be drawn, this unclearness creates a huge risk that filmmakers might not always be 
willing to take. An exemption that uses the term “filmmaking” would be much clearer because it 
would point to an activity rather than a genre that should be viewed as a marketing category or 
an arbitrary classification based on claims of “reality” or other inherently subjective descriptions.  
Relatedly, we note that there is pending litigation about the constitutionality of § 1201 generally, 
and of this proceeding in particular. This litigation raises the possibility that the triennial review 
amounts to an unconstitutional speech licensing regime and a prior restraint in violation of the 
First Amendment. We note that the content-based distinctions in the existing exemption between 
“documentary” and “non-documentary” create additional constitutional tension that may not 
survive strict scrutiny. Given the fraught procedural context of this review, which requires 
speakers to seek permission in advance of engaging in First Amendment-protected fair use, we 
urge the Register to avoid these constitutional concerns by eliminating the content-based 
distinctions presently included in the exemption, thereby ensuring that filmmakers can make fair 
use regardless of the precise content of their output. 
4. § 1201’s prohibition on circumventing access controls is the cause of the adverse effects.  
We have shown that filmmakers, who are not traditionally classified as documentary filmmakers, 
need to make fair use of short portions of motion pictures for the purpose of criticism or 
commentary. Further, we have made clear that the use in question is a quintessentially 
noninfringing use. In order to exercise their right to make fair use, filmmakers need access to 
high quality content from DVDs, Blu-rays, and digitally transmitted video. However, the vast 
majority of high quality content is protected by TPMs, and there is no other source from which 
the filmmakers could access this content, nor are there viable alternatives to circumvention. 
Filmmakers are therefore adversely affected in that they are often forced to self-censor and are 
thus unable to make criticism and commentary as they see fit. In fact, a filmmaker may even 
have to abandon his or her project all together due to the prohibition on circumventing TPMs. 
These adverse effects are clearly caused by § 1201’s prohibition on circumventing access 
controls.  
Conclusion 
 
The exemption currently in effect, codified at 37 C.F.R. 201.40(b)(1), and provisionally 
recommended for renewal, should be modified to include all filmmakers. Filmmakers make a 
broad impact on the viewing public in numerous ways, including in an educational setting and in 
the world outside the classroom. Films have the ability to create an impetus for widespread and 
needed change in modern society, and the ability to make fair use of TPM-protected materials is 
frequently a necessary component in making criticism and commentary. Alternatives to 
circumvention, including screen capture, are insufficient for the needs of filmmakers and their 
distributors, and are inaccessible because of the high level of technical skill that these tools 
[PAGE 28]
 
 
28 
 
require.117   
For these reasons, we respectfully urge the Register to modify the current exemption to:  
(1) remove the “documentary” limitation; and  
(2) remove reference to screen capture technologies. 
                                                      
117 Letter from Jim Morrissette, Kartemquin Films (December 4, 2017), Appendix B.  
[PAGE 29]
 
 
29 
	
APPENDICES 
 
APPENDIX A: LETTER FROM MICHAEL C. DONALDSON 
APPENDIX B: LETTER FROM JIM MORRISSETTE 
APPENDIX C: LETTER FROM BOETTCHER/TRINKLEIN PRODUCTIONS 
APPENDIX D: LETTER FROM JAMES CARMAN 
APPENDIX E: LETTER FROM JON KATZMAN 
APPENDIX F: LETTER FROM LIANNE HALFON 
APPENDIX G: LETTER FROM MATTHEW MILLER 
APPENDIX H: LETTER FROM MICHAEL MAILER 
APPENDIX I: LETTER FROM TIM PEDEGANA 
APPENDIX J: LETTER FROM ZACK ANDREWS 
APPENDIX K: LETTER FROM ROBERTO MILLER 
APPENDIX L: LETTER FROM JOSHUA LOUIS 
APPENDIX M: LETTER FROM MARC DELORME 
APPENDIX N: LETTER FROM RACHEL WARD 
APPENDIX O: LETTER FROM MEGAN GRIFFITHS, MATTHEW BRADY, AND ALISA 
TAGER 
APPENDIX P: LETTER FROM ROB GRANT 
APPENDIX Q: LETTER FROM ALFRED SPELLMAN 
APPENDIX R: LETTER FROM BRENDA GOODMAN 
APPENDIX S: LETTER FROM JACK LERNER AND MICHAEL C. DONALDSON TO 
MARIA PALLANTE, REGISTER OF COPYRIGHTS; ARTICLE WRITTEN BY “THE 
WRAP” ABOUT THE FILM STEVE JOBS. 
[PAGE 30]
 
 
30 
	
APPENDIX T: NON-DISPARAGEMENT CLAUSES 
APPENDIX U: LETTER FROM ALEX PODOBAS 
APPENDIX V: EDUCATIONAL EVENTS FOR FILMMAKERS ABOUT FAIR USE 
 
 
 
[PAGE 31]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix A 
Letter from Michael C. Donaldson 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[PAGE 32]
~~NAl~~~N O ~Alll~ 
U.S. Copyright Office 
101 Independence Avenue S.E. 
Washington, D.C. 20559-6000 
To the Register of Copyrights: 
December 18th, 2017 
Since the beginning of cinema, narrative films have made use of copyrighted material 
pursuant to the fair use doctrine. During the period when production was dominated by major 
studios, the practice became to license anything and everything for fear of legal consequences. 
Fair use cases were based on situations such as a mistake as to whom to license from (in 
Amsinck, the baby crib mobile manufacturer was paid, but the artist for the creative works 
dangling above the crib was not) , oversight (the poster on the Roe set in Ringgold) or 
understandable oversights (the Mike Tyson ' s tattoo in Hangover 2). All of the fair use cases 
arose in studio films (as opposed to independent films) , and the vast majority of them were shot 
on sound stages dressed by the production company. 
During the triennial hearing of 2012 I only had one scripted film in the office that used 
fair use that implicated the DMCA. I pointed out that I had information about a few nan-ative 
films that were beginning to exercise their rights under the fair use doctrine and predicted that 
this was the beginning of a major trend. The basis for that prediction was the mobility within the 
independent film community. Independent filmmakers work on a documentary one week and a 
nairntive film the next week. This intermingling between these two types of work was inspiring 
filmmakers to take what they had learned to be their rights in making a documentary, and use it 
when they worked on scripted films. 
In the next round of Section 1201 Heai-ings we submitted a 10-page chart 
containing 37 scripted films which our office cleared and 11 films we did not work on but were 
the subject of published court opinions. Each of the films we worked on obtained Errors and 
Omissions (E&O) insurance coverage for their fair use materials. Out of the eighteen fact-based 
films, only one had had a fair use claim, and it resulted in a court opinion finding fair use. Of the 
twelve totally fictional works in both natural and set dressed settings , only one that had a claim 
("What Women Want" in 2000) that also resulted in a finding of fair use.Today we submit a 
chart that contains all the cases we could find that involved scripted films. Interestingly, all 
challenges of infringement, save one, were found to be fair use, where that exception had been 
relied upon. We will keep looking for more cases involving scripted films. 
MICHAEl OONAlOSON I USA CAlllF I DEAN CHHEY I CHRISTOPHER PEREZ I MARISA KAPUST I KATHRYN AllMOHAMMAOI I EREZ ROSENBERG I KATE SERFOSS 
400 South Bever ly Drive, Suite 400 , 
Bever ly Hills, California , 90212 
Office 310-277-8394 Fax 310-277 -4870 
New York Affil iate: 
Gray Krauss Stratford Sandler Des Rochers LLP 
New York, NY www.gksd -law.com 21 2-996 -6700 
[PAGE 33]
We had intended to attach a second chaii composed of scripted films we worked on that 
utilized fair use. The cha1i included a total of 91 films that came through our office alone. We 
thought it was important to see the growth of fair usage among independent filmmakers who are 
making films not classified as documentaries. We opted not to include the chart due to the 
concerns of some clients about the legal implications of having accessed certain high quality 
audio visual materials. 
Several filmmakers have expressed to me personally that they would like to use material 
pursuant to fair use in fictiona l films, but are nervous and have figured out other, albeit less 
effective, ways to tell their stories. Each one expressed a preference for being able to use real 
footage and had concerns about access to source material. Each one represents a situation in 
which the DCMA has acted as censor to the storyteller. The purposes of the Copyright Law have 
been frustrated by anti-circumvention provisions when telling stories that explore and comment 
on our life and times. Creative voices need all the tools possible to make their important stories 
clear and continuing. 
Sincerely, 
Michael C. Donaldson 
Encl: Chart 
[PAGE 34]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix B 
Letter from Jim Morrissette 
[PAGE 35]
1 
 
 
 
 
 
Jim Morrissette 
Technical Director 
Kartemquin Films 
1901 W. Wellington 
Chicago, IL 60657 
 
 
November 27, 2017 
 
 
To whom it may concern: 
 
I would like to thank the Copyright Office for the opportunity to speak in support of our 
proposed renewal of the exemption allowing us to circumvent CSS encryption on DVDs, AACS 
on Blu-ray discs, and the various encryption and authentication protocols on Digital Video 
Transmissions (DVTs). DVTs include internet streaming, internet downloads, TV Pay-Per View, 
and recordings from Digital Video Recording (DVR) devices connected to cable or satellite 
dishes. 
 
As the Technical Director at Kartemquin Films in Chicago, I feel more strongly than ever that 
the proposed exemption renewal is necessary for all filmmakers, allowing digital access to “fair 
use” and public domain works for inclusion in their films.  
 
Distribution of Independent Films Expanded Since 2015 
 
Expanded independent film distribution into movie theaters for film festivals and theatrical 
release over the last few years requires higher resolution video sources than DVD can provide. 
Many independent filmmakers are showing their work as theatrical releases first, and then later 
on broadcast TV, cable, and streaming distribution. 
 
Over 70% of all movie theaters in the US now use digital projection in 4K resolution 
(40963840x2160 pixels). The digital theater projectors use DCP (Digital Cinema Pac) formatted 
files on hard disc that must be at least 1920x1080 pixels, raising the bar for image resolution 
over anything a standard definition DVD (720x480 pixels) can adequately deliver. 
 

[PAGE 36]
2 
A DVD file can be “up-converted” to 1920x1080 pixels by creating additional “fake” pixels to 
fill in-between the real pixels using expensive video hardware boxes like the $2000 Teranex. The 
process of creating a DCP for theatrical screening requires additional conversion of EVERY 
frame of the video into individual still frames (1,440 per minute). During this process the “fake” 
frames behave differently than the actual frames from the DVD and create another level of image 
degradation beyond just the up-conversion to HD. DCP files also require conversion of the video 
from RGB color space to XYZ color space to adhere to the strict DCP specifications. 
Interpolated video frames from DVD up-conversion to HD get degraded in the conversion to 
XYZ color space as well. If the video being converted to DCP format has HD 1080x1920 actual 
real frames, the video image quality remains high despite this conversion to multiple still frames 
and XYZ color space. 
 
As we predicted in 2015, 4K video content has become mainstream in 2017.  Many documentary 
filmmakers, including Kartemquin Films,  are now producing programs in Ultra High Definition 
(UHD) 4K (3840x2160) format. In fact, Netflix now requires all original content programs to be 
produced in 4K. Up-conversion of DVD content from 720 pixels (horizontally) to 3840 pixels 
(horizontally) is unacceptable visually on a 4K UHD TV, much less on an 80 foot wide theater 
screen.  
 
In the last 3 years, 4K production and distribution has become a reality for Independent 
Filmmakers. Professional video cameras that shoot 4K are available for under $2000, and even 
current iPhones shoot 4K UHD at cinematic frame rates. All professional editing software 
programs now support 4K, and 4K content is widely available. Netflix, iTunes, and Amazon are 
streaming movies and original content in 4K. Apple TV, Chromcast, and Roku 4K UHD 
streaming boxes are available  to provide 4K content. 4K UHD Blu-ray players are available for 
as little as $200 and plenty of 4K UHD Blu-ray titles are available to play on them.  
 
4K UHD TVs are selling well online and at local retailers such as Best Buy and Target. 
“Futuresource” forecasts that throughout 2017, 35% of global TV sales will be 4K UHD units. 
 
As a result, independent filmmakers will be at a distinct disadvantage if they cannot acquire at 
least HD (1080) content to include in their 4K productions. Thus the urgent need for an 
exemption that allows filmmakers to access HD and UHD content on Blu-ray discs and from 
online sources such as Netflix 
 
 
 
[PAGE 37]
3 
 
 
Above is a chart to scale showing just how small a DVD image is compared to HD and 4K. 
 
Image resolution is measured by the number of individual pixels that make up the video picture 
vertically and horizontally. DVD image resolution of 720x480 pixels is represented by the small 
purple box in the upper left of the chart. The green area is full HD Blu-ray image resolution of 
1920x1080 pixels, and the orange area represents 4K Ultra High Definition (UHD) with 
3840x2160 pixels. 
 
The total number of pixels per video frame for each format is as follows: 
DVD: 345,600 
Blu-ray: 2,073,600 or 6 times more than DVD 
4K UHD: 8,294,400 or 4 times more than Blu-ray and 24 times more than DVD 
 
Computer screen capture software programs continue to suffer from serious defects, 
including dropped frames and loss of audio sync.   
 
No suitable screen capture software exists that would allow independent filmmakers to obtain the 
type of high quality material needed to pass muster with distributors and broadcasters. 
 
Our research, and the experience of our community suggest that the same problems we 

[PAGE 38]
4 
articulated in the 2014-2015 proceeding exist today.1  
 
These include: 
 
• Dropped Frames, stuttering 
• Loss of Audio Sync 
• Non-standard  frame resolution 
• Overly compressed video files 
 
In the last few years, some screen capture programs have emerged that claim to handle HD 
video.  However, these only work on very powerful computers that require immense system 
resources (CPU, GPU, RAM and the like). They are PC only, and most filmmakers and editors 
use Mac systems. Moreover, screen capture of streaming video requires a lot of system 
resources. Important factors for recording include: high end graphics processor; CPU clock 
speed; and use of solid state system and data drives. Some screen capture progrms require 
“codecs,” small computer programs computer program that encode and decode digital data 
streams. These codecs cannot be used directly in the editing process and must be converted and 
re-encoded to an edit-ready file codec, which is time consuming and causes significant quality 
loss.  In addition, PC graphics cards that claim to be able to capture high-resolution video game 
play directly in the graphics card itself cannot capture any HDCP 2.0 or 2.2 protected discs (such 
as a Blu-ray) playing on a PC, or any protected video streams like Netflix. 
 
In short, there are no screen capture alternatives that are of sufficient quality for the feature films 
that independent filmmakers create.  
 
Scan Conversion: 
 
Shooting video of an HDTV screen with an HD capable cell phone camera or HD 
camcorder was unacceptable for broadcast or theatrical display in 2015, and it is even less 
suitable now.  Aliasing issues, poor audio, color balance shifts, and camera auto-exposure 
flickering remain. Moiré rainbow banding and aliasing often occurs when shooting a flat screen 
monitor or TV with an HD video camera, and is not possible to fix these defects in post 
production. 
 
 
Updated Broadcast Technical Requirements Remain High 
 
Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) technical specs, last updated in 2016, specifically state: “The 
image must be free of compression artifacts (such as macroblocking and mosquito noise), 
aliasing (such as the artifacts associated with scan conversion), frame dropouts, and other 
artifacts association with conversion and encoding.” TOS 3.3.1 
                                                
1 See Letter from Jim Morrissette  (Feb. 4, 2015), attached as Appendix B to Comment of International Documentary 
Association, et. al., In the Matter of Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for 
Access Control Technologies  (2014) (Docket No. 2014 -07).  
[PAGE 39]
5 
 
These kinds of artifacts, associated with up-converting DVD material to HD, and all other 
proposed alternatives to circumvention, are difficult and costly to fix, and often cannot be 
brought up to the PBS standards. 
 
In short, there are no workable screen capture alternatives that are of sufficient quality for the 
feature films that independent filmmakers create. 
 
Filmmakers Need Access to Content Only Available on Blu-ray 
 
Blu-ray versions of films often contain additional material not available on the DVD version of 
the film. These can include director’s commentaries, deleted scenes, behind the scenes footage, 
etc. that is not available anywhere else. They also offer the film in its original aspect ratio. 
 
Here is an example of the “extras” available on the Blu-ray version of the movie “Arrival”” vs 
the DVD version of the same film. 
 
 
 
 
 
In conclusion, over the last three years, filmmakers’ need for access to a minimum of HD 1080 
quality for fair use video clips has increased greatly. Theatrical distribution of documentaries in 

[PAGE 40]
6 
digital DCP format and the expansion of UHD 4K video streaming by Netflix and Amazon into 
homes are two major recent developments that have contributed to this increased need to make 
HD quality video accessible to filmmakers. 
 
The 4K resolution requirements of theatrical DCP presentation and Netflix submission, broadcast 
network requirements, and the move to 4K UHD distribution for home viewing, is why an 
exemption that covers DVD, Blu-ray, and digitally transmitted video remains crucial. 
[PAGE 41]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix C 
Letter from Boettcher/Trinklein Productions 
[PAGE 42]
To Whom It May Concern:
We at Boettcher/Trinklein Productions have been producing ﬁlms for over twenty-ﬁve years.  We 
have written and produced many award-winning programs, including the long-running PBS series 
Pioneers of Television.  Most recently, we produced two television programs on the lives and careers 
of Robin Williams and Mary Tyler Moore as well as the ﬁlm A Return to Grace: Luther’s Life and 
Legacy about Martin Luther.  
We  are  in  writing  in  support  of  expanding  the  current  DMCA  exemption  to  include  non-
documentary projects because it will very likely affect our work in the next three years and beyond.
Our experience is that the sharp lines between documentary and drama are not sharp at all. If a 
documentary uses dramatic storytelling (complete with actors, sets, costumes, and makeup) could 
it be classiﬁed as a drama? If so, then we’re hindered in our ability to tell these stories. Case in point 
is our 2-hour ﬁlm on Martin Luther for PBS, which aired nationally on Sept 12, 2017. It could be 
classiﬁed as a documentary, because it’s a factual story and we used narration and on-camera 
interviews with experts. At the same time, much of the ﬁlm plays out like a drama: entire scenes 
with actors speaking dialogue in period costumes on authentic sets. Given the signiﬁcant amount of 
drama in the ﬁlm, we decided early on that our storytelling toolbox could not include fair use of 
materials from DVD or Blu-ray, because the exemption did not cover accessing that material for use 
in a drama. So there is already a chilling effect in that a drama-heavy documentary might be seen as 
a drama outright, and thus under a different set of rules. 
This goes to the larger point: the distinction between drama and documentary is an artiﬁcial one. 
The  ﬁlms  we  call  “documentaries"  have  used  dramatic  storytelling  techniques  from  the  very 
beginning (The ﬁrst theatrical doc Nanook of the North  is a great case in point). Similarly, dramas 
often try to recount factual stories. Consider the 2012 Ben Afﬂeck movie Argo which chronicled the 
freeing of the US hostages in Tehran. The ﬁlm meticulously followed the facts of the rescue; and 
served as an important history lesson for those who saw it. One key to the story was Ted Koppel’s 
nightly reports on ABC about the continuing saga in 1979-80. That key element of the story could 
not have been acquired from a DVD--and used via fair use--because the exemption does not cover 
“drama.”
Ultimately, we feel that our work is restricted by the fact that the DMCA exemption does not 
currently extend to non-documentary projects, and we fully stand behind the effort to expand the 
exemption to include the uses we anticipate making in the future.
Sincerely,
Michael Trinklein  Steve Boettcher 
Steve Boettcher / Mike Trinklein
Boettcher/Trinklein Television
PO Box 240075 - Milwaukee WI 53224 - 262-323-1999
[PAGE 43]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix D 
Letter from James Carman 
[PAGE 44]
James	Carman’s	DMCA	Exemption	Letter	
	
My	name	is	James	Carman.		I	am	an	accomplished	New	York	based	filmmaker	
who	also	works	as	a	photographer	and	cinematographer.		 I	run	his	own	production	
company	 called	 Time	 Traveler	 Productions.	My	 feature	 length	 documentary,	 The	
Hidden	 Hand;	 Alien	 Contact	 and	 the	 Government	 Cover-up,	 has	 won	 5	 awards	
and	is	distributed	internationally.	It	was	on	both	Amazon	Prime’s	and	Netflix’s	best	
selling	documentary	list	for	3	weeks.		
	
I	 have	 shot	 many	 feature	 films	 that	 have	 been	 shown	 in	 festivals	 and	 film	
theaters	 around	 the	 globe	 (Sundance,	 Cannes,	 Berlin,	 and	 Toronto	 film	 festivals.)	
Recently	five	films	I	 shot	were	shown	at	the	 MoMA	retrospective	of	Bruce	La	Bruce.	
My	 short	 films	 were	 screened	 at	 the	 Berlin	 and	 Locarno	 Film	 Festivals.	 I	 am	 a	
member	 of	 the	 Producer’s	 Guild	 and	 am	 currently	 directing	 a	 TV	 series,	
Superconscious,	 which	 explores	 people	 with	 special	 gifts	 and	 abilities.	 He	 is	 also	
producing	a	feature	film	about	radical	thinking	called	HyperParanØid.	
	
HyperParanØid	 is	 a	 science	 fiction	 low	 budget	 film	 that	 takes	 place	 in	 a	
prison	setting.	It	deals	with	arguing	“thought	leaders”	who	are	confined	together.	It	
would	be	helpful	to	fill	out	the	story	with 	fair	use	imagery	from	off	 set.	This	would 	
compliment	the	isolation	the	inmates	feel	in	their	jail	cell	and	let	the	audience	know	
the	state	of	what	the	future	has	become.		
	
Footage	of	space,	whether	from	space	agencies	or	science	fiction	films,	 would	
be	 instrumental	 in	 portraying	 this	 age,	 along	 with	 images	 of	 environmental	
degradation,	 overcrowding	 and	 pollution.	 This	 footage	 would	 come	 mainly	 from	
documentaries	 and	 feature	 films.	 In	 some	 instances,	 it	 might	 be	 necessary	 to	 rip	
from	DVDs	or	Blu-rays.	For	this	reason,	it	would	be	critical	if	 HyperparanØid	could	
implement	footage	sourced	externally	from	the	primary	production	shoot.	Being	as	
this	is	a	low	budget	film,	this	possibility	would	enable	the	film	to	portray	its	message	
in	its	true	scope.	
	
We	 completely	 support	 the	 proposed	 expansion	 of	 the	 DMCA	 exemption	 to	
narrative	filmmakers.	If	you	have	any	questions,	please	feel	free	to	ask.	
	
Sincerely,	
James	Carman		
	
	
	
[PAGE 45]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix E 
Letter from Jon Katzman 
[PAGE 46]
To Whom It May Concern: 
 
I have been producing Hollywood films for over twenty years.  I also teach a producing class for 
Columbia College on their campus at Raleigh Studios in Hollywood.  
 
I heard about the attempt to get an exemption from the DMCA for narrative filmmakers and thought I 
would share a few projects that would be affected by the result. 
 
We are in development on a project about the real life Dr. Seuss and his wife.  It would be a game 
changer is they could show Dr. Seuss movies like The Grinch in a way that met the standards for fair 
use.  With the exemption, I'm confident that it would already have been made and our writer would be 
on to her next script.  It would make the difference between her becoming a professional screenwriter 
versus keeping her day job as a therapist.  As for me, it's one less project that I can easily bring to 
market.   
 
Our movie script about the last chapter in Jack London's life would benefit greatly from showing 
footage from Call of the Wild or White Fang in the opening scene when one of our characters is reading 
one of Jack's books and the scene morphs into what is now a fictional scene on the Klondike.  It took us 
years to figure out that we should adapt London's semi-autobiographical book The Little Lady of the Big 
House and plug in the real Jack London, his real life wife, and his real best friend for the characters that 
were created in the book.  If we had the ability to use a real Jack London book and movie clip, I think 
we would have saved years of development by coming to the conclusion that Jack London and not his 
literary alter-ego Jack Forrest should be the lead character.  
 
Could I have used some real Michael Jackson music on my bio-pic The Man in the Mirror: The Michael 
Jackson Story?  That’s a question that I often ask.  That would have made it a much more viable project.  
In terms of footage, we did license about three seconds of Michael showing his baby from his hotel 
window to the crowd in Germany.  If we had known more about fair use I would have made a lot of 
changes, including using bits of "Thriller" and "Billie Jean." Wow - would have been amazing.   
 
I also have a few scripts that, with the exemption, would have almost certainly been made already.  One, 
on the making of The Fresh-Prince of Bel-Air would benefit greatly from fair use access to the original 
series. Another, with the original author of Goodfellas, Nick Pileggi, about Goodfellas mobster Henry 
Hill who was later involved in the Boston College point shaving scam would have already been 
completed if we had fair use access to the original Goodfellas movies. Lastly, we have a script about the 
events that led to the first Super Bowl.  Without fair use or the exemption, we would have to recreate the 
first Super Bowl, which is a near financial impossibility for this independent project.  With the 
exemption, it might have already been made.   
 
Thank you for considering an expansion of the DMCA exemption to allow filmmakers like me to make 
fair use. 
 
      Sincerely, 
       
      Jon Katzman 
[PAGE 47]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix F 
Letter from Lianne Halfon 
[PAGE 48]
To Whom It May Concern: 
 
I am a producer at Mr. Mudd.  I have been producing films for over twenty-five years, and my 
previous credits include Juno, The Perks of Being a Wallflower, and Demolition.   
 
Our company is currently developing a film based on the flooding of the Colorado River and a 
speed run down the river through the Grand Canyon.  The film is based on a non-fiction book, 
The Emerald Mile, by Kevin Fedarko.  As part of our film, we would like to use news footage 
that documented the “El Nino” conditions during the weeks before the crisis at the damn. Having 
access to high quality versions of the news footage to use pursuant to fair use would allow us to 
tell the story more accurately. 
 
Our company also developed a limited series dramatizing the story of John Hinckley, Jr. and his 
assassination attempt on Ronald Reagan.  The story is told from the point of view of his family, 
and of the lawyers who were trying to save his life by arguing an insanity plea.   Hinckley’s 
delusions were based on the film Taxi Driver by Martin Scorsese.  Due to the involvement of 
Taxi Driver in John Hinckley, Jr.’s life, we would like to use scenes from the film to effectively 
communicate Hinckley’s obsession with the character of Travis Bickle.  In fact the film was 
played in its entirety at the conclusion of Hinckley’s trial and was hugely effective in his 
defense.  His story would be incomplete without the presence of Taxi Driver.  
 
The exclusion of non-documentary projects has limited my ability to tell stories. As a result, I 
fully support the expansion of the DMCA exemption. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Lianne Halfon 
 
 
 
 
[PAGE 49]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix G 
Letter from Matthew Miller 
[PAGE 50]
	
	
107 SHAW STREET, TORONO, M6J 2W4  |  647 292-4407 
mm@zapruderfilms.com  |  www.zapruderfilms.com  
  
	
	
December 4, 2017 
 
 
To Whom It May Concern: 
 
I am the Executive Producer of a television show called nirvanna the band the show which is made 
for VICE Studios and distributed by VICE internationally.   The show is a pop-culture mash up 
using parody and references to underscore the insane narrative of the episode.  It is steeped in 
nostalgia of a certain pre-internet era (mostly mid-late 1990s) and nary a minute of screen time 
goes by without some kind of pop culture reference or homage. 
 
Structurally the show often takes on the shape and form of the thing it is parodying.  For 
example in a recent episode Matt, one of the two main characters, is watching the 1993 classic 
Mrs. Doubtfire.  When he realizes the absurdity of the film’s premise (Robin Williams in disguise 
to hang out with his kids who he’s not allowed to be around), it births Matt’s idea for a plan of 
action (Matt dresses in a disguise to hang out with his best friend Jay who has told Matt he didn’t 
want to spend time with him that night).  As the episode progresses plot points from Mrs. 
Doubtfire help to in
fluence  the storyline of our own show, culminating in a climactic scene at a 
restaurant where Matt is switching between his true identity and his disguise (just as Robin 
Williams does in Mrs. Doubtfire), before he runs out of rope and the truth comes out. 
 
We would like to push the boundaries of our parody even further and when appropriate and only 
in short, transformative  uses, use footage actually ripped from physical or digital media.  In an 
upcoming episode we are planning a parody of The X Files and would benefit greatly from being 
able to incorporate some of the footage from their opening animations and juxtapose that with 
our own footage. 
 
Beyond nirvanna the band the show, we are developing a feature film called Kill Hitler.  In this time 
travel movie our main character is sent back in time to Kill Hitler in 1939, before WWII breaks out.  
There is a scene in the film where our protagonist attends a CIA style mission briefing.  The 
briefing will contain projected film footage of Hitler.  It would be very helpful to us if we could rip 
existing footage of Hitler, edit it together and then print it ba
ck  to 16 mm film and essentially use 
it as a prop within the briefing scene. 
 
I am happy to further discuss this with you and provide any additional information that may be 
requires in this matter. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Matthew Miller 
President, Zapruder Films Inc. 

[PAGE 51]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix H 
Letter from Michael Mailer 
[PAGE 52]
43 Clark Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 
(212) 966-9494   •   michael@michaelmailerfilms.com 
www.MichaelMailerFilms.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December 4, 2017 
 
 
To Whom It May Concern: 
 
I am an American film producer and director who has produced over thirty films, including Blood and 
Bone (2009), The Ledge (2011) and Empire (2002).  In the course of making these films, I have learned 
a lot about the fair use doctrine as it relates to the use of third party content in films. 
 
I'm writing this letter in support of an exemption to the DMCA for all films, not just documentaries. I 
am currently developing a narrative feature film that I believe will necessitate the usage of archive news 
footage in a way that, based on my past experience, should fall within the protection of fair use. My 
budget for this film is modest and if I am not able to take advantage of a DMCA fair use exemption that 
applies to narrative filmmakers, I will have to divert resources from other priorities, causing the project 
to suffer. In a worst-case scenario, I could see a lack of fair use exemption derailing a project entirely. 
 
I believe the DMCA is an important piece of legislation. But it needs to be modified so that it is helpful 
to creators of all types of films, not just documentarians. Please consider expanding the scope of fair 
use exemptions under the DMCA to narrative films. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Michael Mailer 
Producer/Director 
 
 

[PAGE 53]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix I 
Letter from Tim Pedegana 
[PAGE 54]
To Whom It May Concern: 
I am a post-production supervisor based in Los Angeles. I have worked on an array of award­
winning narrative films based on true stories, including The Imitation Game, lnJo the Wild, and 
the soon to be released Rob Reiner film, Shock and Awe. 
I am currently working on a narrative feature film about a young man who, in the days following 
9/11, travels from Mexico to New York City to find his father, an undocumented worker at the 
World Trade Center's famous Windows on the World restaurant. 
To truthfully illustrate the aftermath of9/l J and the vast amount of people who were missing loved 
ones, we hope to use archival news clips from major world networks on screen as the main 
character travels across a continent to find his father among the rubble. These news clips are 
necessary to illustrate and support the magnitude of the main character's experience and 
contextualize his fictional experience with one that many real families went through in September 
of2001. 
We plan to work with reputable clearance attorneys to ensure that our use of clips will fall within 
the protection of the fair use doctrine. In order to take advantage of fair use, however, we will 
need access to clips which are almost always encrypted. Access to this digital content is the only 
way we can illustrate the real-life impact of 9/11, which is essential to our film going forward . 
[PAGE 55]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix J 
Letter from Zack Andrews 
[PAGE 56]
To Whom It May Concern: 
 
My name is Zack Andrews.  I am a writer and producer, best known for The House October Built 
franchise.  The House October Built was released in 2014, and its sequel was released this year. 
 
In making the first movie, we hadn't started working with clearance attorneys, so I was unaware 
of how fair use was helpful in the making of a film.  We were shooting a scene where five 
friends are watching something in the background in an RV before they go inside a haunted 
house.  Thematically speaking and as a clue to the film, we wanted to use an old episode of 
SCOOBY-DOO as to what would be on in the background (that our characters were watching in 
the RV).  We contacted Warner Bros. and were told that they license episodes out starting at 
$12,000.  With our budget, that was not smart for something so trivial.  But to this day, my 
director brings it up because he really wanted that to be on in the background.  Had I known 
about fair use, I think there is a possibility that we could have made his day.   
 
We also were able to make fair use of a popular song thanks to our new awareness and 
relationship with Donaldson + Callif in our sequel.  While that didn’t implicate the DMCA, 
we’re going to continue to take advantage of fair use in our narrative films, and some of that 
material will probably be behind access controls.  If we don’t have the exemption to be able to 
get to that material, then I don’t know if we can use it. 
 
Fair use has been helpful for us as filmmakers both in wanting certain elements on screen and to 
be protected if they accidentally end up on screen and I support D+C for their continued efforts 
to make this possible. 
 
 
      Sincerely, 
 
       
      Zack Andrews 
         
 
[PAGE 57]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix K 
Letter from Roberto Miller 
[PAGE 58]
	
Roberto Miller, director  roberto@puregrain.com   +1.415.370.4753 
536 Bush St., Mountain View, CA 94041  www.puregrain.com  
 
 
To Whom It May Concern: 
 
I am a filmmaker based in San Francisco. My recent award-winning feature film, Mandorla, is 
currently in distribution worldwide. I have been the director of Pure Grain Digital 
Productions for 20 years, which made the first all-digital film, Mail Bonding (American 
Cinematographer, April 1995).  I have also made commercials for Silicon Valley companies 
such as Apple and HP, and am currently focused on developing my next feature film project.  
 
I am developing a narrative feature film with Liz Holdship about a professor who, in the midst of 
a divided world, leads a team of international scientists on a unique experiment to facilitate a 
sense of unity in humans.  
  
To truthfully illustrate a politically, economically, and racially “divided world” that audiences 
can readily relate to, our main characters will witness clips of contemporary news casts and 
broadcast shows from major world networks such as CNN, Fox News, BBC, ABC news, PBS, 
etc. Some of our characters will see (or recall in their minds) clips from films that illustrate 
a “divided world,” and the fight against it, such as Mr. Smith Goes to Washington, which 
is digitally encrypted in 4K on a Blu-ray disk:  
  
https://www.amazon.com/Washington-4K-Mastered-UltraViolet-Included-
Digibook/dp/B00N5708NE  
  
We plan to work with reputable clearance attorneys to ensure that our use of clips will fall within 
the protection of the fair use doctrine.  In order to take advantage of fair use, however, we will 
need access to clips which, as I mentioned above, are almost always encrypted.  Access to this 
digital content is the only way we can illustrate the “divided world” which is essential to our film 
going forward.  
 
 
       Sincerely, 
 
 
       Roberto Miller 
       Pure Grain Digital Productions 
[PAGE 59]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix L 
Letter from Joshua Louis 
[PAGE 60]
To Whom It May Concern: 
 
I’ve been involved in the film industry as a director, producer and writer since 2008.  I worked 
on numerous independent film projects until 2010, and started to work on narrative films in 
2011. I heard about the attempt to get an exemption from the DMCA for narrative filmmakers 
and thought I would share a few projects that would be affected by the result. 
 
I just completed my second feature film, Devils Tree: Rooted Evil and am currently starting pre-
production on two other feature films. Devils Tree is inspired by events that have been reported 
on in real life about a tree in Florida where many horrible acts have occurred.  It is a fictional 
story about a journalist who decides to write a story about the haunted tree.  This film 
incorporated news clippings and material that were used under fair use.  This project would have 
benefited from the DMCA exemption, as I easily would have obtained quality content without 
being confined by the DMCA and access controls.  
 
My two new films will reference real events, and I would like to use local and national news 
clips in the films. One is a horror film which discusses paranormal activity in hospitals. Being 
able to use news clips that are directly on point, i.e. which show paranormal events in real 
hospitals, will greatly benefit my film.  The other film I am producing is a mob film, in which I’d 
like to incorporate news dealing with various criminal activity, including news clips of organized 
crime busts. The DMCA exemption would certainly help me create these films without the fear 
of being in violation of copyright law, and without the need to expend time and resources to use 
material that would otherwise fall within the exemption.  
 
Expansion of the DMCA exemption to narrative filmmakers would be a vital change that would 
help filmmakers like me to create content without being limited by cost constraints.  This in turn 
will allow filmmakers to convey their messages wholly.  
 
Thank you for considering an expansion of the DMCA exemption to allow filmmakers like me to 
make fair use. 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Joshua Louis 
 
[PAGE 61]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix M 
Letter from Marc Delorme 
[PAGE 62]
To Whom It May Concern: 
 
My name is Marc Delorme. I am a documentary filmmaker based in Hawaii. I have been 
involved in filmmaking for over thirty-five years (NYU-Film Grad/Class of 1982.) 
 
Most of my work has been educational in nature and has focused primarily on social and 
environmental issues in Hawaii. While I may not be very well known as a filmmaker, I 
continue to direct and produce independent films. 
 
As someone involved in creating original media I am quite aware of the need for 
copyright protection. At the same time, I am also aware of the need for copyright law 
exceptions or exemptions. I believe that the issue of the exemption from the DMCA is a 
complicated one that needs to be revisited and updated legally to include narrative 
filmmakers. 
 
The nature of documentary filmmaking is changing. The film that I am currently working 
on will include fair-use footage but will utilize a non-traditional approach 
to documentary storytelling. In order to reach a greater audience, my film will have a 
more “dramatic” feel. Will someone perceive my film to be dramatic in nature as 
opposed to being a documentary? Will I then no longer be covered by the DMCA 
exemption?  
 
My next film will drive this issue even further as I plan to incorporate a documentary 
within a standard dramatic film. The line between documentary and narrative films will 
be blurred even more in this case. I am choosing this approach once again in order to 
reach a larger audience. How will I be protected then as a filmmaker? 
 
Removing the exemption’s limitation to “documentary” would eliminate my concern of 
being in violation of copyright law. 
 
In looking at the matter of fair use footage, I think it is important to consider the 
educational, historical and cultural dimensions to this issue. The fair use footage that I 
plan to utilize will not affect the market value of the underlying works as referred to in 
the new narrative while the new narrative will provide greater educational value. 
 
In other words, allowing filmmakers to apply fair use clips to their storytelling not only 
affects the individual work, but also enriches the American cultural heritage as a whole. 
 
As an American independent filmmaker I urge you to consider this issue. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Marc Delorme 
[PAGE 63]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix N 
Letter from Rachel Ward 
[PAGE 64]
 
2801 Ocean Park Blvd. Suite 374 
Santa Monica, CA 90405  USA 
310.664.1954 – Office  /  310.388.0536 – eFax 
 
	
 
	
	
	December	14,	2017	
	
To	Whom	It	May	Concern:	
	
My	name	is	Rachel	Ward	and	I	have	been	a	producer	on	seven	feature	films,	two	
digital	series,	and	over	a	dozen	commercials.	Of	the	feature	films	I’ve	worked	on,	
two	were	documentaries	and	five	were	fiction	films.	Each	of	these	films	has	been	
financed	through	private	equity	and	produced	entirely	independently	of	the	studio	
system.	As	an	independent	producer,	I	work	with	limited	resources	and	much	of	the	
content	I	create	is	produced	upon	speculation	of	distribution.	Which	is	to	say,	when	
we	make	the	films	we	are	unsure	where	they	will	end	up	–	in	theaters,	on	television,	
online	-	ideally	all	of	these	platforms,	but	one	never	knows.		Securing	licenses	to	all	
the	branded	content,	logos,	music,	or	other	copyrighted	material	is	a	big	part	of	
delivering	an	acceptable	product	to	a	distributor.	It	is	a	process	that	takes	months	
and	is	frequently	cost	prohibitive	to	include	even	the	smallest	non-original	element.	
With	this	regard,	I	find	myself	omitting	any	clips,	news	footage,	or	visual	material	
from	the	finished	film,	regardless	of	the	context	it	provides	to	the	story	or	the	
cultural	reference	or	impact	it	may	have.		
	
An	example	of	this	is	a	web	series	we	sold	to	Universal	called	TESLA	&	TWAIN,	
which	was	a	fictional	exploration	of	the	real	historical	friendship	between	the	great	
writer	Mark	Twain	and	the	genius	inventor	Nikola	Tesla.		We	wanted	to	use	a	four	
second	clip	from	Back	to	the	Future	as	an	analogous	comedic	touchstone.		Due	to	the	
lack	of	an	exemption	for	non-documentary	films,	we	chose	not	to	use	a	clip	from	the	
film	even	though	we	certainly	thought	it	would	quality	as	fair	use.		Licensing	the	
material	was	not	an	option	because	it	would	have	been	too	expensive.		We	ended	up	
creating	an	audio	sound-alike	instead.		Universal	never	released	the	series.	
	
The	expansion	of	a	DMCA	exemption	to	unquestionably	include	fiction	films	would	
be	an	important	resource	that	many	producers	like	myself	would	greatly	appreciate.		
	
Sincerely,		
	
	
Rachel	Ward	

[PAGE 65]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix O 
Letter from Megan Griffiths, Matthew Brady, and Alisa Tager 
[PAGE 66]
To Whom It May Concern:  
 
We are collectively writing to support the effort to expand the DMCA exemption to non -documentary filmmakers 
based on our experience with our recent film The Night Stalker .  The Night Stalker  is a thriller that is based on the 
true story of serial killer Richard Ramirez , played by Lou Diamond Phillips.  Here is a little bit about us:  
 
Megan Griffiths wrote and directed The Night Stalker .  She also directed two episodes of the Duplass Brothers’ 
HBO anthology series Room 104 .  Her film Lucky Them starring Toni Collette, Thomas Haden Church and 
Johnny Depp premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival and was distributed by IFC Films.  Megan’s 
film Eden, based on the true story of a young woman captured into the world of huma n trafficking, was a 
breakout at SXSW in 20 12, winning the Em ergent Narrative Director Award and  the Audience Award for 
Narrative Feature.  He r feature The Off Hours premiered at the 2011 Sundance Film Festival.  
 
Matthew Brady is the founder and owner of MRB Productions.  In addition to The Night Stalker , MRB 
Productions is currently producing a feature film entitled A Little Something for Your Birthday , starring Sharon 
Stone, Tony Goldwyn and Ellen Burstyn.  They are also producing the documentary In Utero.  MRB Productions 
also produces films and programs for commercial and corporate clients and has also produced many hours of 
television for networks such as ESPN, the Hallmark Channel and Comedy Central.  
 
Alisa Tager has been producing films for over twent y years.  In addition to producing The Night Stalker , she is 
known for the films Seven Years in Tibet , Enemy at the Gates  and Serenity.  Alisa’s most recent project is 
Cocaine Godmother , a biopic of the infamous drug lord Griselda Blanco  played by Catherine Zeta -Jones.  Like 
The Night Stalker , news and documentary footage is used in Cocaine Godmother  in order to bring authenticity to 
the story. 
 
Together, our experience on The Night Stalker  makes a compelling case for the need for an exemption for n on-
documentary filmmakers.  Known to many as the "Night Stalker," Richard Ramirez was an unusually cruel and 
prolific serial killer who murdered fourteen people and terrorized Los Angeles in the summer of 1985. Though 
Ramirez was convicted of these atrocit ies and remained on death row for nearly thirty years, he was always 
suspected of committing additional crimes. This thriller tells the story of Kit, an attorney who travels to San 
Quentin on an impossible mission to clear the name of a death row inmate in  Texas-- someone she believes has 
been wrongly accused of murders actually perpetrated by Ramirez.  Kit herself lived in Los Angeles during the 
fear-tinged summer where Ramirez terrified its citizens, and confronting him again dredges up old and frightenin g 
memories of her own past. As the days count down to the innocent Texas man's execution, Kit confronts Ramirez 
about his unspeakable crimes in search of an elusive confession, plunging into intense psychological depths in her 
quest for the truth.  
 
The act ual events surrounding the 1985 murders are integral to the story and the dynamic between the two 
characters.  We used flashbacks throughout the film in order to show what happened from both characters ’ 
perspectives and how it affected them.  In order to depict this in a realistic way, actual news footage is used.  This 
footage was not encrypted, but other footage that could have been useful for our film  – and which would fall 
within fair use – was protected by access controls.  
 
There is no question that th e absence of a DMCA exemption for non -documentary films is limiting for 
filmmakers like us.  We need this exemption in order to make films that are based on a true story.  We have the 
right to fair use, but if we can’t get past access controls, we’re sever ely limited in the material we can actually use.  
 
 
 
     Sincerely, 
        
 
 
     Megan Griffiths  Matthew Brady  Alisa Tager 
[PAGE 67]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix P 
Letter from Rob Grant 
[PAGE 68]
	
Roberto Miller, director  roberto@puregrain.com   +1.415.370.4753 
536 Bush St., Mountain View, CA 94041  www.puregrain.com  
To Whom It May Concern: 
 
My name is Rob Grant.  I have been involved in filmmaking for over a decade, focusing mostly 
on the horror genre.   
 
My most recent project, Fake Blood, uses an “outside the box” concept to examine the 
filmmaker’s responsibility in portraying violent imagery on screen and how audiences react to 
those images.  Fake Blood is most accurately described as a documentary-thriller and blends 
nonfiction and fictional elements to tell the story.  Through narration and various interviews, 
Fake Blood makes reference to my past horror films and well-known films that use violent 
imagery to tell their stories.  To accurately convey the points being made, it was necessary to 
show brief clips of each film under the protection of the fair use doctrine.   
 
Fake Blood is an independent film that was made with a limited budget.  Only through the film 
being labeled as a documentary was I able to take advantage of fair use due to the encrypted 
materials I needed to access.  Without being able to use these clips under fair use, the clips would 
not have been used at all and Fake Blood would not have been completed, which I think would 
be a shame with such an important topic.    
 
If we regard film in general as a potential for change or influence, and by that I mean both 
documentary and non-documentary films, then a filmmaker should be able to use fair use just as 
freely in projects that may not be defined as documentaries if it is reasonably making a point or 
idea more clear.  I can imagine many circumstances where news clips, YouTube videos, and 
DVD clips are needed to help build a realistic world in non-documentary films, thus making the 
films’ messages more powerful and believable. 
 
For these reasons, the DMCA exemption should be expanded to non-documentary films.  
 
 
 
       Sincerely, 
 
 
       Rob Grant 
	
	
[PAGE 69]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix Q 
Letter from Alfred Spellman 
[PAGE 70]
To Whom It May Concern: 
 
I have been a film and television producer for 17 years, producing documentary features and 
miniseries.  I have made extensive use of the fair use doctrine in all of our documentaries.  
 
Our first narrative feature film, which we plan to shoot in 2018, contemplates a present-day 
relationship between several historical figures. We hope to use the Fair Use Doctrine to establish 
the historical nature of the relationship as well as depict pop culture events that occurred over the 
course of the relationship. Many of the events we hope to portray are contained in films and 
other programs where the high-quality clips we need are only available on Blu-ray and digital 
online sources. Without the fair use doctrine, it would be impossible to give the appropriate 
context to the historical figures and the world they inhabited. 
 
Being able to rely on fair use is crucial for all filmmakers.  Without the exemption, our narrative 
feature film will be severely hampered in that I will not have the assurance that I can rely on fair 
use, which is crucial to our project. 
 
Thank you for your consideration of an expansion of the DMCA exemption. 
 
 
      Sincerely, 
       
 
      Alfred Spellman 
      Rakontur 
[PAGE 71]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix R 
Letter from Brenda Goodman 
[PAGE 72]
!
!
Film%%&%Television%Production %
Brenda Goodman 
!
University of Southern California  
900 West 34th Street, Room 437, Los Angeles, California 90089 -1234  •  Tel: 213 740-3320•  Fax: 213 740 3395 
To!Whom!It!May!Concern:!
!
My! name! is! Brenda! Goodman.! ! I! have! been! producing! films! for! over! thirty! years,! and! I! am!
also! a! Professor! of! the! Practice! of! Cinematic! Arts! at! the! USC! School! of! Cinematic! Arts.! ! I’ve!
produced! films! that! are! traditionally! considered! to! be! documentaries! as! well! as! films! that!
most!people!would!think!of!as!narrative!films.!!!
!
Most!recently,!I!produced!the!film!Sex(Ed)(the(Movie,!a!documentary!that!explores!the!humor,!
shock! and! vulnerability! people! face! when! learning! about! sex,! through! the! lens! of! the! often!
hilarious,! only! sometimes! informative,! sexHed! films! from! 1910! to! the! present! day.! ! I! also!
produced! the! film! the! narrative! film! Sophie( and( the( Rising( Sun,! which! was! selected! to!
premiere! at! the! Sundance! Film! Festival! in! 2016.! ! Sophie! tells! the! fictional! story! of! two!
interracial!lovers!swept!up!in!the!tides!of!history!in!South!Carolina!in!1941.!!While!most!of!
the!plot!of!the!film!is!fictional,!the!film!very!much!relies!on!critical!moments!in!history!to!help!
viewers!understand!the!historical!context!in!which!this!love!story!exists.!!The!true!historical!
context! not! only! helps! make! the! love! story! stronger,! but! also! informs! us! of! our! American!
history! on! a! very! emotional! level.! ! You! may! say! that! because! Sophie! relies! so! much! on! the!
true! historical! background! and! that! this! love! story,! at! its! core,! most! likely! occurred! many!
times! over! to! similar! individuals! in! similar! circumstances,! the! film! has! documentary!
elements.!
!
I! continue! to! produce! films! that! rely! heavily! on! an! accurate! historical! background.! ! I!am!
currently! in! development! on! a! script! about! a! young! singer! from! Mexico.! ! She!comes! to! the!
United!States!illegally!to!escape!a!cartel!and!is!targeted!by!ICE!for!playing!at!an!immigration!
rally.!!We!will!want!to!use!news!footage !but!have!been!reducing!it!in!the!script!as!we!feel!we!
either! will! not! get! it! for! all! the! markets! we! need! or! we! will! not! be! able! to! afford! it.!! Even!
though!we!think!we!might!be!able!to!rely!on!fair!use!for!this!material!b ecause!the!use!will!be!
very!transformative,!we’ve!looked!into!the!licensing!route!in!part!because!we!don’t!have!the!
protection!of!a!DMCA!exemption.!
!
The! modification! of! a! DMCA! exemption! to! unquestionably! include! films! like! the! one! 
above!would! help! me! tremendously.! ! Without! it,! I’m! simply! not! going! to! use! the! footage! 
I! was!planning!to!use.!
!
Sincerely!yours:!
!
!
Brenda!Goodman!
!
[PAGE 73]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix S 
Letter from Jack Lerner and Michael C. Donaldson to Maria Pallante, Register of 
Copyrights; Article written by “The Wrap” about the film Steve Jobs 
 
[PAGE 74]
Jack I. Lerner 
UCI Intellectual Property, Arts, and 
Technology Clinic  
UC Irvine School of Law  
401 E. Peltason Dr.  
Irvine, CA 92697  
Michael C. Donaldson  
Donaldson + Callif LLP  
400 S. Beverly Dr. Ste. 400  
Beverly Hills, CA 90212  
October 15, 2015 
Maria Pallante, Register of Copyrights
c/o Jacqueline C. Charlesworth, Associate Register of Copyrights  
United States Copyright Office 
101 Independence Ave. S.E.
Washington, D.C. 20559 
Re:    Docket No. 2014 -7 
Exemptions to Prohibition Against Circumvention of Technological  
Measures Protecting Copyrighted Works  
Proposed Class 6  - Audiovisual works – derivative uses – filmmaking uses 
Dear Ms. Pallante , 
We write to call your attention to recent news stories attached to this letter reporti ng the 
importance of fair use in the upcoming Universal Pictures  narrative film Steve Jobs. We believe 
these reports underscore the hollowness of arguments made in this proceeding that question the 
need for fair use in narrative filmmaking. 1 As these stories demonstrate, even large studios must 
rely on fair use in narrative films and such use enjoys the strong support of executives at the 
highest levels. 
Of course, the iconic Apple commercial at issue here is widely available  on the internet, 
but for more obscure material, often the only source of usable footage is protected by 
technological protection m easures. In such situations, copyright law a nd the Digital Millennium 
Copyright Act operate as a form of private censorship allowing a rightsholder t o suppress 
speech it opposes—as almost happened here.   
We deeply appreciate your consideration of this matter. We hope this new information 
will be helpful to you as you make your final recommendations in this rulemaking.  
Very truly yours,  
Jack I. Lerner   Michael C. Donaldson  
UCI Intellectual Property,  Donaldson + Callif, LLP  
Arts, and Technology Clinic  
CC:   David Mao, Robert Newlen, Nicole Marcou  (Library of Congress); Stacy Cheney (National 
Telecommunications and Information Administration); Stephen Metalitz, Art Neill, David Jonathan 
Taylor, Bruce Turnbull, Matthew Williams (counsel for commenters on proposed Class 6)
1 See Comment of the AACS-LA, Section 5.I.B. (March 27, 2015), 
http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/comments -032715/class%206/AACS_LA_class06_1201_2014.pdf; 
Comment of the DVD CCA, Section 5.I.B. (March 27, 2015), http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/comments -
032715/class%206/DV DCCA_class06_1201_2014.pdf, and Comment of the Joint Creators, Item 5 (March 
27, 2015), http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/comments -
032715/class%206/Joint_Creators_and_Copyright_Owners_class06_1201_2014.pdf.  

[PAGE 75]
10/14/2015 How 'Steve Jobs' Steamrolled Objections of Apple Founder's Family
http://www.thewrap.com/inside-how-steve-jobs-used-apples-super-bowl-ad-without-permission/ 1/11
Follow @stevepondAWARDS | By Steve Pond on October 12, 2015 @ 3:02 pm
-oEV· IDPLO\ UeIXVed dLUeFtoU DDnn\ %o\Oe¶V UeTXeVt to XVe tKe LFonLF ¶· ASSOe Dd
EXt tKe dLUeFtoU IoXnd D ZD\ to XVe Lt Dn\ZD\
iSteve -oEVw IBT receJWeE rBWeT Grom crJtJcT, BwBrET WoterT BnE eBrly BVEJenceT Jn -oT "nHeleT BnE
/ew :orL, bVt tIe lBte tecI JconT GBmJly IBT been pVttJnH roBEblocLT Jn tIe wBy oG DDnn\ %o\OeAT
moWJe Grom tIe TtBrt

[PAGE 76]
10/14/2015 How 'Steve Jobs' Steamrolled Objections of Apple Founder's Family
http://www.thewrap.com/inside-how-steve-jobs-used-apples-super-bowl-ad-without-permission/ 2/11
In fact, Boyle revealed to TheWrap that the filmmakers and Universal Studios’ lawyers had to invoke the
fair use exception to U.S. copyright law in order to use Apple’s famous “1984” Super Bowl commercial.
The rights to the commercial were initially denied them by the family, which hated Walter Isaacson‘s
biography of Jobs on which Aaron Sorkin partly based his screenplay.
The commercial, which was directed by R
 idley Scott, was only aired twice — once late at night on Dec.
31, 1983 to qualify for advertising awards, and then more notably during the 1984 Super Bowl.
Also Read: Critics Love 'Steve Jobs': 10 Reviews Promising Michael Fassbender Drama Is Worth
Price of Admission
Often considered the greatest television commercial ever made, the ad was inspired by the George
Orwell novel “1984” and features a young woman throwing a hammer through a huge screen on which a
B
ig Brother-type figure addresses a crowd of faceless, obedient workers.
The commercial plays a key role in “Steve Jobs.” It is screened before Jobs introduces the first
Macintosh computer to a rapt audience at a product launch in 1984, and it is also a source of heated
arguments between Jobs, played by Michael Fassbender, and Apple CEO John Sculley (Jeff Daniels)
i
n the film.
In an interview with TheWrap, Ridley Scott said that the “Steve Jobs” filmmakers originally approached
him asking for permission to use the groundbreaking commercial. “I said, ‘I will do everything I can to
get it,'” he said.
The director said he went to Chiat-Day, the advertising agency for which he had created the
commercial. “Chiat contacted me and said Steve’s family had said no, because they weren’t happy
a
bout the direction the film had taken.”
Boyle picked up the story from there in a separate interview, confirming to TheWrap that the filmmakers
never received permission to use the footage. “We got it under fair use,” he said, citing the exception to
copyright law that allows artists to use part of a copyrighted work without payment or permission.
Also Read: 
 Trevor Noah Addresses Apple Backlash With 'Steve Jobs' Screenwriter Aaron Sorkin
The fair use doctrine takes into account “the purpose and character of the use,” the nature of the
copyrighted work, the amount of the work used in relation to the entire work, and the effect of the use on
the potential market or value of the original work.
Universal’s legal department, Boyle said, carefully considered whether the use of the “1984” ad could
q
ualify under fair use. “Universal have been exemplary in their confidence, and willing to take some risks
[PAGE 77]
10/14/2015 How 'Steve Jobs' Steamrolled Objections of Apple Founder's Family
http://www.thewrap.com/inside-how-steve-jobs-used-apples-super-bowl-ad-without-permission/ 3/11
to support the filmmaking,” the director said, and then chuckled. “I’m sure it helps that they’ve had such
a stellar year, so they’re not as nervous about stuff.”
Boyle singled out Universal Pictures chairman Donna Langley and president Jimmy Horowitz, who
formerly worked in the studio’s legal affairs department, for supporting his right to use the advertisement.
In his film, much of “1984” is glimpsed from behind as it plays on a huge screen at the Apple product
l
aunch.
“You could have had other circumstances where people would have said it was too risky,” Boyle said.
“But in the American system, freedom of speech is very big part of culture. And we know lawyers are
very powerful, but they can stand with you as well and protect you sometimes. There is a need for
responsible people to be able to say what they really want to say, and not to be prevented from doing
t
hat.”
See video: New 'Steve Jobs' Trailer Emphasizes Drama of Creating 'Most Tectonic Shift to Status
Quo... Ever' (Video)
Boyle said he did have to change some other copyrighted material, particularly news footage from ABC,
which denied permission to use it. And he expected to receive criticism from those close to Jobs —
which he has, from current Apple CEO Tim Cook and others who felt that the person depicted on screen

[PAGE 78]
10/14/2015 How 'Steve Jobs' Steamrolled Objections of Apple Founder's Family
http://www.thewrap.com/inside-how-steve-jobs-used-apples-super-bowl-ad-without-permission/ 4/11
is not the Jobs they knew.
Others familiar with Jobs, including Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak and longtime Apple and NeXT PR
agent Andrea Cunningham, have said that despite the fact that Sorkin purposely fictionalized parts of
the story, the daring and unconventional film accurately captures the real guy. Both Wozniak and
Cunningham are depicted in the movie, played by Seth Rogen and Sarah Snook, repsectively.
“It’s so difficult dealing with real people’s lives, and it’s why you have to have an important story if you’re
going to do it,” said Boyle, who spoke to TheWrap the day after an official Academy screening that drew
a capacity crowd of enthusiastic voters to the 1,000-seat Samuel Goldwyn Theater in Beverly Hills.
Also Read: 33 Best Picture Challengers in First Oscar Outlook: 'The Martian,' 'Steve Jobs,' 'Bridge
of Spies'
“And when you’re dealing with people who just recently passed away, you are always going to be
dealing with grief or with personal sensitivity,” Boyle said. “The thing that is different about this is that
Jobs was a huge public figure.
“And I’m afraid, however unpopular this may be with his friends and family, he is a major figure in our
lives, and it’s incumbent upon us all to look at his work and his legacy.”
[PAGE 79]
10/14/2015 How ‘Steve Jobs’ used Apple’s Super Bowl ad without permission | Star Tribune
http://m.startribune.com/variety/movies/332251172.html?section=/variety 1/4
MOVIES
How ‘Steve Jobs’ used Apple’s Super Bowl ad without
permission
Michael Fassbender plays the title role in "Steve Jobs." — Francois Duhamel, TNS
By THE WRAP 
October 13, 2015 - 6:08 PM
   
“Steve Jobs” has received raves from critics, awards voters and early audiences in Los Angeles
and New York, but the late tech icon’s family has been putting roadblocks in the way of Danny
Boyle‘s movie from the start.
In fact, Boyle revealed to TheWrap that the filmmakers and Universal Studios’ lawyers had to
invoke the fair use exception to U.S. copyright law in order to use Apple’s famous “1984” Super
B
owl commercial. The rights to the commercial were initially denied them by the family, which
hated Walter Isaacson‘s biography of Jobs on which Aaron Sorkin partly based his screenplay.
The commercial, which was directed by Ridley Scott, was only aired twice — once late at night
on Dec. 31, 1983 to qualify for advertising awards, and then more notably during the 1984
Super Bowl.

[PAGE 80]
10/14/2015 How ‘Steve Jobs’ used Apple’s Super Bowl ad without permission | Star Tribune
http://m.startribune.com/variety/movies/332251172.html?section=/variety 2/4
Also Read: Critics Love 'Steve Jobs': 10 Reviews Promising Michael Fassbender Drama Is
Worth Price of Admission
Often considered the greatest television commercial ever made, the ad was inspired by the
George Orwell novel “1984” and features a young woman throwing a hammer through a huge
screen on which a Big Brother-type figure addresses a crowd of faceless, obedient workers.
The commercial plays a key role in “Steve Jobs.”
  It is screened before Jobs introduces the first
Macintosh computer to a rapt audience at a product launch in 1984, and it is also a source of
heated arguments between Jobs, played by Michael Fassbender, and Apple CEO John Sculley
(Jeff Daniels) in the film.
In an interview with TheWrap, Ridley Scott said that the “Steve Jobs” filmmakers originally
approached him asking for permission to use the groundbreaking commercial. “I said, ‘I will do
everything I can to get it,'” he said.
The director said he went to Chiat-Day, the advertising agency for which he had created the
commercial. “Chiat contacted me and said Steve’s family had said no, because they weren’t
happy about the direction the film had taken.”
Boyle picked up the story from there in a separate interview, confirming to TheWrap that the
f
ilmmakers never received permission to use the footage. “We got it under fair use,” he said,
citing the exception to copyright law that allows artists to use part of a copyrighted work
without payment or permission.
Also Read: Trevor Noah Addresses Apple Backlash With 'Steve Jobs' Screenwriter Aaron
Sorkin
The fair use doctrine takes into account “the purpose and character of the use,”  the nature of
the copyrighted work, the amount of the work used in relation to the entire work, and the effect
of the use on the potential market or value of the original work.
Universal’s legal department, Boyle said, carefully considered whether the use of the “1984” ad
could qualify under fair use. “Universal have been exemplary in their confidence, and willing to
take some risks to support the filmmaking,” the director said, and then chuckled. “I’m sure it
helps that they’ve had such a stellar year, so they’re not as nervous about stuff.”
[PAGE 81]
10/14/2015 How ‘Steve Jobs’ used Apple’s Super Bowl ad without permission | Star Tribune
http://m.startribune.com/variety/movies/332251172.html?section=/variety 3/4
Boyle singled out Universal Pictures chairman Donna Langley and president Jimmy Horowitz,
who formerly worked in the studio’s legal affairs department, for supporting his right to use
the advertisement. In his film, much of “1984” is glimpsed from behind as it plays on a huge
screen at the Apple product launch.
“You could have had other circumstances where people would have said it was too risky,” Boyle
s
aid. “But in the American system, freedom of speech is very big part of culture. And we know
lawyers are very powerful, but they can stand with you as well and protect you sometimes.
There is a need for responsible people to be able to say what they really want to say, and not to
be prevented from doing that.”
See video: New 'Steve Jobs' Trailer Emphasizes Drama of Creating 'Most Tectonic Shift to
Status Quo... 
 Ever' (Video)
Boyle said he did have to change some other copyrighted material, particularly news footage
from ABC, which denied permission to use it. And he expected to receive criticism from those
close to Jobs — which he has, from current Apple CEO Tim Cook and others who felt that the
person depicted on screen is not the Jobs they knew.
Others familiar with Jobs, including Apple co-founder Steve
 Wozniak and longtime Apple and
NeXT PR agent Andrea Cunningham, have said that despite the fact that Sorkin purposely
fictionalized parts of the story, the daring and unconventional film accurately captures the real
guy. Both Wozniak and Cunningham are depicted in the movie, played by Seth Rogen and
[PAGE 82]
10/14/2015 How ‘Steve Jobs’ used Apple’s Super Bowl ad without permission | Star Tribune
http://m.startribune.com/variety/movies/332251172.html?section=/variety 4/4
Sarah Snook, repsectively.
“It’s so difficult dealing with real people’s lives, and it’s why you have to have an important
story if you’re going to do it,” said Boyle, who spoke to TheWrap the day after an official
Academy screening that drew a capacity crowd of enthusiastic voters to the 1,000-seat Samuel
Goldwyn Theater in Beverly Hills.
Also Read: 33 Best Picture Challengers in First Oscar Outlook: 'The Martian,' 'Steve Jobs,'
'Bridge of Spies'
“And when you’re dealing with people who just recently passed away, you are always going to
be dealing with grief or with personal sensitivity,” Boyle said. “The thing that is different about
this is that Jobs was a huge public figure.
“And I’m afraid, however unpopular this may be with his friends and family, he is a major
figure in our lives, and it’s incumbent upon us all to look at his work and his legacy.”
Read original story Inside How ‘Steve Jobs’ Used Apple’s Super Bowl Ad Without Permission
At TheWrap
Comments
[PAGE 83]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix T 
Non-Disparagement Clauses 
[PAGE 84]
MASTER USE, SYNCHRONIZATION AND PERFORMANCE RIGHTS LICENSE 
This agreement ("Agreement"), dated and effective as of is hereby acknowledged 
and entered into by and between EntertainmentOne "Licensor"), with offices at 200 Varick Street, New 
York NY 10014 and ("Producer"), located at 
As used herein, the term "Producer" shall include all of Producer's licensees, 
assignees and designees. 
1) COMPOSITIONS : The musical compositions covered by this Agreement are those compositions 
which are set forth on Schedule A (the "Composition(s)"), attached hereto and incorporated herein by 
this reference. 
2) MASTERS: The master recordings covered by this Agreement are those masters which are set forth 
on Schedule B (the "Master(s)"), attached hereto and incorporated herein by this reference. 
3) MUSIC VIDEOS: The music videos covered by this Agreement are those music videos which are set 
forth on Schedule C (the "Music Video(s)") , attached hereto and incorporated herein by this reference. 
4) ARCHIVAL VIDEOS: The archival videos covered by this Agreement are those archival videos 
which are set forth and identified on Schedule D (the "Archival Video(s)") , attached hereto and 
incorporated herein by this reference. 
5) CONTENT: The content to and of which Licensor hereby grants Producer access to high-resolution 
versions, is set forth and identified on Schedule E (the "Content"), attached hereto and incorporated 
herein by this reference. 
6) PICTURE: As used herein, the "Picture" shall mean the motion picture documentary series tentatively 
entitled "The Defiant Ones" and any portion thereof (including clips), together with all trailers , 
featurettes , advertisement s, "behind the scenes" and "making of' footage, director's cut and other 
versions and promotional material for the Picture. 
7) NUMBER AND TYPE OF USES: Licensor hereby agrees and understands that Producer may 
use the Compositions , Masters, Music Videos, Archival Videos, and Content (individually and 
collectively referred to hereinafter as the "Licensed Properties") in any manner and for such number of 
uses as Producer may elect, provided such use is in connection with the Picture. Said use of the 
Licensed Properties includes, but is not limited to, the right to rerecord , reproduce and/or perform 
excerpts from the Licensed Properties and/or the entirety of any Licensed Properties, as a vocal use, 
instrumental use, visual/foreground use, background use, use as part of a music video or other audio­
visual work or any other use and manner, in the soundtrack of and in timed relation to Picture. 
Producer may use the Licensed Properties in whole or in part, edited or otherwise modified in 
Producer's sole discretion . 
8) TERRITORY: The territory covered by this Agreement is the universe ("Territory"). 
9) PERPETUAL TERM: All rights granted herein shall commence on the date hereof and shall endure 
perpetually , including, without limitation, for the periods of all copyrights in each country of the 
Territory in and to the Licensed Properties and any and all renewals or extensions thereof in each 
country of the Territory and thereafter in perpetuity ("License Term"). 
10) GRANT OF RIGHTS: Licensor hereby grants Producer the non-exclusive , irrevocable, and perpetual 
rights, license, privilege, and authority during the License Term to record, reproduce, dub, synchronize , 
edit, adapt, arrange, re-arrange and use, in each country of the Territory (and to import the recordings of 
[PAGE 85]
the Licensed Properties into any country throughout the Territory), the aforesaid type and use of the 
Licensed Properties in synchronization or in timed-relation with the Picture, and to make copies of such 
Licensed Properties in the Picture, and to exhibit, distribute, perform (publicly and otherwise), broadcast, 
market and otherwise exploit the Licensed Properties in the Picture (including, for the avoidance of 
doubt, all in-context and out-of-context trailers, featurettes, advertisements and promotional material 
therefor) perpetually throughout each country in the Territory in all media now known or hereafter 
devised and in any and all languages and any manners and format now known or hereafter devised, 
excluding only theatrical. 
11) FEE: As full and complete consideration for the rights granted herein, Licensor shall be paid a one-time, 
flat fee of ("License Fee") upon full execution of this 
Agreement. For the avoidance of doubt, the License Fee constitutes a buyout and no further sums shall 
be due, including without limitation for use on DVDs, electronic deliveries and other sales and 
exploitations of the Picture in any and all media whether now or hereafter known. The foregoing 
notwithstanding, this license does not include the name and likeness rights for any of the artists or 
personalities included in the video clip. Producer shall negotiate and pay for those rights, only if and 
when necessary as determined by Producer, separately from this agreement. 
12) CREDIT: Provided Licensor is not in material breach of any provision of this Agreement, Licensor shall 
receive credits on screen in the end crawl of the particular episode(s) of the Picture in which the Masters, 
Compositions, Archival Videos, and/or Music Videos are used in substantially the following form: 
"Under Exclusive License from Entertainment One U.S LP.". All other aspects of such credits shall be 
in Producer's sole and absolute discretion. No causal or inadvertent failure by Producer or any failure by 
a third party to comply with the provision of this Section 12 shall constitute a breach of this Agreement. 
13) DELIVERY: Licensor shall deliver the Masters, Music Videos, Archival Videos and Content to 
Producer in time for preparation and dubbing and editing, on such dates as Producer shall require and in 
such form as Producer shall require. Timely delivery is of the essence in this Agreement. 
14) REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES: Licensor acknowledges, warrants, represents and 
agrees that: 
a) It has the full right, power, and authority to enter into this Agreement, and to grant all rights 
granted herein; it has not made and will not make any grant or assignment which will or might 
conflict with or impair the complete enjoyment of the rights granted to Producer in this Agreement; 
b) Licensor owns or controls the percentage of copyright interest and rights to the respective 
Compositions, Masters, Music Videos, Archival Videos throughout the Territory as specifically 
set forth in the respective schedules attached hereto and all required third-party consents have been 
received by Licensor and Producer has secured the consent of the estate of Tupac Shakur required 
for Licensor to license the rights granted herein in and to the Compositions, Masters, Music 
Videos, Archival Videos to another party; 
c) Licensor is under no court or administrative order, disability, restriction or prohibition, whether 
contractual or otherwise, with respect to Licensor's right to execute this Agreement, to grant the 
rights herein granted and to perform each and every term and provision hereof; 
d) Neither the Licensed Properties nor any part or parts thereof, violate or infringe or will violate or 
infringe upon any common law statutory or other right of any person, firm, corporation, entity, 
partnership or labor organization including without limitation contractual rights, property rights, 
copyrights and rights of privacy or unfair competition; 
e) Licensor's agreements with all third parties who render services in connection with any or all of 
the Compositions, Masters, Music Videos, Archival Videos shall provide that third parties will 
[PAGE 86]
look solely to Licensor for any payment in connection with any of the Licensed Properties in the 
Picture and that Producer shall have no responsibility whatsoever with respect thereof; 
f) Licensor shall be responsible for any payments due to any record companies, artists, producers, 
unions (e.g. re-use fees/new use fees, etc.) or other third parties, with the exception of the estate of 
Tupac Shakur, who may be due any compensation in connection with the grant of this license and 
the rights hereunder. 
g) Producer shall not be required to make any payments of any nature for, or in connection with, the 
acquisition, exercise, or exploitation of rights by Producer pursuant to this Agreement except as 
specifically provided in this Agreement; and 
h) Licensor makes no representation or warranty with respect to the rights in and to the Content 
granted to Producer hereunder. 
15) NO OBLIGATION TO USE: Producer shall not be obligated to use the Licensed Properties, nor any 
part thereof, in the Picture. 
16) REMEDIES: No failure by Producer to perform any of its obligations hereunder shall constitute a breach 
hereof, unless Licensor gives Producer written notice of such non-performance and Producer fails to cure 
within sixty ( 60) business days of receipt of such notice. Licensor's rights and remedies in the event of 
a breach or alleged breach of this Agreement by Licensee shall be limited to an action at law for damages, 
if any, and in no event shall Licensor or any of its affiliates, subsidiaries, parent entities, agents, 
principals, members, employees, independent contractors, licensees, successors, assigns or creditors be 
entitled to injunctive or other equitable relief against the Picture, any advertising or promotion thereof, 
or Producer, its licensees, successors or assignees. 
17) INDEMNIFICATION: Licensor hereby agrees to indemnify Producer, Producer's successors, 
distributors, sub-distributors, assigns, and the respective officers, directors, agents, and employees of 
each of the foregoing, from and against any damages, liabilities, costs and expenses (including 
reasonable outside attorneys' fees), arising out of or connected with any claims and damages arising 
from the breach of any term, provision, representation or warranty of Licensor made in this Agreement. 
Producer shall indemnify and defend Licensor from and against any and all claims and damages arising 
from the production, distribution, exhibition or exploitation of the Picture, or any element thereof, to the 
extent such claim or damage does not arise out of a breach by Licensor hereunder. 
18) SEVERABILITY: In the event that any terms or provision of this Agreement shall be held invalid by 
a court of competent jurisdiction or governmental agency of competent jurisdiction: (i) the provision of 
this Agreement so affected shall be limited only to the extent necessary to permit compliance with the 
minimum legal requirement; (ii) no other provisions of this Agreement shall be affected thereby; and 
(iii) all such other provisions shall continue in full force and effect. The parties shall negotiate in good 
faith to replace any invalid, illegal or unenforceable provision with a valid provision, the effect of which 
comes as close as possible to that of such invalid, illegal or unenforceable provision. 
19) WAIVERS: No waiver of any term or condition of this Agreement shall be construed as a waiver of 
any other term or condition hereof. The descriptive headings of the paragraphs of this Agreement are for 
convenience only and do not constitute a part of this Agreement. The parties agree that ambiguities 
contained in this Agreement (if any) are not to be construed against the drafter of this Agreement. 
20) ARBITRATION: Any dispute relating to this agreement shall be settled pursuant to binding arbitration 
under the rule of the independent Film and Television alliance ("IFTA") before a sole arbitrator in New 
York, NY and the prevailing party thereof shall be entitled to collect reasonable outside attorneys' fees 
and costs. 
[PAGE 87]
21) ASSIGNMENT: Producer shall have the right to assign this Agreement to any person, corporation, 
and/or entity for the purpose of distributing, exploiting, exhibiting, and/or marketing the Picture, or the 
ownership therein. Licensor shall not assign rights without Producer's prior written consent and any 
attempted assignment without such consent shall be void and shall transfer no rights to the purported 
assignee. 
22) NOTICES: Any notice under this Agreement shall be written and delivered by hand, by a recognized 
courier service such as Federal Express, or by facsimile or e-mail with confirmation of receipt and 
prepaid first class (air mail if posted to another country) post to the party at its address above and shall 
be deemed to have been served immediately if hand delivered, faxed or e-mailed during business hours 
(or otherwise when the next business day starts). Courtesy copies of all notices shall be sent to the 
following: 
23) COUNTERPARTS: This Agreement may be signed in counterparts and facsimile or scanned copies of 
the Agreement shall be considered originals for all purposes. 
24) FURTHER ASSURANCES: The parties hereto agree to sign such other documents, do and perform 
and cause to be done and performed such further and other acts consistent herewith as may be necessary 
or desirable in order to give full effect to this Agreement. 
25) ADDITIONAL DOCUMENTS: Licensor agrees to execute, deliver and/or file any and all further and 
reasonable instruments consistent herewith, which Producer may reasonably deem necessary to carry out 
the purposes of this Agreement. 
26) GOVERNING LAW: This Agreement will be governed by the laws of the State of New York. 
27) ENTIRE AGREEMENT: This Agreement constitutes the entire agreement between the parties hereto 
with respect to all of the matters herein and its execution has not been induced by, nor do any of the 
parties hereto rely upon or regard as material, any representations or writing whatsoever not incorporated 
herein and made a part hereof and supersedes all prior agreements and understandings, whether oral or 
written, between the parties relating to the subject matter hereof. Any amendments, additions to or 
changes in this Agreement shall be valid only if set forth in writing and signed by the parties. If a 
provision of this Agreement is held invalid under any applicable law, such invalidity will not affect any 
other provision of this Agreement that can be given effect without the invalid provision. 
[Signatures on following page] 
[PAGE 88]
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this Agreement as of the day and year 
written above. 
[PAGE 89]
- . I . J. 
[PAGE 90]
SCHEDULEB 
----- ------- --
[PAGE 91]
SCHEDULEC 
[PAGE 92]
SCHEDULED 
ARCHIVAL VIDEOS 
[PAGE 93]
SCHEDULEE 
CONTENT 
[PAGE 94]
 
  
NON- EXCLUSIVE CLIPS & STILLS LICENSE 
 
DATED:                                                 CONTRACT #:  
  
LICENSOR: Miramax, LLC 
2450 Colorado Ave., Ste. 100E 
 Santa Monica, CA 90404  
 Attn:  
 
LICENSEE:  
 
 
 
 
Licensed Clip(s) and still(s):  Twenty-Three (23) outtake interview Clips from  
see Exhibit A) 
Underlying Motion Picture :  (“MOTION PICTURE”)  
Licensing Program:  (“PROGRAM”)  
Permitted Use of LICENSED MATERIAL:  The LICENSED  MATERIAL will be featured within 
the PROGRAM. The MOTION PICTURE  is viewed in a positive light and the LICENSED 
MATERIAL will retain its original integrity.  
 
I. Number of Clip(s) and still(s): Twenty-Three (23) Clips (See Exhibit A) 
II. Duration of Clip(s): Not to exceed Sixty (60) seconds in the aggregate  
III. Term: US & Canada:  in Perpetuity; World excluding US & Canada: 
 
IV. Territory: Worldwide  
V. Distribution Media:  All media, whether now known or hereafter devised, excluding  only 
theatrical. In-context promotional rights expressly reserved  
 
License Fee (US$):    
Total:       
 
Payment must be made prior to using content.  Payment shall be made via credit card, wire, or check to 
Visual Icon Inc.  See Exhibit “B ” for payment instructions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[PAGE 95]
Miramax, LLC ("LICENSOR") hereby grants to  
(“LICENSEE”) this no n-exclusive and non -transferable license  (except as otherwise provided 
below) ("License") to use (but neither materially alter nor modify (e.g., color correction is 
acceptable)) the LICENSED MATERIAL only in the PROGRAM described above, and only for 
the purposes and manner otherwise set forth herein.  This License is fully conditioned upon 
payment of the above License Fee and upon  LICENSEE’s execution of this License. For good 
and valuable consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which being hereby ack nowledged, 
LICENSOR and LICENSEE agree as follows:  
 
1) LICENSEE will not make any reproduction of or from the LICENSED MATERIAL 
whatsoever in whole or in part, except for use in connection with the PROGRAM, and as herein 
described. 
 
2) LICENSEE will include a cr edit notice in the PROGRAM in which the LICENSED 
MATERIAL appears, in the form of "Courtesy of Miramax.”  LICENSEE’s inadvertent failure to 
accord such credit shall not be deemed a breach hereof.  
 
3) LICENSEE shall not use the LICENSED MATERIAL for any purpos e in connection 
with the advertising and publicizing of the PROGRAM in which the LICENSED MATERIAL is 
used, without the prior express written consent of LICENSOR.  
 
4) LICENSEE represents, warrants and agrees that it will obtain and be solely responsible 
for all other required authorizations, consents and releases in connection with the proposed use of 
the LICENSED MATERIAL, and pay all re -use fees necessary (if any) for the use of the 
LICENSED MATERIAL hereunder (including, but not limited to, consents from all unions and 
guilds to the extent required under applicable collective bargaining agreements, or otherwise 
required by law).  LICENSOR represents and warrants that it has the full right and authority to 
enter into this License and to grant the rights herei n granted.  LICENSOR further represents and 
warrants that LICENSEE’s permitted use of the LICENSED MATERIAL will not infringe upon 
the copyright of any third party. The provisions of this Paragraph 4 shall survive the expiration or 
earlier termination of t his license. 
 
5) LICENSEE hereby indemnifies, defends and holds harmless Licensor, and its affiliates, 
agents, employees, representatives, associates, parent and subsidiary corporations, and each of 
them, from and against any and all loss, cost, damages, liability and expense, including 
reasonable outside attorneys’ fees, arising out of any claim whatsoever which may be brought 
based upon LICENSEE’s use of the LICENSED MATERIAL.   LICENSOR hereby indemnifies, 
defends and holds harmless Licensor, and its affili ates, agents, employees, representatives, 
associates, parent and subsidiary companies, and each of them, from and against any and all, cost, 
damages, liability and expense including reasonable outside attorneys’ fees, arising out of any 
claim whatsoever wh ich may be brought due to a breach by LICENSOR of any term, 
representation, or warranty (or any combination of the foregoing) in this LICENSE.  In the event 
of a breach or default of any term under this License by LICENSEE, LICENSOR shall provide 
written notice to LICENSEE of such breach or default and LICENSEE shall have thirty (30) days 
following its actual receipt of such written notice to cure or remedy the breach or default.  
 
6) LICENSEE shall pay all direct, verifiable, out -of-pocket, third-party laboratory costs and 
other direct, verifiable, out -of-pocket, third-party costs that may be involved in obtaining the 
LICENSED MATERIAL.  
 
7) This License shall be governed by the l aws of the State of California.   Any action to 
enforce its terms shall be commenced w ithin the State of California and within a court of 
competent jurisdiction in Los Angeles County, California.  
 
8) This License shall be deemed null and void unless fully executed by both parties.  
 
9) LICENSEE will make available to LICENSOR a digital file of the  program for the sole 
purpose of verification of the use of the LICENSED MATERIAL , which may not be shared by 
LICENSOR and shall be promptly destroyed by LICENSOR following such verification . 
[PAGE 96]
 
10) The PROGRAM shall not be derogatory to or critical of LICENSOR,  or any officer, 
director, agent, employee, affiliate, parent or subsidiary of LICENSOR or of any MATERIAL 
owned, produced or distributed by LICENSOR.  The LICENSED MATERIAL will not be used 
in a manner derogatory to or critical of the MOTION PICTURE from which the LICENSED 
MATERIAL was/were taken or the persons involved in the production or distribution of the 
MOTION PICTURE from which the LICENSED MATERIAL was taken.  
 
11) This License may not be amended, modified or supplemented (whether by amendment, 
side letter, schedule, exhibit, addendum or otherwise) except by the written agreement of both 
parties.  This License is complete and embraces the entire understanding between the parties, all 
prior understandings, either oral or written, having been merged herein.  
 
12) LICENSEE shall have the right to assign this License and the rights granted hereunder 
for the purposes of exhibiting, distributing, advertising, promoting, and otherwise 
exploiting the PROGRAM. 
 
AGREED AND ACCEPTED:  
 
Miramax, LLC:      
 
      
      
 
Its:      
 
As Of:      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[PAGE 97]
 
   
 
Exhibit A 
 
[PAGE 98]

[PAGE 99]

[PAGE 100]
 
[PAGE 101]

[PAGE 102]
Exhibit B 
 
Payment must be made in advance of receiving content. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[PAGE 103]
~c-,, - B.. s-~ TELEVISION 
~ _ .. ( __ ~ DISTRIBUTION 
LICENSE AGREEMENT 
This is an Agreement dated as of!!!!!:etw:een==CBS;TEL:E:VI;SI=O=N=D=IS:TRIB:::lITI::ON~, a~di=·=vi=si~on~=of~CBS STIJDIOS, INC. ("CBS") and -"Licensee"), for and on behalf of 'Copyright 
Holder''), c/o , wherein Licensee seeks to obtain and CBS 
hereby grants certain non-exclusive rights to use footage as more specifically set forth below. Licensee and CBS agree that the use of the footage will be 
subject to the terms and conditions set forth herein and the Standard Terms and Conditions which are attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference 
(the "Agreement "). 
. ,. --.. ~ - -· - - . 
FOOTAGE : 
TYPE OF USE! 
USE OF FOOTAGE: 
MEDIA: 
INITIAL BROADCAST/ 
RELEASE DATE: 
TERM: 
RUNS: 
TERRITORY: 
LICENSE FEE: 
FOOTAGE FEE: 
ADMINISTRATIVE FEE: 
BANK.FEES: 
CANCELLATION FEE : 
RESTRICTION : 
~: 
NO CREDIT PENALTY FEE: 
The Footage will be incorporated into a -ntitled 
"Program''). 
All media. 
-••••• hrough peipetuity. 
Unlimited. 
Worldwide. 
USD er 30 seconds aggregate use per episode (footage is cut or used more than once within the 
program for an aggregate running time of up to 30 seconds) . Payment must be made before master Footage is 
ordered and released. Total footage running time may not exceed four ( 4) minutes in length. 
US~ per episode. Payment must be made before screening or master Footage is ordered and released 
and must be returned with a signed copy of the Agreement 
usn•••iei-license. 
The payment of bank fees for wire transfers is Licensee 's responsibility and may not be deducted from the fees 
owed to CBS . 
USD- (if applicable) . 
All music and third-party materials that may be included in the footage must be cleared separately . 
A credit must be accorded as follows: 
H any fees are due as referenced herelnabove, no invoice will be issued. This Agreement shall serve as your formal invoice and payment needs to be 
received by CBS with a signed copy. By signing in the space provided below, Licensee warrants and represents that they have the right and 
authority on behalf of the Copyright Holder of the Program to enter into this agreement thereby agreeing to all of the terms and conditions 
contained above and in the attached Standard Terms and Conditions. If there is any inconsistency between the provisions above and any provisions in 
the Standard Terms and Conditions, the provisions above shall prevail. 
CBS TELEVISION DISTRIBlITION, 
a division of CBS STIJDIOS, INC. ("CBS'') 
- ---- - - - - - - - - - - - ····- ··-- --- -·-· - -·· ·- --- ·----··· - ··· ·-- · - ----- - - - - ----
[PAGE 104]
~(-, - BS"1 TELEVISION 'Ill .A .. _ . L . DISTRIBUTION 
ST AND ARD TERMS AND CONDITIONS 
I. GRANT OF LIMl1ED LICENSE: Upon receipt by CBS of this Agreement, signed by Licensee and cmmter-signed by CBS, CBS hereby grants to 
Licensee, without any representations or warranties of any kind, expressed or implied, as to the extent of any rights to the contemplated use, a non­
exclusive and non-transferable license to use the Footage pursuant to the terms hereof. The Footage shall be used in and as part of one Program only 
that is exhibited or broadcast in whole in the Media, in the Territory and for the Term, and will not be used for any other pwposes whatsoever. Use of 
the Footage in any other version of the Program, in whole or in part is expressly prohibited. Licensee will not make any reproduction of or from the 
Footage whatsoever in whole or in part, except for use in and as part of the Program. Licensee warrants that the Footage shall not be loaned, assigned, 
disposed of, transferred to, licensed by, or sold to any other person, firm, corporation or entity. Licensee further warrants and represents that upon 
completion of production of the Program, all right, title and interest in and to the Program shall be assigned to Copyright Holder and that Copyright 
Holder shall abide by all of the terms and conditions of this Agreement; in any event, Licensee shall remain primarily liable and responsible for all of 
the obligations to which it agrees hereunder. Unless otherwise set forth herein, Licensee may not use the Footage in connection with the main or end 
titles of the Program, nor shall the Footage be used in any manner such that it appears that artists appearing in the Footage have rendered services for 
the Program or Licensee. If Licensee has not signed and returned this Agreement to CBS within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of this 
Agreement, then CBS may, in its sole discretion, terminate the Agreement and deem it void ab initio. If Licensee has not signed and returned this 
Agreement to CBS within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of this Agreement but used, exhibited or broadcast the Footage, Licensee's use of the 
Footage constitutes acceptance of the terms of this Agreement, and Licensee is obligated to abide by the terms and conditions set forth herein or be in 
breach. 
2. LICENSE FEE: Licensee shall pay the license fee before master Footage is released If Footage is not used within the Program, CBS will refund the 
license fee less the cancellation fee, as defined in Paragraph 4, to Licensee upon fulfillment of all requirements specified in Paragraph 13 of this 
Agreement. 
3. FQ()TAGE FEE: Licensee will pay all costs ("footage fee"), before screening Footage is released, arising in connection with the license granted 
hereunder and with making the Footage available to Licensee including, without limitation, researching, screening, processing, laboratory, transfer and 
shipping charges attributable to the manufacture of any pre-print material and positive prints or tape of the Footage, the return of materials and the costs 
involved in replacing any lost or damaged elements. 
4. CANCELLATION FEE: If CBS provides master Footage to Licensee and the Footage is not used with the Program, Licensee will pay a 
cancellation fee for the Footage. 
5. CREDIT: Licensee agrees that there shall be included in any use of the Footage a credit as specified and provided herein. 
6. NO CREDIT PENALTY FEE: If credit is not accorded in the Program as required herein, Licensee shall pay a no credit penalty fee in lieu of 
providing credit. The no credit penalty fee is due regardless of whether Licensee's failure to provide credit was inadvertent or intentional. 
7. MEDIA DEFINITIONS: "All Media": All forms of program delivery via any form of media now known or hereafter devised 
8. RELEASES: Licensee shall not have the right to use the Footage without first obtaining all required written authorizations, releases, consents, 
clearances and licenses, and make all required payments, in form and substance satisfactory to CBS, as may be necessary with respect to the use of the 
Footage including, without limitation, the releases set forth below, and shall and furnish CBS with copies of all such releases upon request. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, as long as all required written authorizations, releases, consents, clearances and licenses have been obtained, any and all 
required payments that may be due in relationship thereto may be made after delivery of the Program to the broadcaster but must be made before initial 
broadcast of the Program. 
(a) Written releases from all individuals appearing recogn.iz.ably in the Footage, including, but not limited to: 
(i) those the results and proceeds of whose services are utilized in the Footage; and 
(ii) stunt persons appearing in any stunt identifiable in the Footage. 
(b) Written releases from any unions or guilds to the extent required under applicable collective bargaining agreements in connection with the use of 
the Footage, as well as consents from and payments to unions and guilds, including. if applicable and without limitation, the American Federation 
of Television and Radio Artists, the Screen Actors Guild, the Writers Guild of America and the Directors Guild of America 
(c) If any music is included in the Footage, consents must be obtained from those performing music in the Footage (including musicians), if any, and 
master use, synchronization and performing licenses must be obtained from the copyright proprietors of the applicable master recording( s) and 
composition(s) and such other persons, firms or associations, societies or corporations as may own or control the performing rights thereto. 
9. EDITING. PUBBING AND COLQRIZING: Licensee shall not edit, dub, colorize or otherwise alter the Footage, except to edit for time. 
NATURE OF PROGRAM: The Program shall not be in any way derogatory to or critical of the entertainment industry, CBS, or any officer, director, 
agent, representative, employee, affiliate, parent or subsidiary of CBS or of any program or motion picture produced or disttibuted by CBS and none of 
the Footage will be used in a manner which would be derogatory to or critical of the program from which the Footage was taken or to the ~ 
involved with the production of the program from which the Footage was taken. 
[PAGE 105]
11. ADVERTISING: Licensee shall not use the Footage or the name of CBS for any pwposes in connection with the advertising, publicizing or any other 
promotion of the Program. 
12. RETURN OF MATERlALS/ELEMENTS: If the Footage was provided to Licensee by e-mail, FIP, or any other Internet based form of delivering 
downloadable footage, Licensee must destroy the Footage upon initial broadcast of the Program. 
13. VERIFICATION: Upon broadcast of the Program or sooner, Licensee shall provide to CBS, at Licensee's expense, a viewing copy of the Program 
for the purpose of verifying the Footage used, the title and credit accorded, and the copyright registered Such copy should be sent as a downloadable 
file to: CID Clip Licensing Group via e-mail at ctdcliplicensinggroup@cbs.com. 
14. AGREEMENTS. NOTICES AND PAYMENTS: 
Agreements and Notices to CBS: CBS Television Distribution 
.... 
Payments to CBS: 
15. COPYRIGIIT: Licensee represents and warrants that the end of show copyright to Licensee's program shall be registered as © 2017 SOML, LLC, 
that Licensee shall be the copyright proprietor of the Program, that it shall be registered for copyright protection in accordance with the requirements of 
the Universal Copyright Convention, and that all formalities shall be complied with in all countries where the Program will be exploited. Licensee 
further represents, warrants and agrees that the incorporation of the Footage into the Program shall in no way affect the continued and separate 
copyright in the Footage and the program from which the Footage was taken, and that said copyright will not merge with the copyright of Licensee's 
Program. 
16. PROGRAM SECURIJY: Licensee shall make every effort to provide adequate security of the Program that contains the Footage to prevent theft, 
pirating, unauthorized exhibition, duplication or copying of the Program. Should Licensee become aware of any infraction of security, Licensee shall 
make every effort to remedy such infraction and shall immediately notify CBS of the efforts being made. CBS reserves the right to remedy any 
infraction of security of the Footage. 
17. RIGIITS: CBS hereby reserves all its rights in the Footage and the program from which it came. CBS shall at all times, anywhere in the world and 
whether or not in conflict or competition with Licensee, have the right to use or authorize others to use the Footage in any way CBS may desire. 
18. INDEMNITY: Licensee will indemnify, defend and hold CBS and its parents, affiliates, subsidiaries, agents, independent contractors, representatives, 
associates, and the officers, directors, and employees of each and all of them, harmless from and against any and all losses, costs, damages, judgments, 
liabilities and ex~ including, without limitation, attorneys' fees and costs and any payments that may be due any music publisher, musician, 
writer, director, actor, union, guild or other party arising out of any claim whatsoever, whether or not groundless, which may, whenever and wherever, 
arise orbe brought or based directly or indirectly by reason of Licensee's use of the Footage. 
19. GOVERNING LAW: This Agreement and all matters or issues collateral thereto shall be governed by the federal laws of the United States and the 
laws of the State of California applicable to agreements entered into and to be performed entirely within the state, and Licensee further agrees to be 
subject to the jurisdiction thereof. 
20. REMEDIES: Licensee further acknowledges that a breach by Licensee of any of its representations, warranties or agreements hereunder will cause 
CBS irreparable damage, which cannot be readily remedied in damages by an action at law and may, in addition thereto, constitute an infringement of 
CBS's copyright and trademark, thereby entitling CBS to equitable remedies, costs and attorneys' fees. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event 
Licensee provides CBS with a downloadable viewing copy of the Program, as specified in Paragraph 13 hereinahove, no less than thirty (30) days prior 
to initial broadcast of the Program, time being of the essence, on a one-time-only basis, Licensee shall be afforded 15 consecutive days to cure the 
problem after being given written notice of an issue. 
21. W AIYER: A waiver by either Licensee or CBS of any of the terms and conditions of this Agreement in any instance shall not be deemed or construed 
to be a waiver of such term or condition for the future, or of any subsequent breach thereof. 
22. ENTIRE AQREEMENI: This Agreement contains the entire understanding of the parties hereto relating to the subject matter hereof and 
supersedes all prior licenses, whether oral or written, pertaining thereto. No modification, amendment, or waiver of this Agreement or any of the 
terms or provisions hereof shall be binding upon CBS or Licensee unless confirmed by a written instrument signed by Licensee and by a duly 
authorized officer of CBS. 
[PAGE 106]
FILM FOOTAGE PROGRAM LICENSE AGREEMENT 
No. 56580-1 
Agreement dated as of between Twentieth Television, a division of Twentieth Century Fox Film 
Corporation ("Fox"), an "Licensee") to obtain certain rights to use the 
film/tape footage ("Footage") as set forth below. Licensee and Fox agree that the use of the Footage will be 
controlled by the tenns set forth on this page and the attached Standard Terms and Conditions . 
A. FOOTAGE: The Footage shall consist of six clips totaling :29 seconds from the television program 
entitled 
B. PICTURE : The Footage shall only be used as background playback on a television set in connection 
with the motion picture currently entitle ("Picture") . Neither the Footage, nor the Picture, 
may be included in whole or any part containing the Footage, in any other program, production or 
product. The use is limited to the scene outlined in Exhibit "A" attached hereto. 
C. MEDIA: The "Media" is All Media Exhibition. 
D. TERRITORY : The "Territory" is Worldwide . 
E. TERM: The "Term" shall be in perpet uity, to the extent Fox now or hereafter owns or controls all 
copyrights in and to the Footage throug' .out the Territory, and any renewals or extensions thereof. 
F. LI ENSE FEE: Licensee shall pay Fox the non-refundable sum of-"License Fee") based 
on the rate of per minute, or portion of a minute, per episode in connection with the Picture as 
herein provided. 
G. CREDIT/COPYRIGHT NOTICE : Licensee shall accord Fox credit in the Picture in the following form: 
"Footage Fro~Courtesy of Twentieth Television . All rights reserved . " 
By signing in the spaces provided below, the parties have agreed to all of the tenns and conditions contained 
above and in the attached Standard Terms and Conditions . 
Twentieth Television, a division of Twentieth Century 
Fox Filno-ration 
~ ("Fm/') 
By~~~-L__J~___Jl_b:=.==::::::==--
[PAGE 107]
STANDARD TERMS AND CONDITIONS 
1) GR.ANT CF LIMTED LICENSE: Upon receipt by Fox of this 
Jlgreemen~ signed by Licensee, Licensee is granted by Fox, 
without any representations or warranties of any kind, e~ressed 
or implied, a non-e:>dusi\e and non-transferable license to use 
the Footage pursuant to the terms hereof. The Footage shall only 
be used in and as part of the Picture, for emibition in the !Vedia, in 
the Tenitol')( and for the Term. The Footage will not be used for 
any other purposes whatsoe\er. Licensee will not make any 
reproduction of or li'om the Footage whatsoe\er in whole or in 
part, eicept for use in and as part of the Picture. Unless otherwise 
set forth herein, Licensee may not use the Footage in connection 
with the main or end titles of the Picture nor shall the Footage be 
used in any manner such that it appears that artists appearing in 
the Footage ha-.e rendered ser"1ces for the Picture or Licensee. 
2) LICENSE FEE: If Licensee has not signed and returned this 
Jlgreement along with the License Fee to Fox within sixty da~ 
after Licensee's receipt of this Jlgreemen~ then this ,Agreement 
shall automaticallyterminate in its entirety and be deemed \Old ab 
initio and Licensee shall be in breach of its obligations herein. 
3) RaEASES : Licensee shall not ha-..e the right to use the Footage 
without obtaining all required indi\1dual authotizations , releases, 
consents, dearances and license s ("'Releases'") as may b e 
necessary with respect to the use of the Footage indud ing, 
without limitation, the Releases set forth below: 
a) Witten releases from all indi\1duals appearing recognizably 
in the scene(s) contained in the Footage and li'om all stunt 
persons appearing in any stunt identifiable in the scene(s) 
oontained in the Footage. 
b} Witten releases from any unions or guilds to the extent 
required under applicable collecti-..e bargaining agreements 
in connection with the use of the Footage. 
c) If any music is induded in t he Footage, mastt:r use, 
synchronization and performing licenses must be obtained 
from the copyright proprietors of the applirable master 
recording(s) and oomposition(s) and such other persons, 
firms or associations, societies or corporations as may own 
or oontrol the perorming rights thereto. 
Licensee shall pay any fees and other payments required in 
connection with the Releases and furnish Fox with copies of all 
such Releases upon request 
4) ~: Licensee will pay all costs arising in connection with the 
license granted hereunder induding screening, processing, 
laboratory, transfer and shipping charges 
attributable to the manufacture of any pre-print material and 
positiw prints or tape of the Footage, the return of materials and 
the costs fn\Ol\ed In replacing any lost or damaged materials 
dellwred to Licensee . 
5) EDITING. DUBBING .AND ca.ORIZING: Licensee shall not ~di~ 
dub, colori20 or otherwise alter the Footage, e>eept to edit for time. 
6) NAWRE a= ptCWRE: lhis License Is conditioned on the Picture 
not being derogatory to or critical of the entertainment Industry~ 
of Fox. or any officer, director; agent, empl~e. a11illate, parent or 
subsidiary of Fox or of any motion picturMele\4slon program 
produced or disb'lbuted by Fox and the Footage will not be used In 
a manner which would be derogatory to or aitical of the motion 
picture/tele\4slon program from which the Footage was taken or to 
the persons inwlwd with the making of the motion 
pictureltele"1sion program from which the Footage was taken. If 
Licensee "1olates this pro\tsion, this Pgreement shall 
automaticallytenninate in its entirety and be deemed \Old ab initio 
and Licensee shall be in breach of its obligations herein. 
7) REIURN Cf MVERIPl,S : Upon the comp/efion of production of 
the Picture, Licensee shall promptly return all preprint material 
and positi1.e prints or tape of the Footage to such locafion as Fox 
shall designate. 
8) ,AQ'vERllSING: Licensee shall not use the Footage or the name of 
Fox for any purposes in connection with the ad\ertising, 
publici2ing or any other promotion of the Picture. 
9) Ca>YRIGHT: Licensee represents, warrants and agrees that the 
incorporation of the Footage into the Picture shall in no way affect 
Fox's continued and separate copyright ownership in the Footage 
and the motion pictureltele\1sion program from which the Footage 
was taken and that the copyight ownership of Fox will not merge 
with th e Picture nor depri\e Fox of its copyight ownership. 
Licensee further represents, warrants and agrees that Licensee 
shall be the copyright proprietor of the Picture, that the Picture 
shall bear a copyight notice thereon and that if the Picture is 
e>qJloited in the United States, it shall be registered for copyight in 
the United States Copyright Olice and the Picture shall be 
registered for copyright protection, and all formalities shall be 
complied with, in all other counb'les where the Picture will be 
e~loited. 
10) COOD!llQ'.JS CF USE: The consent of Fox is conditioned upon 
Licensee's compli ance with the pro"1sions of the Uni\ersal · 
Copyright Con1.ention and of the laws of the United States to 
protect the copyighted Footage. Licensee shall not haw the right 
to use the Footage unless it complies with said laws. 
[PAGE 108]
11) .ft:jQe.t'rrt Licensee will indemnif)c defend and hold Fox and its 
otficers, directors. agents, empl~. representalr.es , 
associates, atliliates and subsidiary corporations, and each and 
all of them harmless from and against any and all loss. oosts , 
damage , liabil ity and ~nse, including reasonable atfOmE¥ ' 
tees. arising out of any daim v.tlatsoe-.er, wtlelher or not 
groundless, wtiidl may arise, diredly or indlredl)( by reason of 
Licensee's use of the Footage or any breach of fhis .Agreement 
12) GQ,fRNING VW. This ,Agreement and all matters or issues 
material thereto shall be QO\e(Tled by the laws cl the State of 
California applicable to contracts perbmed entirely therein. 
13) RBEDIES : Licensee further a<:l<J'loWedges fhat a breadl try 
Licensee of any of its representations , warranties or agreements 
hereunder will cause Fox irreparable damage, Yilich cannot be 
readily remedied in damages in an action at law and ma}( in 
addition thereto, cxinstitute an infringement of Fox's copylghl 
thereby entitling Fox to equitable remedies , costs and attome~· 
tees. 
14) JERMNATIOO: W thout prejudice to anyng ht or remedya \Gilable 
to Fox. this .tlgreement shall be tenninable at the election of Fox in 
the e-..ent of breach of any term or condition hereof and in the e\ent 
of any such termination, no further use f tll(' Fu.A.ace hall be 
made by Licensee. 
15) DERNmQ\JS : The following tenns shall ha-.e the meanings as 
set forth below: 
a) "All Media Exhibition .. : The emib ition of a M>tion Picture 
using any form of M:>tion Picture copy by Home \ideo 
E>ctiibibon, Non-Theatrical E>chibition, Tele\1sion Emibition, 
Theatrical E>chibition and Internet E>tlibition. 
b) "Home Video Exhibition .. : The non-public e*1ibitioo of a 
M>tion Picture by means of an audio/\.isual de\.fce for 
\4ev.ing in a pri..ete res idence . 
c) "Motion Pictl!'e· : Pictures of e>ery kind and d1.=ir< cter 
....tiatsoe-.er, 'htiether produced by rneans C'f ·n1 
photographic, electrical, electrornc medw1!Cll or t)tf c: 
processes or de\4ces now known , and ttLir a• npan}'lng 
de\.fces and processes whereb y ptctures, images lois~al 
and aural representations are recorded or otherwise 
preser\ed for projecti on, reproductJon, eJcti1b1tion, or 
transmission by any means or m edia now known in such 
manner as to appear to be in motion or sequence, ind uding 
oomputer generated pictures and graphics other than "1deo 
games . 
d) "Non-Theatrical Exhibition" : The e*iibition of a M>tion 
Picture using any form of M>tion Picture oopy in any manner 
naN known by any medium or process now known, other 
than Theatrical E>chibition, Tele\lsion Emibition , or Home 
\ideo EJctiibition. 
e) 'jeleyfs!oo edjbltlqJ• : The dtibl c:l a~ Aca.re 
using any bm al Mllorl Pkt.re alp'f for ~ b) 
MY means OON knolM'I (lndudng <MW...._ , c:al1le. ..,._ 
fiber, master antema. sa:el!iae, rniaoMM. dosed CllUJiC. 
multi-point distribution seN<:es <:. <ired broal:Xat S'J&11lms) 
for \iewing he M:>lion PkUe on he screen c:l a ~ 
recei\el' or comparable de-Jee OON ~ (lfQdr.g t°9' 
definition aele-.ision). oiler hwl Herne \4deo. ~ Thelh:at 
or Theatrical EJNbition, wihout regard as t> how ~ 
recei-.ed byfle \iewer . 
i) '"Basic C)!jnatioo Tefe\1sjon &tibkjm• : Tele-.isJon 
Elnbition (olher lhan Free Tele\ision ElhbOOn a Pay 
Tele>Jsion Elnbilion ) sudl as basic cable. ...nerebyht 
transm ission of programming ao.er ooe or more 
channels Is a'lo&ilable t> Ile \iewer on Ile basis cl he 
pa)ITlent cl an access, carriage oreq.i pment ~tor he 
pri\ilege cl unimpaired reception cl tie transmission b 
'°'ewing. without regard as D how ~im;Mely rec:er.ed b)' 
the\iewer . 
ii) "Rn Tefevtslon Extw1>1t!on•: Tele'Jsioo Elnbition 
(other than Basic Oi gm a6on Tele\ision E>hbilion or 
Pay Tele\is ion Elnbition) ~ progammtng 
originates from O\el'~r. aetresNI eele\iSJOO 
broadcast stations wtthout regard as t> how 1'tlmalel ) 
recei-.ed by the \Aewer. 
iii) "Pav Te!e\1siofl Exhibition" : Tele\is ion Eitibiton (otw 
than Basic Oigination Tele\oision Elhbi lion or Free 
Tele\Asion 8t1i bition) ~ Ile r.ins mi.ssion al 
programming is a-..ailable t> 1he -.iewer on tie basis cl a 
prem ium subsaiplion ct\arge or fee (as cisingUshed 
from an access . carnage or equipment fee) for he 
pri-.ilege of unimpaired reception cl the trans.mission for 
l.iewing , whether such transm ission is on a pay-per­
\4ew, pay-per-show. pay-per-channel (suctt as HBO) or 
pay-per-tim e basis. without regard as t> how ultimatel) 
recei-..ed by the \4ewer. 
f) "Theatrical Exhibition ": The runbition of a M:>lion Plebe using 
any fonn of M>tion Picture copy by any process n<:Nil known in 
wal k-in or dri-.e-in theaters open lo the general public on a 
regularly sd'leduled basis where a fee is charged b 
admiss ion to \4ew the M:>tion Picture . 
g) "Internet Exhibition" : The "Internet Btlibition," as suctt is 
commonly understood , or similar or successor technolog)(ies). 
whether now known or hereafter de'\Ased. 
16) ENTIRE ,AGREEM:NT : This .Agreement contains Che entire 
understanding of the parties hereto relating to Che subject matter 
hereof and supersedes all prior licenses. wnether oral or \\fltten, 
pertain ing thereto . No modification, amendment or wai\er cl this 
,Agreement or any of the terms or pro-Asians hereof shall be 
binding upon Fox or Licensee unless oonfirmed by a \\1'itten 
instrument signed by Licensee and by a duly aulhoriled oftlcer ol 
Fox 
[PAGE 109]
 
Meg Nakahara 
Account Manager 
(212) 664-2236 
meg.nakahara@nbcuni.com 
  
LICENSE AGREEMENT 
( ) 
 
 
1 
NBCUniversal:2265328v2 
This license agreement (“Agreement”) is entered into between NBC News Archives LLC, A Division of NBCUniversal 
Media, LLC, and its parent, subsidiary and affiliated companies ( "NBC") and  ("Licensee") 
located at , regarding the use of  
content ("Content") in a production ("Production") titled: 
 
 
 
1.  Footage 
 
The Content which is the subject of this Agreement: 
 
________ 
 
2.  Ownership and Reservation of Rights 
 
As between the parties to this Agreement, Licensee acknowledges that NBC is the sole owner of the Content, including 
all copyright and other exclusive rights in it. This Agreement does not transfer any ownership rights or copyrights in the 
Content to Licensee, all of which shall remain NBC’s property.  NBC shall at all times throughout the universe have the 
right to use and authorize others to use the Content or any portion thereof in any manner. 
 
3.  Third Party Clearances 
 
The Content m ay contain listed restrictions, including, without limitation, restrictions as to time, manner, industry 
and territory of use, and required pre-approval by a depicted person or their representative. The absence of such a 
listed restriction is not a guarant ee that there are no limitations on use or required consents.  Licensee, not NBC, 
shall be solely responsible for obtaining all third party required consents, clearances and releases, and for making all 
payments of any associated costs and expenses directly to third party that are necessary to use the Content, including, 
but not limited to: consents from those who appear recognizably in the Content; moral rights or the equivalent; rights 
from third parties for use of their material in the Content including but not limited to products, logos, storefronts, 
mastheads, works of fine art, footage and photos; consent from those whose services are used in conjunction with 
the Content; as well as consents from or payments to any applicable  unions, guilds, leagues or professional 
organizations.  If music is in the Content, it is the responsibility of Licensee to obtain applicable licenses, such as 
synchronization, master and performing rights licenses.    
 
4.  Rights Granted 
 
NBC grants Licensee a non-exclusive license to use the Content solely in the Production in the following media, territory 
and term: 
 
Rights Package: All Media Worldwide including in-context Promotion (Excluding Advertising & Theatrical) In Perpetuity  
 
5.  Limitations of Use 
 
The use of any NBC still photographs, graphics, logos, trademarks, talent (voice-over or image) or use of the Content for 
promotional, advertising or marketing purposes is strictly prohibited  without prior written permission from NBC, 
[PAGE 110]
 
Meg Nakahara 
Account Manager 
(212) 664-2236 
meg.nakahara@nbcuni.com 
  
LICENSE AGREEMENT 
(  
 
 
2 
NBCUniversal:2265328v2 
except as noted in paragraph 1 [Footage].  Other than a credit as noted in paragraph 11 below, NBC cannot be identified 
as the provider of the Content without prior written permission from NBC, except as noted in paragraph 1.  Provided, 
however, that if NBC’s “bug” or other watermark appears in the Content, the  “bug” or watermark must not be altered 
and must be visible in the Content unless NBC approves otherwise in writing or paragraph 1.  Other than for use as part 
of the Production, Licensee may not make any reproductions or use of the Content.   Licensee represents and warrants 
that the use of the Content and the Production will not defame or constitute trade disparagement of NBC, its officers, 
directors, agents, employees, affiliates, parents or its subsidiaries or of any production from which the Content is taken 
or which is produced or distributed by NBC or any of the foregoing entities. 
 
6.  Fees and Expenses 
 
The license fees for the use of the Content for the rights granted above and outstanding services are listed below. 
 
Service Notes Qty Unit Price Total Price 
Service Description Notes Qty Unit Price Total Price 
 
Total Amount:  ________  
 
The license fee is non-refundable and is based on the final Content ordered. All fees and expenses are due and payable 
within thirty (30) days of receipt of invoice. Licensee shall forward an executed pdf copy of this Agreement to Meg 
Nakahara - meg.nakahara@nbcuni.com at NBC News Archives LLC. This Agreement is not valid unless the Agreement is 
fully executed and Licensee has paid all fees.   Licensee is responsible for the payment of all applicable sales and use 
taxes, customs and duties.  Licensee shall pay all research, shipping, material and transfer costs in connection with this 
Agreement, even if the Content is provided but not used. 
 
7.  Protection of Content; File Deletion or Return of Content 
 
Licensee agrees to provide adequate security to prevent theft, pirating, and unauthorized exhibition, duplication or 
copying of the Content . Licensee shall give prompt notice to NBC of any such unauthorized activity, and shall take all 
steps necessary to stop such unauthorized activity. Without limiting the foregoing, if use of Content is permitted on the 
Internet, or any other online or interactive media , Licensee shall take commercially reasonable, technically feasible 
steps to impede digital theft and ensure that the Content remains in the linear production for which it was licensed and 
cannot be searched by shot and downloaded in broadcast or substantially comparable quality. Upon the earlier of the 
completion of the Production, the expiration or earlier termination of this Agreement, Licensee shall promptly delete 
the Content from its computers or other electronic storage systems and shall ensure that Licensee’s subcontractors do 
likewise. If the Content is not provided in a digital form, the Content and any copies of it must be returned to NBC at 
Licensee’s expense. Under no circumstances may Licensee retain Content supplied by NBC other than that portion of 
the Content that is incorporated into the Production. 
 
 
8.  Disclaimer of Warranty or Representation; Limitation on Recovery 
 
Except as otherwise specifically stated in paragraph 2 above, NBC makes no warranty or representation, express or 
implied, of any kind with respect to the Content or its use, including but not limited to disclaiming all warranties of 
merchantability and fitness for a particular purpose.  Licensee acknowledges that due to technological limitations, the 
[PAGE 111]
 
Meg Nakahara 
Account Manager 
(212) 664-2236 
meg.nakahara@nbcuni.com 
  
LICENSE AGREEMENT 
( ) 
 
 
3 
NBCUniversal:2265328v2 
Content may not be of broadcast quality.  Licensee acknowledges that its damages in the event of NBC’s breach of this 
Agreement shall be limited to recovery of the fees actually paid by Licensee to NBC as set forth in this Agreement. 
NBC’s liability under any theory shall not exceed the return of the amount of fees actually paid by Licensee, and under 
no circumstances will NBC be liable for any special, indirect, consequential or incidental damages or lost profits or any 
other damages. 
 
9.  Indemnification 
 
Licensee agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless NBC (and its current and future parent and subsidiary 
companies, affiliated entities, successors and assigns and their respective officers, directors, agents and employees) 
from any actions, claims, liabilities, damages, loss or costs (including attorneys ’ fees) of any kind or nature whatsoever 
which may arise out of Licensee's use of the Content or Licensee's breach of this Agreement.  This indemnity shall 
survive the termination of this Agreement.   
 
10.  Sub-license 
 
Licensee may assign its rights under this Agreement solely in connection with the distribution of the Production. 
However, under no circumstance may such assignee sub-license or archive any Content except to the extent and in the 
form that such Content is contained in the Production.    
 
11.  Credit and Copyright Notice 
 
Licensee will give NBC an appropriate credit ("NBCUniversal Archives") in the end credits of the Production at least as 
prominent in size and placement as that accorded any other supplier of content used in the Production. In the case of 
still images for editorial uses, Licensee shall include a copyright notice and credit adjacent to each image. In the case of 
footage posted on line for editorial uses, Licensee shall include a copyright notice and credit adjacent to each link where 
the footage is posted. Licensee represents and warrants that its use of the Content in the Production will not affect 
NBC’s continued and separate copyrights in and ownership of the Content or the programs from which it is taken. 
Licensee will affix an appropriate Licensee copyright notice in the Production. 
 
12. Termination; Withdrawal 
 
In addition to any other remedies, NBC may terminate this Agreement and revoke any rights granted if Licensee 
materially breaches any term of the Agreement. Upon termination, cancellation or expiration of this Agreement, 
neither Licensee nor any other person or entity covered by the license granted in this Agreement will have any right to 
make any use of the Content. Such termination will not suspend, alleviate or otherwise impact Licensee’s payment 
obligations under this Agreement.  Upon notice from NBC that the Content may be subject to a claim for which NBC 
may be liable, NBC may require Licensee immediately to stop using the Content. NBC will use best commercially 
feasible efforts to provide comparable Content, as determined by NBC in its reasonable judgment, for no additional 
charge, subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement. 
 
13. Confirmation of Use 
 
At NBC's request, a copy of the Production shall be provided to NBC for the purpose of verifying that Licensee has 
complied with the terms and conditions of this Agreement. 
[PAGE 112]
 
Meg Nakahara 
Account Manager 
(212) 664-2236 
meg.nakahara@nbcuni.com 
  
LICENSE AGREEMENT 
(  
 
 
4 
NBCUniversal:2265328v2 
 
14.  Miscellaneous 
 
The parties to this Agreement are independent contractors with respect to each other, and nothing in this Agreement 
shall create any association, partnership, joint venture or agency relationship between the parties. The illegality, 
invalidity or unenforceability of any specific provision shall in no way affect the remainder of this Agreement. No 
modifications of this Agreement will be effective unless set forth in writing signed by both parties. A waiver by either 
party of any of the terms and conditions of this Agreement shall not be deemed or construed to be a waiver of such 
term or condition for the future, or of any subsequent breach thereof.
  This Agreement shall be construed under the 
laws of the State of New York. The parties irrevocably consent that the state and federal courts located in the County of 
New York in the State of New York shall have exclusive jurisdiction. This paragraph shall survive the termination or the 
expiration of this Agreement. This is the entire agreement and it supersedes all prior oral or written understandings and 
communications concerning the Content.    
 
ACCEPTED AND AGREED: 
 
 
NBC News Archives LLC, 
A Division of NBCUniversal, LLC  
  
  
  
Signature:  Signature:  
Print:  Print:  
Title:  Title:  
Date:  Date:  
Email:  Email:  
 
[PAGE 113]
y and between PARAMOUNT PICTURES CORPORATION 
("Producer"), located at 
Producer has requested the use of thirty three seconds of film clips from the above-referenced Property (the "Material") as 
background video playback within the upcoming feature film entitled the "Picture"). Producer agrees that the 
Material shall not be shown on more than 80% of the screen in the Picture at any time. Producer agrees that the usage of the 
Material in the Picture and the context in which it is used shall conform specifically to the usage set forth, and there shall not be any 
direct or indirect use of or reference to the Property elsewhere in the Picture or otherwise. 
This will confirm that PPC has no objection to Producer's non-exclusive use of the Material as aforesaid and PPG agrees to make 
the Material available to Producer subject to the following terms and conditions: 
1. The Material, as incorporated in the Picture, may be exhibited in all media, worldwide in perpetuity. Producer has no right 
to exhibit or otherwise use, or to cause, authorize or permit others to exhibit or otherwise use the Material except as set forth in this 
Agreement. Without limiting the foregoing, the Material may not be used in any advertising and promotion of the Picture. Producer 
shall have no right to edit or to otherwise alter the 
2. Producer shall pay all laboratory and other costs that may be involved in making the Material available to Producer and in 
editing and printing the same. 
3. It is expressly understood and agreed that PPC's waiver of objection hereunder to Producer's use of the Material is given 
only insofar as PPC is concerned and that PPC makes no warranty or representation whatsoever with respect to the nature or 
extent of its rights, if any, in and to the Material. Producer shall be solely responsible for obtaining any and all further clearances, 
releases, consents and authorizations that are~required from all other persons or entities and for all payments 
with respect thereto, including, but not limited t~any and all performer(s), appearing in the Material, and from all 
unions and guilds having jurisdiction over the Property, to the extent required under the applicable collective bargaining 
agreements. 
4. In addition to payment of costs referred to in Paragraphs 2 and 3 above, and in consideration of PPC's waiver of objection 
--~-
ereunder, Producer shall pay to PPC a non-refundable, non-returna ble total fee of Fifteen Thousand Dollars 
xclusive of the fee pursuant to Paragraph 2). Pa ment shall be due u on Producer 's si nin of thi 
Please make check a able to Paramount Pictures Cor ora i n 
6. Without limiting Producer's obligations under Paragraph 3 above, Producer shall indemnify, hold harmless, and defend 
PPC, its parent, affiliated and subsidiary companies, and its and their officers, directors, agents and employees ("lndemnitees") 
from and against any and all liabilities, claims, causes of action, suits, losses, damages, fines, judgments, settlements and 
expenses (including any and all attorney's fees and court costs) which may be suffered, m ade or incurred by any of such 
lndemnitees arising directly or i directly out of the use of the Material by Producer and any breach of any warranties, 
representations and agreements de by Pr du er herein. 
7. Producer represents and ntained in the context in which the Material is used will be in any way 
derogatory to the Property, any person connected with the production of the Property or depicted therein or to the literary or 
dramatic material upon which It is based. 
8. PPC reserves all of its rights in and to the Property and the Material. The Picture shall bear the copyright notice required 
under U.S. copyright law, and any copyright in such Picture to the extent of Material used therein shall be held in trust for PPG 
and/or the copyright proprietor of the Property if any other than PPC. 
[PAGE 114]
9. It is understood and agreed that Producer's use of the Material shall in no event be deemed to constitute the placement of 
commercial time by PPG. 
10. Producer agrees that the following visual notice will be given in the end credits of the Picture: 
e ng o use e a ena as gran e ere1n s a not e ass1gne or su licensed, in whole or in part, by Producer, 
except to authorized distributors~ 
13. This Agreement canno~altered without the written consent of PPG. Please note that Producer is 
not authorized to use the Material excepting upon the conditions stated above. 
14. This Agreement shall be construed and interpreted pursuant to the laws of the State of California, and the parties hereto 
submit and consent to the exclusive jurisdiction of the courts of the State of California, including Federal Courts located therein, 
in any action brought to enforce (or otherwise relating to) this Agreement. 
15. This Agreement (including any exhibits and schedules which are attached hereto and made a part hereof by this 
reference), when signed by the parties, shall constitute the entire understanding of the parties with respect to the subject matter, 
superseding all prior and contemporaneous promises, agreements, and understandings, whether written or oral, pertaining thereto 
and cannot be modified except by a written instrument signed by the parties hereto, nor may it be amended or rescinded, other than 
as provided by its terms, except by a writing duly executed by an authorized officer of the party to be charged. 
Please signify acceptance of the above terms and conditions by signing in the space provided below. 
AGREED TO AND ACCEPTED: 
PARAMOUNT PICTURES CORPORATION 
Sign: _________ Date: ___ _ Sign: _ _________ Date: ____ _ 
Print: Print: 
Title: Title: 
[PAGE 115]
As of 
SONY PICTURES STUDIOS, INC. 
10202 West Washington Boulevard 
Culver City, California 90232 
Re: 
Dear Sir/Madame: 
•I 
We have advised you that we are about to produce a documentary entitled 
' ~("PROGRAM") and that we desire to include therein excerpts ("FOOTAGE") 
~s ("PICTURES") more fully described on, and for the specific use as set forth in 
Schedule "A" attached hereto and incorporated herein by this reference. 
The license fee, if any, specified in Schedule "A", shall be due and payable 
immediately upon the execution of this Agreement, is non-refundable, and Sony Pictures 
Studios, Inc. receipt of the fee shall be a condition precedent to the effectiveness of the 
Agreement and you consent to our use of the FOOTAGE upon and subject to the following 
terms and conditions: 
1. You grant to us without warranty or representation of any kind a non-exclusive 
and non-transferable license to include the FOOTAGE in the PROGRAM and to exhibit, 
market and exploit the same as part of (but not separate from) the PROGRAM and for no 
other use or purpose, provided that we shall have the right to assign the Program to our 
broadcast licensees. 
2. We will not have the right to, and we expressly agree that we will not at any time 
license or authorize any person to use, exploit, distribute, exhibit, broadcast, or rebroadcast 
any of the FOOTAGE or any portion thereof (a) except as a part of the PROGRAM, or (b) in 
any manner not herein specifically authorized by you. Further, we agree that we have no right 
to edit or otherwise alter the FOOTAGE, the music contained therein, or any portion thereof. 
3. We will not use your name, logo or trademark for any purpose without your 
written consent first had and obtained. 
4. We acknowledge that the use of the FOOTAGE, portions thereof, or any music 
and any master recordings thereof also require additional consents or licenses. Accordingly, 
we undertake that as a condition for the use of any of the FOOTAGE or portion thereof, we 
will at our sole cost and expense, obtain all consents and licenses and other permissions which 
may be required from such persons, publishers, guilds or unions whose consents, licenses or 
permissions are so required. We acknowledge that you make no warranty or representation as 
to your right to authorize us to use any likenesses or performances contained in the 
FOOTAGE. Ifby reason of use by us of the FOOTAGE, or any portion thereo~ any person 
including any person whose likeness or performance is reproduced (or any guild or union or 
other person acting on his or her behalf) shall make any claim, including, without limitation, 
1 
[PAGE 116]
any claim for the payment of money for any reason, the satisfaction and discharge of any such 
claim shall be our sole responsibility and we shall take such actions as may be necessary or 
appropriate in the defense of such claim and shall pay any amount required to be paid on 
account thereof. If the FOOTAGE contains copyrighted material licensed from a third party, 
(including but not limited to film clips, still photographs, posters, music , etc. embodied in the 
film clip being licensed) or music and master recordings controlled by you, it shall be our sole 
responsibility to secure all additional consents, licenses and permissions as may be necessary 
for the use of such material. 
5. We will, at our own cost and expense, indemnify and defend you, and your 
officers, employees, successors and assigns for and hold you and such parties harmless from 
and against any and all suits, claims, losses, costs and damages (including reasonable 
attorneys' fees) resulting from or arising out of any breach by us of any of the provisions 
hereof, or any claim or suit made or brought against you or any of said parties, based directly 
or indirectly, upon any use of the FOOTAGE by us. 
6. The PROGRAM shall not be derogatory to the film industry or to you or to any 
motion picture photoplay produced or distributed by you and the FOOTAGE will not be used 
in a manner that would be derogatory to the PICTURES or to the person( s) appearing or 
Clepicted therein or the literary material upon whic the PICTURES were based. 
7. We will protect the FOOTAGE by including on the PROGRAM the appropriate 
copyright notice or notices under the Universal Copyright Convention and by taking all other 
steps necessary or appropriate to protect your rights in the FOOTAGE and to prevent the 
FOOTAGE from falling into the public domain, it being understood that we will hold in trust 
for you our copyright in the PROGRAM, to the extent of the use therein of the FOOTAGE. If 
the foregoing appropriate copyright notice is not included on the PROGRAM, at your request 
we shall add the statement in substantially the form "Contains excerpts from motion pictures 
held under copyright and licensed by Columbia Pictures Industries, Inc ." 
8. Without prejudice to any other right or remedy which may be available to you, 
including, without limitation, your right to enjoin the use of the FOOTAGE in the 
PROGRAM, this license shall be immediately terminable and voidable at your election if we 
breach any term hereof . 
9. We shall pay all laboratory and other out-of-pocket costs that may be involved 
in obtaining the FOOTAGE. 
10. We will make available to you a copy of the Program for the purpose of 
verification of licensed material. 
11. We are under no obligation to use the FOOTAGE in the PROGRAM. Ifwe 
elect not to use the FOOTAGE in the PROGRAM, all license fees as well as all laboratory and 
shipping charges remain due in full. There is no kill fee or refund. 
12. Other than as may be required by any applicable law, government order or 
regulation, or by order or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, neither party shall 
divulge or announce, or in any manner disclose to any third party, any confidential information 
or matters revealed to the other party pursuant hereto, or any of the specific terms and 
2 
[PAGE 117]
conditions of the Agreement, and both parties shall do all such things as are reasonably 
necessary to prevent any such information becoming known to any party other than the parties 
involved with the transaction. 
13. The substantive laws (as distinguished from the choice oflaw rules) of the State 
of California and the United States of America applicable to contracts made and to be 
performed entirely in California shall govern (i) the validity and interpretation of this 
Agreement, (ii) the performance by the parties of their respective obligations (iii) all other 
causes of action (whether sounding in contract or in tort) arising out of or relating to this 
agreement or its cancellation or termination. 
14. This agreement shall be construed and enforced in accordance with the laws 
of the state of California without regard to the choice of law principles thereof. The parties 
agree that any and all disputes or controversies of any nature between them arising at any 
time shall be determined by binding arbitration in accordance with the Commercial 
Arbitration Rules of the American Arbitration Association ("AAA") before a single neutral 
arbitrator ("Arbitrator"). The Arbitrator shall be an attorney or retired judge with at least ten 
(10) years experience in the entertainment industry and shall be mutually agreed upon by 
the parties. If the parties are unable to agree on an Arbitrator, the Arbitrator shall be 
appointed by the AAA. The fees of the Arbitrator shall be borne equally by the parties, 
provided that the Arbitrator may require that such fees be home in such other manner as 
Arbitrator determines is required in order for this arbitration clause to be enforceable under 
applicable law. The parties shall be entitled to conduct discovery in accordance with 
Section 1283.05 of the California Code of Civil Procedure, provided that (a) the Arbitrator 
must authorize such discovery in advance based on findings that the material sought is 
relevant to the issues in dispute and that the nature and scope of such discovery is 
reasonable under the circumstances, and (b) discovery shall be limited to depositions and 
production of documents unless the Arbitrator finds that another method of discovery (e.g., 
interrogatories) is the most reasonable and cost efficient method of obtaining the 
information sought. There shall be a record of the proceedings at the Arbitration hearing 
and the Arbitrator shall issue a Statement of Decision setting forth the factual and legal 
basis for the Arbitrator's decision. If neither party gives written notice requesting an appeal 
within ten (10) business days after the issuance of the Statement of Decision, the Arbitrator's 
decision shall be final and binding as to all matters of substance and procedure, and may be 
enforced by a petition to the California Superior Court, which may be made ex parte, for 
confirmation and enforcement of the award. If either party gives written notice requesting 
an appeal within ten (10) business days after the issuance of the Statement of Decision, the 
award of the Arbitrator shall be appealed to three (3) neutral Arbitrators (the "Appellate 
Arbitrators"), each of whom shall have the same qualifications and be selected through the 
same procedure as the Arbitrator. The appealing party shall file its appellate brief within 
thirty (30) days after its written notice requesting the appeal and the other party shall file its 
brief within thirty (30) days thereafter. The Appellate Arbitrators shall thereupon review the 
decision of the Arbitrator applying the same standards of review and all of the same 
presumptions as if the Appellate Arbitrators were a California Court of Appeals reviewing a 
judgment of the California Superior Court, except that the Appellate Arbitrators shall in all 
cases issue a final award and shall not remand the matter to the Arbitrator. The decision of 
the Appellate Arbitrators shall be final and binding as to all matters of substance and 
procedure, and may be enforced by a petition to the California Superior Court, which may 
be made ex parte, for confirmation and enforcement of the award. The party appealing the 
3 
[PAGE 118]
decision of the Arbitrator shall pay all costs and expenses of the appeal, including the fees of 
the Appellate Arbitrators and the reasonable outside attorneys' fees of the opposing party, 
unless the decision of the Arbitrator is reversed, in which event the expenses of the appeal 
shall be borne as determined by the Appellate Arbitrators. The Arbitrator shall have the 
power to enter temporary restraining order, preliminary and permanent injunctions. Prior to 
the appointment to the Arbitrator or for remedies beyond the jurisdiction of an Arbitrator, at 
any time, either party may seek pendent-lite relief in a court of competent jurisdiction in Los 
Angeles County, California without thereby waiving its right to arbitration of the dispute or 
controversy under this section. All arbitration proceedings (including proceedings before 
the Appellate Arbitrators) shall be closed to the public and confidential and all records 
relating thereto shall be permanently sealed, except as necessary to obtain court 
confirmation of the arbitration award. The provision for this paragraph shall supersede any 
inconsistent provision of any prior agreement between the parties. Nothing in this 
paragraph shall prevent either party from seeking interlocutory and/ or injunctive relief from 
a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to other provision of the Agreement. 
The parties hereby waive the right to jury trial with respect to all claims and issues 
arising out of or relating to this agreement whether sounding in contract or tort, and 
including any claim for fraudulent inducement thereof. 
AGREED AND ACCEPTED: 
SONY PICTURES STUDIOS, INC. 
By= - -----=-= =-- ­
Vice President, Content Licensing 
Wl • •• ·~ • . . ~ . I •4 
Its: 
4 
[PAGE 119]
FOOTAGE: 
USE OF FOOTAGE: 
RIGHTS: 
FEE: 
CREDIT REQUIRED: 
SCHEDULE "A" 
.... -
I••••-
For inclusion in a 
All media, worldwide, in perpetuity. 
For use in connection with the Program only. No 
separate use for advertising or promotion. 
-
5 
[PAGE 120]
 
Scott Norman 
Sales and Rights Manager 
(212) 413-5989 
scott.norman@nbcuni.com 
  
LICENSE AGREEMENT 
(J ) 
 
 
1 
 
This license agreement (“Agreement”) is entered into between NBC News Archives LLC, A Division of NBCUniversal 
Media, LLC, and its parent, subsidiary and affiliated companies ( "NBC") and   ("Licensee")  
located at , regarding the use of NBC NEWS content 
("Content") in a production ("Production") titled: 
 
 
 
1.  Footage 
 
The Content which is the subject of this Agreement: 
 
   
   
    
   
 
  
   
 
 
2.  Ownership and Reservation of Rights 
 
As between the parties to this Agreement, Licensee acknowledges that NBC is the sole owner of the Content, including 
all copyright and other exclusive rights in it. This Agreement does not transfer any ownership rights or copyrights in the 
Content to Licensee, all of which shall remain NBC’s property.  NBC shall at all times throughout the universe have the 
right to use and authorize others to use the Content or any portion thereof in any manner. 
 
 
3.  Third Party Clearances 
 
The Content may contain listed restrictions, including, without limitation, restrictions as to time, manner, industry 
and territory of use, and required pre-approval by a depicted person or their representative. The absence of such a 
listed restriction is not a guarantee that there are no limitations on use or required consents.  Licensee, not NBC, 
shall be solely responsible for obtaining all third party required consents, clearances and releases, and for making all 
payments of any associated costs and expenses directly to third party that are necessary to use the Content, including, 
but not limited to: consents from those who appear recognizably in the Content; moral rights or the equivalent; rights 
from third parties for use of their material in the Content including but not limited to products, logos, storefronts, 
mastheads, works of fine art, footage and photos; consent from those whose services are used in conjunction with 
the Content; as well as consents from or payments to any applicable  unions, guilds, leagues or professional 
organizations.  If music is in the Content, it is the responsibility of Licensee to obtain applicable licenses, such as 
synchronization, master and performing rights licenses.    
 
 
 
 
[PAGE 121]
 
Scott Norman 
Sales and Rights Manager 
(212) 413-5989 
scott.norman@nbcuni.com 
  
LICENSE AGREEMENT 
( ) 
 
 
2 
 
 
4.  Rights Granted 
 
NBC grants Licensee a non-exclusive license to use the Content solely in the Production in the following media, territory 
and term: 
 
Rights Package:   All Media, (excluding Theatrical Distribution and advertising), Worldwide, in perpetuity, includes Film 
Festival showings. 
Expires On:  in perpetuity 
 
5.  Limitations of Use 
 
The use of any NBC still photographs, graphics, logos, trademarks, talent (voice-over or image) or use of the Content for 
promotional, advertising or marketing purposes is strictly prohibited  without prior written permission from NBC, 
except as noted in paragraph 1 [Footage].  Other than a credit as noted in paragraph 11 below, NBC cannot be identified 
as the provider of the Content without prior written permission from NBC, except as noted in paragraph 1.  Provided, 
however, that if NBC’s “bug” or other watermark appears in the Content, the “bug” or watermark must not be altered 
and must be visible in the Content unless NBC approves otherwise in writing or paragraph 1.  Other than for use as part 
of the Production, Licensee may not make any reproductions or use of the Content.  Licensee represents and warrants 
that the use of the Content and the Production will not defame or constitute trade disparagement of NBC, its officers, 
directors, agents, employees, affiliates, parents or its subsidiaries or of any production from which the Content is taken 
or which is produced or distributed by NBC or any of the foregoing entities. 
 
6.  Fees and Expenses 
 
The license fees for the use of the Content for the rights granted above and outstanding services are listed below. 
 
Service Notes Qty Unit Price Total Price 
     
 
     
 
 
 
The license fee is non-refundable and is based on the final Content ordered. All fees and expenses are due and payable 
within thirty (30) days of receipt of invoice. Licensee shall forward an executed pdf copy of this Agreement to Scott 
Norman - scott.norman@nbcuni.com at NBC News Archives LLC. This Agreement is not valid unless the Agreement is 
fully executed and Licensee has paid all fees.   Licensee is responsible for the payment of all applicable sales and use 
taxes, customs and duties.  Licensee shall pay all research, shipping, material and transfer costs in connection with this 
Agreement, even if the Content is provided but not used. 
 
 
 
 
 
[PAGE 122]
 
Scott Norman 
Sales and Rights Manager 
(212) 413-5989 
scott.norman@nbcuni.com 
  
LICENSE AGREEMENT 
( ) 
 
 
3 
 
 
7.  Protection of Content; File Deletion or Return of Content 
 
Licensee agrees to use commercially reasonable efforts to provide adequate security to prevent theft, pirating, and 
copying of the Content . Licensee shall give prompt notice to NBC of any such unauthorized activity, and shall take all 
steps necessary to stop such unauthorized activity. Without limiting the foregoing, if use of Content is permitted on the 
Internet, or any other online or interactive media , Licensee  shall take commercially reasonable, technically feasible 
steps to impede digital theft and ensure that the Content remains in the linear production for which it was licensed and 
cannot be searched by shot and downloaded in broadcast or substantially comparable quality. Upon the earlier of the 
completion of the Production, the expiration or earlier termination of this Agreement, Licensee shall promptly delete 
the Content from its computers or other electronic storage systems and shall ensure that Licensee’s subcontractors do 
likewise. If the Content is not provided in a digital form, the Content and any copies of it must be returned to NBC at 
Licensee’s expense. Under no circumstances may Licensee retain Content supplied by NBC other than that portion of 
the Content that is incorporated into the Production. 
 
8.  Disclaimer of Warranty or Representation; Limitation on Recovery 
 
Except as otherwise specifically stated in paragraph 2 above, NBC makes no warranty or representation, express or 
implied, of any kind with respect to the Content or its use, including but not limited to disclaiming all warranties of 
merchantability and fitness for a particular purpose.  Licensee acknowledges that due to technological limitations, the 
Content may not be of broadcast quality.  Licensee acknowledges that its damages in the event of NBC’s breach of this 
Agreement shall be limited to recovery of the fees actually paid by Licensee to NBC as set forth in this Agreement. 
NBC’s liability under any theory shall not exceed the return of the amount of fe es actually paid by Licensee, and under 
no circumstances will NBC be liable for any special, indirect, consequential or incidental damages or lost profits or any 
other damages. 
 
9.  Indemnification 
 
Licensee agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless NBC (and its current and future parent and subsidiary 
companies, affiliated entities, successors and assigns and their respective officers, directors, agents and employees) 
from any actions, claims, liabilities, damages, loss or costs (including attorneys ’ fees) of any kind or nature whatsoever 
which may arise out of Licensee's use of the Content or Licensee's breach of this Agreement.  This indemnity shall 
survive the termination of this Agreement.   
 
10.  Sub-license 
 
Licensee may assign its rights under this Agreement solely in connection with the distribution of the Production. 
However, under no circumstance may such assignee sub-license or archive any Content except to the extent and in the 
form that such Content is contained in the Production.    
 
 
 
 
 
11.  Credit and Copyright Notice 
[PAGE 123]
 
Scott Norman 
Sales and Rights Manager 
(212) 413-5989 
scott.norman@nbcuni.com 
  
LICENSE AGREEMENT 
-  
 
 
4 
 
Licensee will give NBC an appropriate credit ("NBCUniversal Archives") in the end credits of the Production at least as 
prominent in size and placement as that accorded any other supplier of content used in the Production. In the case of 
still images for editorial uses, Licensee shall include a copyright notice and credit adjacent to each image. In the case of 
footage posted on line for editorial uses, Licensee shall include a copyright notice and credit adjacent to each link where 
the footage is posted. Licensee represents and warrants that its use of the Content in the Production will not affect 
NBC’s continued and separate copyrights in and ownership of the Content or the programs from which it is taken. 
Licensee will affix an appropriate Licensee copyright notice in the Production. 
 
12. Confirmation of Use 
 
At NBC's request, a copy of the Production shall be provided to NBC for the purpose of verifying that Licensee has 
complied with the terms and conditions of this Agreement. 
 
13.  Miscellaneous 
 
The parties to this Agreement are independent contractors with respect to each other, and nothing in this Agreement 
shall create any association, partnership, joint venture or agency relationship between the parties. The illegality, 
invalidity or unenforceability of any specific provision shall in no way affect the remainder of this Agreement. No 
modifications of this Agreement will be effective unless set forth in writing signed by both parties. A waiver by either 
party of any of the terms and conditions of this Agreement shall not be deemed or construed to be a waiver of such 
term or condition for the future, or of any subsequent breach thereof.
  This Agreement shall be construed under the 
laws of the State of New York. The parties irrevocably consent that the state and federal courts located in the County of 
New York in the State of New York shall have exclusive jurisdiction. This paragraph shall survive the termination or the 
expiration of this Agreement. This is the entire agreement and it supersedes all prior oral or written understandings and 
communications concerning the Content.    
 
 
14. INJUNCTIVE RELIEF 
If Licensee breaches its obligations hereunder, the damage, if any, caused NBC shall not be irreparable or sufficient to 
entitle the undersigned to injunctive or other equitable relief.  Consequently, NBC's rights and remedies shall be limited 
to the right, if any, to obtain damages at law and NBC shall not have any right in such event to terminate or rescind this 
agreement or any of the rights granted to Licensee hereunder or to enjoin or restrain the development, production, 
advertising, promotion, distribution, exhibition or exploitation of the Production and/or any of Licensee's rights 
hereunder. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[PAGE 124]
 
Scott Norman 
Sales and Rights Manager 
(212) 413-5989 
scott.norman@nbcuni.com 
  
LICENSE AGREEMENT 
( ) 
 
 
5 
 
ACCEPTED AND AGREED: 
 
 
NBC News Archives LLC, 
A Division of NBCUniversal, LLC  
  
  
  
Signature:  Signature:  
Print:  Print:  
Title:  Title:  
Date:  Date:  
Email:  Email:  
 
[PAGE 125]
Licensee: 
Address: 
Attention: 
ABCNEWS VideoSource 
License Agreement & Basic Provisions 
No.-
2. Grant of Rights: ABCNEWS VideoSource (the Licepsor) hereby grants to Licensee the !itnited, non-
exclusive and non-transferable license to show footage the Foota e · 
footage): various clips of approved ABC Ne\VS talent 
3. Program Licensed Use: 
4. Territory: 
5. Licensed Media: 
6. Term: 
7. License Fee Per Second: 
8. Minimum License Fee: 
9. Seconds Ordered: 
Worldwide 
I! media (excluding Theatrical) and in context ad 
and promotion {for b-roH onl ) 
Perpetuity 
I I I • I ________. 
and are hereby incorporated by reference. To the extent there is any inconsistency between the Basic 
Provisions and the Standard Tenns and Conditions, the Basic Provisions shall govern. 
11. Additional Terms: It is understood that this tee arrangement is non-precedential. 
AGREED AND ACCEPTED: 
For Licensee: .. S VideoSource 
Signature: 
Date: Date: 
[PAGE 126]
ABCNEWS VideoSource 
.STANDARD TERMS AND CONDITIONS 
1. Grant of License; Upon receipt by Lic.ensor ofthis.A greeinent~ signed by Liceilsee;·Licensee is.granted 
Qy.'i,.icensor, a non -~,x~ lu$i ve, non-tr.ansferab'Je license to use the FMtage pursuant. to the terms ofthis 
Agreement. 
2. Limited Use: The. Footage may not be used i'n conoectiOn with the exploitation, advertising, publicity or 
prpm·otion of the pfoduction·unle5s.otherwise agreed to in ad va nc ~ in Writing. ~·Y Licensor. Licensee 
(u1thet a·grees thafttie.Pootag. will not be used in any~ari ner: hich is <letrjmental o.r disparaging tp 
.Licensor. 
3. Tertitoi'.y: Any contemplated use of the Footage outsi(le of the Territory will require a .supplementary 
licerise from Licens0r, 
4. Crea_it: Whep and If cred!ts are fUfl'·irr l.;i~n~e~'s produ.ction., Li~~nsee. sha!l give Licensonuron".'.screer\. 
vjsµal credft {"Foo~age :cou!:tesy·ofA8CNEWS VlDEOSOl.iRCEn, displaye·d in the-:end titles of the 
pr:odµction ina similar manner an:d duratiori as o.tiier credits Whieh·are.ruh. Other than the foregoing, 
AB~ .w:.ill not be identifj ed. in. any way ~s the footage supplier. without ABC's expr.ess written 
pe:rmi~sion. . 
s.. ;\µqltjqoal Coiisents'. .It is .&pe~Ci fical Jy understood by Licensee thaf by. entering into tl1 is a,greementi 
Licensorfai~ not r.epr.esented,:and does·not {epresent, that Licensor iS"graniing Li~nsee ~ny right 
whatsoever either than ·a lice rise· fo .use the:Footige as-· set forth in'lhe Agreement. 'Licensee shall 
obtain, at Licensee's own·expense, requisite corisenisand rel eas~s from any individual performers, or 
other persons who appear recognizably iii ihe Footage; .and any n.~ce ssary consents .and releases. from 
the·Writers Guild of'America ("WGA>!), American Federation-qfTe leyision arn;I Radio. Artists 
("AFTRA"), Dfrecfors Guild 6f America.("DGA"), .Americ:an Federation ofMu s i ~lans (''AFrvl';), and 
~ny either gu 1ld or un·i' 0)1 which might ha,ve jurisdiction· ()Ve( the· e~p 19 ita~ion of the F.o.ot~ge as well ~s 
ari.y other entities such"as, 'but not limited to-, producijon .COIJ'lP~l'!ies , disfrib.utors, s po rt~ clu\)s., or·. 
associations \vhose pem1fsslon or re.lease may be required. If any music is included..in th..e' Footage, 
J icenses inust be obta,ined for the use ofany·master rec.ord in gs .o.r. mt.1siCal copyrights c<;>ntained inJhe 
Foqtage, including music. publishing, 'and/or synchronizatjon licenses ~nci/or perform an·~e rights. It is 
agreed tha.t Li<;ensee,shall be solely.responsible.to t4e perf1:mners, rriusic rights holclers, unions and 
guilds for the p<1yme.nts qf any fees, expense!>., costs, penalti ~s, res\d.uals or any oth.!!r ·s·ums ~vhich may 
b.ecome:due.under th~ir reJ;pective rµJes a.nd . r~g4 1ations: fTom Li¢~i1see1 s exp!Oitation Qfthe.F.ootage, 
· Mor!!Q,>,7.~r. Li~n·see agrees to .mal\e t.imel}''Payment;.<U L\ceilse.e's·owh.'expense; ofany an·d alt f~s. 
~xpens·es. costs, penalties, resldu«:ils· ora.ny other sums whiCh tna'y be: required. 
6. Nan·ation/Voice~over :: No. Footage may be· used which contains narration or voke-o ver without the· 
e~pres~ specific written permission of Lic·en·s0r, 
7. Security: Licenseeshall·pmvide adequate sect.itifyto prevent theft, pifa~ing, and unauth~rized 
.exhiliition, duplication or copyii11rofthe'Footage: License·e shall gjve:proinpi notice. ~o-l. icensor .pf any 
·such·unauthorfied activity. . 
8, Payment: Lfoenseewill be invoiced for all payments due under th.i.s agreement. NO USE MAY .BE. 
MADE OF THE· FOOT AGE UNTIL A FULLY EXECUTED COPY OF THIS AGRE~MENT IS. 
RECEIVED BY LICENSOR AND ALL PAYMENTS bUEA n:E MADE TO LlGENSOR, All .. 
. PliY.ments. are. made ex1<li1siv~ .c:>f any appli'c~b i e .taxes: described uri.de~ p.ari,tgraph9 .b~lt1w. . 
[PAGE 127]
9. Taxes: Licensee agrees to pay all foreign taxes (including, but not limited to, any withholding taxes), 
sales, use, property and similar taxes properly in1posed in connection with this Agreen1ent. Licensee 
shall be responsible for filing any tax returns or repo1ts,and n1aking any remittances to the appropriate 
governmental authorities with respect to these taxes. Any interest or penalties arising from the failure 
to file such returns or repo1ts or to make such remittances on a ti1nely basis shall be the sole 
responsibility of Licensee. 
10. Vie\vin!! Copy/Footage Transfer Costs: Licensee shall pay all shipping, 1naterial and transfer costs in 
connection with this Agreement. It is understood that these costs will be payable even if the footage is 
provided but not used. Title to the dubs shall pass to the Licensee upon the Licensor making the 
product available for delivery. 
11. Pavment of Licensee Fee: Licensee will be charged the License Fee for all clean Footage ordered at the 
per second rale set forth in the Basic Provisions. 
!2. Mini1nun1 License Fee: In the event footage is provided but not used, Licensee will be responsible for 
the Miniinum License Fee set fo1th in the Basic Provisions. 
13. Return of Footage: lt is mandatory that a!\ Licensor supplied dubs, transfers and Footage materials be 
returned to Licensor at Licensee's expense immediately after use. In addition, Licensee shall furnish 
Licensor a digital \Vatennarked file of the Program if so requested by Licensor. 
14. No Assignment Neither the Footage nor any of the rights or obligations hereunder may be assigned, 
sub licensed, sold or transferred by Licensee to any other entity, person, firm or corporation, other than 
as required by the Licensee for the production and distribution of the Progra1n. 
J 5. Jnden1nlfication: Licensee agrees to defend, indemnify and hold Licensor and their respective parent 
and, subsidiary cotnpanies, predecessors, successors and assigns and the respective officers, directors, 
agents and e1nployees of each, hannless from and against any and all liability, losses, actions, claims, 
demands or damages (including, \Vithout limitation, reasonable outside attorney's fees and punitive 
da1nages) (collectively, "Losses") of any kind, including but not limited to, any based on libel, slander, 
or rights of privacy or publicity, or of any nature whatsoever which may arise out of Licensee's use of 
the Footage or breach ofthis Agreement; and, in this regard, Licensor agrees to give Lic_ensee prompt 
notice of any clai1n or proceeding and an opportunity to defend with counsel ofLicensee's choice 
and at Licensee's O\vn expense, and Licensor fu1ther agrees that Licensor will not settle or 
coin promise any clailn without Licensee's consen~ which .shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
Not\vithstanding1he foregoing, the indemnification obligations set forth in this paragraph shall not 
apply solely to the extent that Losses arise out of Licensor's breach of this Agreement and of its 
representations and \Varranties herein. 
l6. Warranties: Licensor warrants its authority to enter into this Agree1nent in that, subject to and without 
in any way lin1iting Licensee's obligations as set forth in Section 5 above, Licensor either owns the 
Footage or has a license to control the exhibition and distribution rights thereto. Licensee agrees that 
Licensee's da1nages hereunder, in the-event of Licensor's breach, shall be limited to recovery of the 
fees actually paid by Licensee to Licensor as set forth herein. Subject to Licensee's strict compliance 
\Vith the terins of this Airreen1ent and the scope of the license set forth herein. Licensor's ri!!hts shall 
be liinited to an action at law for dama!!es, and Licensor shall not be entitled to restrain or enjoin the 
distribution of the Program. 
17. Complete Agreement: This Agreement shall be interpreted under New York law and all disputes 
hereunder shall be brought in a Court in the State of New York. This Agree1nent constitutes the 
complete and full understanding of the parties relating to the subject matter herein contained. Ail prior 
agree1nents and understandings, lfany, between the parties are merged in this Agreeinent, which alone 
fully and completely expresses the pa1ties agree1nent. This Agreement cannot be modified except in 
\~Tiling expressly agreed to by both parties. 
[PAGE 128]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix U 
Memorandum from Alex Podobas 
[PAGE 129]
1 
TECHNOLOGICAL PROTECTION MEASURES IN DIGITAL CONTENT 
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS 
MEMORANDUM OF ALEX PODOBAS  
DECEMBER 18, 2017 
Biography 
Alex M. Podobas is a Senior Cybersecurity Analyst/Penetration Tester at US ProTech, Inc. He 
specializes in analyzing web applications and networks for security vulnerabilities, developing 
applications to parse “Big Data” sets to analyze anomalous security events, and reviewing web 
applications, databases, and other cloud-related technologies for compliance with federal and 
state data privacy statutes. Mr. Podobas has a Juris Doctor from the University of California, 
Irvine School of Law and an undergraduate degree from the University of California-Los 
Angeles 
This memorandum presents Mr. Podobas’s analysis alone and does not represent in any way the 
opinions of the US ProTech, Inc. or any other organization or person. 
Introduction 
The number of software tools and services specifically built to deliver media content online has 
risen as the Internet has increasingly become a distribution system for video streaming. 
Encryption measures are routinely integrated into online distribution platforms to protect digital 
video files during storage and transmission. This memorandum discusses several of the most 
prominent encryption measures in use today. 
WebM 
Definition 
WebM constitutes a set of open-source, royalty free software technologies used to support 
playback of audio-visual media files primarily in web-based context. Per its open-source project 
website: “WebM defines the file container structure, video and audio formats. WebM files 
consist of video streams compressed with the VP8 or VP9 video codecs and audio streams 
compressed with the Vorbis or Opus audio codecs.”
1  WebM technology is deployed on 
                                                
1 See https://www.webmproject.org/about/. 
[PAGE 130]
2 
thousands of websites worldwide. Its most prominent use case includes generic YouTube, which 
makes WebM the default transcoding scheme for video uploads.2 
WebM utilizes encryption and decryption of media files through the AES (Advanced Encryption 
Standard), a FIPS (Federal Information Processing Standard)-compliant cryptographic algorithm 
defined at 66 FR 63369.
3 AES operates as a “symmetric block cipher,” using a fixed-length bit 
and a single key used to encrypt (encipher) and decrypt (decipher) AES-protected data.4  
DVR Systems 
DVR stands for “Digital Video Recorder.” The purpose of such systems is to digitally save 
copies of video content onto storage devices such as USB sticks, external hard drives, or hard 
drives internal to the DVR itself. DVR systems are a general descriptor for the functionality they 
provide, and are not a brand identity or trademark associated with one particular vendor.   
Encryption on DVR Systems using HDCP 
DVR systems routinely include encryption.  
(1) HDCP:  Some DVR Systems utilize a technology named “High-bandwidth Digital 
Content Protection” (“HDCP”). This encryption technology protects the transmission 
between what device reads the content from a media source and what that device is 
connected to in order to display the media source. Thus, the purpose of HDCP is to 
regulate which displays are authorized to transmit the audio and/or video content of 
HDCP-protected files at the “last stage” of the transmission: the connection between a 
device and the display, and whether the display can ultimately render the audio and visual 
aspects of HDCP-protected content.
5 
(2) HDCP Components. HDCP-protected systems typically include four components: 
source (such as a set-up box like a DVR or a DVD or Blu-Ray player); sink (the display 
that receives content and renders it on a display for viewing); repeaters (such as audio 
                                                
2 See https://youtube.googleblog.com/2011/04/mmm-mmm-good-youtube-videos-now-
served.html.  
3 See https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2001/12/06/01-30232/announcing-approval-of-
federal-information-processing-standard-fips-197-advanced-encryption-standard. 
4 The raw source code of WebM’s encryption mechanism may be found at 
https://github.com/webmproject/webm-tools/blob/master/webm_crypt/webm_crypt.cc and the 
yet un-finalized standards specification for AES support in WebM may be found at 
https://www.webmproject.org/docs/webm-encryption/.  
5  See https://www.digital-cp.com/sites/default/files/resources/HDCP_deciphered_070808.pdf at 
1. 
[PAGE 131]
3 
amplifiers or video splitters); and digital interfaces (physical input/output ports that are 
connected by a cable). HDCP protects the digital interface communication channel, and 
includes:
6 
• Digital Visual Interface (DVI) 
• DisplayPort, GVIF (Gigabit Video Interface) 
• DLI (Digital Light Interface 
• UDI (Unified Display Interface) 
 
HDCP utilizes encryption to verify that a device is authorized to perform certain content using 
authentication, authorization, and encryption. HDCP uses these principles in three distinct steps. 
In the explanation below, imagine a scenario in which an HDCP-protected Blu-Ray disc is 
inserted into a Blu-Ray player and asked to play a particular movie on a particular screen. The 
components of this example, for the sake of clarity, shall be:  
• Source: a Blu-Ray DVD  
• Transmitter 1: A device (Blu-Ray Player) that is asked to render the audio-visual 
content of a media source  
• Connector 1: an HDMI cable connected on one end to Transmitter 1 and on the other 
end to Receiver 1. 
• Receiver 1: A high-definition television set authorized to play HDTV content 
HDCP Encryption Step 1 (Authentication): 
Prior to sending any content from Source to Receiver 1, Transmitter 1 instantiates an 
authentication process with Receiver 1. The purpose of this authentication process is to confirm 
that Receive 1 is authorized to receive data from Transmitter 1. Two sets of data are used to 
identify that a certain transmitter or receiver is actually that transmitter or receiver. 
(1) Device Private Keys 
a. Transmitter 1 and Receiver 1 (like all HDCP transmitters and receivers) include 
“Device Private Keys.” These keys are unique to the transmitter or receiver that 
holds these keys, meaning that no other transmitter or receiver holds an identical 
set of Device Private Keys. Each Device Private key is a 56-bit key, and each 
                                                
6 See https://www.digital-cp.com/sites/default/files/resources/HDCP_deciphered_070808.pdf at 
3. 
[PAGE 132]
4 
transmitter or receiver holds 40 Device Private Keys which are each 56-bit length-
keys. These are never shared with other HDCP transmitters or receivers.  
(2) Key Selection Vector 
a. In addition to the Device Private Key, Receiver 1 and Transmitter 1 (like any 
receiver and transmitter) each contain a Key Selection Vector unique to the device 
that holds a Key Selection Vector. Each Key Selection Vector is  a 20-bit binary 
value and is used like a public key in public-private key exchange authentication 
mechanisms to verify the identity of a particular device.  
Step 1, Part A:  
The first part of HDCP authentication is initiated by Transmitter 1, which occurs when 
Transmitter 1 sends (1) its Key Selection Vector (again, a key akin to a public key) to Receiver 1  
and (2) a second unique value that Transmitter 1 generates. This secondary value is based on a 
proprietary algorithm licensed by the   
Step 1, Part B:  
The second part of HDCP authentication is when Receiver 1 parses Transmitter 1’s 
communication and then returns (1) its own key Selection Vector back to Transmitter 1 along 
with (2) a unique value that identifies Receiver 1 as a repeater (see “HDCP Overview 
Definitions ” above for the definition of a receiver).  
Step 1, Part C:  
If this exchange of data between Transmitter 1 and Receiver 1 is successful, then a secret value, 
shared only between Receiver 1 and Transmitter 1, is generated. This shared secret is generated 
from a proprietary algorithm licensed by Digital Content Protection LLP, and the shared secret’s 
creation involves two steps: (1) Transmitter 1 using its Device Private Key (not shared with 
Receiver 1) and Receiver 1’s Key Selection Vector and (2) Receiver 1 using its Device Private 
Key (not shared with Transmitter 1) and Transmitter 1’s Key Selection Vector 
The overall purpose of this key-based exchange serves the purpose of confirming to Transmitter 
1 that Receiver 1 is actually Receiver 1, and separately confirming to Receiver 1 that Transmitter 
1 is really Transmitter 1.  
[PAGE 133]
5 
Step 1, Part D: 
If Receiver 1 and Transmitter 1 have completed Part A, Part B, and Part C of Step 1 and 
ultimately verified to one another that each device matches the identity of what it purports to 
represent, then content may be transmitted from the Source by Transmitter 1 to Receiver 1. This 
transmission stream is encrypted using the key-based exchange authentication process described 
in Step 1. The encryption process uses two technical avenues to create an encrypted stream of 
content from Source and transmitted between Transmitter 1 and Receiver 1. 
HDCP Encryption Step 2 (conditional) 
Step 2 is a conditional step, meaning that it may or may not occur depending on whether or not 
Receiver 1 is a repeater. Suppose that instead of being a high-definition television (as the original 
example above instructs), Receiver 1 is a video-splitting device that enables the Source’s 
contents to play on multiple television screens.  If Receiver 1 is a repeater, then an intermediary 
step is performed: checking how many downstream Key Selection Vectors are present. This 
quantity is important because, as Digital Content Protection, LLC notes: “HDCP sources, 
repeaters and sinks may connect together in a tree-shaped topology with up to seven levels and 
127 devices. This enables many different combinations of devices. Encrypted HDCP content 
flows through this topology over HDCP-protected interfaces.”
7 
HDCP Encryption Step 3 (Periodic Checks) (conditional 
Step 3 does not involve the initial authentication and authorization steps, but instead involves 
subsequent authentication and authorization. Specifically, every 128 frames of video or at least 
once every two seconds (but not necessarily once per second), a certain process occurs that has 
two purposes:  
(1) Receiver 1 sends a communication back to Transmitter 1 to verify that Transmitter 1 is 
still Transmitter 1, which simultaneously confirms to Transmitter 1 that Receiver 1 is still 
Receiver 1.  
(2) Receiver 1 and Transmitter 1 communicate to verify that the encrypted stream of content 
from Source to Transmitter 1 to Receiver 1 is synchronized.   
                                                
7 See https://www.digital-cp.com/sites/default/files/resources/HDCP_deciphered_070808.pdf at 
4.  
[PAGE 134]
6 
HTML 5 Encryption 
Netflix, a major on-demand media provider, detailed its recent support for HTML 5 streaming 
video in a March 2017 Medium post.8 The company wrote, “we have launched HTML5 video on 
Chrome OS, Chrome, Internet Explorer, Safari, Opera, Firefox, and Edge on all supported 
operating systems.” In the same post, Netflix further described that “[our] adoption of HTML5 
has resulted in us contributing to a number of related industry standards,” including MPEG-
DASH, WebCrypto, and Encrypted Media Extensions. In a Comment submitted as part of the 
2014-2015 § 1201 Anticircumvention Rulemaking, HTML5’s encryption mechanism was 
discussed at the time of writing (late 2014).9  This memorandum expands upon that submission by 
discussing new or updated types of online media protection mechanisms.  
WebCrypto API 
WebCrypto is a “JavaScript API for performing a wide array of basic cryptographic operations in 
web applications,”10 including hashing, generating and verifying signatures, data encryption and 
decryption, derivation of shared secrets, and importing and exporting cryptographic keys.11 
Web applications are, of course, the means by which streaming video content is delivered to end 
customers. Netflix, Hulu, HBO Now, and YouTube are both web applications (as accessible 
from a web browser), but also operate through mobile OS-specific platforms like iOS and 
Android.  
The WebCrypto API has two features that make it relevant in the context of digital rights 
management: 
(1) Encryption without exposure of cryptographic keys: The ability to utilize private keys 
without making the contents of the key available to JavaScript. Otherwise, the risk is such 
that cryptographic content that should never be made available to the general public, like 
a private key, could operate in the web browser’s DOM tree and therefore potentially be 
exposed. Accessing the DOM tree is typically accomplished by right clicking on a web 
page and then selecting “Inspect Element” or “View Source” (or some variation thereof). 
(2) Data integrity protection: Online video streaming services often cache static content to 
execute faster load times. The Web Crypto API can encrypt the contents such as to 
                                                
8 https://medium.com/netflix-techblog/update-on-html5-video-for-netflix-fbb57e7d7ca0 
9 Comment of Authors Alliance et al., Docket No. 2014-07 (filed Feb. 6, 2015).  
10 https://www.w3.org/TR/WebCryptoAPI/; https://developer.mozilla.org/en-
US/docs/Web/API/Web_Crypto_API 
11 https://webkit.org/blog/7790/update-on-web-cryptography/  
[PAGE 135]
7 
prevent the inappropriate taking of the protected media content or separately to confirm 
that it has not been tampered with (data integrity protection). 
MPEG-DASH 
The “MPEG” in “MPEG-DASH” is an acronym for the Moving Picture Expert Group (“a 
working group of ISO/IEC with the mission to develop standards for coded representation of 
digital audio and video and related data.”)12 and the “DASH” in “MPEG-DASH” stands for 
“Dynamic Active Streaming over HTTP.”13 MPEG-DASH is supported by a veritable 
consortium of technology companies, including:  
Google, Adobe, Akamai, Cisco, Comcast, Dolby, Ericsson, Microsoft, Netflix, Qualcomm, 
Samsung, Experi, Arris, Brightcode, Verizon (Digital Media Services), technicolor, 
Nexstreaming, and more.14  
MPEG-DASH supports the ability to apply different encryption protection schemes to different 
parts of a media file. For example, a movie can have different licensees available for the audio 
and video components of the movie file within the ContentProtection element.
15 
Encrypted Media Extensions (EME) 
As specified by the W3C, EME is a proposed standard that 
“extends HTMLMediaElement [HTML51] providing APIs to control playback of encrypted 
content.”16 The full technical standard is available at https://www.w3.org/TR/encrypted-
media/#introduction.    
Like MPEG-DASH, EME permits licensors and other parties that have an interest in DRM 
diverse control over how, and by what mechanism, media content is encrypted. Implementations 
may “select content protection mechanisms, control license/key exchange, and execute custom 
license management algorithms.”17 
                                                
12 https://mpeg.chiariglione.org/.  
13 The ISO/IEC standard ISO/IEC 23009-1:2014(E) is available in PDF format at 
http://standards.iso.org/ittf/PubliclyAvailableStandards/c065274_ISO_IEC_23009-1_2014.zip 
and serves as the technical resource for this brief description. 
14 http://dashif.org/members/.  
15 ISO/IEC 23009-1:2014(E), pg. 75 (5.8.41: Content Protection). 
16 https://www.w3.org/TR/encrypted-media/.  
17 Id. 
[PAGE 136]
8 
Widevine  
Widevine is a DRM solution produced by Google. Per its “Supported Platforms,” Widevine is 
deployed on a variety of living room media players, the main mobile OS platforms (Android and 
iOS), significant desktop operating systems (MacOS, Windows, Linux, and Chrome OS), and a 
variety of chipset vendors.
18 Widevine includes support for several media encryption 
technologies discussed in this writing (MPEG-DASH, CENC, and EME).19  
                                                
18 http://www.widevine.com/supported_platforms.html. 
19 https://storage.googleapis.com/wvdocs/Widevine_DRM_Getting_Started.pdf; 
https://storage.googleapis.com/wvdocs/Widevine_DRM_Encryption_API.pdf.  
[PAGE 137]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix V 
Educational Events for Filmmakers About Fair Use 
[PAGE 138]
EDUCATIONAL EVENTS TO INFORM FILMMAKERS ABOUT FAIR USE 
 
Various organizations and institutions have held panels, discussions, and lectures in order to 
inform filmmakers about fair use of copyrighted materials. 
 
 
2018 
 
1. March 2018: Lisa Callif will be speaking at a one-hour CLE session as part of the SXSW 
2018 Film program. 
 
2. March 2018: Michael Donaldson will be giving a workshop at SXSW. 
 
3. 2/28/2018: Michael Donaldson will be a guest speaker at Harvard Law School. 
 
2017 
 
4. November 2017: Lisa Callif gave a master class on fair use at the International Documentary 
Association master class. 
 
5. 11/6/2017: Chris Perez gave a guest lecture for the Intellectual Property and Technology Law 
Clinic at USC Gould School of Law. 
 
6. October 2017: Lisa Callif moderated a documentary case study panel at Film Independent 
Forum. 
 
7. October 2017: Lisa Callif hosted a fair use lecture for client Dirty Robber. 
 
8. October 2017: Lisa Callif gave a guest lecture at UCLA extension class for fair use in music. 
 
9. August 2017: Lisa Callif participated in Fair use master class during Minas Gerais 
Audiovisual Expo - MAX 2017 in Brazil by sending in a video on fair use. 
 
10. 7/26 & 7/27/2017: Chris Perez gave a lecture titled Clearance & Copyright Lecture at 
UCLA. 
 
11. 7/24 & 7/25/2017: Dean Cheley gave a guest lecture titled Legal Issues for Independent 
Projects at UCLA. 
 
12. 7/7/2017: Chris Perez gave a lecture for a production class at Columbia College / Semester in 
LA. 
 
13. July 2017: Jack Lerner presented on fair use at the “Your Preproduction Legal Checklist: 
How to Save Time, Money and Needless Suffering and Learn from People Who Didn't," 
University Film & Video Association Annual Conference. 
 
[PAGE 139]
14. 4/28/2017: Dean Cheley gave a guest lecture titled Fair Dealing vs. Fair Use Entertainment 
& Media Law Symposium 2017 in Toronto.  
 
15. 4/12/2017: Chris Perez was a guest speaker for the Film Independent Documentary Lab at 
Film Independent. 
 
16. February 2017: Lisa Callif participated in a fair use Q&A at California State University, 
Long Beach. 
 
17. February 2017: Jack Lerner presented on fair use at the YouTube Creators' Summit in Santa 
Monica, CA. 
 
18. 2/23 & 2/24/2017: Dean Cheley gave a guest lecture titled Clearance and Copyright at 
UCLA. 
 
19. 2/8 & 2/9/2017: Dean Cheley gave a guest lecture titled Legal Issues for Independent 
Projects at UCLA.  
 
20. 2/6 & 2/7/2017: Chris Perez gave a Clearance & Copyright lecture at UCLA. 
 
21. 2/2/2017: Chris Perez gave a lecture for a production class at Columbia College / Semester in 
LA. 
 
22. 2017: Michael Donaldson was a guest lecturer at Harvard Law School. 
 
23. 2017: Jack Lerner presented on fair use at Whittier Law School. 
 
24. 2017: Jack Lerner gave a guest lecture titled Online Media and the Law at the USC 
Annenberg School of Journalism. 
 
25. 2017: Jack Lerner gave a guest lecture on fair use at the UCI Humanities Research Institute. 
 
2016 
 
26. November 2016: Lisa Callif was a speaker at Emoji Film event at Emojicon. 
 
27. 11/16/2016: Dean Cheley gave a guest lecture titled Basics of Copyright, Fair Use and 
Personal Rights for Dealmaking in Entertainment Industry Course at USC Gould Law 
School.  
 
28. 10/17/2016: Chris Perez gave a guest lecture for the Intellectual Property and Technology 
Law Clinic at USC Gould School of Law. 
 
29. 9/28/2016: Dean Cheley gave a guest lecture titled Fair Use in Narrative Films in the Media 
Arts & Culture Department at Occidental College. 
 
[PAGE 140]
30. 8/14/2016: Chris Perez gave a Fair Use, Rights & Clearances Master Class MFA Social 
Documentary Film SVA.  
 
31. 8/3 & 8/4/2016: Dean Cheley gave a guest lecture titled Legal Issues for Independent 
Projects at UCLA. 
 
32. 8/1 & 8/2/2016: Chris Perez gave a Clearance & Copyright lecture at UCLA. 
 
33. 7/14 & 7/15/2016: Michael Donaldson was a guest speaker at UCLA Summer Program in 
Producing in Los Angeles, CA. 
 
34. 4/12/2016: Chris Perez was a panelist at the Intellectual Property and Fair Use in Nutshell 
Panel for USC Talent Week. 
 
35. 4/4/2016: Chris Perez was a guest lecturer for Studio Producing for Film and TV at 
Columbia College / Semester in LA. 
 
36. 3/28/2016: Chris Perez gave a guest lecture for the Intellectual Property and Technology Law 
Clinic at USC Gould School of Law. 
 
37. 2/23 & 2/25/2016: Chris Perez gave a Clearance & Copyright lecture at UCLA. 
 
38. 2016: Michael Donaldson spoke in Havana, Cuba about fair use’s applications in Cuba at the 
University of Havana Law School. 
 
39. 2016: Michael Donaldson gave a two week-long workshop in Zimbabwe for the American 
Film Showcase program of the United States Department of State.  
 
40. 2016: Jack Lerner presented on fair use for the Hispanic Bar Association of Orange County. 
 
41. 2016: Jack Lerner presented on fair use at Books in Browsers in San Francisco, CA. 
 
42. 2016: Jack Lerner presented at the filmmaker workshop, "Fair Use: You Be The Judge" at 
Getting Real conference (International Documentary Association) in Los Angeles CA. 
 
43. 2016: Jack Lerner gave a guest lecture titled Online Media and the Law at the USC 
Annenberg School of Journalism. 
 
2015 
 
44. 10/15/2015: Jack Lerner presented on “Fair Use & Friction: Fan Art, Remix, Appropriation 
& the Law," California Lawyers for the Arts in Long Beach, CA. 
 
45. 7/9/2015: Chris Perez gave a guest lecture at Studio Producing for Film and TV at Columbia 
College / Semester in LA. 
[PAGE 141]
 
46. 5/31/2015: Chris Perez gave the following lecture: Produced by Session: Based on a True 
Story at The Studios at Paramount. 
 
47. 5/28 & 5/29/2015: Michael Donaldson was a guest speaker at Moscow Film School in 
Moscow, Russia. 
 
48. 5/16-5/27/2015: Michael Donaldson was a guest speaker at American Film Showcase (AFS) 
in Kiev, Ukraine. 
 
49. 2/19/2015: Chris Perez gave a guest lecture at Studio Producing for Film and TV at 
Columbia College / Semester in LA. 
 
50. 2/16 & 2/17/2015: Michael Donaldson was a guest speaker at UCLA Winter Program in 
producing in Los Angeles, CA. 
 
51. 2/10/2015: Michael Donaldson was a guest speaker at Loyola Law Chicago in Chicago, IL. 
 
52. 2/3/2015: Chris Perez was a guest lecturer at CalArts Graduate Seminar. 
 
53. 1/13/2015: Chris Perez gave a Production & Clearance lecture at USC SCA. 
 
54. 2015: Michael Donaldson was a guest speaker at University of Southern California Law 
School. 
 
55. 2015: Michael Donaldson gave a two week-long workshop in the Ukraine for the American 
Film Showcase program of the United States Department of State.  
 
56. 2015: Jack Lerner presented on fair use at the Brooks Institute in Ventura, CA 
 
57. 2015: Jack Lerner presented on fair use for the Orange County Bar Association. 
 
58. 2015: Jack Lerner gave a guest lecture titled Online Media and the Law at the USC 
Annenberg School of Journalism. 
 
2014 
 
59. November 2014: Lisa Callif was a guest speaker at CLEAR Association’s legal seminar. 
 
60. 11/10/2014: Dean Cheley gave a guest lecture at the Fair Use and Other Legal Issues for 
Documentary Filmmakers at New York Film Academy in Los Angeles. 
 
[PAGE 142]
61. October 2014: Lisa Callif was a panel guest at The Association of Media & Entertainment 
Counsel’s event “Understanding Fair Use in Reality TV and Unscripted Programming.”  
 
62. 10/24/2014: Chris Perez gave a Clearance & Copyright lecture at UC Irvine. 
 
63. 2/24-2/25/2014: Michael Donaldson was a guest speaker at UCLA Spring Program in 
Producing in Los Angeles, CA. 
 
64. 2/5/2014: Michael Donaldson was a guest speaker at University of Miami Cinema & 
Interactive Media Department, Miami, FL. 
 
65. 2014: Michael Donaldson was a guest speaker at University of California at Los Angeles 
Law School.  
 
2013 
 
66. 12/11/2013: Michael Donaldson was a guest speaker at Hiscox Insurance Co., Whose 
Permission Do I Need: Fair Use Trademarks, and More in Los Angeles, CA. 
 
67. 9/26/2013: Michael Donaldson was a guest speaker at New York University, Whose 
Permission Do I Need: Fair Use, Trademarks, and More in New York, NY. 
 
68. 7/15 & 7/16/2013: Michael Donaldson was a guest speaker at UCLA Summer Program in 
Producing in Los Angeles, CA. 
 
2012 
 
69. 7/25-7/26/2012: Michael Donaldson was a guest speaker at UCLA Summer Program in 
Producing in Los Angeles, CA. 
 
2011 
 
70. 10/24/2011: Michael Donaldson was a guest speaker at Columbia College Chicago, Lecture 
on Copyright, Clearance and Fair Use in Chicago, IL. 
 
71. 7/25-7/28/2011: Michael Donaldson was a guest speaker at UCLA Summer Program in 
Producing in Los Angeles, CA. 
[PAGE 143]
 
72. 7/20/2011: Michael Donaldson was a guest speaker at Columbia College Chicago, “Semester 
in LA,” in Los Angeles, CA. 
 
73. 3/23/2011: Michael Donaldson was a guest speaker at Columbia College Chicago, “Semester 
in LA,” in Los Angeles, CA. 
 
74. 1/13/2011: Michael Donaldson was a guest lecturer at Chapman University via Skye for their 
production legal clinic. 
 
2008 
 
75. 2008: Michael Donaldson was a guest speaker at University of California at Berkeley Law 
School. 
 
76. 2008: Michael Donaldson was a guest speaker at Stanford Law School. 
 
 
Miscellaneous 
 
77. Jack Lerner co-wrote “Everything is a Remix: Fair Use,” an educational YouTube video, 
available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vTLQ4h4yKSk. 
