[PAGE 1]
This is a Word document that allows users to type into the spaces below. The comment may be single-spaced, but should be in at least 12-point type. The italicized instructions on this template may be deleted.  
	
 [   ] Check here if multimedia evidence is being provided in connection with this comment ITEM A.  COMMENTER INFORMATION  OmniQ is a joint venture for the commercial development of a method for non-reproductive substitution of the material object in which a work is fixed. The method is disclosed in a patent application for Digitally Transferring Content Across Media Without Reproduction, Patent Application # WO 2016/168832; US 2016028135 (annexed hereto as Exhibit 1, hereafter the “OmniQ Invention”). Although necessarily a for-profit endeavor to attract the needed investment, OmniQ currently plans to incorporate as a public benefit corporation with the aim of restoring the public benefit provided from secondary markets for lawfully made copies of copyrighted works that, although still supported by the first sale doctrine and Sections 109 and 202 of the Copyright Act, is rapidly being lost on account of modern technological advances that allow copyright holders to effectively avoid business models that allow secondary markets to flourish. By use of the OmniQ Invention, OmniQ seeks to restore the public benefit that Sections 109 and 202 used to guarantee. To be clear, although the OmniQ Invention discloses the specific method OmniQ intends to use to space-shift motion pictures and other audiovisual works (as well as literary and pictorial works) from one material object to another without copying, the exemption sought need not be limited to the precise method disclosed in the OmniQ Invention. Rather, it should be permitted for any space-shifting process that does not reproduce the work into another copy. Also, although OmniQ also hopes to make the technology available to libraries, particularly public and academic libraries, as a means of regaining the freedom to “lend” copies without requiring the consent of the copyright holder, and a library use case might include non-reproductive space-shifting of literary works fixed with ink on paper, the proposed exemption is limited to Class 3, given that circumvention is unnecessary for space-shifting copies of literary works printed on paper, as they do not come with TPM. The OmniQ Invention seeks to, among other things, maintain the viability of, and the public benefit afforded by, secondary markets for the exchange of lawfully made copies of copyrighted works. As technological advances often render copies in certain formats obsolete when the technology needed to access them is going into disuse (for example, a DVD is useless without a DVD player), and as digital dissemination and storage technologies increasingly result in the fixation of lawful copies on material objects that are too cumbersome to redistribute and may share space with thousands or even millions of fixations of other works (as in “downloading”), a new method is needed to preserve important avenues through which those unable to afford new copies in the primary market may continue to obtain access to lower cost second-hand copies notwithstanding the current trend toward digital dissemination that is causing a reduction in the availability of discrete fixations on individually transferable single-
[PAGE 2]
  
2 	
work copies.1  OmniQ’s representative for purposes of this Petition is:  John T. Mitchell  15213 Reserve Road Accokeek, MD 20607  john@interactionlaw.com  1-202-415-9213  ITEM B.  PROPOSED CLASS ADDRESSED  Proposed Class 3: Audiovisual Works—Space-shifting We note that Proposed Class 3, as described in the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, would consider two very different petitions. The OmniQ petition seeks an exemption for non-reproductive space-shifting where the reproduction right is not implicated at all because no reproduction takes place. In contrast, the De Petris petition seeks an exemption in order to enable “personal” reproductions either as back-up copies or for use on other devices. This distinction between the OmniQ and De Petris petitions is important for several reasons: 1. The first objective of the De Petris petition – a back-up copy “in the event that something happens to the original, fragile disc” cannot be achieved by using the OmniQ method of non-reproductive space-shifting because no reproduction of the work into copies of any kind – backup or otherwise – takes place.  2. The second De Petris objective, “to play the content on tools that do not play discs (newer computer; iPads; iPhones; etc.),” can be achieved using the OmniQ solution without making a copy. That means that exempting the OmniQ solution lessens the need for the De Petris solution, and vice versa, with respect to personal copies made in order to watch from a more convenient fixation. Both achieve the same objective, except that the De Petris solution achieves it by allowing for the reproduction of the work into a second copy, while the OmniQ solution can only be achieved without reproducing the work into a second copy but, instead, shifting it to a more convenient substrate while destroying the original copy. 3. The De Petris solution presumes that a reproduction of the work on the DVD would be made, resulting in two or more copies (the DVD copy + back-up copy + copy to be played on devices that do not play discs), and would, ostensibly, rely solely upon fair use under Section 107 to establish that such reproductions are not infringing of the reproduction right. The OmniQ solution, in contrast, is by definition non-infringing 																																																								1 Lawfully made copies fixed in hard drives, servers and mobile phones are, of course, redistributable under Section 109. The problem is that to distribute the fixation of one work requires the distribution of the entire library of works fixed on the hard drive, server or mobile phone.   
[PAGE 3]
  
3 	
because there is no reproduction. Although a fair use analysis might well result in a finding of non-infringement, and would provide an alternate basis for the exemption, fair use analysis is unnecessary where there is no reproduction.  4. By depending on fair use for the reproduction, the De Petris solution risks harm to the copyright holder’s interests insofar as there is a greater chance that the lawfully made copy on DVD would be redistributed while the back-up or convenience copy remains in possession of the person who no longer owns the DVD used to make them. Although the exemption could be granted subject to terms along the lines of Section 117(a), designed to prevent the authorized copy from being in possession of anyone other than the owner of the first copy, it may prove difficult to monitor compliance, particularly with respect to audiovisual works.2  For these reasons, although OmniQ is not opposing the De Petris petition, and although there may be some overlap in the result of allowing the enjoyment of a movie on DVD using a device that does not play DVDs, OmniQ wishes to make clear that its petition is radically different, in that no back-up copies or convenience copies are made at all. With the OmniQ solution, the copyright owner continues to sell the DVD at whatever price the market will bear, and the Copyright Act’s intent that the copy pass from one person to another unfettered is preserved.  ITEM C.  OVERVIEW  The Basic Petition Because non-reproductive space-shifting implicates none of the exclusive rights of the copyright holder, there is no need to rely solely upon fair use analysis with respect to the reproduction right, as ReDigi is attempting, or cobble together some “virtual” DVD player that, as Zediva and VidAngel learned, required a public performance. Plus, even if the “space-																																																								2 Motion pictures and other audiovisual works retain their value decades after they are first published, and the copyright holder can anticipate the opportunity to exploit the reproduction and distribution rights for the entire term of the copyright. And although a DVD must be played by use of a device, the DVD is removed after the performance, making way for the next title, whereas computer programs typically are not performed from the DVD, which was one reason why Congress wanted to authorize the reproduction necessary to privately perform (“run”) the work.  Computer programs, in contrast to motion pictures, are literary works of comparatively short life spans, such that newer versions will soon supplant the older ones. Plus, copies of motion pictures and other audiovisual works can be enjoyed without the need for patches and updates to retain their functionality in the face of newer operating systems or security vulnerabilities. Chances are that once a new version is installed, the old version will have little or no market value. Publishers of computer programs may also employ methods, such as “product keys” to make certain that no copy of a copy can be performed on more than one device. In fact, some major publishers of computer programs, such as Microsoft, allow for unlimited free reproductions by means of a download, and monetize the product keys as a proxy for the copy. That is not the case with motion pictures or other audiovisual works.  
[PAGE 4]
  
4 	
shifting” or “format shifting” misnomers are applied to the activity proposed by De Petris, and the reproductions constitute fair use of the reproduction right, there remains the concern that infringing copies may proliferate once a fair use copy is in the wild.3 In the case of true space-shifting, where the fixation of the work is simply moved from one material object to another without reproducing more copies, circumvention does not touch on any of the copyright holder’s exclusive rights. As practiced in the OmniQ Invention, not only is lawfulness not dependent on Section 107, but also the potential harm associated with the multiplication of copies is eliminated. Although OmniQ is not asking for an exemption limited to those who practice the OmniQ Invention, we note that, once shifted using the OmniQ Invention, the copy that has been shifted is protected from unlawful reproduction to a far greater extent than the typical TPM, such as the Copy Scramble System (CSS). That is because CSS must function with mass-produced copies intended for playback in a dizzying array of devices from different manufacturers, leaving it highly vulnerable to casual circumvention.4 Once the right “key” is found, it opens any copy of the work. In contrast, the OmniQ Invention is more able to vigorously guards against unauthorized reproduction because multiple stronger encryption keys are required to space-shift one copy. As described in Exhibit 1, and in less technical terms in the Declaration of Johann George (annexed hereto as Exhibit 3), instead of 40-bit encryption intended for any factory-made DVD to work with any factory-made DVD player, the encryption on the space-shifted copy is unique to that particular copy. As estimated by Johann George, Exh. 3, the time it would take to break the encryption in order to reproduce a DVD or Blu-ray fixation that has been space-shifted using the OmniQ Invention method would exceed the term of the copyright by a mind-boggling multiple of years.   OmniQ’s solution resolves the concerns that were raised with respect to so-called space-shifting proposed in the previous triennial (and which may well be renewed in opposition to the De Petris Petition) by addresses the fundamental weakness identified: That this so-called space-shifting requires the reproduction of a “fair use copy” of the work. That is, in seeking the exemption, proponents argued that Section 107 provided a right to reproduce the work. True space-shifting, such as practiced using the OmniQ Invention, is inherently non-reproductive. In the absence of any reproduction, there is no need to apply fair use analysis to justify it. Accordingly, the exemption needn’t be limited to non-commercial uses in order to enhance its weight on the fair use scales, but may cover commercial space-shifting for purely entertainment 																																																								3 The concern may be misplaced. Given the relative ease with which the motion picture on an optical disc can be “ripped” and copied onto a hard drive or another optical disc using cheap off-the-shelf software that is readily available to anyone, it is doubtful that anyone wishing to make an infringing copy would bother to add a step of “fair use reproduction” before making an infringing copy. The De Petris Petition seeks a lawful means of circumvention to make fair use, whereas the infringer is not going to worry whether circumvention also violates Section 1201. 4 See, e.g., Gregory Kesden, Course: 15-412 Operating Systems: Design and Implementation, Lecture 33 (Wednesday, December 6, 2000) (course at Carnegie Mellon University), available at http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~dst/DeCSS/Kesden/index.html (noting that 40-bit encryption is particularly weak, and describing five methods of attack). Circumvention that may have been a novel concept in 2000 is now available to the masses as a simple installation requiring no particular skill. 
[PAGE 5]
  
5 	
purposes, just like DVD movies may be commercially sold or rented without the consent of the copyright holder and for purely entertainment purposes. Non-reproductive space-shifting should be permitted in any instance in which a work is digitally embodied in a material object that cannot, as a practical matter, be re-sold, lent, rented or gifted, solely because it either shares the same recording medium with thousands of other works (such as a large-capacity hard drive), or because the medium (such as a DVD) relies on older technology of increasing obsolescence with respect to playback (private performance).  Non-reproductive space-shifting serves the constitutional purpose of copyright. “The sole interest of the United States and the primary object in conferring the monopoly lie in the general benefits derived by the public from the labors of authors.”  Fox Film Corp. v. Doyal, 286 U.S. 123, 127 (1932). In pursuit of that interest, Congress endorsed the Supreme Court’s conclusion that copyright holders could not extend the scope of their copyrights by means of an end-user license agreement that gave them greater control over copies they no longer owned. Bobbs-Merrill Co. v. Straus, 210 U.S. 339 (1908). The codification of the first sale doctrine (which actually never has required a “first sale”) carried with it a strong expression of public policy encouraging secondary markets for re-dissemination of copies, recognizing that copyright owner control over secondary markets would tend to reduce, rather than promote, the progress of science and art: “it would be most unwise to permit the copyright proprietor to exercise any control whatever over the article which is the subject of copyright after said proprietor has made the first sale.” H.R. Rep. No. 2222, 60th Cong., 2d Session (1909).  When an end-user license agreement printed on the inside cover of a book in the manner of Bobbs-Merrill (and which can legally and practically be ignored) is replaced with TPM to achieve similar ends (but which might not be so easily circumvented and ostensibly carries with it the threat of civil or criminal prosecution), it is important that both the legal means and the practical means of ignoring it are within reach of the public, in order to prevent the copyright holder from exercising “any control whatever” over the transfer of ownership of lawfully made copies. That’s what OmniQ’s invention aims to do, and with the aid of a sensible exemption from the anti-circumvention prohibition, it can do so more efficiently, reaching a broader segment of the population.  Digits On Plastic = Ink On Paper We did not abandon basic copyright principles when we developed audio and videotape. Digital media should be no different. It is common to hear a distinction being made between “digital copies” and “physical copies,” forgetting that a movie on a DVD is 100% physical and digital. The first sale doctrine has always focused on the copy/copyright distinction rather than the technology used for making the copy. Section 202 of the Copyright Act (which was part of the original enactment or the statutory first sale doctrine in 1909) drove home the distinction between the ordinary ownership of “things” (such as paper, shampoo bottles, watches, discs or hard drives) that might contain works of authorship and the intangible exclusive rights conferred with respect to those works. The Copyright Act is replete with definitions that are technology neutral, and in fact, future-proofed to apply to technologies “now know or later developed.”   As we shift from ink on paper to bits on something else, we are left with more of a practical problem than a legal one – How do I exercise my right to lend, give away or sell the copy of Work No. 3,476 on my hard drive without also having to part with my hard drive, which 
[PAGE 6]
  
6 	
also happens to be a copy of Works Nos. 1-3,475 and 3,477-5,000? There is a legal right to lend Work No 3,476 so long as the entire hard drive is lent.  Of course, on a daily basis, millions of people let friends and family use their smartphones and laptops – technically a redistribution of copies and phonorecords protected by Section 109(a) of the Copyright Act – but those redistributions rarely involve long term lending or transfer of ownership, and to the degree that the hard drive or smart phone contains computer programs or musical works, such lending would not be prohibited by Section 109(b)(1)(A) unless “for the purposes of direct or indirect commercial advantage.”  But this sets up another quandary, which has yet to reach the courts: Supposed one wants to rent a laptop so that a friend can watch a movie that was lawfully made on the hard drive, but rental of musical works and computer programs residing on the same hard drive would constitute infringement? One legal solution might be for the courts to allow the general rule favoring alienation to trump the specific rule prohibiting it, but a more elegant solution would allow the OmniQ Invention to facilitate non-reproductive space-shifting of the movie from one hard drive to another, and then back, after viewing.5  For many years, the public has been enjoying digital copies made in a factory and shipped to their homes through various distribution channels – DVD sales (in retail stores or by mail order), DVD rentals (in retail stores of by mail), and acquisition of second-hand (“used”) copies through thrift shops, online sales, or gifts. All of this activity was carried out without needing the consent of the copyright owner. The freedom to alienate a copy meant that a video retailer could rent that copy out as many times as it wished, to as many people as it wished, at whatever price it wished, and for however long it wished, all without the consent of the copyright owner. Unsurprisingly, motion picture studios that wanted to capture a greater share of the added value provided by Section 109 of the Copyright Act (to the owner of the copy, that is), simply charged more for the initial sale. It was not uncommon for VHS copies to cost upward of $75, to be purchased primarily by video rental stores. Eventually, the studios began experimenting with “sell through pricing” intended to allow retail sales to compete with rentals, but the wholesale price to the retailer was the same whether intended for resale or rental. Today, DVD copies are uniformly offered at a “sell-through” price, yet if a VHS copy is made, it is often sold at the higher price, knowing that the primary purchasers are video rental stores. In other words, the copyright holder gets to control the price of each copy it distributes or authorizes; any additional value of that copy as a result of the value of secondary market for it can be captured by the copyright holder when establishing the initial price – just as it is with the purchase price of a new automobile.   Digital delivery puts the consumer into possession of a lawfully made copy by using the home replicator (a download) rather than the factory replicator (a DVD). Both are lawfully made copies of the same work of authorship, and both enjoy the de jure freedom to redistribute that copy, but until now, only the owner of the DVD copy could distribute it, as a practical matter, because the owner of the computer copy would have to part with the entire computer. Still, the 																																																								5 This scenario is not within the scope of Class 3. It is offered to illustrate the need for a lawful means to continue enjoying the intent of the right of alienation, even when a hard drive can’t be loaned out in discrete slices containing just one work.  
[PAGE 7]
  
7 	
law with respect to the rights of the copyright holder and the copy owner remain the same, governed by Sections 109 and 202. (Unfortunately, the owner of the DVD sees the value decrease as playback options are reduced.) The motion picture industry has long advocated that a copy made by digital delivery should be treated the same as a copy delivered by mail – at least when assessing taxes. As early as 2001, when Congress was grappling with the legal consequences of digital delivery, the Motion Picture Association of America addressed the question of whether the delivery of a movie through e-commerce networks (now known as electronic sell-through, or EST) should be considered trade in goods or trade in services, MPAA’s Vice President for Trade & Federal Affairs gave the following example: If a consumer were to place a telephone order for a DVD of the film “Finding Forrester” and have a copy of that DVD delivered to his house on a UPS truck, that is a “goods” transaction. Likewise, if the same consumer ordering a copy of the same DVD on his/her computer and had the same content delivered digitally and downloaded from his computer to a write-able DVD – that is still a “goods” transaction. The only difference is that a digital network instead of a delivery van provided the transportation from the retailer to the consumer.  Testimony of Bonnie J.K. Richardson before the House Commerce Committee Subcommittee on Commerce, Trade and Consumer Protection, May 22, 2001, prepared statement at 12. Notably, Ms. Richardson referred to the digital delivery as being “of the same DVD” rather than “the same work that was on the DVD.” As early as 2001, the movie industry already saw “the DVD” almost like the literary world sees “a book”. There is no “book” in the Copyright Act. The value of the literary work of authorship is in the ability to read it, not in the quality of the paper or whether it is on a Kindle. Likewise, “a DVD” tells the consumer that “the movie” is in digital form, but for all practical purposes, the consumer will get just as much enjoyment from watching the movie from a DVD inserted into a DVD player hooked up to a TV or computer screen as from watching it from an ISO image on a computer hard drive hooked up to the same TV.    In Copyright Act terms, the UPS delivery involves reproduction onto a medium that has not yet been distributed, whereas digital delivery over the Internet involves reproduction onto a medium that has already been distributed to the person receiving the download.6 The question to be addressed now is whether and how to facilitate the second and third distribution of that digitally delivered copy without the impractical extremes – having to distribute the entire hard drive or other storage medium, on the one hand, or opening up a free-for-all replication (or multiplication) of copies without the copyright holder’s consent, on the other.  
																																																								6 See, e.g., United States v. Cohen, 946 F.2d 430, 434 (6th Cir. 1991) (“[C]opyright law does not forbid an individual from renting or selling a copy of a copyrighted work which was lawfully obtained or lawfully manufactured by that individual.” (emphasis added)); United States v. Sachs, 801 F.2d 839, 842 (6th Cir. 1986). Copyright law does not forbid it, but the copyright holder’s choice of technology may forbid it, as a practical reality. 
[PAGE 8]
  
8 	
Given the way courts have been treating reproductions by digital delivery as though they infringe not only the reproduction right, but also, the distribution right, and doing to at the instigation of copyright owners who perceive their distribution rights to have been infringed when only a reproduction technically, took place.7 Legally speaking, so-called “digital copies” are substantively evolutionary, not revolutionary. Recording “bits” on a hard drive, USB, or any other tangible medium is the legal equivalent of recording ink on paper, grooves in vinyl, chemical reactions on film, and magnetic impulses on “analog” cassette or 8-track tape. During most of the 160 or more years that the first sale doctrine has existed (over a century since its first codification in 1909), the tangible medium was easier to re-distribute than to replicate. That is, the easiest way to let someone read my copy of a popular book was to lend my particular copy of the book. It became the public policy that copyright owners should exercise no control at all over the copies they put into circulation. The Congressional committee recommending codification of the judicially created first sale doctrine stated, “it would be most unwise to permit the copyright proprietor to exercise any control whatever over the article which is the subject of copyright after said proprietor has made the first sale.” H.R. Rep. No. 2222 (1909) (emphasis added). And, instead of codifying it that way as mere passive exhaustion of the distribution right, Congress went further, authorizing the owners (or, initially, mere possessors) to redistribute their copies without the consent of the copyright holder. Case law since then has shown all manner of gimmicks to avoid Section 109, and though downloads and streaming are not gimmicks, per se, by emphasizing streaming and digital delivery of downloads over physical delivery of copies, copyright owners gain de facto control, not due to the laws of copyright, but by harnessing the laws of physics – we can’t simply cut a sliver out of a hard drive to redistribute the portion in which the work is fixed. With more fixations being delivered as digital download copies, and fewer as individual copies, replication has now caught up with and surpassed distribution as the most efficient way of passing on the content of my copy to someone else. If we do not allow a comparable manifestation of the 																																																								7 The distribution right is limited to the distribution of “copies and phonorecords,” which are both defined as “material objects.” While some courts facing the issue squarely have insisted on the distribution of a material object for the right to apply, others, including the Ninth Circuit (see, e.g., A & M Records, Inc. v. Napster, Inc., 239 F. 3d 1004 (9th Cir. 2001), where all parties and the court treated digital delivery over the Internet as both a reproduction and a distribution) and the Supreme Court (see, e.g., Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd., 545 US 913, 920 (2005) (“Given these benefits in security, cost, and efficiency, peer-to-peer networks are employed to store and distribute electronic files by universities, government agencies, corporations, and libraries, among others,” emphasis added), have seemed to simply assume that an electronic delivery encompasses both a reproduction and a distribution, for infringement purposes. The question need not be settled here, but it warrants noting that if electronic delivery does infringe the Section 106(3) distribution right even though the reproduction was made on a material object that the downloader already owned, then a fortiori, the Section 106(3) distribution right is exhausted by Section 109, to which it is subject, and the owner of the copy lawfully made by downloading is free to “re-distribute it” by digital delivery, as well – at least using the non-reproductive method taught in the OmniQ Invention. 
[PAGE 9]
  
9 	
principles underlying the first sale doctrine to evolve alongside the technological evolution, we risk losing the important benefits of the doctrine. The approach that courts seem to be pointing to (see footnote 7, above) is one way. OmniQ’s Invention is another – and the two are compatible. To be clear, OmniQ’s petition for an exemption for non-reproductive space-shifting has nothing to do directly with the first sale doctrine. Rather, given the shrinking opportunities to enjoy the benefits of the first sale doctrine, and growing inability to actually act on the redistribution right Congress vested in copy owners, millions of intended beneficiaries are left behind, faced with a more costly choice of having to buy all of their copies “new, and unused” due to a lack of secondary markets. To understand the harm to the public, we must therefore look at the benefits of protecting our longstanding unlicensed redistribution regime, which benefits are rapidly being lost to a permissions-based system characterized by first sales only. The benefits of unlicensed redistribution made possible by the first sale doctrine and Sections 109 and 202 of the Copyright Act have come to be part of the fabric of our culture. Quite simply, had Abraham Lincoln been unable to borrow the books he studied to practice law, we most likely would never have had a “President Lincoln” to sign the Emancipation Proclamation. Those books could be borrowed one at a time, leaving the rest on the lender’s shelf, but our modern massive digital storage capabilities, coupled with digital delivery, effectively mean that the entire bookshelf full of books would have to be loaned in order for the next Lincoln to borrow but one.8   Congress had good reason to stand against allowing copyright holders to exercise “any control whatever” over authorized copies placed in the stream of commerce: a. Intermediaries are ready, willing and able to get the works out into the hands of people that the first seller may consider too marginal. Whether a distributor, such as a “one stop” who services smaller accounts that would overwhelm a major publisher, a retailer that concentrates on smaller markets that might fall below the threshold for major chains, a small, independent retailer willing to do business in less affluent neighborhoods, the used product merchant, the seller of carefully curated collections of copies of rare works that the copyright owner does not wish to promote, or the 99-cent new release video rentals from kiosks with low overhead, it would be impossible for a publisher to directly reach the consumers in all of these markets.   b. Distribution reaches beyond “first consumers” in the commercial marketing sense. Copyright law encourages unlicensed redistribution, advancing the progress of art and science by reaching those unwilling or unable to pay the market price to own a new copy. Rental models, library lending, second-hand stores, and private sales through yard sales or online markets such as eBay and Craigslist, all enable the widespread dissemination intended by the Constitution’s copyright clause and by Sections 109 and 202 of the Copyright Act. Plus, copies regularly wend their way from one person to another at no 																																																								8 Reference to Lincoln’s borrowed books is by analogy, of course. They are in the public domain and can be freely copied. Plus, there is no TPM that must be circumvented in order to gain access to literary works printed on paper, which is why this petition need not encompass them. 
[PAGE 10]
  
10 	
cost through gifts, lending and inheritance. First sale doctrine case law includes redistribution even as far as copies intended for the trash heap or retrieved from the recycling bin. See, e.g., Harrison v. Maynard, Merrill & Co., 61 F. 689 (2nd Cir. 1894); Independent News Co. v. Williams, 293 F. 2d 510 (3rd Cir. 1961). It gives the copyright owner the right to charge what it wants for the copy it owns or authorizes to be made, but prohibits the copyright owner’s subsequent control over whether someone else may come to own it or possess it.  c. Market viability of the original publication increases. The value of the original sale is greater because of its redistribution value. Consider how new car sellers trumpet the high resale value of their new cars. In the consumer’s mind, the “resale” value need not be cash – the value in giving it to a relative, trading it in on a newer model, or donating it to charity in exchange for a good feeling or a tax deduction, all enhance the market value of the original.9 Absence of the first sale doctrine would be comparable to an automobile market where new cars could only be disposed of as scrap, or after successfully negotiating a transfer license from the manufacturer. Notably, there is no comparable statutory right of the owner of a lawfully made automobile to redistribute it without the consent of the manufacturer, though the general rule of alienability of chattel may suffice. (Perhaps another reason is that Congress’ authority to regulate commerce includes no limitation to the purpose of “advancing the progress of freedom to travel by useful means.”)  d. Redistribution cannot be limited. Whether it was Bobbs-Merrill trying to keep the price of THE CASTAWAY above one dollar, or Mark Twain trying to artificially bolster the perceived value of his books, or the major college textbook publishers trying to charge the most the market will bear in different regions of the globe, the right of the owner of a non-infringing copy to redistribute it over the copyright owner’s objection has provided an important safety valve against artificial scarcity that would limit access only to those with deepest pockets. Mark Twain learned that the first sale doctrine (along with the copy/copyright distinction) protected from liability such distributors as chose to breach price fixing agreements intended to add luster to the perceived value of his books;10 the Supreme Court held that Macy’s was free to resell THE CASTAWAY for pennies on the dollar notwithstanding an end-user license agreement to the contrary;11 the Supreme Court held that copyright owners could not escape the Copyright Act’s limitation on their 																																																								9 Automobile makers competitively advertise the value of the first sale doctrine: “The Subaru Legacy retains its value better than any other vehicle in its class for 2017.” Subaru advertisement, at https://www.subaru.com/why-subaru/reviews-awards/legacy.html; “Not only does the 2015 Toyota Tacoma have the highest resale value in its class, it's also Kelley Blue Book's #1 Best Resale Value Winner. Out of ALL 2015 cars, trucks, and SUVs, KBB deemed the Toyota Tacoma to have the highest resale value.” Toyota advertisement, at https://www.performancetoyotastore.com/blog/2015/august/12/toyota-cars-with-the-best-resale-value.htm.  10 Clemens v. Estes, 22 F. 899 (C.C.D. Mass. 1885). 11 Bobbs-Merrill Co. v. Straus, 210 U.S. 339 (1908).  
[PAGE 11]
  
11 	
copyrights by making the copies abroad;12 and ordinary merchants remained free to buy from the “exclusive” retailer and put the product on their own shelves.13 Restricting the reach of the first sale doctrine, whether by clever distribution agreements, attempts to escape it by manufacturing abroad, by wrapping the fixed work behind various technological measures to impair the usefulness of the redistributed copy,14 or even the passive collateral effect of CSS on a DVD – a system intended to prevent unauthorized reproduction but with the added “benefit” to the copyright owner that redistribution could be tempered by licensing the equipment needed to work with the encrypted discs, might all be attractive to the copyright holder as a more lucrative approach, but they widen the economic divide in terms of participation in the constitutionally intended progress of science and the useful arts. Without a vibrant first sale doctrine, we would have a legal landscape in which the poor need the copyright owner’s permission to play a movie from a fixation that had been first distributed on a DVD, even though the poor do not have a DVD player or, if they do, lack the ability of acquiring the used DVD from dwindling local sources. Abraham Lincoln’s lender would have needed a license from the copyright holder before letting him borrow books, an executor of an estate would need to search out the copyright owners for permission before transferring copies by inheritance,15 the birthday gift shopper would need to be sure the copy came with a re-distribution 																																																								12 Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 568 US __, 133 S. Ct. 1351 (2013). 13 Back in 1993, Orion Pictures provided McDonald’s with an exclusive video title, and reportedly “attempted to prevent McDonald’s from selling tapes to retailers after reports surfaced that Trans World Music, Musicland and other retailers had purchased them at fast-food chain [sic] for resale in their stores.” VIDEO WEEK (April 5, 1993), p. 4. There is no indication that Orion’s efforts met with any degree of success; nor could they, since any given McDonald’s customer buying a sandwich with a premium could happen to be a video store employee doing the boss a favor. Indeed, any customer is free to resell their tapes, whether to video stores or to each other.  14 About ten years ago, the “EZ-D” DVD was introduced, enticing copyright owners to, for an added cost or reproduction, distribute DVDs that were less attractive to consumers, because they would self destruct, See Sarah N. Lynch, This DVD Will Self-Destruct, TIME.COM, Tuesday, July 01, 2008, at http://content.time.com/time/business/article/0,8599,1817828,00.html. It was (fortunately) a market failure, for it was an attempt to circumvent Section 109 by rendering the DVD unusable – no longer a “copy” – 48 hours after the “first sale” customer opened it. It used technology to obliterate the Section 109 right Congress had intended to be superior to the distribution right. But it also demonstrated Section 109’ economic value to the owner of the copy and the value to the subsequent owner to which it might be distributed – value that the self-destructing DVD basically tried to recapture. 15 Which raises another use case for the OmniQ Invention: When Uncle Tony dies, leaving behind a couple of terabytes worth of lawfully made copies of copyrighted works, and the only choices of the executor who wants to divide them up among the heirs is to either say “sorry, only one of you can have it,” or else reproduce them without permission, non-reproductive space-shifting could move the fixations, individually, from Uncle Tony’s hard drive to a medium for each of the heirs, according to their selections. But Uncle Tony may need to stick around a few more years before OmniQ can perfect that particular space-shift.  
[PAGE 12]
  
12 	
authorization, and a donation of DVDs to the after-school program for underprivileged students would be limited to those DVDs for which permission to donate had been obtained.  The digital marketplace should be no different in that regard, as the most attractive target consumer is the heavy spender with the financial means to purchase new copies, whether on DVD or by licensed download, at whatever “optimal” price the market will bear. But once a movie has been watched, it just takes up space on the bookshelf or the hard drive. The owner of the hard drive is not likely to part with it so that someone else can enjoy the motion picture fixed on it, nor will the offer to sell or lend a DVD be attractive to the consumer who lacks the technology (licensed by the Copy Control Association) to play it. It is perfectly lawful to do so, but it comes with a tremendous practical barrier – the hard drive redistribution is the equivalent of Abraham Lincoln having to cart away the book owner’s entire bookshelf full of books just to read one book; the DVD redistribution is the equivalent of Lincoln borrowing the book bound shut, without permission to cut the binding, because his knife was from an unlicensed knife-maker.  As technology has evolved to the point that it can be used to expand the copyright holder’s control beyond the limits of the copyright while diminishing access to important secondary markets by the less affluent, just to prevent price competition against the premium prices charged for the first copy, it is imperative that the Librarian of Congress use her authority to provide relief to those being sidelined from the progress of science and useful arts. There is a failure in the market because, currently, all of the approaches to preserving the benefits of Section 109 and the first sale doctrine have required a “reproduction” or “public performance” step that depends on permission from the copyright holder, or has required permission from the copyright holder to circumvent the TPM system the copyright holder deployed. In either case, the access to copyrighted works via secondary markets that the first sale doctrine and Sections 109 and 202 of the Copyright Act intended to protect is quickly eroding. The public’s access to movies is rapidly moving away from the unlicensed retail market (sales, resales and rentals), together with a long tail of informal yard sales, swaps and gifts, and moving just as rapidly toward an environment where licensors serve as gatekeepers to knowledge and entertainment, where only the more privileges licensees or the unlicensed infringers can enjoy the bounty Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution intended.  The problem is exacerbated by a TPM system that pretends to control access to motion pictures and other audiovisual works on optical discs as an adjunct to preventing unauthorized reproduction of the work from them. Books, for example, continue to be widely available without TPM, and no “licensed equipment” is needed to access them. Music on CDs comes with no TPM; to the contrary, it comes with immunity from lawsuit for noncommercial reproduction, 17 U.S.C. § 1008. But there is currently no legal “patch” for a broken first sale doctrine where TPM-protected movies on optical discs are concerned. With books and music CDs, anyone is free to engage in the kind of activity that CSS on DVD prevents. Non-reproductive space-shifting is lawful with all media, as is fair use reproduction, but where CSS serves as a legal barrier to such non-infringing use while providing no barrier at all to infringing use, it effectively enlarges the reach of Section 106 rights as it diminishes the non-exclusive rights Congress 
[PAGE 13]
  
13 	
reserved to the public. Given that Congress specifically stated its intent that nothing in Section 1201 be interpreted to alter the balance of exclusive versus non-exclusive rights, it is imperative that this exemption process authorizes circumvention aimed at restoring the balance.  As Section 1201(c)(1) provides that “Nothing in this section [1201] shall affect rights, remedies, limitations, or defenses to copyright infringement, including fair use, under this title,” we must not allow any TPM to interfere with non-reproductive space shifting as described in the OmniQ Invention, which involves no infringing reproduction or public performance. Finally, there is no indication that the market controlled by the major owners of the copyrights in motion pictures is moving in the direction of offering a digital-delivery counterpart to the analog first sale doctrine benefits. To the contrary, the freedom that a retailer had to choose any movie title to stock, including the freedom to purchase copies from an “exclusive retailer” the copyright holder might have chosen, is rapidly giving way to a model in which the bulk of the revenue is coming from a handful of large companies (offering public performances (such as through VOD (video on demand), SVOD (subscription video on demand)) or EST (electronic sell-through, which is to say, copies reproduced by means of an authorized download)), and with which licensing deals are reached, often with exclusivity clauses, and always for a very limited period of time. As explained more fully below, the rapid shift within the movie industry to delivering movies by licensed public performance and licensed downloads at the expense of unlicensed redistributions of lawfully made copies is resulting in fewer motion pictures being available to the masses. Shareholders of the major movie studios may be content to reap higher profits from a vastly reduced viewing public, but that runs counter to the Constitution’s Article I, Section 8 authority to secure exclusive rights to authors. The Librarian of Congress should lend her aid to restoring the public benefit, to the fullest extent that Section 1201 allows. The Long Shot OmniQ believes that there is arguably no circumvention activity that need to be exempted, because, notwithstanding judicial and Register of Copyrights pronouncements (from years ago) that CSS is a technological measure that effectively controls access to a work, as defined in Section 1201 (a)(3)(B), the reality is that, for all practical purposes, once millions of people have already installed one or more of the many competing “DVD ripping” programs, the “ordinary operation” of the DVD no longer “requires the application of information, or a process or a treatment, with the authority of the copyright owner, to gain access to the work,” id. Instead, all that is required is the DVD owner’s desire to “rip the DVD to my hard drive,” and accomplish the task with an innocuous couple of clicks. (In fact, the off-the-shelf software does not care whether the user is the owner, or just the renter or borrower). It is time to accept the fact that we have been in denial about since 1999: CSS is useless as an access control if the purpose is to “protect” any exclusive right of the copyright holder. While it may be true that most people technically gain access in the method authorized by the copyright holder (which is to say, they simply bought a DVD player that was licensed by the DVD Copy Control Association), it is just as true that anyone wishing to reproduce the work from the DVD onto a personal computer may do so with greater ease than answering a “what movie do you want to watch tonight” text 
[PAGE 14]
  
14 	
message. The most difficult step is deciding which from among the many competing computer programs is the better deal,16 and that step need not be repeated to continue ripping away.   Having said that, we are not attempting to persuade the Librarian of Congress to abandon the “alternate reality” that CSS and AACS continue to meet the statutory definition of a TPM. That may be too much of a long shot – at least until the next triennial.  Given that the current Notice of Proposed Rulemaking notes the previous treatment of circumvention with respect to DVDs, we must assume that the Register continues to at least presume that, for purposes of this triennial rulemaking, CSS and AACS “effectively controls access to a work.” We do, however, believe that it is reasonable for the Librarian of Congress to take into consideration two important facts when considering the Petitions with respect to Class 3:  First, the fact that CSS and AACS don’t actually perform the access control function that was intended, and they provide no protection at all (at least not beyond “fig leaf” level) against unauthorized access to the works fixed on the DVD or Blu-ray discs for the purpose of unlicensed reproduction, it is very difficult to fathom any injury to the copyright owner that could come from even the most liberal of exemptions. Second, many of the “ripping” tools simply reproduce the work to the hard drive along with the entire disc image (ISO file) without actually circumventing anything. They do not gain access to the work, per se, and playback may still require the use of an ordinary CSS-compliant DVD player app (or AACS-compliant app).17 There is, of course, no “exclusive right to do or to authorize access to a work” in Section 106. The sole legitimate interest to be protected is the reproduction right. When it is clear that the emperor has no clothes – that CSS and AACS do nothing to protect the reproduction right – it is time to at least take the reality into consideration when fashioning exemptions, rather than perpetuate the charade of an invisible fig leaf.  ITEM D.  TECHNOLOGICAL PROTECTION MEASURE(S) AND METHOD(S) OF CIRCUMVENTION The OmniQ Petition seeks an exemption to circumvent the TPMs employed on DVD and Blu-ray discs – essentially the same as those identified by the Register during the last triennial rulemaking process:  The vast majority of DVDs use the Content Scramble System (“CSS”) to encrypt audiovisual works on DVDs using a fixed set of decryption keys, and the Copyright Office and courts have found that CSS is an “access control” within the meaning of section 1201(a)(1). The CSS key was decoded in 1999, and decryption 																																																								16 Not only can DVD “ripping” software can be readily purchased or downloaded, but Amazon.com alone offers approximately 30 different choices “in stock” to anyone searching for “dvd ripper” under the “software” category.  17 See, e.g., Danny Chadwick, “The Best DVD Copy Software of 2017,” Top 10 Reviews, latest update March 3, 2017, at http://www.toptenreviews.com/software/multimedia/best-dvd-copy-software/, in which 8 of the “Top 10” works were said to be able to “Copy ISO to Hard Drive,” explained in a pop-up: “An ISO file is a type of disc image that serves as the blueprint of a DVD and behaves the same way as a disc when opened with DVD player software. The best DVD copy software allows you to copy these types of files for backup or archiving purposes.” Id.  
[PAGE 15]
  
15 	
software is now available on the internet, including the programs MactheRipper, DVDDecrypter, and Handbrake.  Blu-ray discs are protected primarily by the Advanced Access Content System (“AACS”), which allows vendors to revoke compromised keys and distribute new keys. In 2012, the Register recognized AACS as a TPM subject to the DMCA. Proponents, including EFF/OTW, attest that Blu-ray circumvention tools are also easily available, including DVDFab and MakeMKV. Another TPM, called BD+, protects some Blu-ray discs. Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding, Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights, October 2015, at 29 (citations omitted).  Although this Petition seeks an exemption to circumvent such TPMs, the OmniQ Invention’s method of non-reproductive space-shifting is largely agnostic to the class of works and to the TPM being used.18  The OmniQ invention is also largely agnostic to the TPM, at least with respect to the TPM used with DVDs and Blu-ray discs. But the TPM nevertheless presents a barrier to fulfilling the Constitutional objectives. For example, the OmniQ system can “ingest” a DVD to substitute a hard drive for the plastic medium, keeping intact the entire work together with all TPM surrounding it. But when “the work” of interest is just the motion picture, having to maintain the surrounding TPM is very inefficient, and a useless exercise once the anti-copying function has been replaced with something far more effective; it is akin to forcing consumers to keep the shrink wrap and electronic article surveillance tags together with the DVD long after they have become worthless for their intended purposes of preventing tampering and theft. And, since the DVD of any motion picture often includes other copyrighted works (such as movie previews or “trailers”, interviews, or “making of” features), if the person receiving the space-shifted copy only desires the feature film, it is more efficient to only space-shift the primary work on the DVD, and ignore the undesired works. Similarly, a francophone film buff may be happy space-shifting just the original French language film, without the English subtitles (assuming that the subtitles are a separate work in a separate file as opposed to integrated into the movie). As described in the OmniQ Invention application, OmniQ’s method for non-reproductive space-shifting can substitute the hard drive for the plastic, where the entire “disc image” is preserved. But because OmniQ’s encryption system is so much more robust than the Copy Scramble System (“CSS”) or any other disc-based TPM in preventing reproductions, the TPM no 																																																								18 The OmniQ Invention is not limited to audiovisual works; it can be applied equally to space-shifting of sound recordings, literary works, and visual works – anything work fixed in a manner that can be moved from one material object to another without reproduction, and in which the fixation in the new material object is digital. If the original fixation is in non-digital form, such as ink on paper rather than digits on a disc, the OmniQ Invention can be practiced adding what might be referred to as “format-shifting,” in which the fixation of, say, a literary work fixed using words printed with ink on paper is space-shifted and format-shifted into a fixation of the same words fixed in digital form on digital media. But, since there is no TPM surrounding works printed with ink on paper, this Petition does not encompass them. 
[PAGE 16]
  
16 	
longer serves any useful function once OmniQ’s space-shifting has been completed. Specifically, past technologies have either involved DVD direct reproductions through so-called “rippers” that result in the multiplication of unauthorized reproductions, or more creative efforts to “contain” the reproductions by making the unauthorized reproduction first, and then attempting to delete all other copies (e.g., Capitol Records, LLC v. ReDigi Inc., 934 F. Supp. 2d 640 (S.D.N.Y. 2013)). Before ReDigi’s “copy and delete” approach, Congress considered (but did not adopt) the legitimacy of a “forward-and-delete” method of space-shifting advocated by former Congressman Rick Boucher. Introduced during the 105th Congress, he proposed to legalize the reproduction of a copyrighted work from one medium to another so long as the source copy was subsequently destroyed. The “Digital Era Copyright Enhancement Act,” provided that Section 109(a) (i.e., the entitlement of owners of lawfully made copies to transfer ownership or possession of them without the consent of the copyright owner)  applies where the owner of a particular copy or phonorecord in a digital format lawfully made under this title, or any person authorized by such owner, performs, displays or distributes the work by means of transmission to a single recipient, if that person erases or destroys his or her copy or phonorecord at substantially the same time. The reproduction of the work, to the extent necessary for such performance, display, distribution, is not an infringement. H.R. 3048, 105th Cong., Section 4. The intent was to permit the owner of a lawfully made copy to do the equivalent of transferring possession even though the tangible medium itself would not change hands. The drawback was that, for a period of more than a transitory duration, there would be two copies that could simultaneously be perceived or further reproduced. And, the system did not lend itself to containment – “trust me, I deleted the source copy right away” was too tenuous a basis for granting the right, particularly given that typical computer operating systems allow for the recovery of deleted items. The OmniQ Invention approach resolves all of those concerns. Throughout the entire process, there is never a multiplication of the work into copies. There is never a point in which the work is fixed in two material objects at once. And, the system is so robust that there is no backup: If the material object substitution fails, the copy is lost forever. If the person to whose hard drive the fixation is shifted breaks the hard drive, the copy is gone. The result is just like when a Netflix customer receives a broken DVD in the mail, and Netflix must replace it with an entirely different lawfully made copy – it cannot simply say, “don’t worry, we will burn you a new copy.”   The OmniQ space-shifting process need not “bypass or disable” the TPM, but the TPM is nevertheless a hindrance. It is far easier to bypass or disable the CSS on a DVD movie, or AACS on a Blu-ray disc than to bypass or disable the OmniQ encryption. (See Exhibit 3, Declaration of Johann George, at 2.) With OmniQ, no “back doors” are permitted. Indeed, the OmniQ encryption is so strong that not even the business using it can keep a “back door” to decrypt it in case of loss. In that sense, OmniQ agrees with members of the House Government Oversight and Reform Committee's Information Technology Subcommittee who, at a hearing on April 29, 2015, criticized the inherent weakness of encryption with back-door access: "It is clear to me that creating a pathway for decryption only for good guys is technologically stupid," said Rep. Ted Lieu (D-Calif.), who has a bachelor's in computer science from Stanford University. "You just can't do that." 
[PAGE 17]
  
17 	
Andrea Peterson, “Congressman with computer science degree: Encryption back-doors are ‘technologically stupid’,” The Switch, The Washington Post, April 30, 2015, available at http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/the-switch/wp/2015/04/30/congressman-with-computer-science-degree-encryption-back-doors-are-technologically-stupid/.  Rep. Jason Chaffetz (R-Utah), chairman of the Government Oversight and Reform Committee, also expressed concern about back doors. “It’s impossible to build a back-door for just the good guys — if somebody at the Genius Bar could figure it out, so could the nefarious folks in a van down by the river," he said. Id. OmniQ’s method of non-reproductive space-shifting ensures that the person who owns or controls neither the original material object in which the work had been fixed cannot use a back door to regain the fixation – the ability to perceive or reproduce the work from the material object – once the space-shifting occurs. It is a flaw by design, and something that beneficiaries of the secondary market will simply have to live with. See, e.g., the preliminary FAQ (frequently asked questions) OmniQ developed at the time the OmniQ Invention was being invented, designed to explain to potential customers that, unlike an Electronic Sell-Through model (such as downloads from the iTunes store), there would be no way to simply “recover” the movie if your iPhone falls in the toilet. There is no backup copy “in the cloud” that can restore the copy lost.19   OmniQ’s encryption is sufficiently strong as to ensure that the work will have long entered the public domain by the time a brute force attack succeeds. And for that reason, the independent deployment of such a system is to be preferred over TPM applied by the copyright holder. Any copyright holder that used TPM to prevent reproduction long after the copyright expired might face charges of monopolization or copyright misuse. By independently protecting the work from being reproduced from that copy, the OmniQ method continues to incentivize the copyright holder to reproduce the work into additional copies, or license others to do so. (We realize that, when the copyright term expires, OmniQ’s encryption would continue to prevent reproduction, but at least it is not an act of monopolization or misuse, given that OmniQ is not the copyright owner.) But the ability to lawfully bypass the virtually useless TPM will make space-shifting much more efficient and less costly than having to respect it, thereby making lawful copies more widely accessible to people of all walks of life through low-cost space-shifting.  Looking under the hood: In its most recent triennial rulemaking, the Copyright Office noted that OmniQ did not provide a prototype that would, in effect, allow it to kick the tires and look under the hood, so to speak: Commenter OmniQ submitted a patent application that purports to set forth a system of “non-reproductive” space shifting, such that the original instance of a work is destroyed or made unusable when a copy of the work is moved to a new medium. OmniQ asserts that use of such a system would not implicate any of the exclusive rights under section 106 because “[t]here is no ‘reproduction or duplication.’” Although described in written comments, this system was not demonstrated at the hearings, and it is not clear from the record that a product 																																																								19 The FAQ is attached to Exhibit 2, Declaration of John T. Mitchell. 
[PAGE 18]
  
18 	
embodying the patent specification has been made available for potential users or even prototyped.  Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding, Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights, October 2015, at 113 (citations omitted, emphasis added).  At another point in the Recommendations, the Register similarly noted: Proponent OmniQ contends that the “non-reproductive” space-shifting model it describes in its comments is a noninfringing use because the process described does not constitute reproduction under the Copyright Act. The Register cannot credit OmniQ’s arguments in light of its failure to establish that the technology it advocates has actually been developed. The question therefore appears to be a hypothetical one.  Id. at 123 (citation omitted, emphasis added). OmniQ respectfully disagrees with the notion that a working prototype is necessary or even desirable. This is why: First, to create a prototype that actually takes a CSS-protected DVD or AACS-protected Blu-ray disc and space-shifts by circumventing the TPM sounds almost like entrapment. Surely that was not the Register’s intent, but the problem is that, even if a prototype could satisfy the Register that the non-reproductive space-shifting process actually operated as described, it would be necessary to do an act that is currently prohibited by Section 1201 – or at least that is the contention of the copyright holders who use CSS and AACS, and was the position of the Register in 2015. Second, the whole point of a patent application is to describe the invention with sufficient clarity that anyone skilled in the art could build it.20 The degree of clarity required under our patent laws is sufficient as a matter of law. The current OmniQ Invention application (Exhibit 1 hereto) is under consideration by the U.S. Patent Office, which does not require a working prototype before making its determination of patentability. The point of the 1201 process is not to determine whether, if the USPTO grants the patent, the invention will join the ranks of so many other inventions for which a prototype was never made, and the invention was never practiced. Rather, it is enough that the patent examiner believes it could work as described, and it is not unusual for a patent to be granted for something that might appear to work “on paper” but that, in reality, simply don’t work.21 In any event, even if the Patent Office denies the OmniQ Invention patent application (for example, because someone else already invented it, thereby failing the novelty requirement, or because it is too obvious, thereby failing the non-obvious 																																																								20 35 U.S.C. § 112 provides, “The specification shall contain a written description of the invention, and of the manner and process of making and using it, in such full, clear, concise, and exact terms as to enable any person skilled in the art to which it pertains, or with which it is most nearly connected, to make and use the same, and shall set forth the best mode contemplated by the inventor or joint inventor of carrying out the invention.” 21 See, e.g., Wonderful energy patents that didn’t quite work, THE SOURCE (published by the British Gas Company) at https://www.britishgas.co.uk/the-source/our-world-of-energy/surprising-world-of-energy/energy-patents.  
[PAGE 19]
  
19 	
requirement), there is nothing to prevent anyone from practicing the method described in the Exhibit 1 patent application for the OmniQ Invention.  Third, even if a prototype were presented for testing, and assuming, arguendo, that the Copyright Office has or can hire the expertise to know whether the split-second computing operations are being carried out precisely in the manner described in the OmniQ Invention patent application, together with the added protection of the OmniQ encryption on each chunk that is read into volatile memory, the Section 1201 task is not for the Librarian of Congress to test each method someone might use to carry out the exemption. The Petition asks for an exemption to carry out non-reproductive space-shifting along the lines of described in Exhibit 1 (the OmniQ Invention patent application), but does not ask that the particular OmniQ Invention method be the only one used. (See Declaration of Johann George, Exhibit 3, for a “plain English” description.) Like “building a better mousetrap,” if another inventor figures out how to move the authorized fixation of an audiovisual work from a DVD or Blu-ray disc to some other material object, without reproduction, the inventor would also benefit from the proposed exemption. Surely, if the exemption is granted, neither the Register of Copyrights nor the Librarian of Congress have authority to prevent the competitor’s entry into the market until it, too, presents a working prototype to be tested. To put it more directly, the OmniQ Petition is not for an exemption “to practice the OmniQ Invention,” but an exemption to use any method now known or later developed of moving the fixation from the disc to something else, without reproduction. To be sure, OmniQ would be satisfied if the granted exemption required the level of encryption planned by OmniQ, but it is certainly not necessary for the Register to wait 6.4 quadrillion years22 to see whether OmniQ can implement the such strong encryption, given that the copyright in a work made for hire only lasts 95 years. Nor do we suggest waiting even 95 years! The Librarian of Congress is free to craft an exemption for non-reproductive space-shifting, including a requirement that at no time may the work be “sufficiently permanent or stable to permit it to be perceived, reproduced, or otherwise communicated for a period of more than transitory duration” on more than one material object “from which the work can be perceived, reproduced, or otherwise communicated, either directly or with the aid of a machine or device.” 17 U.S.C. § 101 (definitions of “fixed and “copies”). Fourth, requiring a functioning prototype would appear to be arbitrary and capricious, Quite simply, if the Librarian of Congress refuses to grant an exemption that would allow circumvention of CSS and AACS in order to practice the non-infringing method such as that described in the OmniQ Invention patent application on account of the possibility that no one will actually be able to build it, and no one will actually build it because the Librarian of Congress refuses to grant an exemption for it which would permit the invention to be practiced without risk of being sued for violating Section 1201, we are in a hopeless loop. Indeed, a very significant reason why OmniQ has yet to build a prototype is precisely because potential investors are concerned about whether, without such exemption, Section 1201 would frustrate their efforts to see a return on investment. See Declaration of Mark Vrieling, Exhibit 4. Plus, if investment is going to be made to practice the OmniQ Invention by building the device, it is important to know whether the device may be designed to efficiently move just the audiovisual 
																																																								22 See Declaration of Johann George, Exhibit 3, at 2. 
[PAGE 20]
  
20 	
work by circumventing the TPM, or must be designed to move the entire contents of the disc, including the useless TPM.23 Fifth, there is absolutely no danger if the OmniQ Invention does not work. Assuming that the Librarian of Congress authorizes circumvention of CSS and AACS for the narrow purpose of non-reproductive space-shifting along the lines described in the OmniQ Invention, and further assuming, arguendo, that no one is able to perfect the non-reproductive part of the implementation, or that a court were to rule that the OmniQ Invention process itself, as practiced, in reality infringes the reproduction copyright, then the exemption would simply not apply to such conduct. We are confident that the Librarian of Congress can fashion an exemption that does not apply to non-reproductive space-shifting if the non-reproductive feature does not become a reality.   Finally, the exemptions that the Register has recommended in the past have never required the demonstration of a working model. We concede that the OmniQ invention is novel (as it must be, to qualify for patent protection), but novelty is no reason for putting the brakes on “the progress of science and the useful arts.”  Accordingly, OmniQ respectfully requests that the Petition be evaluated on the basis of the written Petition itself, referring, at most, to the OmniQ Invention patent application for all necessary understanding of how the exemption might be applied.  ITEM E.  ASSERTED ADVERSE EFFECTS ON NONINFRINGING USES   The Proposed Class Includes More Works Protected By Copyright Than Not Given the current length of copyright protection in U.S. law, odds are that any audiovisual work in the class, selected at random, is still protected by copyright, and that fact will hold true over the next three years. Although the precise number of motion pictures with expired copyrights is not available, it is certainly a very small number in comparison to the number still under copyright. For example, IMDb has listed 284 movie titles in the public domain in 2011 (and quite surprisingly, only 76 movie titles in the public domain in 2012).24 In contrast, there are or will be 540 new movies released in December 2017 alone.25 It is safe to say that even if the IMDb numbers are too low, the vast majority of motion pictures published on TPM-protected DVDs and Blu-rays discs are still copyright protected.  																																																								23 By analogy, it is as if Redbox were seeking investors to back the designing and building DVD rental kiosks without knowing whether it was legally permitted to discard the clamshell cases along with the EAS (Electronic Article Surveillance) tags, or would be required to build a kiosk that rented DVDs inside the EAS-tagged clamshell case supplied by the studio.  24 See http://www.imdb.com/list/ls003915205; http://www.imdb.com/list/ls055593451. (It is curious that the “New 2012” list is smaller than the “Old 2011” list.) Both lists are dwarfed by the number of new copyrighted movies released every year.  25 See, The Numbers - Movies Released and Planned for Release in 2017, https://www.the-numbers.com/movies/year/2017. 
[PAGE 21]
  
21 	
 The Uses At Issue Are Non-Infringing Under Title 17 Non-infringing uses are (a) private performances and (b) non-reproductive space-shifting.  (a) Private performances  The private (or, more precisely, non-public) performance of a work is not within the scope of exclusive rights; private performances are always non-infringing – even the thief who steals an infringing DVD copy of a motion picture has a right to watch the movie; doing so infringes no one’s copyright. There has never been – and never can be – a case where an infringer found guilty of making infringing reproductions and distributing the resulting copies for profit is also found guilty of watching the movie from one of those copies. It is a legal impossibility. The point is not to argue for an exemption for the benefit of a thief who wants to watch a stolen copy of an infringing DVD, but to drive home how much more rightful it is for the owner of a lawfully made copy of a movie on DVD to watch it.  Because private performances are fully protected by the First Amendment to the Constitution, and can never be infringing of any copyright, as a matter of law, it is important that relief be granted against any TPM that serves as gatekeeper for “access” in a manner that effectively usurps the First Amendment-protected non-infringing right to privately perform a work.   The owner of a DVD has just as much a right to watch the movie fixed in the DVD as does the owner of a book have a right to read it. And, just as the owner of the book who has not yet learned to read has the right to have someone else privately perform it for her enjoyment, the owner of a DVD who has no machine or device on which to watch it has a right to use a different machine or device, including one not authorized by the copyright owner. Section 1201 did not create an “exclusive right of access to a work,” nor is it intended to give the owners of Section 106 rights leverage over which machines or devices may be used to privately perform a work, which is a non-exclusive right beyond the reach of the copyright holder’s realm of exclusivity. Although one may say, “let’s watch a DVD,” it is the movie (the copyrighted audiovisual work), and not the DVD, which is being watched.26 Accordingly, if the owner of the DVD is able to privately perform the work in a manner other than the one that the copyright holder had intended, and can do so without infringing the reproduction right, there should be freedom to circumvent the TPM. And because the OmniQ Invention method facilitates non-reproductive space-shifting, the non-exclusive right to privately perform the work encompasses the right to perform it after having first moved the fixation from the DVD to a laptop, if that is the private viewer’s preference. To the extent that the TPM purports to allow the copyright holder to charge for “access” to the exercise of a Constitutionally protected right that properly belongs to the public, it is abhorrent to the Copyright Act and the Constitution, and the Librarian of Congress must not lend aid to such a scheme even if the perpetrators are able to pull it off unassisted by the government. Shelley v. Kraemer, 334 US 1 (1948). 
																																																								26 From a Copyright Act perspective, “Let’s perform a motion picture or other audiovisual work non-publicly tonight!” is more accurate, but who wants to say that? 
[PAGE 22]
  
22 	
 (b) Non-Reproductive Space-Shifting27 The use at issue is non-infringing for three reasons. First, the proposed exemption relies on the Copyright Act’s own expression of what constitutes a “reproduction” of a work into “copies,” as well as case law interpreting it. Second, the use is expressly non-reproductive; the exemption need not anticipate all possible implementations or require prototypes to see whether, in fact, they function as the exemption requires. Accordingly, none of the exclusive rights in Section 106 are infringed by non-reproductive space-shifting. Third, assuming, arguendo, that the reproduction right is implicated, the use is still non-infringing because it satisfies the “fair use” requirements of Section 107.  1.  Non-Reproductive Space-Shifting As Described In The OmniQ Invention Does Not Reproduce The Work Into Copies The first sale doctrine and its corollary, exhaustion of the distribution right, has for centuries ensured a robust secondary market for the redistribution of lawfully made copies of copyrighted works through resales, gifts, and lending. Such activity has ensured wider dissemination of copyrighted works while stimulating the creation of more works due to increased demand.28 That elegant arrangement has served us well, enabling Abraham Lincoln to borrow law books when he did not have the means to purchase them at the publisher’s first sale price, requiring only the consent of the owner of the books, and not the consent of the copyright owner.29 The doctrine ensures that secondary distribution, combined with a free market, will enable people from all walks of life to enjoy access. With the advent of digitally-delivered copies (i.e., downloads from a server to a personal computer or portable device, now referred to as electronic sell-through), the benefits of the first sale doctrine are all but gone, not because the objectives of copyright law are any different, but because the laws of physics applicable to digitally delivered copies have thwarted the statutory intent. One may still lawfully lend or sell the copy created by authorized digital download, as always, but doing so involves parting with a computer or portable device onto which the work was downloaded. That is because the distribution right applies only to the distribution of “copies 																																																								27 We again stress that OmniQ is solely advocating on behalf of true space-shifting of a non-reproductive nature. Although Recording Indus. Ass'n of Am. v. Diamond Multimedia Sys., Inc., 180 F.3d 1072, 1079 (9th Cir.1999) and A & M Records, Inc. v. Napster, Inc., 239 F. 3d 1004, 1019 (9th Cir. 2001) both used the phrase “space shifting” or “space-shift,” in both cases, the facts involved reproduction that resulted in the multiplication of copies. In plain English, neither case involved “shifting” the fixation of the work from one medium to another, but rather, “copying the fixation of the work from one medium onto an additional medium.”   28 See, e.g., Richard Roehl, Hal R. Varian, Circulating Libraries And Video Rental Stores, First Monday, Vol. 6, No. 5, May 7, 2001, available at http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/854/763, which explores the role that unlicensed commercial “circulating libraries” played in increasing demand for more reading material, and lowering the rate of illiteracy.   29 Although Lincoln’s borrowing preceded any legislative codification, it demonstrates that the public enjoyed the benefits of unlicensed redistribution as common law right to alienate chattel. 
[PAGE 23]
  
23 	
and phonorecords,” which are defined as “material objects” in which the work has been fixed. Both the distribution right and the limitation on that right apply only to material objects that are being distributed. In the case of downloads, the reproduction of a work from one material object (e.g., the copyright owner’s Internet-connected server) to another (e.g., a person’s laptop computer) supplants the reproduction + distribution process used, until very recently, to deliver copies. Instead of reproducing works onto cheap material objects that are shipped in commerce, making their way to the first new owner and then to any number of subsequent persons by sale, gift, rental or lending, the digitally disseminated work is reproduced directly onto the first owner’s comparatively very expensive material object containing myriad other works and with which the owner of the material object will be reluctant to part. As downloads increasingly replace the reproduction and distribution of prerecorded media, such as DVD movies, the public benefits of the first sale doctrine are being lost, as a smaller percentage of copies can be circulated on discrete media.   Meanwhile, what had been a competitive free-for-all in which sales, rentals, resales and trade-ins competed with each other and with gifts and lending, is quickly giving way to a more dominant market of strict licensing, where the copyright owner largely dictates both the availability and the price. Even for streaming services, where the service sets the price, the licensing terms sought by the copyright owner may simply mean that the service prefers not to offer it. Twenty years ago, a video store might purchase fewer copies if the wholesale price was too high, but there was no limit on the number of times it could be rented, and no power of the copyright holder to require that it be removed from the shelf after a term ended. Los of freedom to continue lending comes at public expense. Libraries, for example, obtain the right to “digitally lend” copies (by offering secure reproductions with a limited lifespan), but this requires permission from (a.k.a. payment to) the copyright holder, which is free to limit the number of patrons who may “check out” the book before another payment is required. The practice of lending a book until it is falling apart, and then rebinding it to give it more life, is too quickly giving way to a system in which libraries need to ask permission from the publisher just to let someone borrow the book or a movie. The OmniQ Invention is a means of achieving the intended benefits of the first sale doctrine within an Internet-connected digital environment without infringing the copyright or requiring the permission of the copyright holder, and without requiring any amendments to the Copyright Act. Non-Reproductive Space-Shifting Is True Shifting  The only reason so-called “space-shifting” has ever raised copyright infringement concerns is that they are “shifting” in name only. In reality, the controversial attempts to mimic the operation of the first sale doctrine, also referred to as a “digital first sale” equivalent, is that they have required either a reproduction (e.g., ReDigi) or a public performance (e.g. Zediva), and then require a fair use determination to establish that the reproduction or public performance are not infringing. (In Zediva’s case, it failed in its effort to persuade the court that the performance was not to the public,) These may be well-intended, and there may be a time when ReDigi’s “copy-first-and-then-delete-the-originals” approach or Zediva’s “remote DVD player” approach 
[PAGE 24]
  
24 	
might pass fair use muster, or otherwise avoid infringement, but those approaches are not contemplated by this Petition.  True space-shifting – that is, the substitution of one material object in which the work is fixed for another, and which results in no reproduction anywhere in the process – is well represented in U.S. and Canadian jurisprudence. Because the Canadian experience has reached Canada’s highest court, we will begin north of the border to provide a fuller legal framework, just as we did in comments during the last triennial. Because Canadian copyright law is so similar to that of the U.S., and because lower courts in the U.S. have taken the same path, the Supreme Court of Canada has provided useful guidance. Canadian Space-Shifting Jurisprudence: The leading case, Théberge v. Galerie d’Art du Petit Champlain inc., [2002] 2 S.C.R. 336, 2002 SCC 34 (CanLII), explains the essence of the reproduction right by emphasizing “re”. That is, there must be a multiplication of copies. Any process that, once complete, has generated no more copies than when the process began, is not a reproduction. As explained by the Court:  The appellants purchased on the open market a quantity of posters of the respondent’s artistic works. They subjected these posters to a technique which involved spreading a special resin or laminating liquid across the face of a poster. The resin is designed to bond with the surface inks. After the applied coating is dried (or cured), the coated poster is submerged in a bath of solvent which loosens the paper substrate but leaves intact the fixed ink/resin layer, thus allowing the latter to be peeled off the former. The rear of the ink/resin layer is then coated with a suitable adhesive resin and transferred to a canvas substrate, which is then smoothed and finished. Id. at ¶ 35.   My colleague, Gonthier J., takes the position that if the image were transferred from one piece of paper to a different piece of paper with no other “change”, there is a new “fixation” and that would be “reproduction”.  But in what way has the legitimate economic interest of the copyright holder been infringed?  The process began with a single poster and ended with a single poster.  The image “fixed” in ink is the subject-matter of the intellectual property and it was not reproduced.  It was transferred from one display to another.  It is difficult to envisage any intellectual content let alone intellectual property embodied in the piece of blank paper peeled away, or in the piece of blank paper substituted for it.  When Raphaël’s Madonna di Foligno was lifted for preservation purposes from its original canvas in 1799 under the direction of the chemist Berthollet and fixed to a new canvas, the resulting work was considered to be no less an original Raphaël.  Similarly, when the frescoes of Pompeii were restored by replacement of the underlying plaster, the result was not classified as a “reproduction”, even though the old plaster was a constituent physical element of the original frescoes.  If a comparable copyright situation arose, I do not think the artist would (or should) have a veto over a purchaser’s attempt to preserve the asset.  These examples may be more spectacular than the humble swap of substrates of a paper poster, but the principle is the same and applies equally to authorized copies as 
[PAGE 25]
  
25 	
well as to the original artistic work.  In neither case is there reproduction within the meaning of the Act. Id. at ¶ 38 (emphasis in original).  The Quebec Court of Appeal adopted a more restricted view than does my colleague, suggesting that the violation of economic rights lay not simply in “fixation” but in moving the ink film from a paper substrate to a substrate of a more costly material, namely canvas ([2000] Q.J. No. 412 (QL), at paras. 18-23). (This was thought to place the respondent’s work for resale in a different market niche, as discussed below.) This too, in my view, goes too far. If the “new” substrate material were made of a smooth sheet of vellum (calf) or papyrus, the result would have the identical appearance to the original paper. How has the copyright holder’s interest in the “intellectual” property been harmed by such a change in the material composition of the backing? Does the mischief only emerge in appearances, i.e., if the new piece of paper has a textured finish, or is pebbled to look like canvas? No one would deny the world of difference between the original artistic work and a mechanically produced copy, but we are talking here about moving the same physical layer of inks around different blank substrates. To allow artists to regulate what can or cannot be done with posters in this way would have the public searching for elusive distinctions. There would be no even reasonably “bright line” between infringing and non-infringing conduct, a deficiency that would be particularly mischievous when dealing with pre-judgment seizure at the instance of a plaintiff without judicial supervision. I do not foreclose the possibility that a change of substrate could, as part of a more extensive set of changes, amount to reproduction in a new form (perhaps, for example, if the respondent’s work were incorporated by the ink transfer method into some other artist’s original work) but the present case does not rise to that level. Id. at ¶¶ 39-41. The Court went on to focus on reproduction: “As one would expect from the very word “copyright”, “reproduction” is usually defined as the act of producing additional or new copies of the work in any material form.  Multiplication of the copies would be a necessary consequence of this physical concept of “reproduction”. Id. at ¶ 42 (emphasis in original). Significantly, the Théberge Court actually cited U.S. case law in support of its conclusion, and to that we now turn.   United States Space-Shifting Jurisprudence:  The leading case in the United States is C. M. Paula Co. v. Logan, 355 F.Supp. 189 (N.D. Tex. 1973). The court focused on whether the process at issue – using a chemical method for lifting a copyrighted image off on one backing and placing it on another – was an infringement of the reproduction right. It held that it was not: 
[PAGE 26]
  
26 	
The Court notes at the outset that without copying there can be no infringement of copyright. Further, plaintiff has the burden of establishing that there has been a copying—a "reproduction or duplication" of a thing.  The process utilized by defendant that is now in question results in the use of the original image on a ceramic plaque; such process is not a "reproduction or duplication."  The Court believes that plaintiff's characterization of the print thus used as a decal is appropriate. Each ceramic plaque sold by defendant with a Paula print affixed thereto requires the purchase and use of an individual piece of artwork marketed by the plaintiff. For example, should defendant desire to make one hundred ceramic plaques using the identical Paula print, defendant would be required to purchase one hundred separate Paula prints. The Court finds that the process here in question does not constitute copying Id. at 191 (citation and footnotes omitted). OmniQ’s non-reproductive space-shifting is identical in all significant respects. If, for example, a video service using OmniQ’s patent-pending invention wished to substitute a customer’s hard drive for the plastic disc of a DVD movie for one hundred customers, then one hundred DVDs of the movie would have to be purchased. At the end of the process, the work is no longer fixed in the 100 DVDs, but instead fixed in 100 customer hard drives. There is no “‘reproduction or duplication’ of a thing.” As Section 202 of the Copyright Act instructs, we must be mindful of the distinction between the intangible work and the tangible copy of a work. The reproduction right attaches to the work, not the copy. Whether the material object in which the work is fixed is substituted for another material object is inconsequential for purposes of the reproduction right. “The court chooses to focus on the art work itself, not on the material on which the work was mounted or the ultimate use to which the tiles ‘lend themselves.’ The mode of affixation of the art work onto the mat or tile is insignificant.” Lee v. Deck the Walls, Inc., 925 F. Supp. 576, 580 (N.D. Ill. 1996), aff'd sub nom. Lee v. A.R.T. Co., 125 F.3d 580 (7th Cir.1997). The court added, in a footnote, “Certainly Congress did not intend that courts look to the type of adhesive, whether it be Elmer's glue, Superglue or tape, to be the fact upon which a copyright infringement issue should be determined.” Id., n. 3. When the Seventh Circuit affirmed, Judge Easterbrook observed, “An alteration that includes (or consumes) a complete copy of the original lacks economic significance.” 125 F.3d at 581. “The art was bonded to a slab of ceramic, but it was not changed in the process.” Id. at 582.30 As noted above, this is what distinguishes OmniQ’s non-reproductive space-shifting from efforts like that of ReDigi. There, reproductions were, in fact made, even if the next step involved deletion of duplicates. As the ReDigi court explained: “It is beside the point that the original phonorecord no longer exists. It matters only that a new phonorecord has been created.” Capitol Records, LLC v. ReDigi Inc., 934 F.Supp.2d 640, 560 (S.D.N.Y. 2013). In distinguishing C.M. Paula (and, by implication, the OmniQ method), the court explained: 
																																																								30 The OmniQ Invention, likewise, removes the fixation from the DVD to the hard drive, no more and no less. The unaltered work of authorship remains intact, but on a different medium.  
[PAGE 27]
  
27 	
“ReDigi's service is distinguishable from the process in that case. There, the copyrighted print, or material object, was lifted from the greeting card and transferred in toto to the ceramic tile; no new material object was created. By contrast, ReDigi's service by necessity creates a new material object when a digital music file is either uploaded to or downloaded from the Cloud Locker.” Id. at 650-51. In short, there is strong authority in both the United States and Canada that where the owner of a lawfully made copy transfers the fixation of a work from one material object to another, without altering the work or causing more copies to be created, there is no infringement of the exclusive right to reproduce the work into copies and phonorecords. The copyright holder’s right remains inviolate, while the public’s interests expressed in the “copyright clause” of the Constitution are advanced. Moreover, the ability to substitute one material object for another helps ensure that the Copyright Act’s (§ 109) plan for unlimited recirculation of lawfully made copies that have already been placed in circulation by the copyright holder will not be stunted merely because modern digital technology makes it cumbersome to transfer the entire library of works (such as a hard drive) sharing a single material object, or to make use of a DVD when DVD players are no longer readily available. Legal Precedent For “Analog Copies” Must Be Applied To “Digital Copies”  OmniQ was not a petitioner during the Sixth Section 1201 Triennial Proceeding, but commented on a proposal similar to the De Petris petition here, suggesting that even if the Copyright Office were reluctant to recommend an unfettered exemption for the purpose of making back-up or convenience copies, it should consider allowing non-reproductive space-shifting to that end. The Register noted the legal authority cited in support of true space-shifting (i.e., moving the work from one material object to another without increasing the number of copies), but suggested that such precedent did not involve a digital format, pointing to the ReDigi case as the “most analogous” case involving the digital format, 2015 Recommendation at 123. But there is no reason to reject pre-digital cases, and instead look solely at a digital case in whish the reproduction step was admitted (even if danced around). We respectfully suggest that the Register reconsider this stance, as that there is no room to doubt the precedential value of the cases that are more factually on point. The only fact in common with ReDigi is the word “digital.” The Copyright Act establishes no basis for disparate treatment, and judicial precedent confirms this.  As noted above, at 5, there is no legal basis upon which to distinguish “digital copies” from any other copies for purposes of copyrights in audiovisual works, or to treat “digital” as a signal for sui generis treatment. In the same way that a “literary work” may appear on a printed paper, microfiche, a USB thumb drive, or a server in the so-called “cloud”, the Section 101 definitions of “copies,” “fixed,” “motion pictures” and “audiovisual works” make no distinction between 16mm film, videocassette tape, a DVD, a laptop hard drive, a smart phone, or a remote server. Accordingly, there is no basis for reluctance in applying established legal precedent developed at a time when space-shifting involved works that were fixed in material objects using so-called “analog” methods to space-shifting that involves works that were fixed using “digital” technology, or speculating as to whether, some day, a federal court might conclude that there is a reason for treating “digital” as sui generis.  
[PAGE 28]
  
28 	
The U.S. Supreme Court agrees. In his concurring opinion in the 1984 “Betamax” decision, Justice Brennan reminds us that analog versus digital is a distinction without a difference. He summarized the judicial policy of taking the Copyright Act as we find it, without speculating as to whether Congress might desire a different result in the case of newer technology:  Like so many other problems created by the interaction of copyright law with a new technology, "[t]here can be no really satisfactory solution to the problem presented here, until Congress acts." Twentieth Century Music Corp. v. Aiken, 422 U.S. 151, 167 (1975) (dissenting opinion). But in the absence of a congressional solution, courts cannot avoid difficult problems by refusing to apply the law. We must "take the Copyright Act . . . as we find it," Fortnightly Corp. v. United Artists Television, Inc., 392 U.S. 390, 401-402 (1968), and "do as little damage as possible to traditional copyright principles . . . until the Congress legislates." Id. at 404 (dissenting opinion).  Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City Studios, Inc., 464 U.S. 417, 500 (1984), Brennan, J., concurring (full citations added). The Supreme Court of Canada has reached the same conclusion, and established the principle of “technological neutrality” as a fundamental copyright principle. See Cary J. Craig, Technological Neutrality: (pre)Serving the Purposes of Copyright Law, in THE COPYRIGHT PENTALOGY, Michael Geist, ed., at 271, discussing Entertainment Software Association v Society of Composers, Authors and Music Publishers of Canada, 2012 SCC 34, [2012] 2 SCR 231, in particular. Craig writes: Michael Geist is right to suggest that “the biggest long term impact [of the ESA decision] may be felt when courts begin to assess the effect of the new digital lock rules. Those rules are distinctly non-neutral and could face a rough ride if challenged before the courts.” Geist explains, “those rules ‘impose an additional layer of protections’ and create ‘a gratuitous cost’ for consumers who lose their user rights in the shift to Internet-based technologies”—precisely the kinds of effects that the Court found to be contrary to its substantive version of the technological neutrality principle. Id. at 296 (citations omitted). We will face the same issue in the United States, eventually, but in the meantime, we can be guided by the Supreme Court’s policy, and the Librarian of Congress may freely follow it to the limits of her Section 1201 power.31 Craig suggests technological neutrality as a “regulatory starting point,” and we recommend it here:  Technological neutrality is an inherently appealing concept for policy makers in the digital age. At its core, the concept implies that regulations can and should be developed in such a way that they are independent of any particular technology, neither favouring nor discriminating against specific technologies as they emerge and evolve. From a principled perspective, neutrality and non-discrimination in the law are almost always laudable goals; from a practical perspective, 																																																								31    
[PAGE 29]
  
29 	
technologically neutral regulation holds the promise of sustainable laws in a time of rapid technological change.  Id. at 272-73. 2. The Proposed Exemption Itself Is Premised On Genuine Non-Reproduction In contrast to the De Petris request, which seeks an exemption to reproduce the work into copies to be used as a back-up or for playback on different devices, and in contrast to other nominal space-shifting methods that, in reality, involve the making of a copy first and then going about deleting all but the last,32 the exemption requested by OmniQ is specifically limited to non-reproductive space-shifting, which is to say, space-shifting that does not involve making a copy first, or otherwise creating an additional copy.  Although the Librarian of Congress could grant the exemption limited to space-shifting that does not entail reproduction of the work into copies, and leave it to the courts to decide whether someone practicing the OmniQ Invention method is nevertheless reproducing the work into copies, the plain meaning of the Copyright Act provides all of the information needed to conclude that the OmniQ Invention, as described in Exhibit 1, does not involve a reproduction of the work into copies, and therefore is not infringing.  Section 106(1) of the Copyright Act grants authors audiovisual works the exclusive right, subject to Sections 107-122, to do or to authorize “to reproduce the copyrighted work in copies.”  Although the term “reproduce” is not defined in the Act, it is clear that Congress intended to follow the plain English meaning of the term, which is to say, to “reproduce” is to “produce again” or “produce another.” That is, without “re” there would be no “reproduction.” Accordingly, non-reproductive space-shifting would require that there never be a second copy, and the method explained in the OmniQ Invention patent application fastidiously adheres to the Copyright Act’s provision for what constitutes a reproduction into a copy. Beginning with the definitions in 17 U.S.C. § 101, it is clear that the reproduction right does not encompass shifting of the work from one material object to another without thereby adding to the number of copies that have been made. Also, it is clear that however the Act has been interpreted with respect to so-called “analog” cases (such as lifting an image off of paper and fixing it on a more durable material object, leaving the paper blank) the entire structure of the Copyright Act’s fundamentals (starting with the definitions) contemplates the application of the same rules to new forms, formats, devices and technologies as to the old.  “Audiovisual works” are works that consist of a series of related images which are intrinsically intended to be shown by the use of machines, or devices such as projectors, viewers, or electronic equipment, together with accompanying sounds, 																																																								32 Capitol Records, LLC v. ReDigi Inc., 934 F. Supp. 2d 640 (S.D.N.Y 2013). Although the District Court remarked that ReDigi had changed its position on whether copies were made during the process, id. at 650, n.5, the ReDigi patent itself states that a copy is made first, before all others are deleted.  
[PAGE 30]
  
30 	
if any, regardless of the nature of the material objects, such as films or tapes, in which the works are embodied.  17 U.S.C. § 101 (emphasis added). The definition of “audiovisual works” is technology neutral, both with respect to the material object constituting the copy and with respect to the machine, device, or electronic equipment used to show the work.   “Copies” are material objects, other than phonorecords, in which a work is fixed by any method now known or later developed, and from which the work can be perceived, reproduced, or otherwise communicated, either directly or with the aid of a machine or device. The term “copies” includes the material object, other than a phonorecord, in which the work is first fixed.  17 U.S.C. § 101 (emphasis added). As the Second Circuit has explained, the definition of “copies” requires an “embodiment requirement” and a “duration requirement,” a point we shall return to below (see discussion of the definition of “fixed”). At this juncture, we draw attention to “any method now known or later developed.” There is no way to read “except digital” into that definition.   Also, the last sentence in the definition of “copies” would be unnecessary – superfluous – if “reproduce” in Section 106(1) did not have the ordinary English language meaning of multiplying the number of copies. Clearly, in plain English, the first material object in which a work is fixed would not be a “copy,” for it is the original; there was nothing to have copied. Congress therefore had to “tweak” the definition just enough to make sure that the original fixation would be treated in the same manner as any reproduced copy of it, otherwise, the author would have no Section 106(3) distribution right over the original.    A “device”, “machine”, or “process” is one now known or later developed.  Section 101 (emphasis added). Once again, the Copyright Act is technology neutral unless expressly stated otherwise. To put “digital” devices, machines or processes in perspective, it is important to bear in mind that, with the exception of sound recordings, there is nothing special about “digital” insofar as the Copyright Act is concerned. Digits are to disc as ink is to paper.   A work is “fixed” in a tangible medium of expression when its embodiment in a copy or phonorecord, by or under the authority of the author, is sufficiently permanent or stable to permit it to be perceived, reproduced, or otherwise communicated for a period of more than transitory duration. A work consisting of sounds, images, or both, that are being transmitted, is “fixed” for purposes of this title if a fixation of the work is being made simultaneously with its transmission.  Section 101 (emphasis added).   Finally, even where the Copyright Act provided special treatment for “digital” reproductions with respect to phonorecords, it did so only to succeed in hammering a square peg 
[PAGE 31]
  
31 	
into a round hole. Because the compulsory license in 17 U.S.C. § 115 was only triggered when the phonorecord was made and distributed, and “downloads” only implicated the reproduction right with no distribution of the material object, Congress essentially deemed the reproduction to encompass distribution as well, not in the Section 106(3) meaning, but just for purposes of applying the Section 115 compulsory license to downloads – “digital phonorecord deliveries.” This demonstrates that Congress continues to view the distribution right as merely a means of perfecting and protecting the reproduction right. Melville B. Nimmer and David Nimmer, 2 NIMMER ON COPYRIGHT, § 8.12[A] (“granting the distribution right is a necessary supplement to the reproduction right in order to fully protect the copyright owner”). See, also, C.M. Paula Company v. Logan, 355 F. Supp. 189, 191-92 (N.D. Texas 1973) (quoting an earlier version of the Nimmer treatise). The distribution right is simply a means of perfecting the right to profit from the reproduction of the work into copies, particularly in the event that one who did not infringe the reproduction right is distributing the infringing copies; but the copies themselves are merely tokens of the fact that the reproduction right was exercised. By analogy, if the author of a haiku poem calls someone on the phone and says “write this down,” and proceeds to recite the poem, the author has no claim of ownership over whatever article the licensee may have written it on – be it a napkin, a wall, or a hand, or by digital means, such as typing it on a laptop.  3. Even If Arguably Reproductive, The Use Is Non-Infringing Fair Use That Helps Restore The Lost Benefits Of The First Sale Doctrine  The “first sale doctrine” has been part of the fabric of our nation’s copyright laws from their inception. When the Supreme Court decided Bobbs-Merrill Co. v. Straus, 210 U.S. 339 (1908), there had already been a line of lower court cases establishing the same principle – that once an author relinquishes ownership of a copy of the work, at whatever price it chose, the public interest in unfettered redistribution of that copy takes over. Even Mark Twain learned that lesson. For purposes of this initial comment, we suggest that all of the fair use arguments mustered in support of the De Petris Petition apply here, with two important distinctions: First, the use is intended to restore the benefits of the diminishing world of secondary distributions made possible by Section 109(a) – and would have the effect of doing so. Second, there is no cognizable harm to copyright owners, because (a) Section 109(a) already means that any copy they make can be distributed, and (b) just as with a copy on DVD, the OmniQ Invention means only one person can own the copy at a time, and only one person can privately perform the copy at a time.  Users Are Adversely Affected In Their Ability To Make Such Noninfringing Uses (And Are Likely To Be Adversely Affected In Their Ability To Make Such Noninfringing Uses During The Next Three Years) (i) Availability for use of copyrighted works For most of our nation’s history with copyright protection, copyrighted works were typically published in discrete copies – material objects in which a single work, or a closely related small collection of works – were embodied. The Copyright Act’s sharp distinction between the intangible copyrighted work and the tangible copy of the work (17 U.S.C. § 202) could be given full effect in commerce, together with the Copyright Act’s express limitation on the distribution right (17 U.S.C. § 109(a)) which entitles owners of lawfully made copies to 
[PAGE 32]
  
32 	
redistribute them without the consent of the copyright holder. (Sections 109 and 202 of the Copyright Act of 1976 were originally codified together in § 41 of the Copyright Act of 1909, and in § 27 of the Copyright Act of 1947. Prior to 1909, these principles were adhered to as part of our common law.) So-called “digital copies” have been around since the days of the music CD and DAT (digital audio tape). Music CDs have been manufactured commercially in the United States since the September 21, 1984, release of Bruce Springsteen’s Born in the U.S.A., dubbed by CBS as “The First CBS Records Compact Disc Made In The U.S.A.” See http://www.keithhirsch.com/the-very-rare-red-bruce-springsteen-born-in-the-u-s-a-cd. That same day, The Edison CD Sampler was issued from the same plant. See http://www.keithhirsch.com/the-edison-cd-sampler.  Interestingly, even back then The Edison CD Sampler betrayed the publisher’s attempted to restrict uses that are statutorily placed beyond the copyright owner’s control. Rather than TPM, the digital copy (or “digital phonorecord,” to be precise) carried a legal warning resembling the one struck down by the Supreme Court in Bobbs-Merrill Co. v. Straus, 210 U.S. 339 (1908): “FOR EDUCATIONAL USE ONLY – NOT FOR SALE.” Obviously, it is perfectly lawful for anyone to use it for non-educational use of the CD, and to sell it. But as modern TPM systems allow copyright owners to use technological locks rather than austere and baseless warnings to suppress lawful uses, thumbing one’s nose at legal puffery is not an option. What is different today, with respect to audiovisual works in Class 3, is that in spite of new ways of watching a movie, the public’s access to movies is shrinking dramatically. While there may be enough movies available to find something worth watching, the breadth of choice in movies was many times higher 20 years ago than it is today.  From the copyright owner’s perspective, that may be perceived as a good thing. Your local video store of 20 years ago may have carried 20,000 titles, but the studios were not making any incremental money on rentals following the sale to the store. When a potential viewer wanted to decide on a movie to watch, the studio naturally preferred that the viewer purchase a new copy, watch it at the theater, or at least stimulate rental store demand so that the video retailer would have to direct more of its revenue toward purchasing new releases. Like consumers satisfied to keep driving a 10-year old car to the chagrin of auto makers, retailers that turned customers into classic film buffs happy to watch a black and white Hitchcock flick were doing Hollywood studios no favors. In the end, however, movie selection at retail was responsive to public demand, regardless of which choices (or lack of choices) were more profitable for the studio. A retailer who saw an increased interest in French comedies could beef up the catalog buying used copies of French comedies from a broker rather than steer customers to a smaller selection of new releases. Today, relatively few video rental stores remain. Even Netflix, which had been a fierce competitor of local video retailers with its mail order DVD rentals, and used to famously drive increased interest in older movies, has been cutting way back on its selections, not bothering to replace classics on DVD, or license the rights to stream them as public performances. Zach Schonfeld, Netflix, Streaming Video And The Slow Death Of The Classic Film, Newsweek (online), Sept. 15, 2017, at 6:10 AM, at http://www.newsweek.com/2017/09/22/netflix-streaming-movies-classics-664512.html. Schonfeld goes on to note that 1960 was the year Alfred Hitchcock’s Psycho was released, along with Billy Wilder’s The Apartment, and Stanley Kubrick’s Spartacus: 
[PAGE 33]
  
33 	
But in the vast world of Netflix streaming, 1960 doesn’t exist. There’s one movie from 1961 available to watch (the original Parent Trap) and one selection from 1959 (Compulsion), but not a single film from 1960. It’s like it never happened. There aren’t any movies from 1963 either. Or 1968, 1955 or 1948. There are no Hitchcock films on Netflix. No classics from Sergio Leone or François Truffaut. When Debbie Reynolds died last Christmas week, grieving fans had to turn to Amazon Video for Singin' in the Rain and Susan Slept Here. You could fill a large film studies textbook with what’s not available on Netflix. Id. Of course, Amazon Video has its own limited selection, and having to subscribe to multiple services just to try to cobble together a decent choice is costly to the public, whose local video store did not charge a monthly admission fee whether they rented anything or not. Schonfeld describes the selection as “abominable,” noting that, at the time he checked on the ever-rotating (due to licensing) steaming platform, there were just 43 movies made before 1970. Only 25 movies from the pre-1950 era were available to the more than 100,000,000 global subscribers.  Stephen Prince, a cinema studies professor at Virginia Tech, observed, “Now we see the danger inherent in this change—an emphasis on mainstream, contemporary movies has replaced what had been a broad archive of world cinema… Convenience biases viewers toward mainstream fare and makes films of the past or from other cultures less visible.” Id. “My students are heavily biased toward what’s new and what can be streamed on portable devices,” Prince says. “What isn't available to stream essentially doesn't exist.” Id. To paraphrase the Swedish film scholar, Jan Olsson, the cost of acquiring streaming rights often exceeded the customer acquisition/retention value.  Librarian (and writer) Rachel Paige King decried the shift to a system based on contractual permissions rather than the operation law:  So, as the technology to disseminate all kinds of art and information becomes more sophisticated, so too does the means and the motive to restrict access. If entertainment industry executives are smart (and they are) they’ll make sure that streaming video turns out to be a whole lot more expensive for consumers than home DVD rental.  Id. And she is right. That is exactly what is happening. “The end result,” says Schonfeld, “is a paltry, pathetic catalog of older films shackled by copyright law. It’s a strange conundrum: The internet promises a century’s worth of multimedia output at your fingertips but ruthlessly privileges whatever got released yesterday. Some films have been left behind in obsolete format hell.” Id.  As major streaming services become filmmakers, in an effort to both compete using “exclusives” and avoid the need to pay licensing fees, some films do not even get a theatrical release open to everyone, before being confined to an exclusive streaming service. “Frankly, this is why I’m keeping all my DVDs,” says film critic, Leonard Maltin. “And it's a pain in the neck, because they take up space. But I don't trust the cloud. And I don't trust the marketplace to maintain titles that are in some cases obscure or not terribly commercial.” “There are some movies you basically have to break the law to see.” Id. (quoting classic cinema blogger, Nora Fiore). And that is what OmniQ seeks to correct. Millions upon millions of movies have already been made, sold, and lawfully distributed, and are currently gathering dust 
[PAGE 34]
  
34 	
in warehouses, basements and living room shelves, while the movies that have been fixed on them cannot be watched on streaming services, or can only be seen by paying the “new” price of a download, if available. (ii) Availability for use of works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and educational purposes  When it comes to using a work for nonprofit archival, preservation and educational purposes, we have already entered into an era in which a permissions-based “extracopyright” system based on technological magic rather than declared exclusive rights is replacing what has historically been an absolute right to watch any movie your could get your hands on, and to if it was yours and not infringing, pass it on to someone else. At its most immediate level, even students of film are stymied. As Professor Stephen Prince observed, “What isn't available to stream essentially doesn't exist. I've had students ask if it is okay to watch Vertigo on Youtube.”  My wife teaches courses using Latin American films, often online as part of distance learning offered by a local community college servicing a broad rural area. Every semester, her students encounter difficulties meeting homework assignments that require them to watch a movie that they cannot find anywhere – at least not without unreasonable effort, such subscribing to a new monthly subscription service or having to purchase a copy from collectors. Her own copy is loaned to the college library, which is inconvenient to many. Non-reproductive space-shifting would permit all of her students to take turns borrowing the single copy, just as they would from the library, if they could get to it. See Declaration of Betty González Mitchell, Exhibit 5.  For most of our history with copyrighted works, the works could be perceived without the aid of technological devices. Literary works could be accessed for as long as the ink was protected from fading and the paper from disintegrating with age. Film projectors could be homemade by anyone with modest skill. Even a vinyl phonorecord could be accessed using a homemade turntable equipped with a sewing needle and a paper cone – even before the more modern pizza box offered a more elegant solution. See http://www.instructables.com/id/Makedo-Pizza-Box-Gramophone/. The digital format ushered in an era where access to works fixed in that format required something more – a computer and some specially written computer program – to gain access, and that technological step made it feasible, for the first time, for copyright holders to lace their reproductions with digital access locks which, if used responsibly, might do nothing more than protect against copyright infringement, but might otherwise become tools for intentional or unintentional capturing of non-exclusive rights for exclusive control.  To illustrate, when a library kept an archive of books for use of its patrons, its use was a noninfringing use authorized by law. The library had an absolute right to make the books available to the public, and the public had an absolute right to read the books. But as the format has changed, such that the book is in a file format fixed on the library’s server, the library’s ability to lend the copy and the patron’s ability to read the copy is severely hindered, where reasonable access requires reproduction or public display. Although it is certainly more practical for the library to make a copy for the customer (almost instantly and at marginal cost), doing so involved a reproduction requiring the copyright holder’s permission or, if for a use for which permission is not required, may be impossible without circumventing TPM. In effect, then, lawful non-infringing uses beyond the control of the copyright holder as a matter of law 
[PAGE 35]
  
35 	
suddenly fall within the de facto control of the copyright holder by operation of the laws of physics shielded by anti-circumvention law insufficiently softened by this exemption process.   (iii) Impact that the prohibition on the circumvention of technological measures applied to copyrighted works has on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research  There are two primary ways in which the prohibition on the circumvention of TPM applied to copyrighted works affect criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship and research: access to the work and access to a specific copy of the work.  First, all of these activities require some manner of access to the work. The private performance of a work is never infringing, of course. Even the private performance by means of an infringing reproduction is constitutionally protected. Accordingly, the only constitutionally permissible prohibition on the circumvention of TPM that controls private performance access must be one that is narrowly tailored to go no farther than necessary to protect a legitimate copyright interest. By analogy, if a copyright holder sells a lawfully made copy of a book the access to which is protected by a padlock, a law that prohibits the owner of the lawfully made copy from breaking the padlock without the copyright holder’s permission is illegitimate. The fact that a thief cannot read the copy of a locked un-sold book may be acceptable, whereas the copyright owner’s use of the lock to impose a metered access to the lawfully made and distributed copies, or to charge a fee to unlock copies being redistributed pursuant to § 109, would not. The difficulty with the uses described in this sub-section (iii), which mirror statutory examples of fair use, is that the fair use factors are fact-specific, making it difficult to apply a single rule to all access concerns. It may be that if TPM prevents a movie critic from evaluating my copy of a movie, even if doing so is a non-infringing private performance, the movie critic remains free to access the work by other means, such as buying, borrowing or renting a different copy, or watching a public performance. Even so, restrictions imposed by the copyright holder burden the movie critic’s freedom if they go beyond essential copyright protection. If the copyright holder’s answer to the fact that its TPM blocks non-infringing access to the work is to say that there are other means of accessing the work, such as paying to download it, paying for a movie theater ticket, or buying a different copy, the solution results in an enlargement of the copyright monopoly beyond the statutory limits. In short, any solution that enlarges the scope of the copyright monopoly should be rejected. If the movie critic wishes to privately perform a work from a lawfully made copy, and cannot, the solution is not that the copyright owner can license or otherwise make available some other access. Rather, the solution is to recognize that Section 1201(c) and the First Amendment require that the movie critic be free to privately perform the work without having to turn to the copyright holder for permission. This brings us to the second way in which TPM may frustrate these uses. It is crucial that the right to privately perform the work be agnostic to the copy from which the private performance is facilitated, just as the Copyright Act and the First Amendment do not distinguish between a professional film critic who publishes in the New York Times from the 8-year-old film critic who publishes by turning in her homework for Mrs. Doubtfire’s second-grade English class. The former may be able to send an assistant, with a budget, to scare up an alternate means of access, whereas the latter may be limited to the copy available from a neighbor or the bargain 
[PAGE 36]
  
36 	
bin of a thrift shop. Telling the second-grader that she can open an iTunes account to purchase a reproduction rather than circumvent the TPM on the copy she holds in her hands abridges her rights under the Copyright Act and the First Amendment. See, also, Declaration of Betty González Mitchell, Exhibit 5. In sum, the point is that both the Constitution and the Copyright Act require that the “impact” be judged not as an economist might judge market alternatives, or as a copyright holder might mix and match the exercise of exclusive rights to maximize profit, but rather on whether the non-infringing means of access reserved to members of the public are abridged. Because I have a right, under the Constitution and under the Copyright Act, to watch a movie from a second-hand copy I received from a previous owner of that lawfully made copy, that right is abridged if the copyright holder uses TPM to limit that freedom and force me to find an alternate means of access even if that alternate means is readily available and at a nominal additional cost. A student who subscribes to cable television and has two streaming subscriptions should not have to subscribe to a third subscription service, just because the student does not have a DVD player on which to watch a more inexpensive DVD copy. (iv) Effect of circumvention of technological measures on the market for or value of copyrighted works When limited to non-reproductive substitution of the material object in which the work is fixed, the impact on the market for and value of the work likely increases. But in any event, because there is no reliance on “fair use,” this fair use factor is immaterial. It is no more relevant than a discussion of whether a second-hand bookstore increases or decreases the value of a copyrighted work, since used book sales are a matter of right without regard to fair use. To properly analyze the impact, we must segregate each exclusive right identified in § 106. First of all, the circumvention would have no impact on the exclusive right to perform or display the work publicly, nor would it have any impact on the exclusive right to create derivative works. (§§ 106(2), 106(4), 106(5) and 106(6).) Although it is conceivable that, in individual instances, there might be an impact (for example, if a licensed public performance of a motion picture is facilitated or hindered by the particular medium in which the work is embodied), it is inconceivable that there would be an overall impact. With respect to the reproduction right in § 106(1), the non-reproductive substitution would have no effect at all with respect to any individual authorized copy. After all, it is non-reproductive. But by enabling the non-reproductive substitution of the tangible medium in which the work is fixed, the value of the initial copy is likely to increase (whether that value is expressed in a higher market price or simply a higher demand for more copies). For example, the purchase of a DVD-version of a motion picture has more value if there is a greater secondary market for that copy, and the option of non-reproductive substitution of the DVD plastic for a solid state laptop hard drive increases that secondary market. The EZ-D example, discussed above, at n.14, demonstrates that film producers know that there is greater value in redistributable copies.  (v) Other factors that may be appropriate for the Librarian to consider in evaluating the proposed exemption  
[PAGE 37]
  
37 	
The proper operation of the U.S. Copyright Act’s anti-circumvention prohibition requires that technological protection measures not serve as thumbs on the scale of the Copyright Act’s balance between exclusive rights granted under constitutional authority and the non-exclusive rights enjoyed by the general public. As the Supreme Court instructed, protecting non-exclusive rights is just as important as protecting exclusive rights. Fogerty v. Fantasy, Inc., 510 U.S. 517 (1994). It would be error to allow any TPM to be used in a manner that allows the copyright owner to enlarge the scope of its exclusive rights beyond the limits established by Congress. To borrow from Fogerty,  Because copyright law ultimately serves the purpose of enriching the general public through access to creative works, it is peculiarly important that the boundaries of copyright law be demarcated as clearly as possible. To that end, [members of the public] who seek to advance a variety of [non-infringing uses of copyrighted works] should be encouraged to [circumvent TPM’s that encroach upon non-infringing uses] to the same extent that [copyright owners] are encouraged to [deploy TPM to prevent] infringement. In the case before us, the successful [use of non-reproductive space-shifting would result in] increased public exposure to [any digitized] work that could, as a result, lead to further creative pieces. Thus a successful [circumvention of TPM for non-infringing use] may further the policies of the Copyright Act every bit as much as a successful prosecution of [circumvention] claim by the holder of a copyright. Id., at 527. “It is the right of the public to receive suitable access to social, political, esthetic, moral, and other ideas and experiences which is crucial here.” Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC, 395 U.S. 367, 390 (1969). It is incumbent upon the Librarian of Congress to make sure that this right is not abridged by TPM that goes beyond copyright protection by infringing on the public’s non-exclusive rights. As the Supreme Court said over 150 years ago, monopolies granted under authority of Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution are not served by use of collateral power to prevent the public from enjoying non-infringing uses of a copyrighted work, for “the benefit to the public or community at large was another and doubtless the primary object in granting and securing that monopoly,” Kendall v. Winsor, 62 U.S. 322, 328 (1859). In this case, that collateral power is derived from over-broad use of TPM with no safety valve to prevent copyright owner power over non-infringing use.  Such a limitation preventing use of TPM to suppress non-infringing uses is supported by international law. The anti-circumvention provisions were intended to meet the U.S. obligations in the WIPO Copyright Treaty and the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty. Article 11 of the WIPO Copyright Treaty does not require or encourage any legal protection or remedies against circumvention of TPM used to prevent non-infringing acts: Contracting Parties shall provide adequate legal protection and effective legal remedies against the circumvention of effective technological measures that are used by authors in connection with the exercise of their rights under this Treaty or the Berne Convention and that restrict acts, in respect of their works, which are not authorized by the authors concerned or permitted by law. Although 17 U.S.C. § 1201 does not specifically use the WIPO “or permitted by law” formulation (which is identical in Article 18 of the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty), § 1201(c) specifically requires that this section not be read as altering the copyright 
[PAGE 38]
  
38 	
balance, and the courts have required that there be a nexus between a cognizable copyright and the TPM. See, e.g., Chamberlain Group v. Skylink Tech., Inc., 381 F. 3d 1178 (Fed. Cir. 2004). Where “the critical nexus between access and protection” is missing, id. at 1204, there can be no liability. Where the Copyright Act authorizes a use, anyone circumventing a TPM to make that authorized use is “immune from § 1201(a)(1) circumvention liability. In the absence of allegations of either copyright infringement or § 1201(a)(1) circumvention, [users of the OmniQ invention] cannot be liable for § 1201(a)(2) trafficking.” Id. The Chamberlain court and others have read “or permitted by law” into the fabric of U.S. copyright jurisprudence. And it could be no other way, since every use that is not prohibited by the Copyright Act is fully protected by the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.  Because non-reproductive space-shifting does not involve any reproduction at all, such activity is beyond the reach of the copyright monopoly, and is fully protected by the First Amendment. Accordingly, circumvention of TPM that interferes with non-reproductive space-shifting must be allowed, regardless whether the copyright owner might prefer to suppress non-infringing competition.  The Statutory Prohibition On Circumventing Access Controls Is The Cause Of The Adverse Effects  1. General Principles The inability to circumvent the technological protection measures at issue has, for purposes of non-reproductive space-shifting, an adverse effect on noninfringing use as a matter of law. Where the space-shifting can be accomplished without infringing the reproduction right (or any other exclusive right of the copyright owner), the interposition of TPMs, even if for an otherwise legitimate intention of preventing infringing reproductions, necessarily results in an expansion of the copyright owner’s monopoly into activity that Congress has expressly excluded from the scope of the copyright. For the same reasons that the Supreme Court established that a court’s authority to award costs and attorneys’ fees to the prevailing party in a copyright infringement lawsuit could not be applied in a manner that tipped the scales in favor of copyright owners, Fogerty v. Fantasy, Inc., 510 U.S. 517 (1994), so, too, must the Librarian of Congress exercise her discretion with respect to exemptions, in order to preserve that same balance between exclusive and non-exclusive rights.33 This is particularly so in the context of a Section 1201 exemptions proceeding, given that Section 1201 itself states, in subsection 1201(c), that nothing in Section 1201 should empower copyright holders to gain more control over non-infringing conduct, or allow TPM to impede First Amendment rights to use consumer electronics and computing products. The burden must be on the deployer of TPM to prevent such collateral damage and, failing to do so, Congress empowers the Librarian of Congress to restore to the public First Amendment freedom and the full enjoyment of all non-exclusive rights. In the exercise of its authority under Article I, Section 8 or the Constitution, Congress “may not overreach the restraints imposed by the stated constitutional purpose. Nor may it enlarge the patent monopoly without regard to the innovation, advancement or social benefit 																																																								33 The non-exclusive rights, which is to say, everything that is not granted to authors in Section 106, which rithgs are themselves “subject to” the limitations and exceptions in Sections 107-122.  
[PAGE 39]
  
39 	
gained thereby.” Graham v. John Deere Co. of Kansas City, 383 US 1, 6-7 (1966). Adding “to the sum of useful knowledge” is an inherent requisite of all copyright monopolies, and “may not be ignored.” Id. at 7. The Librarian of Congress must, therefore, apply her exemption authority with the same adherence to the constitutional imperative.  Accordingly, when the Copyright Act itself authorizes uses of a work without the consent of the copyright owner, it is not enough that there be alternate non-infringing means of access authorized by the copyright owner. For example, where the copyright holder uses TPM to diminish lawful enjoyment of secondary markets, it is not enough that the potential beneficiary of the second-hand market remain free to purchase the product at full price. Similarly, just as the Copyright Act gives the copyright holder the exclusive right to print a literary work in a paperback book, but does not give the copyright owner the power to determine that it can only be read by the light of a G.E. light bulb, or to prohibit magnification or projection onto a wall in order to read it better, the authority to reproduce a movie onto a plastic disc does not come accompanied with the exclusive right to determine the means of privately performing the work that is on the disc.   And, when the market is such that there are fewer DVD players on which to play movie fixed in a DVD, it is no solution for the copyright owner to point to other copies of the work available for sale, to invite the DVD owner to go to iTunes to obtain a copy by EST (electronic sell-through, or “download”), or to simply watch a public performance of the work if and when it comes available. And if the owner of a copy of the work fixed on a DVD wishes to lend it to a friend or give it to a charity, it is no solution that one can give the cash value, instead, so that the friend or charity can go out and get their own. The whole point of the Copyright Act is to maximize the creation and dissemination of the works for the benefit of all. When TPM works for the sole benefit of the copyright owner by artificially restricting non-infringing uses established by law, directly limiting the reach of knowledge and the useful arts in a profit-maximizing way unrelated to protection or exploitation of exclusive rights, there must be a way of lawfully circumventing it. 2. Technological Solutions To Technology’s Damage To Section 109 Rights Are Suppressed34  																																																								34 We refer to Section 109 “rights” because we understand them to be exactly that. We are aware of the popularity of relegating the limitations and exceptions in Section s 107 through 122 as mere defenses to a claim of copyright infringement, rather than as affirmative rights, but the fact remains that, in Section 109(a), Congress “authorized” owners to redistribute copies in defiance of the copyright owners’ wishes (and Section 106 makes the distribution right “subject to” Section 109); and Section 109(d) refers to the “privileges” described in Section 109(a). Plus, Section 1201(c)(1) recognizes fair use as among “rights, remedies, or defenses … including fair use;” 1201(c)(3) clearly establishes a right not to have to design products to respond to any particular TPM; and 1201(c)(4) recognizes rights, such as free speech rights with respect to use of consumer electronics or computing products, the courts have held that Section 107 is intended in great part to protect First Amendment rights. Courts have had no reluctance to refer to “section 109 rights.” See, e.g., DSC Communications Corp. v. Pulse Communications, 170 F. 3d 1354, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 1999) (“Such a restriction is plainly at odds with the section 109 right to transfer owned copies of software to third parties” (emphasis added)). See, also, Sebastian 
[PAGE 40]
  
40 	
Although the “first sale doctrine,” and its amplified codification in the Copyright Act of 1909 (currently 17 U.S.C. §§ 109 and 202), are a longstanding part of the Copyright Act, and all of the exclusive rights in Section 106 are “subject to” Section 109, the expression of it in the copyright context has roots that run much deeper into the fabric of our society. To put it bluntly, every single day, millions of Americans depend on the freedom of alienation of previously sold property, including Copies of motion pictures and other audiovisual works. Some families depend upon thrift stores for much of their shopping for clothing, household goods, and, yes, even DVDs containing motion pictures and other audiovisual works. Our national policy means that people are free to buy or rent used DVDs and used cars with equal ease, even though the original manufacturers of DVDs and cars might prefer to be able to regulate the resale and rental markets.  The first sale rule is statutory, but finds its origins in the common law aversion to limiting the alienation of personal property. See Burke & Van Heusen, Inc. v. Arrow Drug, Inc., 233 F.Supp. 881, 883 (E.D.Pa.1964); Colby, The First Sale Doctrine — The Defense That Never Was?, 32 J. Copyright Soc'y U.S.A. 77, 89 (1984). See also H.R.Rep. No. 987, 98th Cong., 2d Sess. 2, reprinted in 1984 U.S. Code Cong. & Admin. News 2898, 2899 ("the first sale doctrine has its roots in the English common law rule against restraints on alienation of property"); 2 M. Nimmer, THE	LAW	OF	COPYRIGHT § 8.12 (1987).  																																																																																																																																																																																			Intern., Inc. v. Consumer Contacts (PTY) Ltd., 847 F. 2d 1093, 1097 (3rd Cir. 1988) (“the first sale right of section 109(a)”); Softman Prods. Co., LLC v. Adobe Systems, Inc., 171 F. Supp. 2d 1075, 1090 n.19 (“Scholars have suggested that Congress contemplated that parties might attempt to contract out of a first sale right.”); Lantern Press, Inc. v. American Publishers Co., 419 F. Supp. 1267, 1373 (E.D.N.Y. 1976) (“the rights of those who purchase paperbacks in the regular course of trade and elect to rebind them” and sell them); Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc., 555 F. Supp. 2d 1164, n.10 (W.D. Wash. 2008) (“an ‘owner’ with a right to resell his copy under § 109”); Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc., No. C07-1189RAJ, (W.D. Wash. Sept. 30, 2009 (uses a section heading “A. Rights Belonging to an "Owner" of a Copy of Copyrighted Material: The First Sale Doctrine of § 109 and the Reproduction Exception of § 117,” and goes on to say that Section 109 is “commonly known as the ‘first sale’ right”); Brilliance Audio v. Haights Cross Communications, 474 F.3d 365, 373 (6th Cir. 2007) (noting “the traditional bargain between the rights of copyright owners and the personal property rights of an individual who owns a particular copy”). “The first sale doctrine ensures that the copyright monopoly does not intrude on the personal property rights of the individual owner, given that the law generally disfavors restraints of trade and restraints on alienation.” Id. at 374. (Subsequent history, is any, is omitted from these examples, as it is of no relevance to the reason cited.) In any case, all semantics aside, it is unassailable that the owner of a copy has an ownership “right” in it, and that the Copyright Act, in granting certain limited exclusive rights, leaves everything else as a non-exclusive right to be enjoyed by all. Moreover, all activity involving copyrighted works that falls outside of the reach of the exclusive right is fully protected by the First Amendment, which provides all the “right” necessary for legal recognition as such. The courts will not lend their aid to a private party wishing to do what would be unconstitutional for the government to do directly, Shelley v. Kraemer, 334 US 1 (1948), and neither should the Register of Copyrights. 
[PAGE 41]
  
41 	
There is, however, an economic reason for the rule as well. As the district court said in Burke & Van Heusen, "the ultimate question under the `first sale' doctrine is whether or not there has been such a disposition of the copyrighted article that it may fairly be said that the copyright proprietor has received his reward for its use." 233 F.Supp. at 884. See Platt & Munk Co. v. Republic Graphics, Inc., 315 F.2d 847, 854 (2d Cir.1963). See also Cosmair, Inc. v. Dynamite Enters., Corp., No. 85-0651, slip op. (S.D.Fla. Apr. 9, 1985) (1985 WL 2209).  Sebastian Intern., Inc. v. Consumer Contacts (PTY) Ltd., 847 F. 2d 1093, 1096-97 (3rd Cir. 1988). The Supreme Court has long recognized the importance of this right to alienate one’s own property, both within and without the context of copies of copyrighted works:  But because a manufacturer is not bound to make or sell, it does not follow that in case of sales actually made he may impose upon purchasers every sort of restriction. Thus a general restraint upon alienation is ordinarily invalid. "The right of alienation is one of the essential incidents of a right of general property in movables, and restraints upon alienation have been generally regarded as obnoxious to public policy, which is best subserved by great freedom of traffic in such things as pass from hand to hand. General restraint in the alienation of articles, things, chattels, except when a very special kind of property is involved, such as a slave or an heirloom, have been generally held void. `If a man,' says Lord Coke, in COKE	ON	LITTLETON, section 360, `be possessed of a horse or any other chattel, real or personal, and give his whole interest or property therein, upon condition that the donee or vendee shall not alien the same, the same is void, because his whole interest and property is out of him, so as he hath no possibility of reverter; and it is against trade and traffic and bargaining and contracting between man and man.'" Park v. Hartman, supra. See also GRAY	ON	RESTRAINTS	ON	ALIENATION, §§ 27, 28.  Nor can the manufacturer by rule and notice, in the absence of contract or statutory right, even though the restriction be known to purchasers, fix prices for future sales. It has been held by this court that no such privilege exists under the copyright statutes, although the owner of the copyright has the sole right to vend copies of the copyrighted production. Bobbs-Merrill Co. v. Straus, 210 U.S. 339. There the court said (p. 351): "The owner of the copyright in this case did sell copies of the book in quantities and at a price satisfactory to it. It has exercised the right to vend. What the complainant contends for embraces not only the right to sell the copies, but to qualify the title of a future purchaser by the reservation of the right to have the remedies of the statute against an infringer because of the printed notice of its purpose so to do unless the purchaser sells at a price fixed in the notice. To add to the right of exclusive sale the authority to control all future retail sales, by a notice that such sales must be made at a fixed sum, would give a right not included in the terms of the statute, and, in our view, extend its operation, by construction, beyond its meaning, when interpreted with a view to ascertaining the legislative intent in its enactment." It will hardly be contended, 
[PAGE 42]
  
42 	
with respect to such a matter, that the manufacturer of an article of commerce, not protected by any statutory grant, is in any better case.  Dr. Miles Medical Co. v. John D. Park & Sons Co., 220 US 373, 404-05 (1911) (emphasis added). But although this “right of alienation is one of the essential incidents of a right of general property in movables, and restraints upon alienation have been generally regarded as obnoxious to public policy,” id., and that policy is best advanced “by great freedom of traffic in such things as pass from hand to hand,” id., the very same modern technology that has enabled more efficient reproduction and wider dissemination of “first” sales is making it much harder to exercise that freedom to traffic in lawfully made copies that the Copyright Act has, for well over a century, intended pass from hand to hand without restraint. (This is particularly true in the case of licensed downloads – reproductions, authorized by the copyright holder, in which the owner of the computer or mobile phone onto which the work is reproduced becomes the “owner of a lawfully made copy” with the legal right to redistribute it, but no practical way of doing so.) And, unlike a printed copy of a literary work that can be read for generations to come, lasting as long as the book or magazine is protected from destruction, an audiovisual work on DVD suffers from two threats to alienability.   First, sales of playback devices are in a downward trend,35 and less likely to be included with a personal use computer.36 In fact, Lifewire reports, Probably the biggest factor that will lead to the demise of the optical drive in PCs is Microsoft dropping support for DVD playback. In one of their developer blogs, they state that the base versions of the Windows 8 operating system will not include the software necessary for playing back DVD videos. This decision carried over to the latest Windows 10. This is a major development as it was a standard feature in previous versions of the operating system. Now, users will either have to purchase the Media Center pack for the OS or will need a separate playback software on top of the OS.37  The Lifewire article goes on to note the explain the impact on consumers: The end result is that it can be a major headache for the consumers who wish to have the new optical formats in their computers. In fact, users of the Apple software have it even worse as the company refuses to support the technology within the Mac OS X software. This makes the Blu-ray format all but irrelevant for the platform.38 																																																								35 DVD players/recorder unit shipments in the United States have been in year-to-year decline every year since 2014. See https://www.statista.com/statistics/220729/forecast-in-dvd-player-shipments-in-the-us/.  36 See, e.g., Mark Kyrnin, Death of the Computer Optical Drive Why Most Moderns PCs Do Not Feature CD, DVD or Blu-ray Drives, Lifewire, August 12, 2017, at https://www.lifewire.com/death-of-the-computer-optical-drive-832403.  37 Id. 38 Id. 
[PAGE 43]
  
43 	
 Kyrnin’s conclusion speaks directly to one substantial reason – completely independent of the secondary markets being lost – why consumers must be able to migrate their DVD and Blu-ray copies to their hard drives: Now optical storage is not going to completely disappear from computers any time soon. It is just very clear that their primary usage is changing and is not a requirement for computers like they once were. Instead of being used for storing data, loading software or watching movies, the drives will likely be there to convert the physical media into the digital files for playback on computers and mobile devices. It is almost certain that the drives will be completely removed from most mobile computers in the near future. There is little use for the drives when it is so much easier to view them off a digital file than the disc. Desktops will still pack them for a while as the technology is so inexpensive to include and there are not the space issue of mobile computers. Of course, the market for external peripheral optical drives will survive for a while for anyone that still wants to have the capability that will be dropped from their future computers.39  Accordingly, the millions upon millions of lawfully made copies of motion pictures on DVD and Blu-ray discs, made and distributed as intended by the Copyright Act, will soon be “a major headache” to watch. Having to find a third party optical disc drive compatible with one’s latest laptop, find the correct connectors, and then have to purchase and install playback software because your operating system does not provide it natively, just to be able to watch that movie fixed on a DVD or Blu-ray disc, is comparable to, but an exponentially higher burden than, rummaging for your reading glasses because your eyesight no longer lets you enjoy that book like you once could. As for people of more modest means, who may not have the luxury of being able to purchase a third party optical drive or purchase playback software, the mere fact that they can buy a used DVD or Blu-ray disc at an affordable price does not necessarily mean that they can watch the movie fixed on it. Second, the DVDs themselves have such a short lifespan in relation to the typical 95-year length of the copyright term, that they may become unplayable long before the copyright expires on the work fixed in them.40 The statutory prohibition on circumventing access controls is impeding the solution to the loss of non-infringing secondary distributions that Section 109 and the common law “first sale 																																																								39 Id. 40 According to the Optical Storage Technology Association, for example, manufactures of writable DVDs claim life spans ranging from 30 to 100 years. See http://www.osta.org/technology/dvdqa/dvdqa11.htm. The same source suggests that a short lifespan is not a problem, because the work fixed on the DVD is in a digital form, such that “contents may be transferred to future storage systems as becomes necessary to preserve whatever has been stored on the discs.” The Optical Storage Technology Association has obviously not met TPMs of 17 U.S.C. § 1201. It’s straightforward solution to the problem runs directly into the prohibition. 
[PAGE 44]
  
44 	
doctrine” intended to foster. Existing long before we had a Copyright Act, the right to alienate the copies one owns has been an integral part of the fabric of copyright law. When Congress legislatively endorsed the Supreme Court’s holding in Bobbs-Merrill, it went a big step further by than declaring that the copyright holder’s exclusive rights do not extend so far as to allow control over copies it no longer owns. Agreeing “it would be most unwise to permit the copyright proprietor to exercise any control whatever over the article which is the subject of copyright after said proprietor has made the first sale.” H.R. Rep. No. 2222, 60th Cong., 2d Session (1909), Congress made clear that copy ownership is separate for copyright ownership, and transfers with respect to one do not control the other, and that all of the rights and incidents of ownership of ordinary chattel apply with respect to non-infringing copies that have been lawfully acquired. Plus, while Section 106 makes all copyrights “subject to sections 107-122,” Section 109(a) is uniquely set out as a specific authority of the owner of the copy, which is superior to that of the copyright’s distribution right.   Closing comment: The OmniQ Invention method of non-reproductive space-shifting need not be the only way to engage in non-reproductive space-shifting. We are not suggesting that the exemption should be patent-specific. Nor are we suggesting that “fair use” alone is an insufficient justification for an exemption when the fair use standard is met. Rather, OmniQ’s Patent method demonstrates that space-shifting can be carried out without reproduction and in a manner that is more protective of the reproduction right than any TPM in use today, and without the collateral damage when well-intended TPM infringes upon non-exclusive rights. Consequently, non-reproductive space-shifting fully protects the integrity of the reproduction right and, when OmniQ’s method is followed, makes it unnecessary for the user to rely on fair use analysis or for the copyright owner to rely on its own TPM.  DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE Commenters are encouraged to submit documentary evidence to support their arguments or illustrate pertinent points concerning the proposed exemption. Any such documentary evidence should be attached to this form and uploaded as one document through regulations.gov. In addition to the evidence cited, the following documentary evidence is included with this submission: Exh. 1. Digitally Transferring Content Across Media Without Reproduction, Patent Application # WO 2016/168832; US 2016028135. Exh. 2. Declaration of John Mitchell (and attached OmniQ FAQ). Exh. 3. Declaration of Johann George. Exh. 4. Declaration of Mark Vrieling. Exh. 5. Declaration of Betty González Mitchell. 
[PAGE 45]

[PAGE 46]

[PAGE 47]

[PAGE 48]

[PAGE 49]

[PAGE 50]

[PAGE 51]

[PAGE 52]

[PAGE 53]

[PAGE 54]

[PAGE 55]

[PAGE 56]

[PAGE 57]

[PAGE 58]

[PAGE 59]

[PAGE 60]

[PAGE 61]

[PAGE 62]

[PAGE 63]

[PAGE 64]

[PAGE 65]

[PAGE 66]

[PAGE 67]

[PAGE 68]

[PAGE 69]

[PAGE 70]

[PAGE 71]

[PAGE 72]

[PAGE 73]

[PAGE 74]

[PAGE 75]

[PAGE 76]

[PAGE 77]

[PAGE 78]

[PAGE 79]

[PAGE 80]

[PAGE 81]

[PAGE 82]

[PAGE 83]

[PAGE 84]

[PAGE 85]
OmniQ	Class	3	Petition,	Exhibit	2	DECLARATION	OF	JOHN	T.	MITCHELL	Regarding	OmniQ	Proposed	Exemption	Under	17	U.S.C.	§	1201			My	name	is	John	T.	Mitchell.	I	am	one	of	the	founding	partners	of	OmniQ,	and	co-inventor	of	a	method	for	Digitally Transferring Content Across Media Without Reproduction, Patent Application # WO 2016/168832; US 2016028135 (the “OmniQ Invention”).				At	about	the	same	time	as	we	were	inventing,	I	worked	with	entire	OmniQ	partnership	in	developing	a	potential	online	video	store	business	that	would	practice	the	OmniQ	Invention.	In	the	course	of	doing	so,	we	thought	it	might	be	helpful	to	express	our	plans	from	the	standpoint	of	explaining	the	service	to	a	new	customer,	in	the	form	of	a	FAQ	(frequently	asked	questions).				Attached	is	a	DRAFT	FAQ	developed	from	September	24,	2014,	through	May	25,	2015.	Although	it	is	a	draft,	and	subject	to	change	before	launch,	it	is	a	fair	and	accurate	representation	of	how	we	currently	anticipate	that	our	method	for	non-reproductive	space-shifting	would	work,	from	a	layperson’s	perspective	as	prospective	customer,	in	relation	to	shifting	motion	pictures	and	other	audiovisual	works	from	lawfully	made	DVD	copies.			Although	the	DRAFT	FAQ	is	stamped	as	“CONFIDENTIAL,”	my	partners	and	I	have	agreed	to	release	it	at	this	time,	as	an	aide	to	understanding	how	a	business	might	practice	the	OmniQ	Invention	if	the	exemption	requested	by	OmniQ	is	granted.				If	the	OmniQ	invention	were	practiced	with	respect	to	other	works,	such	as	a	public	library,	or	a	university	or	research	library,	lending	literary	works	space-shifted	from	a	printed	copy,	the	implementation	would	be	identical,	except	for	the	fact	that	there	is	no	TPM	associated	with	copies	of	literary	works	printed	on	paper,	and	therefore,	no	need	to	seek	an	exemption.				I	declare	under	penalty	of	perjury	of	the	laws	of	the	United	States	of	America	that	the	foregoing	is	true	and	correct.	Executed	this	18th	day	of	December	2017	in	the	State	of	Maryland.							/s/	John	T.	Mitchell______										John	T.	Mitchell	
[PAGE 86]
CONDIDENTIAL	–	John	T.	Mitchell	CONFIDENTIAL	
CONFIDENTIAL	–	DRAFT	by	John	Mitchell	 1	
OmniQ	FAQ		Legality	Q:	Is	it	legal?	A:	Yes.	It	is	novel,	and	some	copyright	owners	may	want	to	take	a	closer	look,	but	it	is	really	no	different	than	giving	your	DVD	away,	or	selling	it.	Once	the	copyright	owner	makes	and	sells	the	DVD,	there	is	no	longer	any	right	to	control	who	gets	to	own	it,	or	watch	the	movie	that	is	on	it.	The	only	difference	is	that	with	OmniQ,	instead	of	passing	the	movie	around	on	a	DVD,	you	can	pass	it	from	a	DVD	to	a	hard	drive,	and	from	one	hard	drive	to	another.	But	just	like	with	a	DVD	(except	more	secure	from	copying),	the	copyright	owner	gets	paid	for	the	right	to	make	that	first	copy	and	place	it	in	circulation.			Q:	How	is	this	different	from	ReDigi,	that	was	allowing	resale	of	digital	music	files?	A:	ReDigi	was	found	to	have	been	infringing	the	reproduction	right	by	making	copies.	Even	though	it	deleted	the	extra	copies	and	tried	to	imitate	the	results	of	a	resale	market	in	which	the	seller	loses	ownership	of	the	copy,	the	court	found	that	it	had	infringed	the	reproduction	right.	In	other	words,	nothing	was	being	resold.	Instead,	copies	were	being	made.	OmniQ	does	not	reproduce	the	work	into	copies.	It	just	exchanges	one	material	object	for	another,	also	known	as	non-reproductive	space-shifting.		Q:	I’m	a	nerd.	I	know	that	the	“bits”	making	up	a	movie	have	to	somehow	make	it	from	your	hard	drive	to	mine.	Don’t	you	have	to	make	a	copy	onto	my	hard	drive	before	deleting	it	from	yours?		A:	No;	not	at	all.	There	is	a	beautiful	blend	of	copyright	law	and	laws	of	physics	that	allows	us	to	move	the	work	from	one	hard	drive	to	another	without	making	a	copy	first,	or	destroying	one	later.	Under	federal	law,	a	movie	does	not	become	“a	copy	of	a	movie”	until	it	is	fixed	in	a	tangible	medium	long	enough	to	be	perceived	or	reproduced.	Imagine	the	digital	bits	are	like	ink	on	paper:	no	matter	how	much	ink	there	is	on	the	page,	if	the	written	work	can	be	neither	perceived	(e.g.,	read)	or	reproduced	(e.g.,	photocopied)	from	that	blob	of	ink	on	the	page,	it	is	not	a	copy	until	the	ink	is	rearranged	into	a	way	that	allows	one	to	read	or	reproduce	the	work.	OmniQ	is	like	that:	If	the	bits	can’t	be	perceived	(e.g.,	watching	the	movie)	or	reproduced	(e.g.,	making	a	copy	of	the	movie),	then	there	is	no	copy,	no	matter	how	many	bits	there	are.			Q:	When	you	space-shift,	don’t	you	have	to	verify	that	the	copy	is	complete	before	deleting	anything	from	the	original?	
[PAGE 87]
CONDIDENTIAL	–	John	T.	Mitchell	CONFIDENTIAL	
CONFIDENTIAL	–	DRAFT	by	John	Mitchell	 2	
A:	No.	The	system	we	use	carries	a	risk	of	loss	for	us,	but	it	is	the	equivalent	of	the	risk	that	a	DVD	will	be	lost	or	broken	if	delivered	by	mail.		Rental	Q:	When	I	rent	a	movie,	can	I	watch	it	more	than	once	before	I	return	it?	A:	Sure.	It	is	just	like	when	you	rent	a	DVD	that	you	can	play	as	many	times	as	you	like	during	the	rental	period.			Q:	May	I	send	it	to	someone	else	to	watch?	A:	Not	unless	you	send	them	your	laptop,	too.	If	you	own	a	DVD,	the	plastic	disc	contains	the	movie,	so	you	must	send	the	disc	to	someone	else	in	order	for	him	or	her	to	watch	it.	It	is	the	same	with	OmniQ:	you	have	to	send	whatever	the	movie	is	on,	whether	it	is	on	your	desktop	computer,	tablet	or	laptop.			Q:	What	if	I	don’t	return	the	rental	movie?	A:	Then	it’s	yours.	You	agree	to	pay	the	normal	rental	fee	for	as	long	as	you	have	it	out,	up	to	the	stated	replacement	cost.	If,	at	that	point,	you	still	have	not	returned	it,	then	no	more	charges	will	be	made,	and	it	is	yours	to	keep.			Q:	What	if	my	hard	drive	crashes	and	I	lose	everything	on	it?	A:	Wow,	bummer.	We	don’t	wish	that	on	anyone,	but	if	you	can’t	return	it,	you	bought	it,	just	as	if	your	dog	ate	the	DVD.	You	will	end	up	paying	the	replacement	cost.		Q:	But	if	my	hard	drive	crashed,	can’t	you	just	send	another	copy	of	the	movie?	A:	No,	because	we	don’t	send	copies.	The	U.S.	Copyright	Act	defines	“copies”	as	the	tangible	objects	in	which	the	movie	(“the	work”)	is	fixed.	So	if	you	want	a	replacement,	you	either	need	to	go	to	a	video	retailer	and	buy	a	replacement	DVD,	or	go	back	to	the	OmniQ	store	to	buy	a	replacement	space-shifted	DVD.	In	both	cases	we	have	to	start	with	a	copy	made	under	authority	of	the	copyright	owner	before	we	can	space-shift	it.	We	can’t	just	make	more	copies.		Q:	But	when	you	send	me	the	movie,	don’t	you	keep	a	copy	on	your	server	as	a	back-up?	A:	No;	of	course	not.	We	don’t	have	the	right	to	reproduce	the	movie	into	copies.	We	may	have	other	copies	of	the	same	movie,	but	not	the	one	you	lost.	Just	like	with	a	DVD,	the	copy	can’t	be	in	two	places	at	the	same	time.	If	you	have	it,	we	don’t.	If	we	
[PAGE 88]
CONDIDENTIAL	–	John	T.	Mitchell	CONFIDENTIAL	
CONFIDENTIAL	–	DRAFT	by	John	Mitchell	 3	
have	it,	you	don’t.	So	if	we	send	it	to	you	and	you	lose	it,	we	have	to	go	buy	another	one.		Q:	Once	I	return	the	movie,	does	it	take	up	space	on	my	hard	drive?	A:	No.	Once	the	work	is	space-shifted	from	your	hard	drive	back	to	ours,	the	space	it	occupied	on	your	hard	drive	is	freed	up	–	just	like	the	space	a	book	took	up	on	a	library	shelf.		Purchase	Q:	When	I	buy	a	movie,	is	there	any	limit	on	how	many	times	I	can	watch	it?	No.	Just	like	when	you	buy	a	DVD,	you	can	watch	the	space-shifted	movie	as	often	as	you	like	for	as	long	as	you	like.		Q:	What	happens	if	I	quit	my	account,	or	OmniQ	goes	out	of	business?	A:	No	worries.	You	can	continue	to	watch	the	movie,	even	when	offline,	when	you	have	a	closed	account,	or	if	OmniQ	disappeared.	You	just	have	to	keep	the	OmniQ	app	and	the	original	drive	onto	which	the	movie	was	space-shifted.		Q:	When	I	own	a	DVD,	I	can	sell	it,	lend	it,	or	give	it	away.	What	about	a	space-shifted	movie?	A:	You	can	do	the	same	with	OmniQ.	The	only	difference	is	that	the	person	you	sell	it	to,	lend	it	to,	or	give	it	to	must	also	have	the	OmniQ	app	installed.		Q:	Does	OmniQ	take	a	cut	from	my	sales?	A:	No.	You	can	sell	for	whatever	price	you	want.	But	OmniQ	does	charge	a	service	fee	for	space-shifting	to	someone	else.	Just	like	the	Post	Office	charges	for	delivery,	space-shifting	over	the	Internet	involves	someone	paying	for	the	bandwidth	to	space-shift,	so	we	can’t	just	do	it	for	free.	The	service	fee	is	the	same	whether	you	sell	it,	lend	it	or	give	it	away.		General	Q:	Can	I	make	a	copy	of	the	movie,	just	like	I	can	rip	a	DVD?	A:	No.	First	off,	you	have	less	reason	to	rip	it,	since	it	is	already	on	your	computer.	Second,	DVD	ripping	may	be	illegal	if	you	don’t	have	the	copyright	owner’s	permission.	Finally,	unlike	the	largely	ineffective	CSS	(“Copy	Scramble	System”)	on	the	typical	DVD,	we	provide	much	stronger	protection	against	unauthorized	
[PAGE 89]
CONDIDENTIAL	–	John	T.	Mitchell	CONFIDENTIAL	
CONFIDENTIAL	–	DRAFT	by	John	Mitchell	 4	
reproduction.	We	do	it	that	way	so	that	not	even	OmniQ	can	access	the	movie	when	it	is	out	on	rental	to	you,	just	like	if	we	had	rented	you	the	DVD.		Q:	My	hard	drive	is	full.	Can	I	space-shift	to	an	external	drive	instead?	A:	Yes.	You	may	designate	the	drive	to	which	you	want	to	space-shift	the	movie,	and	can	play	back	from	any	computer	or	tablet	that	has	the	OmniQ	player	app	installed	on	it.							
[PAGE 90]
OmniQ	Class	3	Petition,	Exhibit	3	
	 1	
DECLARATION	OF	JOHANN	GEORGE	Regarding	OmniQ	Proposed	Exemption	Under	17	U.S.C.	§	1201			My	name	is	Johann	George.		I	am	one	of	the	founding	partners	of	OmniQ.			I	entered	the	University	of	Waterloo	at	the	age	of	13,	majoring	in	mathematics	and	had	much	exposure	to	computers	during	that	time.		As	a	teenager	in	1979,	I	co-founded	the	company	that	developed	Coherent,	which	was	the	first	Unix-compatible	operating	system	that	ran	on	the	x86	architecture.	I	worked	briefly	with	Steve	Jobs	at	Apple	Computer	and	also	at	NeXT	Inc.,	was	co-founder	and	CEO	of	both	Pattern	Recognition	Systems	and	Sourcelight	Technologies,	CTO	of	Commodore	International,	served	as	an	executive	of	Tecmar,	PathScale	(purchased	by	QLogic)	and	Schooner	Information	Technology	(purchased	by	SanDisk),	and	most	recently	was	the	Senior	Principal	Strategist	for	SanDisk.			In	the	course	of	co-inventing	a	method	of	Digitally	Transferring	Content	Across	Media	Without	Reproduction,	Patent	Application	#	WO	2016/168832;	US	2016028135,	I	was	struck	by	the	ineffectiveness	of	CSS	(Copy	Scrambling	System)	and	similar	TPM’s	(Technical	Protection	Measures)	for	audiovisual	works	on	optical	discs.		Because	such	TPMs	are	designed	to	work	with	an	infinite	number	of	copies	using	myriad	different	players	from	many	different	manufacturers,	they	are	vulnerable	to	being	defeated	using	relatively	unsophisticated	methods.		In	my	professional	judgment,	the	current	technologies	intended	to	protect	audiovisual	works	on	optical	discs	are	completely	ineffective	against	unauthorized	reproduction	–	a	conclusion	born	out	by	the	many	competing	“ripping”	programs	currently	on	the	market.		CSS	and	similar	TPMs	may	generate	revenue	from	technology	licensing	but	offer	negligible	protection	from	copyright	infringement	of	the	works	to	which	they	are	applied.	That	is	because	anyone	who	succeeds	in	circumventing	the	TPM	will,	in	effect,	have	the	equivalent	of	a	“master	key”	to	all	copies	of	the	works	“protected”	by	the	same	TPM.			In	designing	the	method	for	Digitally	Transferring	Content	Across	Media	Without	Reproduction,	it	was	crucial	that	we	devise	a	much	stronger	method	of	preventing	reproduction,	because	the	whole	point	is	to	perform	a	space-shift	in	which	no	reproduction	takes	place.	And,	while	the	studios	who	publish	works	on	DVD	and	other	optical	discs	might	be	comfortable	balancing	the	risk	of	reproduction	against	cost	and	convenience,	we	wanted	to	build	a	solution	that	was	much	more	secure.	The	studios	might	accommodate	room	for	fair	use	copying	or	tolerate	some	amount	of	infringing	reproduction,	but	we	needed	to	prevent	any	reproduction	at	all.	Our	method	for	Digitally	Transferring	Content	Across	Media	Without	Reproduction	required	a	much	more	robust	copy	protection,	in	order	to	ensure	that	our	space-shifting	solution	would	never	result	in	any	unauthorized	reproduction	of	the	work.			
[PAGE 91]
OmniQ	Class	3	Petition,	Exhibit	3	
	 2	
	The	space-shifting	process	we	devised	makes	it	impossible	for	the	fixation	to	constitute	a	“copy”	(as	defined	in	the	Copyright	Act)	in	two	places	at	once.	It	achieves	that,	first,	by	space-shifting	small	“chunks”	of	the	work,	wrapping	each	with	its	own	robust	encryption,	such	that	even	if	someone	managed	to	break	it,	they	would	only	have	access	to	a	small	snippet	of	a	work.	Second,	the	space-shifting	process	reads	these	chunks	into	volatile	memory	that	is	insufficiently	permanent	or	stable	to	permit	it	to	be	perceived,	reproduced,	or	otherwise	communicated	for	a	period	of	more	than	transitory	duration.	During	this	brief	moment,	and	before	the	small	chunk	is	fixed	in	the	new	medium,	the	original	fixation	on	the	disc	is	removed.	Thus,	it	is	physically	impossible	to	perceive,	reproduce	or	otherwise	communicate	the	work	from	two	places	at	once.	In	fact,	the	solution	is	engineered	such	that,	if	anything	goes	wrong	during	the	place-shifting	process,	the	result	is	the	same	as	if	a	mail-order	Netflix	DVD	rental	was	broken	while	the	Post	Office	transported	it	from	the	warehouse	to	the	customer.	The	customer	might	be	able	to	request	a	“free”	replacement	from	the	retailer,	but	the	retailer	has	to	actually	go	out	and	buy	(or	have	already	bought)	the	replacement	from	the	copyright	owner.	Likewise,	our	solution	carries	the	risk	that	if	a	space-shift	fails,	one	must	purchase	(or	have	already	purchased)	a	replacement	DVD	with	which	to	try	the	space-shifting	process	anew.	If	a	mistake	is	made	during	space-shifting	of	any	“chunk”	of	the	work,	it	is	too	late	–	there	will	no	copy	of	that	chunk	that	one	can	go	back	to	and	try	again.			DigiCert	claims	that	when	using	2048	bit	keys,	it	would	take	6.4	quadrillion	years	to	break	with	a	single	modern	desktop	computer	using	an	algorithm	that	utilizes	public	and	private	keys	(https://www.digicert.com/TimeTravel/math.htm).		In	the	case	of	a	movie	that	was	space-shifted	using	the	method	described	in	the	OmniQ	Patent	using	2048	bit	keys,	once	the	keys	are	removed,	there	isn’t	even	a	public	key	to	start	an	attack	with	and	the	methods	will	need	to	be	even	more	brute-force.		Note	that	CSS	only	uses	40	bit	keys	and	AACS	uses	128	bit	keys.		Also,	unlike	CSS	and	AACS	where	the	keys	are	fixed	for	the	life	of	the	content,	with	OmniQ’s	method,	the	keys	are	changing	constantly,	creating	a	moving	target	for	any	attacker.				I	declare	under	penalty	of	perjury	of	the	laws	of	the	United	States	of	America	that	the	foregoing	is	true	and	correct.	Executed	this	18th	day	of	December	2017	in	the	State	of	California.							/s/	Johann	George______										Johann	George				
[PAGE 92]
OmniQ	Class	3	Petition,	Exhibit	4	
	 1	
DECLARATION	OF	MARK	VRIELING		Regarding	OmniQ	Proposed	Exemption	Under	17	U.S.C.	§	1201			My	name	is	Mark	Vrieling.	I	am	one	of	the	founding	partners	of	OmniQ,	having	recruited	the	team	we	currently	have.			I	entered	the	home	video	business	during	the	1980s,	building	Rain	City	Video,	one	of	the	most	successful	video	stores	in	Seattle,	Washington.	For	decades,	I	have	served	on	the	Board	of	Directors	of	the	Entertainment	Merchant’s	Association	(previously	named	the	Video	Software	Dealers	Association),	including	a	term	as	Chairman	and	of	the	Board.				Even	as	the	home	video	rental	industry	matured,	major	national	chains	became	brand	names,	and	studios	began	focusing	on	“sell-through”	in	conjunction	with	efforts	to	drive	up	the	price	of	a	rental	(such	as	by	leasing	videos	to	“rentailers”	in	exchange	for	profit-sharing	with	minimum	prices),	my	store	performed	very	well,	primarily	because	our	selection	of	approximately	30,000	movie	titles	contained	so	many	movies	that	were	simply	not	available	through	the	distribution	channels	that	the	studios	preferred,	which	focused	on	new	releases,	included	“moratoriums”	intended	to	keep	titles	off	of	shelves	for	a	while,	and	“exclusives”	offered	to	favored	retailers,	which	forced	me	to	purchase	from	the	exclusive	retailer	at	the	a	retail	price	instead	of	wholesale.	In	fact,	there	were	often	times	when	Wal-Mart	became	the	de	facto	distributor	because	the	studios’	“rentailer”	distributors	could	not	beat	Wal-Mart’s	prices.					Having	weathered	such	storms,	it	frustrated	me	to	see	the	dramatic	shrinking	of	available	titles	on	account	of	the	studios’	efforts	to	grow	the	permissions-based	delivery	that	avoided	the	need	to	compete	with	secondary	markets	(rentals	and	sales	of	“previously	viewed”	copies)	once	their	distribution	right	was	exhausted.				OmniQ	began	as	an	initiative	to	build	a	user-friendly	movie	viewing	“queue”	that	would	allow	a	viewer	to	select	a	movie	without	regard	to	who	offered	it,	or	even	whether	it	was	offered	in	a	streaming	services,	cable	pay-per-view,	electronic	sell-through	(download),	or	video	on	demand	(VOD).		In	fact,	the	plan	was	to	also	include	local	availability	for	rental	or	borrowing	at	the	customer’s	most	convenient	video	store	or	public	library.	Hence	the	name	“OmniQ.”	The	viewer	“settings”	would	enable	preference	for	watching	a	movie	from	monthly	subscription	service	or	subscribed	cable	channel	before	selecting	an	incrementally	more	costly	option.				The	longer	we	discussed	the	features	that	consumers	would	want	from	our	queue,	the	more	we	began	to	realize	that	the	most	pressing	problem	was	that	even	adding	up	the	various	subscription,	VOD	and	EST	services,	the	selection	of	movies	to	watch	on	any	given	day	was	but	a	small	fraction	of	what	a	store	like	Rain	City	Video	could	offer.	We	decided	then	that	the	best	approach	was	to	build	the	world’s	biggest	video	store,	drawing	on	the	millions	upon	millions	of	DVDs	that	sit	idle	on	peoples’	
[PAGE 93]
OmniQ	Class	3	Petition,	Exhibit	4	
	 2	
shelves	because	the	shrinking	number	of	video	stores	makes	turning	on	the	DVD	player	an	afterthought,	reserved	for	movies	one	has	already	watched,	and	because	the	dwindling	number	of	DVD	and	Blu-ray	players	being	sold	translates	to	lessened	demand	for	used	DVDs.					As	we	began	to	see	a	market	in	which	the	very	same	first	sale	doctrine	that	had	driven	billions	of	dollars	in	new	revenue	for	the	studios	(over	their	initial	vigorous	objection)	was	being	taken	over	by	restrictive	models	that	increased	the	cost	of	viewing	while	reducing	the	number	of	choices,	we	began	looking	for	a	solution	that	would	mimic	the	heyday	of	video	rentals	on	VHS	and	DVD,	but	taking	advantage	of	the	more	rapid	delivery	times	promised	by	a	networked	world.	We	rejected	the	notion	of	copying	the	movie	from	the	DVD	to	a	hard	drive	and	then	breaking	the	DVD,	figuring	that	a	“copy	first	and	then	delete”	approach	relied	too	heavily	on	Section	107	for	its	legality.	(The	ReDigi	experience	proved	us	right.)	We	also	considered	and	rejected	the	idea	of	offering	a	remote	bank	of	DVD	players	that	a	remote	viewer	could	operate,	as	if	it	were	in	their	home	but	with	a	longer	wire.	Again,	when	others	tried	it	and	hit	a	litigation	buzz	saw,	we	were	proven	right	in	not	risking	hat	a	court	would	consider	it	to	be	a	public	performance.				Cabined	between	two	meritorious	but	legally	problematic	solutions,	one	of	which	might	infringe	the	reproduction	right,	and	the	other	which	might	infringe	the	public	performance	right,	but	with	both	a	copyright	lawyer	and	an	experienced	engineer	on	our	team,	we	came	up	with	the	solution	that	is	explained	in	Exhibit	1	to	the	OmniQ	petition	–	the	OmniQ	Invention	–	to	shift	the	work	from	one	material	object	to	another	without	reproduction,	such	that	a	viewer	could	privately	perform	the	work	with	the	copy	residing	on	their	own	device	rather	than	on	a	less	useful	plastic	disc.				Next	came	the	effort	to	solicit	investment.	The	invention	was	well	received.	Our	business	plans	looked	good.	But	then	would	come	the	question:	But	wont’	you	run	into	trouble	with	Section	1201	if	you	circumvent	CSS	or	AACS?”	An	unsatisfactory	answer	to	that	question	(from	the	investor	point	of	view)	was	that	we	could	space-shift	everything,	including	the	advertisements,	fluff	and	yes,	even	the	TPM,	intact,	and	allow	the	customer	to	view	it	using	any	of	the	many	players	on	the	market	that	virtually	ignore	the	TPM.	From	an	engineering	and	financial	standpoint,	that	solution	makes	little	sense.	The	CSS	and	AACS	encryption	is	totally	unnecessary,	given	the	fact	that	our	encryption	method	is	demonstrably	stronger.	CSS	and	AACS	would	be	completely	superfluous	after	the	copy	is	space-shifted	using	the	OmniQ	Patent,	but	the	need	to	preserve	it	simply	takes	up	more	time,	bandwidth,	dollars	and	storage	space,	ultimately	reducing	the	number	of	space-shifted	movies	a	person	could	reasonable	store	at	any	one	time.				The	more	satisfactory	solution	was	to	attempt	to	persuade	the	Librarian	of	Congress	to	allow	the	circumvention	of	the	TPM,	but	the	Sixth	Triennial	Rulemaking	was	already	underway.	The	best	we	could	do	at	the	time	was	to	suggest	that	the	Class	8	exemption	under	consideration	at	least	be	granted	to	meet	the	narrow	non-
[PAGE 94]
OmniQ	Class	3	Petition,	Exhibit	4	
	 3	
reproductive	space-shifting	we	advocated,	but	we	were	unable	to	do	so	as	Petitioners,	and	had	to	simply	get	a	word	as	a	non-petitioning	Commenter	in	during	the	Reply	phase.		 But I or another member of the Partnership have heard potential investors raise the Section 1201 concern countless times. While we are hopeful that we can offer the technology for libraries currently struggling financially to keep paying for the right to “lend” books electronically instead of lending so long as the book lasted, we believe that there is insufficient investor interest in a solution for libraries, even though there is no TPM concern with respect to printed books. The more attractive investor proposition is the video rental store model, using technology to reinvigorate the market for access to movies that the roaring ‘80s of totally unlicensed rentals driven by retailer response to actual consumer demand rather than heavily promoted “exclusives” that capitalize on artificial scarcity. We are hopeful that, once we succeed in exponentially increasing consumer choice of movie to watch, and at an affordable price, we will then be in a position to roll out similar solutions for colleges, universities, and libraries, and covering other works, such as books, photographs, and even an online means of offering “limited edition” unique copies of digital art online that can be exchanged in a free market.      I declare under penalty of perjury of the laws of the United States of America that the foregoing is true and correct. Executed this 18th day of December 2017 in the State of California.       /s/ Mark Vrieling______          Mark Vrieling    
