[PAGE 1]
 
 
This Comment has been submitted by the UCI Intellectual Property, Arts, and Technology Clinic 
and Donaldson + Callif, LLP on behalf of Film Independent, the International Documentary 
Association, and Kartemquin Films.  
 
ITEM A.  COMMENTER INFORMATION  
Film Independent is an organization that helps filmmakers make their movies, build an 
audience for their projects, and diversify the film industry. Film Independent puts on over 250 
annual screenings and events to unite like-minded artists. These events include the Film 
Independent Spirit Awards, which recognizes the finest achievements of American independent 
filmmakers and the LA Film Festival, which showcases select new works from emerging and 
established independent storytellers. Film Independent also offers an artist development program 
to foster the careers of talented filmmakers. 
International Documentary Association is an organization that seeks to assist the growth and 
development of documentary films and the overall documentary culture. IDA provides 
educational programs and resources to documentary makers of various skill levels. IDA’s grant 
programs help filmmakers attain the financing necessary to create documentary films. IDA also 
advocates for major issues that affect documentary filmmakers, including free speech and fair 
use. 
Kartemquin Educational Films is a not-for-profit media arts organization and collaborative 
center for documentary media makers who seek to foster a more engaged and empowered 
society. In 2016 Kartemquin celebrated 50 years of sparking democracy through documentary. A 
revered resource on issues of fair use, ethics, storytelling and civic discourse, Kartemquin is 
internationally recognized for crafting quality documentaries backed by innovative community 
engagement, and for its filmmaker development programs and media advocacy. The organization 
has won every major critical and journalistic prize, including multiple Emmy, Peabody, 
duPont-Columbia and Robert F. Kennedy journalism awards, Independent Spirit, IDA, PGA and 
DGA awards, and an Oscar nomination. 
 
  
[PAGE 2]
 
 
2 
 
Representatives 
UCI Intellectual Property, Arts, and 
Technology Clinic 
Jack I. Lerner, Director 
Lauren Wertheimer and Shaia Araghi, 
Certified Law Students 
UCI School of Law 
401 East Peltason Drive 
Irvine, CA 92697 
(949) 824-7684 
 
 
Michael C. Donaldson 
Christopher Perez 
Donaldson & Callif LLP 
400 S Beverly Dr. # 400 
Beverly Hills, CA 90212 
(310) 277-8394 
 
 
 
 
To contact the commenters, please email dmcafilm@law.uci.edu. 
  
[PAGE 3]
 
 
3 
 
ITEM B.  PROPOSED CLASS ADDRESSED 
Proposed Class 1: Motion Pictures (including television shows and videos), as 
defined in 17 U.S.C. 101, where circumvention is undertaken solely in order to 
make use of short portions of the works for the purpose of criticism or comment, 
where the motion picture is lawfully made and acquired on a DVD protected by the 
Content Scrambling System, on a BluRay disc protected by the Advanced Access 
Control System, via a digital transmission protected by a technological measure, or 
a similar technologica l protection measure intended to control access to a 
work, where the person engaging in circumvention reasonably believes that non -
circumventing alternatives are unable to produce the required level of high-quality 
source material. 
 
ITEM C.  OVERVIEW 
Film Independent, the International Documentary Association, and Kartemquin Films submit this 
Comment to express their support for the above-referenced modification to the exemption 
currently codified at 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1), which has been submitted by the Electronic 
Frontier Foundation, the Organization for Transformative Works, and New Media Rights.   
  
While the existing exemption covering documentary filmmaking1 has helped many creators 
avoid criminal liability, serious problems remain. These include burdensome and confusing 
screen capture language, and content-based limitations on the creative works being made. The 
exemption is confusing for many filmmakers, and the resulting fear and uncertainty has caused a 
severe chilling effect on creators seeking to make fair use.2 The proposed modification would 
remove needless obstacles and add desperately needed clarity.  
  
There is no reason whatsoever to surmise that the proposed modification would increase 
copyright infringement in any way. The first motion-picture-based exemption was granted in 
2006, and numerous motion-picture based exemptions have been granted in every rulemaking 
since then. In that eleven-year timespan, there has not been a single allegation—nor has any 
evidence been introduced—that any motion-picture-based exemption was misused, or caused an 
increase in copyright infringement.  
  
For these reasons, we urge the Register to recommend this modification to the Librarian of 
Congress. 
                                                      
1 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1)(i). The Register has provisionally recommended this exemption for 
renewal. Exemption to Permit Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted Works, 82 
Fed. Reg. 49,550, 49,559 (proposed Oct. 26, 2017) (to be codified at 37 C.F.R. § 201) 
(“NPRM”). 
2 See Comments of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, Organization for Transformative Works, 
and New Media Rights (filed Dec. 18, 2017).  
