[PAGE 1]
This is a Word document that allows users to type into the spaces belo w. The comment may be single-spaced, but 
should be in at least 12-point type. The italicized instructions on this template may be deleted.  
 
 
Please submit a separate comment for each proposed class. 
NOTE: This form must be used in all three rounds of comments by all commenters not 
submitting short-form comments directly through regulations.gov, whether the commenter is 
supporting, opposing, or merely providing pertinent information about a proposed exemption. 
When commenting on a proposed expansion to an existing exemption, you should focus your 
comments only on those issues relevant to the proposed expansion.  
[   ] Check here if multimedia evidence is being provided in connection with this comment 
Commenters can provide relevant multimedia evidence to support their arguments. Please note 
that such evidence must be separately submitted in conformity with the Office’s instructions for 
submitting multimedia evidence, available on the Copyright Office website at 
https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2018. 
ITEM A.  COMMENTER INFORMATION  
Consumers Union 
George P. Slover 
Senior Policy Counsel 
1101 17th St., NW, Suite 500 
Washington, DC  20036 
(202) 462-6262 
 
ITEM B.  PROPOSED CLASS ADDRESSED 
Class 8 – Audiovisual Works – Space-Shifting 
ITEM C.  OVERVIEW 
[See below] 
ITEM D.  TECHNOLOGICAL PROTECTION MEASURE(S) AND METHOD(S) OF CIRCUMVENTION 
 [See below] 
ITEM E.  ASSERTED ADVERSE EFFECTS ON NONINFRINGING USES 
  
[PAGE 2]
 
 
2 
 
Supporting Comments for New Exemption Under 17 U.S.C. § 1201 
Class 3 – Audiovisual Works – Space-Shifting 
December 18, 2017  
  
Consumers Union, the policy and mobilization division of Consumer Reports,1 submits 
this statement in support of proposed Class 3, to permit space-shifting and other reformatting on 
DVDs and Blue-ray discs to enable consumers to make personal use of movies and other 
audiovisual content they have purchased, on formats other than the format on which it was 
purchased.2 
   As we have stated in previous submissions to the Copyright Office, and in our Digital 
Testing Standard launched in March 2017,3 when a consumer purchases a product, the consumer 
should obtain genuine ownership of the product and its parts, including the ability to make 
effective use of the product, and the ability to effectively resell it.4   We believe consumers 
should have the ability to use the products they have purchased in all these respects, as they see 
fit.  We have successfully made this case with respect to mobile devices, both in Congress and 
before the Copyright Office.  And we believe it also applies here. 
Congress enacted the prohibition in section 1201 of the Digital Millennium Copyright 
Act in response to concern that the digital age would otherwise usher in a massive deluge of 
copyright infringement.  But this response has proven, with experience, to be overbroad.  Its 
proliferating use to block access to software that enables and governs – and restricts – the 
functioning of everyday consumer products in which it is embedded, and their interoperability 
with other products, is causing far-reaching harm to fundamental consumer rights. 
We recognize the value of copyright law in nurturing and protecting incentives for 
innovation, both generally and in particular with respect to computer software.  At the same time, 
                                                      
1 Consumers Union is the policy and mobilization division of Consumer Reports, an expert, independent, non-profit 
organization whose mission is to work for a fair, just, and safe marketplace for all consumers and to empower 
consumers to protect themselves.  It conducts its policy work in the areas of antitrust and competitio n 
Policy, financial reform, food and product safety, privacy and data security, telecommunications reform, health care 
reform, and other areas.  Consumer Reports is the world’s largest independent product -testing organization. Using 
its dozens of labs, auto test center, and survey research department, the non-profit organization rates thousands of 
products and services annually.  Founded in 1936, Consumer Reports has over 7 million subscribers to its magazine,  
website, and other publications. 
2 We are also submitting supportive comments on other classes.  The fact that we do not submit comments as to any 
particular class should not be taken to suggest that we oppose the recommendations for that class, or that we do not 
support them in whole or in part. 
3 The Digital Testing Standard (theDigitalStandard.org) was launched on March 6th, 2017 and is the result of a 
collaboration with our cybersecurity partners, Disconnect, Ranking Digital Rights, and the Cyber Independent 
Testing Lab.  The Standard is designed to hold companies accountable and equip Consumer Reports and other 
organizations to test and rate products for how responsibly they handle our private data.  This is a collaborative and 
open source effort.  The Standard is designed to empower consumers to make informed choices about the connected 
products, apps, and services consumers use every day.  
4 The Standard, THE DIGITAL STANDARD, https://www.thedigitalstandard.org/the-standard. 
[PAGE 3]
 
 
3 
 
it is important that the monopoly rights conferred on creators by the copyright laws be kept 
appropriately contained, so they do not spill over into broader, unjustified and counterproductive 
restraints on competition and consumer choice, and do not undermine long-established, 
fundamental rights and expectations of consumers regarding their ownership and dominion over 
the products they have lawfully acquired.  Beyond these immediate effects on consumer rights 
and expectations, broader innovation is impeded if a product’s manufacturer is given 
inordinately sweeping power to control how it is used once it has been released into the 
marketplace. 
 The same kinds unjustified harms to consumers described above are also present with 
respect to DVDs and Blue-ray discs that consumers are unable to reformat to play on other 
formats.  We therefore urge the Copyright Office to look favorably on recommendations to 
enable this reformatting for consumers’ personal use.  
Respectfully, 
George P. Slover 
Senior Policy Counsel 
Consumers Union 
1101 17th St., NW, Suite 500 
Washington, DC  20036 
(202) 462-6262 
 
  
 
DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE 
[See above] 
