[PAGE 1]
This is a Word document that allows users to type into the spaces below. The comment may be single -spaced, but 
should be in at least 12-point type. The italicized instructions on this template may be deleted.  
 
 
ITEM A.  COMMENTER INFORMATION  
The commenter is the Center for Democracy & Technology (CDT), a non-profit advocacy 
organization dedicated to the advancement of democratic values in the digital age. The 
organization is located at 1401 K St. NW, Suite 200, Washington, DC 20005. The contact for the 
organization is Ferras Vinh, who can be reached via email at fvinh@cdt.org or by phone at (202) 
407-8827.  
ITEM B.  PROPOSED CLASS ADDRESSED 
Proposed Class 10: Computer Programs – Security Research  
ITEM C.  OVERVIEW 
The expanded exemption sought is for software security research, which provides essential 
protections for active research and testing efforts into evolving cybersecurity risks. The 
Copyright Office has acknowledged the value of this research, as evidenced by the decision to 
renew the pre-existing exemption.1 However, the exemption contains restrictions on research 
methods and eligible devices, which limits and chills critical research into vulnerabilities with 
the threat of litigation.  
 
As we have noted in previous exemptions, software and related access controls are increasingly 
embedded in a wide range of systems. The Register recognized this by granting an exemption for 
software security research during the last triennial period that included consumer devices, 
medical devices, and motor vehicles.2 But the exemption did not include other types of devices 
that increasingly include software and will also feature security flaws and vulnerabilities, like 
infrastructure and industrial equipment. Due to the widespread integration of software in tangible 
products and physical world processes, these flaws pose risks that are qualitatively different from 
the risks associated with traditional security defects confined to the digital environment.  
 
In light of the rapid proliferation of products and systems subject to software-based security 
flaws and vulnerabilities, an exemption needs to cover more than just a single product or class of 
product. Product-by-product exemptions (e.g., software contained in smart thermostats) would 
                                                      
1 Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted Works, 82 Fed. Reg. 49550, 
49555 (Oct. 26, 2017) (to be codified at 37 C.F.R. pt. 201).  
2 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, 37 C.F.R. pt. 201.40(7). 
[PAGE 2]
 
 
2 
 
make little sense in a world where harmful flaws may exist in any of a wide variety of products 
or systems. If researchers are forced to wait for the next triennial review process each time they 
discover that software on an additional type of specific product carries significant security 
vulnerabilities, the damage will already be done.  
 
For these reasons, the Copyright Office should grant the petitions for a broader exemption 
covering security research under Proposed Class 10.  
 
ITEM D.  TECHNOLOGICAL PROTECTION MEASURE(S) AND METHOD(S) OF CIRCUMVENTION 
The access control measures relevant to this exemption will likely include challenge-response 
mechanisms such as access codes, passwords, keys, or digital signatures; encryption; and 
software features designed to prevent tampering with or changing the software, such as code 
obfuscation and runtime checks. Security researchers must also must be able to reverse engineer 
malware to protect computers, systems, and their users.  
 
I
TEM E.  ASSERTED ADVERSE EFFECTS ON NONINFRINGING USES 
As the Register noted in its recent study, Congress enacted section 1201(j) out of concern that 
“[s]ection 1201(a) could be construed to inhibit legitimate forms of security testing.”3 
Accordingly, the need to shield and encourage this research has gained consensus support, as 
illustrated by the recommendation of the Office to renew the pre-existing exemption. Without 
this exemption, the anti-circumvention provisions of the DMCA serve as a significant barrier to 
research on software flaws and vulnerabilities.4  
 
The exemption provides a protective legal umbrella, allowing researchers to ensure the safety of 
devices and machines used on an everyday basis without the chilling effect of potential litigation. 
By renewing and expanding the exemption, the Register can encourage research that will help 
address dangerous gaps in public safety. In a recent report, “The Importance of Security 
Research,” CDT identified several notable examples of such research, including the following:5 
• Automotive Security Research: In 2015, security researchers discovered flaws in 
Chrysler, Dodge, and Jeep vehicles that use the UConnect system.6 Independent security 
researchers Charlie Miller and Chris Valasek discovered vulnerabilities in the system that 
would allow a malicious actor to turn off the engine, unlock the car, and control the 
                                                      
3 U.S. Copyright Office, Section 1201 of Title 17 at 19 (June 2017). 
4 Petition of Profs. Bellovin, Blaze, Felten, Halderman, and Heninger at 3 (2015). 
5 With the exception of the WhiteScope security research, all of the following examples are described in 
the aforementioned report. 
6 Joseph Lorenzo Hall, Apratim Vidyarthi, and Benjamin C. Dean, Center for Democracy & Technology, 
The Importance of Security Research 3 (2017). 
[PAGE 3]
 
 
3 
 
steering wheel, brakes, transmission, and acceleration.7 The results were disclosed to the 
public, and Chrysler recalled more than 1.4 million vehicles.8 Similar flaws were  
identified by academic security researchers in other investigations conducted in more 
controlled experimental conditions, but were not acted upon.9 
• Medical Devices: Multiple studies from security researchers have highlighted 
vulnerabilities in implanted defibrillators and pacemakers that leave them susceptible to 
malicious software attacks, ransomware, or accidental malfunctions.10 For instance, 
security researchers discovered a flaw that would allow malicious actors to hack a 
pacemaker and deliver a fatal shock to a patient.11 Despite the fact that the issue was 
identified in April 2015, no patch for it has been released.12 More recently, security 
researchers at WhiteScope were able to investigate and uncover more than 8,000 known 
vulnerabilities in pacemaker software, flagging issues that require immediate attention 
from manufacturers and potentially creating a safer product for consumers.13 
• Voting Systems: In July 2017, security researchers were able to subvert every piece of 
voting equipment at the Voting Village at the DEFCON hacking conference within 24 
hours. Notably, researchers were able to remotely control the AVS WinVote system, 
which was largely used in Virginia from 2004 through 2015. The attacker was able to 
manipulate both the ballot display and the electronic recording of votes in a completely 
automated fashion.    
• Consumer Devices: In 2016, researchers at the University of Michigan created malware 
to target a home security/alarm system that provided access to the PIN; remote control of 
the blinds, lights, and other connected home functionalities; and the ability to turn on the 
fire alarm. Many security systems are vulnerable to these problems, as they are 
particularly susceptible to jamming and transmit unencrypted signals on wireless 
networks. 
But while the current exemption has helped promote essential security research in this vein, the 
limitation on devices does not account for the software and access controls increasingly 
embedded in a wide range of other critical systems, including infrastructure and industrial 
equipment.14 For example, researchers have sought to evaluate and ensure the security of 
encryption modules for financial transactions like ATM withdrawals, toll collection, and 
                                                      
7 Id. at 3. 
8 Id. at 4. 
9 Id. 
10 Id. at 6. 
11 Id. 
12 Id. 
13  Billy Rios, Understanding Pacemaker Systems Cybersecurity, WhiteScope IO (May 23, 2017, 9:44 
AM), http:// blog.whitescope.io/2017/05/understanding-pacemaker-systems.html. 
14 Also note Rapid7 concerns about ambiguity at 4. 
file:///Users/fvinh/Downloads/Rapid7,_Bugcrowd,_HackerOne,_Luta_Security_Joint_Comments_to_Cop
yright_Office_Request_for_Additional_Comments,_Docket_No_2015-8_102716.pdf 
[PAGE 4]
 
 
4 
 
infrastructure that communicates with computerized vehicles.15 The current limitation does not 
account for the expanded use of TPMs in other systems, and constrains research that would make 
these devices safer and more secure.16  
 
Moreover, the requirements that circumvention must be “solely” for the purpose of good-faith 
security research and that such search involves accessing a computer program “solely” for 
purposes of good-faith testing, investigation, or correction of a security flaw should be removed.  
Under these requirements, it is unclear whether academic research and open public discussion of 
vulnerabilities fall within the exemption, placing legal constraints on the study and prevention of 
critical flaws. These discussions among peers and experts can help researchers gain a greater 
understanding of the system or the technology beyond the vulnerability itself, as the learning 
process often spans beyond a singular goal or objective. But as a consequence of the current 
restrictions, researchers may be limited in their opportunities to build upon their initial 
discoveries through discussions with peers and the general public, foreclosing opportunities to 
expand their base of knowledge and identify future flaws in software.   
 
Further, the condition that circumvention does not violate the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 
1986 (CFAA) should be removed to reduce uncertainty and risk for researchers. Because section 
1201(j) incorporates the CFAA, a court’s adverse construction of “exceeding authorized access” 
under the CFAA would expose a researcher to liability under both the CFAA and section 1201.
17 
Granting an exemption to strike this language would not shield researchers from liability under 
other laws—it would merely provide them with greater certainty, particularly given that the 
scope of CFAA has not been uniformly interpreted across judicial circuits.18 To address this 
issue, the Register could also replace the language with a provision that states that the exemption 
“does not preclude liability under other applicable laws.”19  
 
The Office should also remove the restriction of security research to the setting of a “controlled 
environment designed to avoid any harm to individuals or the public” to reduce ambiguity for 
researchers. While the aims of the Office are understandable in this context, the Register did not 
provide any concrete guidance as to what constitutes a controlled environment. Subsequently, 
researchers are forced to develop their own set of norms without knowing that they will hold up 
in a court of law. Accordingly, many researchers may choose to forego or withhold research 
rather than face critical legal scrutiny and liability. 
                                                      
15 Mitch Stoltz et al., Additional Comments of the Electronic Frontier Foundation in the Matter of Section 
1201 Study at 7, October 27, 2016. 
16 Matthew Green, Statement on DMCA lawsuit, A Few Thoughts on Cryptographic Engineering (July 28, 
2016), https://blog.cryptographyengineering.com/2016/07/28/statement-on-dmca-lawsuit/. 
17 Erik Stallman and Stan Adams, Comments of the Center for Democracy & Technology before the 
United States Copyright Office, Library of Congress Section 1201 Study at 11, March 3, 2016. 
18 Id. at n. 52. 
19 NTIA Recommendations at 58, 62. 
[PAGE 5]
 
 
5 
 
 
Additionally, the restriction on the post-circumvention use of the “information derived from the 
activity” should be removed to protect the First Amendment rights of researchers and to shield 
researchers from liability for the actions of independent third parties. The limitation chills the 
discussion of vulnerabilities by requiring that the information be used “primarily” to promote the 
security or safety of devices or machines. Under this provision, researchers (1) must discern what 
proportion of discussion about a vulnerability constitutes “primarily” and (2) take responsibility 
for what another party does with the information. As a result, researchers may choose to forego 
or slow down research efforts by shutting down dialogue with potential partners and 
withdrawing from peer reviews and evaluations of the relevant work. 
 
Finally, the limitation for security research to a “lawfully acquired device or machine” should be 
removed from the exemption. While we recognize the need to protect the physical property of 
individuals, copyright protections are intended to protect intellectual property rights. But with 
this language in place, an individual would incur the additional severe penalties of a copyright 
offense for what constitutes a criminal offense. With this in mind, the theft of physical property 
should remain outside the scope of copyright law and enforcement. 
 
DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE 
As documentary evidence, we have attached the “The Importance of Security Research” report 
authored by Joseph Lorenzo Hall, Apratim Vidyarthi, and Benjamin C. Dean at CDT. The case 
studies in the report detail some of the more notable discoveries in security research in recent 
years and help illustrate the importance of an exemption to the DMCA. 
[PAGE 6]

[PAGE 7]
 
 The Importance of Security Research:   
 Four case studies  
  
 How hacking automotive vehicles, medical devices, voting machines, and internet of  
 things devices makes them safer.  
  
 Authors: Joseph Lorenzo Hall, Apratim Vidyarthi, and Benjamin C. Dean  
  
 1. Introduction  
  
 Security researchers and security research are commonly referred to, respectively, as “hackers” and              
 “hacking.” Such words can bring negative connotations to mind, such as hoodie-wearing miscreants in               
 dark rooms lit only by the glow of a computer monitor. This stereotype is far from the truth. Certainly,                    
 there are malicious individuals out there attacking computer systems and networks for a variety of                
 motives every day. However, security research and security researchers are an increasingly important              
 component of protecting against such attacks, as well as proactively assessing flaws in the fabric of our                  
 digital infrastructures and fixing them.  
 In this report, we compare four areas in which computers and networks are playing an increasing role:                  
 automobiles (Section 2), medical devices (Section 3), voting machines (Section 4), and Internet of               
 Things (IoT) devices (Section 5). We show that the efforts of security researchers have been                
 instrumental in finding and fixing flaws in these systems, such as vulnerabilities and bugs that could                 1
 have resulted in serious harm, economic loss, and loss of trust in digital infrastructure.  
 We also describe the complicated results of disclosing flaws. A security researcher does not simply find                 
 a flaw, tell the manufacturer, and have the manufacturer fix it. Where we can, we assess if a given flaw                     
 was fixed and how long it took to fix. As covered in a past CDT report, there is a complex set of laws                        
 and private incentives that might make it difficult for a researcher to engage a manufacturer and for                  
 the manufacturer to quickly fix a reported flaw.  2
 While we try to be detailed in the examples cited in each section, this is not a comprehensive list.                    
 There are simply too many bugs and flaws that either go undetected or that might be detected and                   
 undisclosed or disclosed privately. Instead, these case studies make clear that security research is a                
 necessary and important element of a robust, dynamic cybersecurity ecosystem – one that moves               
 quickly to fix design and implementation flaws in systems that mediate our lives every day. While many                  
 1  Throughout this report, the term ‘flaws’ is used to encompass bugs and vulnerabilities.   
 2  The Center for Democracy & Technology, “‘The Cyber’: Hard Questions in the World of Computer Security Research,” (March 2017),  
 available at: ​  ​ https://cdt.org/insight/the-cyber-hard-questions-in-the-world-of-cybersecurity-research/ ​ .   
 1401 K Street NW, Suite 200 Washington, DC 20005   
[PAGE 8]
 
 of the examples we discuss were not fixed quickly, it is clear from this evidence that we must be very                     
 wary of discouraging security research.   
 2. Automotive Vehicles  
  
 Cars have become computers on wheels. They include complex computerized and networked             
 electronics, engine control units (ECUs), and telematics control units (TCUs), amongst many other              
 digital features. Increasingly, features related to sensing and automation are being added (e.g.,              
 laser-based sensors for object sensing (LIDAR) and semi-autonomous driving subsystems). Integration            
 of these features should  improve vehicle safety, efficiency, functionality, and usability.   
 The development of internet-connected systems in cars creates new security and privacy risks. As the                
 complexity of the software and hardware systems in cars increases, so too does the number of possible                  
 security flaws. Cars are directly responsible for the safety of their occupants, for other people on the                  
 road, and for pedestrians. With the move to increase computerization and networking, existing              
 software flaws are imported into the motor vehicle context. Furthermore, as cars are increasingly               
 connected to centralized cloud providers, new risks of systemic failure may emerge in the event of                 
 cloud outages. The features used to track cars, so as to autonomously guide them through traffic, can                  
 also permit the monitoring of the vehicle’s occupants – both their location and communications – if                 
 privacy-enhancing safeguards are not in place.  
 2.1  Examples of Automotive Security Research  
  
 The automotive vehicle sector has already experienced incidents linked to computerized and             
 internet-connected system malfunction or hacking. Flaws can be relatively simple, which can cause              
 informational and privacy harms, for example, flaws that expose a vehicle’s location over time or a                 
 driver or passenger’s entertainment preferences. More serious flaws may also result in vehicle theft,               
 performance degradation and resultant damage to the car, serious injury to occupants or bystanders,               
 and unnecessary costs or losses to stakeholders of markets that rely on movement of people and                 
 goods.  
 Over the past decade, there have been numerous reports about various forms of flaws in motor                 
 vehicles. These flaws often have security researchers involved directly in their investigation, disclosure,              
 and mitigation. Unfortunately, for a variety of reasons, either additional security research does not               
 take place or the findings of security research are not sufficiently acted upon.  
 Vulnerabilities in wireless connectivity: ​ In 2015, security researchers found flaws in Chrysler, Dodge,              
 and Jeep vehicles that use the UConnect system. Vulnerabilities in this system allowed a malicious                
 actor to turn off the engine, unlock the car, and control the steering wheel, brakes, transmission, and                  
 acceleration. After these flaws were discovered by independent security researchers Charlie Miller             3
 3  Greenberg, A. (2015, July 21). Hackers Remotely Kill a Jeep on the Highway—With Me in It. ​ WIRED ​ . Retrieved from  
 1401 K Street NW, Suite 200 Washington, DC 20005   
[PAGE 9]
 
 and Chris Valasek, and disclosed in a chilling video, Chrysler recalled more than 1.4 million vehicles.                 4
 Chrysler cars, unlike other brands, could not be updated wirelessly, so owners had to bring these                 
 vehicles in for service. The end result was that not all systems were updated. It is notable that similar                     5 6
 flaws were found by academic security researchers years earlier, using investigations conducted in              
 more controlled experimental conditions – on closed tracks or in laboratories – and were not acted                 
 upon.  7
 General Motors (GM) cars have used a similar wireless connectivity system called OnStar. Security               
 researcher Samay Kamkar developed OwnStar, which compromised the OnStar system, thereby            
 identifying the potential for malicious actors to unlock the car, track its whereabouts, and start the                 
 vehicle remotely. This flaw affected more than two million cars, and it took GM five years to patch the                    8
 system.   
 Vulnerabilities in Keyfobs and Locking Systems: Audi, BMW, Toyota, and Ford cars had serious flaws in                 
 their key fob systems. These systems could be compromised with little effort, allowing for cars to be                  
 remotely started and, therefore, stolen. Swiss and German researchers discovered these issues;             9
 however, over three years later, no existing fix for these issues has been provided.   
 Researchers at the University of California, Santa Clara (UCSC) found that Toyota Priuses and Chevrolet                
 Corvettes could be unlocked, started, and vital statistics like fuel levels could be modified through                
 software and hardware manipulation. There are approximately 3.8 million 2010 Priuses on the road,               10 11
 https://www.wired.com/2015/07/hackers-remotely-kill-jeep-highway/  
 4  Cobb, S. (2015, July 29). Cybersecurity and manufacturers: what the costly Chrysler Jeep hack reveals. ​ WeLiveSecurity ​ . Retrieved from  
 https://www.welivesecurity.com/2015/07/29/cybersecurity-manufacturing-chrysler-jeep-hack/  
 5  Luckerson, V. (2015, August 6). How the Jeep Hack Reveals Tesla’s Biggest Advantage. ​ Time ​ . Retrieved from  
 http://time.com/3987360/tesla-hack/  
 6  Despite the ability for such cars to be updated over the air, this is no panacea: a perpetual connection to the internet also introduces the  
 risks of malware, hacking, and other risks that arise with the internet, especially if car companies are careless with their software  
 implementation.  
 7  Koscher, K., Czeskis, A., Roesner, F., Patel, S., Kohno, T., Checkoway, S., McCoy, D., Kantor, B., Anderson, D., Shacham, H., Savage, S.  
 (2010). Experimental Security Analysis of a Modern Automobile. In ​ 2010 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy ​  (pp. 447–462).  
 https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2010.34 ​ ; ​  Checkoway, S., McCoy, D., Kantor, B., Anderson, D., Shacham, H., Savage, S., Koscher, K., Czekis, A.,  
 Roesner, F., Kohno, T. (2011). Comprehensive Experimental Analyses of Automotive Attack Surfaces. In ​ Proceedings of the 20th USENIX  
 Conference on Security ​  (pp. 6–6). Berkeley, CA, USA: USENIX Association. Retrieved from  
 http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2028067.2028073 ​ ; Rouf, I., Miller, R., Mustafa, H., Taylor, T., Oh, S., Xu, W., Gruteser, M., Trappe, W.,  
 Seskar, I. (2010). Security and Privacy Vulnerabilities of In-car Wireless Networks: A Tire Pressure Monitoring System Case Study. In  
 Proceedings of the 19th USENIX Conference on Security ​  (pp. 21–21). Berkeley, CA, USA: USENIX Association. Retrieved from  
 http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1929820.1929848 ​ .  
 8  Greenberg, A. (2015, September 10). GM Took 5 Years to Fix a Full-Takeover Hack in Millions of OnStar Cars. ​ WIRED ​ . Retrieved from  
 https://www.wired.com/2015/09/gm-took-5-years-fix-full-takeover-hack-millions-onstar-cars/  
 9  Greenemeier, L. (2015, July 28). Recall Shows That a Hack Attack on Car Controls Is a Credible Threat. ​ Scientific American ​ . Retrieved  
 from ​ https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/recall-shows-that-a-hack-attack-on-car-controls-is-a-credible-threat/  
 10  Wagner, D. (2015, October 29). Car Hacking Research Accelerates At UC San Diego. ​ KPBS Public Media ​ . Retrieved from  
 http://www.kpbs.org/news/2015/oct/29/car-hacking-research-accelerates-uc-san-diego/  
 11  Worldwide Sales of Toyota Hybrids Top 6 Million Units. (2014, January 14). ​ Toyota USA Newsroom. ​ Retrieved December 14, 2017, from  
 1401 K Street NW, Suite 200 Washington, DC 20005   
[PAGE 10]
 
 along with approximately 14,000 2013 Corvettes.  12
 Independent security researcher Ken Munro discovered that the Mitsubishi Outlander’s TCU had a              
 vulnerability that allowed the car to be unlocked. No patch has yet been issued to rectify the situation                   13
 as Mitsubishi claims that this vulnerability is not a direct threat to consumer security. Approximately                
 50,000 Outlanders were on the road in 2013.  14
 Vulnerabilities in Mobile Apps Connected to Vehicles: Independent researcher Troy Hunt discovered             
 that the Nissan Leaf could be remotely started and the owner’s personal information could be                
 accessed through the car’s mobile app. The company immediately responded by shutting down the               15
 application, thus removing the path for the vulnerability.  
 3. Medical Devices  
  
 Some types of medical devices are increasingly connected to the internet. Functions could be as                
 complicated as remote operation machines, which allow doctors to perform surgical procedures on              
 their patients from afar, or as simple as blood refrigeration units, which are responsible for maintaining                 
 the environmental conditions for blood storage. Additionally, hospital networks are increasingly            
 connected to the internet, which creates risks of system outages or data loss due to accidental or                  
 malicious acts.   
 To highlight the degree of vulnerability here, note that hospital networks – like most networks – are                  
 vulnerable to malware, such as ransomware and viruses. A number of past incidents demonstrate               16
 the potential consequences of this vulnerability. The Hollywood Presbyterian Medical Center suffered a              
 ransomware incident in 2016. In 2011, the Gwinnett Medical Center in Lawrenceville, Georgia was               17
 unable to admit non-emergency patients for three days after a virus crippled its computer system,                
 underlining that these kinds of infestations are not merely annoyances but events that can cause                
 critical patient care outages. Similar cases of ransomware have also been reported around the world,                
 particularly in relation to the WannaCry ransomware outbreak in mid-2017.   18 19
 http://corporatenews.pressroom.toyota.com/releases/worldwide+toyota+hybrid+sales+top+6+million.htm  
 12  The End of the 2013 Corvette - What Did They Build Most? (2013, March 12). ​ Corvette Blogger ​ . Retrieved December 14, 2017, from  
 http://www.corvetteblogger.com/2013/03/12/the-end-of-the-2013-corvette-what-did-they-build-most/  
 13  Lee, D. (2016, June 6). Mitsubishi car alarm system “hacked.” ​ BBC News ​ . Retrieved from  
 http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-36444586 ​ .  
 14  Export Shipments by Region. (2013). ​ Mitsubishi Motor Corporation.  
 http://www.mitsubishi-motors.com/content/dam/com/ir_en/pdf/fact/2013/fact_2013_07.pdf  
 15  Kelion, L. (2016, February 24). Nissan Leaf electric car hack revealed. ​ BBC News ​ . Retrieved from  
 http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-35642749 ​ .  
 16  Ransomware is a type of malware which encrypts data on a device or in a database and only decrypts the data if a ransom is paid.  
 17  Cuthbertson, A. (2016, February 18). Hacked hospital ransom payout ‘incentivises criminals.’ ​ Newsweek ​ . Retrieved from  
 http://www.newsweek.com/hacked-hospital-ransom-payout-incentivises-criminals-428133 ​ .   
 18  Reel, M., & Robertson, J. (2015, November). Hospital Gear Could Save Your Life or Hack Your Identity. ​ Bloomberg ​ . Retrieved from  
 1401 K Street NW, Suite 200 Washington, DC 20005   
[PAGE 11]
 
 3.1   Examples of Medical Device Security Research  
  
 As the variety and number of internet-connected medical devices increases, so too does the risk of                 
 malfunction due to unintended actions or malicious actors exploiting the vulnerabilities in these              
 devices. Particularly in a medical context, these incidents could result in illness or death. Such incidents                 
 are already occurring, and security researchers – in some cases because they have a direct relationship                 
 to a given class of medical devices given their own health concerns – are increasingly responsible for                  
 finding, disclosing, and pioneering workarounds that can potentially render such flaws harmless.  
 Implantable Medical Devices: Insulin pumps transmit dosing information to the device. An incorrect              
 dosage could give rise to a serious medical incident, including the possibility of death. Dosage could                 
 potentially be disrupted either due to malicious actions or due to inadvertent software malfunction.               
 Jay Radcliffe, providing a briefing at Black Hat in 2011, determined that many insulin pumps have                 
 minimal user-adjustable controls. Due to manufacturers wishing to prevent tampering, these pumps             
 can be (re)programmed to cause an overdose of insulin, resulting in potentially serious adverse health                
 outcomes. In similar analyses by Radcliffe years later, on newer insulin pumps, he found additional                20
 flaws, requiring users to either discontinue the use of the provided wireless remote control and/or                
 apply a manufacturer update that limits the maximum dose of insulin applied.  21
 Implanted defibrillators and pacemakers deliver regular stimulation to the heart in order to maintain               
 regular heart-beating. Unfortunately, these devices may possess vulnerabilities that make them            
 susceptible to malicious software attacks, ransomware, or accidental malfunction. For instance,            
 Barnaby Jack, a renowned security researcher, demonstrated how a pacemaker may be hacked so as to                 
 deliver a fatal shock to a patient. The flaw was discovered in April 2015, although no current patch for                    22
 it has as of yet been released.  
 Durable Medical Equipment: Drug infusion pumps are bedside devices that administer a precise              
 dosage of a drug to a patient. Security researcher Billy Rios determined that multiple drug infusion                 
 pumps are susceptible to a flaw that can lead them to deliver the wrong dosage. The flaw exists                   
 because of the way in which they update their firmware, allowing the maximum dosage for patients to                  
 be raised to potentially fatal levels. Hospira, the main company which faces this problem, was warned                 23
 by the researcher but did not take any specific action. The FDA has released alerts about the firmware                   
 http://www.bloomberg.com/features/2015-hospital-hack/  
 19 Anthony, S. (2017, May 12). Massive ransomware attack hits UK hospitals, Spanish banks. ​ Ars Technica ​ . Retrieved from                   
 https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2017/05/nhs-ransomware-cyber-attack/  
 20  Basu, E. (2013, August 3). Hacking Insulin Pumps And Other Medical Devices From Black Hat. ​ Forbes ​ . Retrieved from  
 https://www.forbes.com/sites/ericbasu/2013/08/03/hacking-insulin-pumps-and-other-medical-devices-reality-not-fiction/   
 21  Beardsley, T. (2016, October 4). R7-2016-07: Multiple Vulnerabilities in Animas OneTouch Ping Insulin Pump. Retrieved December 14,  
 2017, from ​ https://blog.rapid7.com/2016/10/04/r7-2016-07-multiple-vulnerabilities-in-animas-onetouch-ping-insulin-pump/  
 22  ​ Id. ​ , at fn 18.  
 23  Zetter, K. (2015, June 8). Hacker Can Send Fatal Dose to Hospital Drug Pumps. ​ WIRED ​ . Retrieved from  
 https://www.wired.com/2015/06/hackers-can-send-fatal-doses-hospital-drug-pumps/ ​ .  
 1401 K Street NW, Suite 200 Washington, DC 20005   
[PAGE 12]
 
 issue.   24
 An independent security research firm, TrapX Security, found that x-ray equipment and picture archive               
 communication systems are potentially accessible by outside actors. Other medical imaging systems             25
 requiring complex electronics (e.g., PET scanners, CT scanners, and MRI machines) have similar flaws.               
 Such systems could be infected with malware and thereby hijacked to gain access to sensitive health                 
 data or even so that the device can join a botnet. The storage systems required minimal to no                   26
 authorization, and did not log access, which makes it difficult to track breaches in the event that they                   
 have happened. There are potentially serious privacy and fraud-related risks given the high value of                27
 medical data.  
 TrapX Security also found that blood refrigeration units often have hard-coded passwords embedded              
 by vendors, which are easy to manipulate. This might allow malicious actors to change the                
 temperature remotely,  which in turn could result in spoilage of blood units.  28
 4. Voting Systems  
  
 The United States has increasingly sought to computerize – and in some cases, network – specific                 
 features of our voting systems. The rationale is to make them more usable; accommodate people with                 
 disabilities, as well as people with non-English language voting preferences; and tabulate unofficial              
 results much faster than it would take to hand-count complicated ballots. However, the use of                
 computers and computer networks in voting system infrastructure also comes with vulnerabilities in              
 those systems.  
 While election-related computer and network vulnerabilities have been studied for decades, they have              
 come into particularly stark relief following the 2016 General Election in the United States. At their                 
 most basic, flaws in election systems can cause disruption in election processes, leading to long lines or                  
 mistakes in ballot contents presented to voters. At their worst, flaws can allow remote attackers a                 
 pathway to changing the election outcome from anywhere in the world. Academic researchers have, in                
 some cases, been able to investigate the security of election systems in the past. By contrast, only                  
 recently have election systems been the focus of independent security researchers. Election systems              
 24  Vulnerabilities of Hospira LifeCare PCA3 and PCA5 Infusion Pump Systems. (2013, May 13). ​ FDA Safety Communication ​  Retreived from  
 http://web.archive.org/web/20151121202227/http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/Safety/AlertsandNotices/ucm446809.htm  
 25  Storm, D. (2015, June 8). MEDJACK: Hackers hijacking medical devices to create backdoors in hospital networks. ​ Computerworld ​ .  
 Retrieved from  
 https://www.computerworld.com/article/2932371/cybercrime-hacking/medjack-hackers-hijacking-medical-devices-to-create-backdoors-
 in-hospital-networks.html   
 26 A network of maliciously-controlled computers often used to flood other computers on the internet with more traffic than they can                      
 handle.  
 27  Zetter, K. (2014, April 25). It’s Insanely Easy to Hack Hospital Equipment. ​ WIRED ​ . Retrieved from  
 https://www.wired.com/2014/04/hospital-equipment-vulnerable/ ​ .   
 28  Zetter, K. (2015, November 24). Medical Devices That Are Vulnerable to Life-Threatening Hacks. ​ WIRED ​ . Retrieved from  
 https://www.wired.com/2015/11/medical-devices-that-are-vulnerable-to-life-threatening-hacks/ ​ .   
 1401 K Street NW, Suite 200 Washington, DC 20005   
[PAGE 13]
 
 and voting machines have authentication systems and cryptographic protections. In the past, these              
 protections impeded independent security researchers who wished to investigate these machines. This             
 was because of the potential for application of Digital Millenium Copyright Act (DMCA)              
 anti-circumvention liability to these researchers. The recent DMCA triennial exemption from            
 anti-circumvention liability for voting systems went into effect, thereby permitting more independent             
 security researchers to investigate and thereby contribute to the improved security of these systems.  29
 4.1   Examples of Voting System Research  
  
 Flaws in voting systems are unfortunately common. In 2004, academic security researchers obtained              30
 a popular voting system, the Diebold AccuVote-TS. This machine had a touchscreen interface that               
 voters would use to make selections. The machine would then record the voter’s ballot onto internal                 
 memory. This system was found to have serious flaws, notably the unchangeable (“hard-coded”)              
 universal password “123456” that allowed complete control over the presentation and recording of              
 the voted ballot. This work was extended a few years later by Princeton researchers who created a                  
 virus that could be installed on this system during a primary election by a single individual subverting a                   
 single machine. This virus could then spread to all other machines between the primary and general                 
 election.  31
 In 2007, the states of California and Ohio were concerned about the security of their voting systems.                  
 They commissioned two separate investigations by academic researchers: the California           
 Top-to-Bottom Review and the Ohio EVEREST review. These were the first “white box” evaluations               32 33
 of voting systems, which allowed academic security researchers, under strict confidentiality terms             
 imposed by the voting system manufacturers, access to source code, documentation, and a number of                
 each model of voting system. Access to such information permitted investigation of potential flaws and                
 vulnerabilities.  
 Since these landmark studies, researchers have focused only episodically on examining voting systems              
 for flaws. Notable cases include the investigation performed on the Sequoia AVC Advantage, which               
 used a powerful hacking technique called return-oriented programming to demonstrate that even             
 29 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies; Library of Congress,                  
 Copyright Office. (2017, October 28). 80 Fed. Reg. 65944 at 65956. Retrieved from  
 https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2015-10-28/pdf/2015-27212.pdf ​ .  
 30  Kohno, T., Stubblefield, A., Rubin, A. D., & Wallach, D. S. (2004). Analysis of an electronic voting system. In ​ IEEE Symposium on Security  
 and Privacy, 2004. Proceedings. 2004 ​  (pp. 27–40). ​ https://doi.org/10.1109/SECPRI.2004.1301313  
 31  Feldman, A. J., Halderman, J. A., & Felten, E. W. (2007). Security Analysis of the Diebold AccuVote-TS Voting Machine. In ​ Proceedings of  
 the USENIX Workshop on Accurate Electronic Voting Technology ​  (pp. 2–2). Berkeley, CA, USA: USENIX Association. Retrieved from  
 http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1323111.1323113 ​ .  
 32  California Secretary of State. (2007). ​ Top-To-Bottom Review ​ . California Secretary of State. Retrieved from  
 http://www.sos.ca.gov/elections/voting-systems/oversight/top-bottom-review/ ​ .  
 33  McDaniel, P., Blaze, M., Vigna, G., Butler, K., Enck, W., Hursti, H., Hall, JL, et al.. (2007). ​ EVEREST: Evaluation and Validation of  
 Election-Related Equipment, Standards and Testing (Academic Final Report) ​ . Ohio Secretary of State. Retrieved from  
 http://www.josephhall.org/papers/Academic_EVEREST_Report.pdf ​ .  
 1401 K Street NW, Suite 200 Washington, DC 20005   
[PAGE 14]
 
 some of the more potentially secure voting system architectures could be cleverly subverted. Initially,               34
 these studies faced some resistance in academic venues due to questions about whether any               
 additional analysis of a voting system above and beyond previous academic treatments would              
 contribute to fundamental knowledge (the merit criteria for academic work). Accordingly, subsequent             
 academic investigations of voting technology focused on newer systems, such as the University of               
 Michigan researchers who (under invitation) mounted an attack against the pilot Washington, D.C.              
 Internet Voting System. This attack allowed them to change the votes on all ballots cast through that                  
 system. Non-academic independent security researchers both could not obtain voting systems easily             35
 and faced a riskier calculus in terms of potential legal liabilities.  
 This emphasizes that there has been a lack of academic and independent attention to voting systems in                  
 recent years. It is difficult to fund and publish academic work without serious contributions to                
 fundamental knowledge. However, with the interest generated by the 2016 U.S. election cycle and the                
 DMCA anti-circumvention exemption, which was issued in 2015, there is increasing attention by              
 independent security researchers given to voting machines and election systems. Two notable             
 examples are the examination of Georgia’s Kennesaw State infrastructure by security researchers             
 Logan Lamb and Chris Grayson and the 2017 DEFCON Voting Machine Hacking Village. In the                36 37
 Georgia case, Lamb wrote a simple computer program that downloaded content from the Kennesaw               
 State University’s Center for Election Systems (CES) website. This serves as both the public face and                 
 administrative portal for all of Georgia’s counties in the maintenance and support of Georgia’s uniform                
 voting system. Lamb, and then months later, Grayson, found serious flaws in the website. These flaws                 
 allowed access to voter registration records for all Georgia voters and software for the voting                
 machines, ostensibly for counties to download to update the software on Georgia’s thousands of very                
 old (15-20 years) voting machines. After a review of CES’ procedures and the material discovered by                 
 these researchers, the Georgia Secretary of State decided that CES could no longer competently               
 provide services and support for Georgia’s voting systems.  
 DEFCON is the world’s biggest hacking conference, held in Las Vegas every August. The conference                
 provides many “villages,” which give security researchers hands-on experiences with security-relevant            
 devices and practices (e.g., lock-picking, biomedical devices, and automotive devices). In 2017, for the               
 first time, voting machines were also available. The “Voting Village” showed that within about 24                
 34  Stephen Checkoway, Ariel J. Feldman, Brian Kantor, J. Alex Halderman, Edward W. Felten, & Hovav Shacham. (2009). Can DREs Provide  
 Long-Lasting Security? The Case of Return-Oriented Programming and the AVC Advantage. ​ USENIX/ACCURATE/IAVoSS Electronic Voting  
 Technology Workshop/Workshop on Trustworthy Elections 2009 (EVT/WOTE’ 09) ​ . Retrieved from  
 http://www.usenix.org/events/evtwote09/tech/full_papers/checkoway.pdf ​ .  
 35  Wolchok, S., Wustrow, E., Isabel, D., & Halderman, J. A. (2012). Attacking the Washington, D.C. Internet Voting System. In ​ Financial  
 Cryptography and Data Security ​  (pp. 114–128). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. ​ https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-32946-3_10 ​ .  
 36  Zetter, K. (2017, July 14). Will the Georgia Special Election Get Hacked? ​ POLITICO Magazine ​ . Retrieved from ​ http://politi.co/2heBRW2 ​ .  
 37  Blaze, M., Braun, J., Hursti, H., Hall, J. L., MacAlpine, M., & Moss, J. (2017). ​ DEFCON 25 Voting Machine Hacking Village: Report on Cyber  
 Vulnerabilities in U.S. Election Equipment, Databases, and Infrastructure ​ . DEFCON. Retrieved from  
 https://www.defcon.org/images/defcon-25/DEF%20CON%2025%20voting%20village%20report.pdf ​ .  
 1401 K Street NW, Suite 200 Washington, DC 20005   
[PAGE 15]
 
 hours, every piece of voting equipment that the organizers were able to procure could be subverted by                  
 ordinary security researchers with no privileged information. Notable findings included the complete             38
 remote control of the AVS WinVote system, which had been used heavily in Virginia from 2004 until it                   
 was decertified in 2015. Remote control of this system allowed an attacker to completely manipulate –                 
 in a totally automated fashion – both ballot display and electronic recording of votes. In addition,                 
 650,000 voter records were discovered on voter registration terminals purchased as surplus from a               
 county in Tennessee. This called into question not just the integrity of the devices, but of the                  
 procedures used to implement, support, and decommission voting systems.  
 5. Consumer Internet of Things Devices  
  
 The consumer Internet of Things (IoT) sphere, consisting of home and handheld networking devices,               
 constitutes a significant proportion of new internet connected devices. These IoT devices have many               
 flaws that result in malfunction and/or enable malicious actors to easily take advantage of them. This                 
 situation is especially concerning because many IoT devices are based on minimal platforms like               
 Arduino and Raspberry Pi, which either are not capable of encryption, which is an important security                 
 measure, particularly for personal information, or do not do so by default. Nonetheless, the                39 40
 number of IoT devices continues to grow, with internet connectivity being implemented in everything               
 from lightbulbs to refrigerators. The rate of growth is rapid; in 2012, there were 8.7 billion                 
 internet-connected devices; this is projected to grow to 50.1 billion in 2020 – reflecting the magnitude                 
 of the security risk that is dawning upon the industry.  41
 5.1   Examples of IoT Device Research  
 The potentially intimate nature of data to be collected from some of these devices, as well as the risk                    
 of personal injury or property damage from the malfunction of these devices, increase the utility of                 
 security researchers in this area. A few key use cases can be used to exemplify the risks that IoT devices                     
 bring, and the value that security researchers play within the industry.  
 Light bulbs: Context Security, a security research firm, discovered a flaw in LifeX bulbs. The                42
 vulnerabilities posed by these smart bulbs can reveal passwords, usernames, and private information              
 being transported through a wireless network. Researchers also found ways to exploit vulnerabilities in               
 Philips smart light bulbs, which would allow for a chain reaction disabling of all light bulbs of the same                    
 38  As had been the case with the 2007 academic security evaluations discussed above.  
 39  AES Algorithm processing time in Arduino vs Raspberry Pi. Retrieved December 14, 2017, from  
 https://crypto.stackexchange.com/questions/12891/aes-algorithm-processing-time-in-arduino-vs-raspberry-pi ​ .  
 40  For example, see: Kumar, U., Borgohain, T., & Sanyal, S. (2015). Comparative Analysis of Cryptography Library in IoT. ​ ArXiv:1504.04306  
 [Cs] ​ . Retrieved from ​ http://arxiv.org/abs/1504.04306 ​ .  
 41  IoT: number of connected devices worldwide 2012-2025. (2017). ​ Statista ​ . Retrieved from  
 https://www.statista.com/statistics/471264/iot-number-of-connected-devices-worldwide/ ​ .  
 42  Wakefield, J. (2014, July 8). Experts hack smart LED light bulbs. ​ BBC News ​ . Retrieved from  
 http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-28208905 ​ .  
 1401 K Street NW, Suite 200 Washington, DC 20005   
[PAGE 16]
 
 type within close proximity.   43
 Smart refrigerators: Pen Test Partners, a security research firm, discovered a vulnerability in a               
 Samsung smart fridge that would allow Gmail – and other websites – login credentials to be accessed                  
 because the “device does not validate SSL certificates.” Thus, the fridge is vulnerable to               44
 man-in-the-middle attacks and also leaks passwords on the wireless network the fridge is connected               
 to. Due to their vulnerabilities, smart fridges have also been found sending out spam when their                 
 software was maliciously modified to be part of a botnet.  45
 Smart thermostats: TrapX and Professor Yier Jin from the University of Central Florida found that if                 
 malicious actors have physical access to Nest thermostats, they can upload custom software onto the                
 devices and take advantage of the unencrypted (potentially private) data stored on those thermostats.              
 This hack required physical access to the device. The manufacturer claimed that such a “jailbreak                 46
 doesn’t compromise the security of our servers or the connections between our devices and our                
 servers.”  
 Baby monitors: Rapid7, a security research firm, found many poor security practices in baby monitors                47
 such as “default passwords and a lack of encryption.” Some manufacturers, like Philips, have released                48
 advisories to their customers due to similar issues. The New York City Department of Consumer Affairs                 
 has released an investigation and an alert due to these issues.  49
 Smart alarm systems and locks: ​ Researchers at the University of Michigan successfully created              
 malware targeting home security/alarm systems. Their custom software granted the researchers            
 access to the PIN; allowed them to remotely control the blinds, lights, and other connected home                 
 functionalities; and even turn on the fire alarm. Many security systems face such problems, including                50
 ADT and Vivint. These devices are vulnerable due to their susceptibility to jamming, and due to their                  
 transmission of unencrypted signals on wireless networks. In another case, a maker of high-security               51
 43 Ronen, E., Shamir, A., Weingarten, A. O., & O’Flynn, C. (2017). IoT Goes Nuclear: Creating a ZigBee Chain Reaction. In ​ 2017 IEEE                        
 Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) ​  (pp. 195–212). ​ https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2017.14 ​ .  
 44  Leyden, J. (2015, August 24). Samsung smart fridge leaves Gmail logins open to attack. ​ The Register ​ . Retrieved from  
 https://www.theregister.co.uk/2015/08/24/smart_fridge_security_fubar/ ​ .  
 45  Fridge sends spam emails. (2014, January 17). ​ BBC News ​ . Retrieved from ​ http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-25780908  
 46  Tilley, A. (2015, March 6). How Hackers Could Use A Nest Thermostat As An Entry Point Into Your Home. ​ Forbes ​ . Retrieved from  
 https://www.forbes.com/sites/aarontilley/2015/03/06/nest-thermostat-hack-home-network/  
 47  Stanislav, M., & Beardsley, T. (2015). ​ Hacking IoT: A Case Study on Baby Monitor Exposures and Vulnerabilities ​ . Rapid7. Retrieved from  
 https://www.rapid7.com/docs/Hacking-IoT-A-Case-Study-on-Baby-Monitor-Exposures-and-Vulnerabilities.pdf   
 48  ​ Cuthbertson, A. (2016, January 29). Are hackers spying on your baby? ​ Newsweek ​ . Retrieved from  
 http://www.newsweek.com/search-engine-sleeping-babies-420967  
 49  Consumer Alert: Consumer Affairs Warns Parents to Secure Video Baby Monitors. (2016, January). Retrieved December 14, 2017, from  
 http://www1.nyc.gov/site/dca/media/pr012716.page   
 50  Fernandes, E., Jung, J., & Prakash, A. (2016). Security Analysis of Emerging Smart Home Applications. In ​ 2016 IEEE Symposium on  
 Security and Privacy (SP) ​  (pp. 636–654). ​ https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2016.44   
 51  Zetter, K. (2014, July 23). How Thieves Can Hack and Disable Your Home Alarm System. ​ WIRED ​ . Retrieved from  
 https://www.wired.com/2014/07/hacking-home-alarms/  
 1401 K Street NW, Suite 200 Washington, DC 20005   
[PAGE 17]
 
 electromagnetic locks threatened researchers at independent security firm, IOActive, after they had             
 detailed serious security shortcomings in those locks, allowing an attacker to modify the              
 “authorizations” stored on the electronic key to allow arbitrary access to other locks.  52
 Fitness monitors: Security researchers at Fortinet discovered an easy way to inject malware into               
 Fitbit’s devices in less than ten seconds. However, Fitbit was reluctant to define such a vulnerability                 53
 as one that would allow malware to spread, and denied the initial vulnerability.  
 6. Conclusion  
  
 This paper has provided a rich set of examples where security researchers have played a critical role in                   
 the identification and reporting of flaws and vulnerabilities in automotive vehicles, medical devices and               
 hospital networks, voting and election systems, and a multitude of consumer IoT devices. In many                
 cases, the implications of these shortcomings are serious, including potential physical harm and death,               
 theft or loss of device control, disruption or outcome changes in government election processes, and                
 eavesdropping on and/or tracking users.  
  
 There is a growing need for greater scrutiny of the security of these technologies as they continue to                   
 proliferate throughout society. Unfortunately, more security researchers are unable to play a greater              
 role in this area – or, at least, are less likely to concentrate in this area – due to chilling effects. This is                        
 because of the uncertainty and potential illegality of their well-intentioned research, under the DMCA               
 – for circumvention of access controls – and the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (CFAA) – for accessing                   
 systems over networks, which were put in place to prohibit maliciously-intended activities, not the               
 sleuthing of well-intentioned researchers and tinkerers. Security researchers also face a general             54
 atmosphere of suspicion and ill-will from the companies that produce and sell these defective               
 products, leading to serious legal threats and, in some cases, lawsuits.  
 As the use of these products in our societies increases, and the risks from their defects also increase,                   
 changes to these laws would permit security researchers to play a greater role in managing these risks.                  
 With a clearer picture of what legal risks security researchers face, we would potentially learn much                 
 more about pervasive insecurity of the digital fabric of society, and hone efforts focused on fixing                 
 vulnerabilities, as well as entire classes of vulnerabilities, for good.  
 52  Zetter, K. (2015, May 6). With Lock Research, Another Battle Brews in the War Over Security Holes. ​ WIRED ​ . Retrieved from  
 https://www.wired.com/2015/05/lock-research-another-battle-brews-war-security-holes/  
 53  Dent, S. (2015, October 21). Fitbit trackers can be hacked in “10 seconds” (update: Fitbit disagrees). ​ Engadget ​ . Retrieved from  
 https://www.engadget.com/2015/10/21/fitbit-tracker-bluetooth-vulnerability/   
 54  ​ Id. ​ , CDT, note 1.  
 1401 K Street NW, Suite 200 Washington, DC 20005   
