[PAGE 1]
ITEM A. COMMENTER INFORMATION
Auto Care Association 
7101 W
isconsin Ave., Suite 1300, Bethesda, MD 20814  
Contact: Aaron Lowe, Senior Vice President, Regulatory and Government Affairs  
301-654-6664, ext. 1021 
Aaron.Lowe@autocare.org  
www.autocare.org 
Counsel: Seth D. Greenstein 
Constantine Cannon LLP 
1001 Pennsylvania Av., N.W. 1300N 
Washington, D.C. 20004 
202-204-3514 
sgreenstein@constantinecannon.com 
I
TEM B. PROPOSED CLASS ADDRESSED 
Proposed Class 7: Computer Programs – Repair 
ITEM C. OVERVIEW 
These Comments by Auto Care Association (“Auto Care”) support our joint petition with 
Consumer Technology Association (“CTA”) for a new exemption for circumvention with respect 
to maintenance, repair, and upgrade of motor vehicles. Auto Care joined CTA, iFixit, and the 
Owners’ Rights Initiative in petitioning for renewal of the previously-granted 2015 “Class 21” 
exemption, now renewed. In these Class 7 comments Auto Care remains focused only on 
motorized land vehicles – specifically, on the need for a new exemption that is understood to 
include expert assistance, with necessary tools, at the direction of a lawfully entitled user.  
In the 2015 Round, NTIA, on behalf of the Administration, recommended the grant of the Class 
21 exemption for circumvention “by or at the request” of a lawfully-entitled user.1 After 
1 “Computer programs embedded in motorized land vehicles or agricultural machinery, when 
circumvention is initiated by or at the request of the owner of the vehicle or machinery, in order 
to make repairs or modifications to the vehicle or machinery. This exemption does not obviate 
the need to comply with other applicable laws and regulations, such as those relating to vehicle 
safety or environmental protection.” NTIA 2015 Round Recommendations to Register. 
[PAGE 2]
 
 
2 
 
receiving comments on its Notice of Inquiry2 and at its 2016 Roundtables, the Register in its 
2017 Report3 and in this Notice of Proposed Rulemaking4 observed that a more generous and 
practical definition of “user” might produce an outcome more useful to users than the previous 
exemption, yet still consistent with the text of Section 1201(a). In these Comments, Auto Care 
focuses on how to apply the Register’s forward-looking insights in the context of motor vehicle 
maintenance, repair, and modification.5 Our main points are:  
   The Register is correct that an independent dealer or servicer is necessarily a “user” as 
contemplated by the statute. 
 
   The auto industry Memorandum  of Understanding does not and cannot address all the 
tools necessary for independent dealers and servicers to compete efficiently and 
effectively with franchised dealers who are devoted to a single brand. Moreover, it 
subjects independent competitors to prohibitive costs (by requiring them to purchase 
OEM-approved tools and parts at OEM-imposed prices) that could be avoided if 
circumvention tools and parts could be created in the competitive aftermarket. 
 
   An independent dealer or serv icer application of a software tool at the vehicle owner’s 
direction for a purpose lawful under copyright law should not be considered 
“trafficking,” so long as the dealer or servicer does not commercially distribute that tool. 
 
   The Register should not excl ude circumvention to obtain access to “telematics” data. 
Telematics data is not subject to copyright. To the extent any transmission might be 
considered subject to copyright, the vehicle’s owner would have a superior claim to the 
contents’ ownership, and at least a clear right to its fair use. 
 
   The 2015 Class 21 exclusion of access to the storage capacit y of “infotainment” systems 
should not be repeated. Gaining access to the storage capacity of a device one owns is 
neither a direct nor a secondary infringement of any copyright.  
 
ITEM D. TECHNOLOGICAL PROTECTION MEASURE(S) AND METHOD(S) OF CIRCUMVENTION 
Original equipment manufacturers (“OEMs”) increasingly use firmware and software to control 
the function and operation of motor vehicle parts, as well as to diagnose faults or breakdowns. 
                                                        
2 See, e.g. U.S. Copyright Office Docket No. 2015-8 Section 1201 Study: Notice of Inquiry and 
Request for Public Comment, Comments of Auto Care Association, March 3, 2016 (“Auto Care 
2016 Comments”). 
3 Section 1201 of Title 17, A Report of the Register of Copyrights, June 2017 (“June Report”) at 
61 - 62.  
4 U.S. Copyright Office, 37 CFR Part 201 [Docket No. 2017-10], Exemptions to Permit 
Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted Works, Oct. 26, 2017 (“NPRM”), at 42 - 43.  
5 Auto Care will not revisit issues, such as the essential fair use nature of auto repair and the 
general merit of expert assistance that, in the renewal of the 2015 Class 21 exemption and the 
texts cited above, may be considered as effectively resolved, unless new objections arise in 
opposing comments. 
[PAGE 3]
 
 
3 
 
Software that controls function and operation is the equivalent of a physical part; diagnostic 
software is the equivalent of a physical meter, gauge, or tool.  The law applicable to physical 
parts and tools should therefore apply where the manufacturer elects to implement mechanical 
functions via software. User-directed auto maintenance, repair, and upgrade can no longer 
sensibly be discussed in any other context.6  
The Register is Correct That Independent Dealers  
and Servicers May be Identified Under Section 1201(a) as Users. 
 
Specialists equipped with software tools now work at the direction of the home driveway 
mechanic who once bought and installed replacement parts. As Auto Care reported in its 2016 
Comments, “new car buyers in 2015 will keep their vehicles for 6.5 years, and used car buyers 
keep those cars on the road for 5.3 more years – a total of more than 11-1/2 years, and more than 
4 years longer than the average in 2006.”7 Auto Care explained: 
It generally is infeasible for the ordinary consumer to repair software-enabled 
parts. OEMs intentionally design vehicles to deter access to software except 
through the use of specialized and costly tools. Those making repairs also need to 
understand how software for a specific part may interact with other software 
controlled vehicle systems. Thus, the aftermarket repair and customization 
industry provides much-needed and cost-effective services that consumers often 
cannot do for themselves.8 
The Auto Industry “MOU” is Necessary but Not  
Sufficient for Economical Assistance to Owners. 
 
The 2014 Memorandum of Understanding9 that gives independent dealers access to OEM 
software is increasingly useful to independent dealers and repair shops,10 but is not and cannot be 
sufficient for them to lawfully and efficiently serve consumers. The MOU requires 
standardization of ports and interfaces, but the software, though now licensed, remains 
proprietary and brand-specific. Independent shops, most of which must service a variety of 
brands to stay in business, remain at a disadvantage compared to franchised dealers. The 
franchised dealer can maintain a single set of expensive software tools, whereas the independent 
servicer is obliged to purchase proprietary access, including TPM circumvention rights, across 
many brands and multiple models. These costs rapidly become prohibitive for independent 
servicers, thus compelling the servicer to choose whether to send the customer to the franchised 
                                                        
6 See, e.g., Comments of Auto Care Association, In the Matter of Section 1201 Study, Dkt. 2015-
8 at 4-6; Comments of Auto Care Association, In the Matter of Software-Enabled Consumer 
Products, Dkt. 2015-16 (“Auto Care 2016 Comments”) at 1-4; Copyright Office Roundtable 
discussion transcript, May 20, 2016, at 17 – 75. 
7 Auto Care 2016 Comments at 4, citing data from the Institute of Highway Safety. 
8 Id. at 5. 
9 See Memorandum of Understanding, Jan. 25, 2014, 
http://www.nastf.org/files/public/OtherReference/MOU_SIGNED_1_15_14.pdf.  
10 Starting with the 2018 model year, the MOU affords access to most OEM repair, as well 
diagnostic, software.  
[PAGE 4]
 
 
4 
 
dealer or incur a loss to keep the customer. Franchised dealers that compete to re-sell or service 
additional auto brands would better serve their customers through lawful uses of TPM 
circumvention tools. 
 
As Auto Care reported in its 2016 Comments at 6, TPMs also are used to control whether 
refurbished parts from one vehicle can be installed on another vehicle of the same model. They 
have also been used to control which servicers are authorized to install a new part. 
The Register, given its insight into the nature of “user,” should appreciate that the auto industry 
MOU, while a laudable and necessary step, is far from sufficient to afford consumers a range of 
economical repair options equivalent to those they enjoyed when cars were strictly mechanical. 
Use of a Tool at the Direction of a Vehicle Owner is Not Trafficking. 
Neither law nor technology requires that independent dealers be prohibited from using software 
that can diagnose and fix more than one OEM’s brand or model. In many cases, the constraint is 
simply that an OEM has chosen to restrict access to tools on a brand-specific basis. It would not 
impair any OEM’s copyright interests for an independent service shop or dealer to use software, 
including circumvention tools, that can diagnose, maintain, or fix more than one brand of 
automobile. Expert users require expert tools. Such shops are not in the business of copying 
software or firmware for any commercial purpose other than assisting the vehicle’s owner, at his 
or her direction; an exemption can be limited to this lawful purpose.  
The use of tools is not affected by whether they have previously been “trafficked,” so long as 
they are applied at the instruction and on behalf of a vehicle owner for a lawful purpose. Whether 
a tool is obtained under MOU or is otherwise invented or acquired, the Librarian’s Section 
1201(a) jurisdiction is identically limited to use. The Librarian was never given any jurisdiction 
to determine whether, prior to use for a lawful purpose, a tool has ever been trafficked.11 
Circumvention of TPMs to Enable a Vehicle Owner’s Access  
to His Own Vehicle’s Telematics Data is Necessary and Lawful. 
  
Of the legal and privacy issues that may pertain to the telematics data generated by an owner’s 
operation of a motor vehicle, the least controversial should be the entitlement of the owners 
themselves to access to this data. Whether access should be available to others is beyond the 
scope of this proceeding. The collected data pertains to how and where the owner drives the 
vehicle, the diagnostic fault codes that might be available through the OBD port, and the number 
of miles driven. The owner is entitled to it. Nothing in copyright law or the DMCA should 
prevent the owner’s access to her own data. 
There is little reason to believe that such data is copyrighted; data is generally not subject to 
copyright.12 Even if copyrighted, such data’s private transmission to the vehicle’s owner, or to a 
servicer acting at the owner’s direction, is not a reproduction or a public performance. And even 
                                                        
11 See Copyright Office Roundtable discussion transcript, May 20, 2016, at 20 – 21 (Besek). 
12 Feist Publications, Inc., v. Rural Telephone Service Co., 499 U.S. 340 (1991). 
[PAGE 5]
 
 
5 
 
if somehow infringing, the owner’s access to data about her own driving or her own vehicle 
would be an obvious fair use. 
In the 2015 Class 21 exemption the Register excluded telematics by asserting that there was no 
evidence of need for telematics data. It would have been more useful, and should be the result in 
the current Round, to declare instead, as the Librarian has in previous instances with respect to 
access to content in the public domain, that such content is “beyond the scope of the rulemaking” 
because it is not covered by copyright.13 As to the industry need for this result, or for an 
exemption should the Register not wish to go this far, there is in fact plentiful evidence. Due to a 
growing trend of vehicle manufacturers restricting the amount of information available through 
the OBD port where most shops currently obtain diagnostic codes, independent servicers, as well 
as users, need data available from telematic systems to maintain the vehicle’s condition and 
safety. That is why this data is increasingly being sent to franchised dealers, so that they can 
solicit vehicle owners for service. Moreover, access to telematics capabilities will increasingly be 
necessary for diagnosis and for uploading software modifications, updates, and repairs to the 
vehicle as more and more vehicle manufacturers move to over the air software updates. Auto 
Care is sufficiently concerned about this issue that Auto Care is part of a public affairs campaign 
aimed at entitling vehicle owners to data about their own vehicles.14 There is no basis in law for 
the Librarian to impair such access by excluding telematics data from lawful TPM 
circumvention. 
There is No Copyright Law Basis to Deny a Vehicle Owner  
Access to Her Own Vehicle’s Storage Capacity for “Infotainment” Content. 
 
Auto Care agrees with CTA’s analysis, in CTA’s 2016 NOI Comments at 7 – 8, that the 
Register’s exception for access to “infotainment” storage capacity was contrary to clear Supreme 
Court precedent. CTA explained: 
As a matter of copyright law, the Office’s rationale is also directly contrary to the 
law as established by the Supreme Court in Sony Corp. of America v. Universal 
City Studios, Inc., 464 U.S. 417, 442 (1984). The Supreme Court held in Sony that 
it is lawful to provide consumers with a device that can store both infringing and 
non-infringing content, so long as there are commercially significant non-
infringing uses for the stored content. In the Class 21 exemption discussion, it was 
only agricultural equipment provider John Deere that even suggested, without 
                                                        
13 See Section 1201 Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the 
Prohibition on Circumvention, Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights at 13 – 15 and n. 
66, citing similar outcomes in 2010 and 2003 Final Rules. (Oct. 2012). Auto Care suggested a 
similar outcome in its 2015 Class 21 Comments based on similar precedent: “The Register 
previously has held that no exemption would be needed to the extent that necessary reverse 
engineering activities for the purpose of promoting interoperability already may be protected 
more broadly by Section 1201(f).3 [n3:] See Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights in 
RM 2002-4; Rulemaking on Exemptions from Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright 
Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, at 172-183 (Oct. 27, 2003). 
14 See video, “Your Car. Your Data. Your Choice.” https://yourcaryourdata.org/#homeIndustry  
[PAGE 6]
 
 
6 
 
proof, that circumvention could result in infringing material being imported into 
vehicle infotainment storage.15 Hence the only copyright interest or concern that 
the Office could have had would be about a closed storage system becoming open 
to storing infringing content. It was clearly established in Sony that allowing such 
capacity into the marketplace is not copyright infringement, even where 
accomplished by a third party with a commercial interest.  
Moreover, even if Supreme Court precedent were otherwise, for there to be contributory 
infringement there must be evidence of direct infringement. There was no evidence or other basis 
in the record for the Register to presume that material added to storage – such as copies of 
entertainment content the consumer owned or created or personal photographs – would be 
infringing, or that access to one’s own infotainment system would be for other than the user’s 
lawful purpose for which an exemption was sought.  
ITEM E. ASSERTED ADVERSE EFFECTS ON NONINFRINGING USES  
As Auto Care notes above, the necessary and lawful nature of circumventing TPMs for purposes 
of vehicle maintenance, repair, and upgrade has already been established in the 2015 Class 21 
exemption, the renewal of that exemption, the Register’s interim study, and this NPRM. The 
only issue for this Round with respect to motor vehicles is whether any difference is made by 
construing “user” as including expert assistance at the direction or at the request of the vehicle 
owner. For this purpose only a summary recapitulation is necessary: 
   Whether the proposed class includes at  least some works protected by copyright. 
While software technically can be considered a “literary” work, it is widely agreed (including by 
Members of Congress involved in passing the legislation) that protection of this sort of 
functional software from consumer access was not foreseen as a purpose of the DMCA.16 Nor do 
all the TPMs applied to software protect copyright-eligible content – many shield data, error 
codes, and other status indicators from being read by anyone other than an OEM-licensed person. 
Nor is copyrighted software necessarily copied when access is gained for purposes of running the 
software in aid of repair. And even when copied, the copying for purposes of repair is functional 
in nature, rather than for purposes of independent commercial exploitation. 
   Whether the uses at issu e are noninfringing under title 17. 
 
The Register has already concluded that the uses involved in auto repair are noninfringing when 
undertaken by the vehicle owner. Access to the software often involves activity that implicates 
no protectable copyright interest at all, such as obtaining or altering non-copyrightable data 
parameters used by the software to control or calibrate performance, or accessing the software to 
replace it with another program. The purpose and status of these noninfringing uses do not 
                                                        
15 No claim of inducement, contributory, or vicarious liability was made – and it would be 
fatuous to suggest that a user is capable of inducement with respect to her own vehicle’s radio.  
 
16 See the relatively recent comments of Members of Congress quoted in CTA’s 2016 NOI 
Comments at 3 – 6. 
[PAGE 7]
 
 
7 
 
change when the vehicle owner receives expert assistance to enable this use – regardless of 
whether the expert makes use of some tool. 

   Whether users are adversely affected in their ability to make such noninfringing uses or, 
alternatively, whether users are likely to be adversely affected in their ability to make 
such noninfringing uses during the next three years.  
 
In renewing the 2015 Class 21 exemption the Register has already determined these issues in 
favor of a user exemption. 

   Whether the statutory pr ohibition on circumventing access controls is the cause of the 
adverse effects. 
In renewing the 2015 Class 21 exemption the Register has already determined this issue in favor 
of a user exemption. 
 
 
I hereby affirm that I have verified the information set forth in these Comments with 
members of the Auto Care Association, and that the statements made are true and correct to the 
best of my present knowledge. 
 
 
Aaron Lowe 
Senior Vice President, Regulatory and Government Affairs  
Auto Care Association 
7101 Wisconsin Ave., Suite 1300 
Bethesda, MD 20814  
301-654-6664, ext. 1021 
Aaron.Lowe@autocare.org  
 
 
 
