[PAGE 1]
 
 
 
[   ] Check here if multimedia evidence is being provided in connection with this comment 
ITEM A.  COMMENTER INFORMATION  
This Comment is submitted on behalf of Brigham Young University (“BYU”) and Brigham 
Young University-Idaho (“BYU-Idaho”) (collectively, “Commenters”).  
BYU is a private research university affiliated with The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day 
Saints. Founded in 1875 as Brigham Young Academy, the university currently serves 33,500 
students from all 50 states and 105 countries. BYU seeks to develop students of faith, intellect, 
and character who have the skills and the desire to continue learning and to serve others 
throughout their lives. 
BYU-Idaho is a private, four-year university affiliated with The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-
day Saints. Originally founded as a regional school in 1888, it was named Ricks College in 1923 
and became the four-year university BYU-Idaho in 2001. BYU-Idaho seeks to create a 
wholesome learning environment in which students can strengthen their commitment to their 
faith and receive a quality education that prepares them for leadership in the home, the 
community, and the workplace. 
This Comment was prepared by the BYU Copyright Licensing Office, which provides services 
and resources to the university’s faculty, staff and students relating to copyright issues that arise 
on campus. Interested parties may contact the following individuals:  
Peter Midgley 
BYU Copyright Licensing Office 
3760 Harold B. Lee Library 
Provo, UT 84602 
copyright@byu.edu 
801-422-9339 
Nate Wise 
BYU-Idaho Intellectual Property Office 
McKay Library 120C 
Rexburg, ID 83460 
copyright@byui.edu 
208-496-7218 
[PAGE 2]
 
 
 
2 
 
 
ITEM B.  PROPOSED CLASS ADDRESSED 
This comment addresses Proposed Class 1: Audiovisual Works—Criticism and Comment.  
ITEM C.  OVERVIEW 
The current DMCA exemptions for motion pictures used for educational purposes should be 
consolidated and expanded to include the following class of works: 
Motion Pictures (including television shows and videos), as defined in 17 U.S.C. 
§ 101, where circumvention is undertaken solely in order to facilitate 
noninfringing performances of the works for nonprofit educational purposes, in 
accordance with 17 U.S.C. § 110(1) or § 110(2). 
This revision would simplify the DMCA exemption for noninfringing educational performances, 
by aligning it with the statutory conditions for such performances and eliminating extraneous 
conditions, such as distinctions between different categories of educational users and 
unnecessary restrictions to “short portions” of motion pictures. Such an exemption would give 
life and meaning to the policies embodied in the educational performance exemptions when they 
were enacted by Congress.  
ITEM D.  TECHNOLOGICAL PROTECTION MEASURE(S) AND METHOD(S) OF CIRCUMVENTION 
This Comment relates to technological protection measures (TPMs) employed on DVDs, Blu-ray 
discs, and by various online streaming services. Such TPMs and methods of circumvention have 
been described adequately in prior rulemaking proceedings. (See, e.g., Register of Copyrights, 
Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the 
Prohibition on Circumvention, Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights, at 29-30 (2015) 
(‘‘2015 Recommendation’’).) 
ITEM E.  ASSERTED ADVERSE EFFECTS ON NONINFRINGING USES  
Commenters generally agree with the new rulemaking approach advocated by petitioners 
Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF), New Media Rights (NMR), and Organization for 
Transformative Works (OTW). As set forth above, the current DMCA exemption for motion 
pictures should be consolidated based on type of use, and distinctions based on the type of user 
should be eliminated.  
For example, the exemption should consolidate the uses for nonprofit educational purposes and 
eliminate unnecessary distinctions between types of users such as the following: 
• college and university faculty and students, see 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1)(iv),  
• faculty of massive online open courses (MOOCS), see 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1)(v),  
• kindergarten through twelfth-grade educators, see 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1)(vi),  
• kindergarten through twelfth-grade students, see 37 C.F.R. § 201.40(b)(1)(vii),  
The copyright statute draws no distinctions between these user groups, and neither should the 
DMCA exemptions for motion pictures. On the other hand, the copyright statute does provide 
[PAGE 3]
 
 
 
3 
 
 
specific exemptions for performances of motion pictures for nonprofit educational purposes, as 
set forth in 17 U.S.C. § 110(1) and § 110(2), which should be recognized and reflected in the 
DMCA exemptions.  
I. The Exemption to Facilitate Nonprofit Educational Performances Should Not Be 
Limited to “Short Portions” of Motion Pictures 
The preamble of the current DMCA exemption includes some restrictions that unnecessarily 
limit instructors and pupils seeking to make noninfringing performances of audiovisual works. 
For example, the current exemption is limited to “short portions” of motion pictures. 37 C.F.R. 
§ 201.40(b)(1). In the 2015 rulemaking proceedings, the Register stated, “the use of only short 
segments is critical to the Register’s determination in this proceeding that a significant number of 
the desired uses are likely noninfringing.” (2015 Recommendation, at 99.)  
While the Register’s statement may have been true for “a significant number of the desired 
uses,” it is manifestly untrue for performances made for nonprofit educational purposes under 17 
U.S.C. § 110(1), sometimes referred to as the “classroom exemption.” Section 110(1) was not 
mentioned in the 2015 Recommendation, and it is not clear to what extent, if any, the Register 
considered this exemption. To qualify for the classroom exemption, a performance must satisfy 
the following statutory conditions: 
• made by instructors or pupils;  
• in the course of face-to-face teaching activities;  
• of a nonprofit educational institution;  
• in a classroom or similar place devoted to instruction; and  
• cannot be given by means of a copy that the person responsible for the performance knew 
or had reason to believe was not lawfully made. 
See 17 U.S.C. § 110(1). Notably, the classroom exemption of Section 110(1) provides no 
limitations or restrictions on the types of works performed or the length of such performances. 
Thus, instructors or pupils can perform even full-length motion pictures in class, and such 
performances are unquestionably noninfringing, provided that they satisfy the remaining 
conditions set forth in the statute.  
Even so, instructors and pupils are adversely affected in their ability to make noninfringing uses 
of more than “short portions” of motion pictures under the classroom exemption due to the 
unduly restrictive language of the current DMCA exemption. As the Register concluded in the 
2015 rulemaking proceeding, “generally speaking, copyrighted motion pictures are not widely 
available in formats not subject to technological protections.” (2015 Recommendation, at 83.) 
Therefore, to make noninfringing performances under the classroom exemption, instructors or 
pupils must have access to licensed decryption and playback devices in the classroom, such as 
DVD players, Blu-ray players, or computers with licensed optical drives.  
As technology advances, however, fewer and fewer classrooms will be equipped with such 
licensed decryption and playback devices. For example, although BYU and BYU-Idaho 
currently have numerous media-enabled classrooms with DVD or Blu-ray players, both 
[PAGE 4]
 
 
 
4 
 
 
universities have decided not to replace such devices as they age out over the next several years. 
And while many classrooms are equipped with personal computers, licensed optical drives are 
becoming increasingly rare in new computers. (Kyrnin, Mark. “Why Do Most New PCs Not 
Come with DVD or Blu-ray Drives?” Lifewire. N.p., 12 Aug. 2017. Web. 18 Dec. 2017.) 
Accordingly, instructors and pupils are increasingly likely to be adversely affected in their ability 
to make noninfringing uses under the classroom exemption during the next three years. 
To meet the needs of the changing modern classroom, the DMCA exemption for motion pictures 
should be expanded to allow nonprofit educational institutions to circumvent technological 
protection measures solely to facilitate noninfringing performances of the motion pictures. In 
many cases, such circumvention may necessitate that a copy of the motion picture be stored on a 
media server or similar device. Such reproduction and storage would be subject to the conditions 
for ephemeral recordings, as provided in 17 U.S.C. § 112(f). In addition, the reproduction and 
storage of such copies would also qualify as fair use under 17 U.S.C. § 107. See, e.g., Authors 
Guild, Inc. v. HathiTrust, 755 F.3d 87, 98-99 (2d Cir. 2014) (holding that copying the full text of 
more than ten million works to university servers was not “excessive or unreasonable” to support 
uses “permitted by the law of copyright”); Authors Guild v. Google, 804 F.3d 202, 229 (2d Cir. 
2015) (holding that digital copies of more than 20 million books made “so as to enable [libraries] 
to make non-infringing use” were “lawfully made” copies). 
II. The Exemption to Facilitate Nonprofit Educational Performances Should Not 
Distinguish Between Different Types of Courses 
Some of the current DMCA exemptions for educational uses distinguish between “film studies or 
other courses requiring close analysis of film and media excerpts,” and other types of courses. 
See 37 C.F.R. §§ 201.40(b)(1)(iv)(B), 201.40(b)(1)(v)(B), 201.40(b)(1)(vi)(B). This distinction, 
which has no basis in the copyright statute, is not helpful and should be eliminated. 
Instructors and pupils regularly make noninfringing performances of motion pictures in a wide 
range of educational settings, well beyond film studies courses. As just one example, motion 
pictures are used extensively in foreign language courses to provide students with opportunities 
to hear a given foreign language as spoken in film and television programs from a given country 
or region.  
BYU has the largest language program in the nation, with more intermediate and advanced 
students in a number of language programs than any other university. Around 60 languages are 
taught in a typical semester. About 35% of the students are enrolled in language classes, almost 
four times the national average. Over 75% of the student body has some proficiency in a foreign 
language, due to the majority of these having served as missionaries around the world. Film and 
video becomes an integral part of the teaching and learning of languages from the beginning 
levels, accounting for almost 75% of the nearly 4,000 video titles that have been requested 
through the Humanities Learning Resource Center. 
Instructors have requested the ability to queue up a series of clips from a film, and add 
comments, annotations, interactions, questions, or other customization to the playback of the 
[PAGE 5]
 
 
 
5 
 
 
video to enhance or individualize the viewing assignment. Instructors should be enabled to make 
such uses, as long as they satisfy the statutory conditions set forth in Section 110(1) or 110(2).  
However, instructors and pupils are adversely affected in their ability to make noninfringing uses 
of motion pictures in non-film studies courses due to the unduly restrictive language of the 
current DMCA exemption.  
III. DMCA Exemptions Should Not Include Any References to Screen-Capture 
Technologies 
As noted in the 2015 rulemaking proceeding, “Section 1201(a)(1) specifies that the exemption 
adopted as part of this rulemaking must be defined based on ‘a particular class of works.’” (2015 
Recommendation, at 17 (emphasis in original).) The statute authorizes the Librarian of Congress, 
upon the recommendation of the Register of Copyrights, to determine classes of works that 
should be exempt from the prohibition on circumvention. The statute makes no mention, 
however, that the Librarian of Congress is authorized to decide or opine on specific means by 
which users may circumvent technological protection measures controlling access to copyrighted 
works. Thus, Commenters recommend avoiding the topic of screen-capture technologies (or any 
other specific technologies alleged to be circumventing) altogether during this rulemaking 
proceeding.  
To the extent the Register wishes to address screen-capture technologies, it should clarify the 
confusing, if not contradictory, references to such technologies in the current DMCA 
exemptions. For example, the exemptions repeatedly use the phrase, “Where the circumvention 
is undertaken using screen-capture technology,” which suggests that the use of such technology 
constitutes circumvention. See 37 C.F.R. §§ 201.40(b)(1)(i)(A), 201.40(b)(1)(ii)(A), 
201.40(b)(1)(iii)(A), 201.40(b)(1)(iv)(A), 201.40(b)(1)(v)(A), 201.40(b)(1)(vi)(A), 
201.40(b)(1)(vii), 201.40(b)(1)(viii). On the other hand, the exemptions also repeatedly use the 
phrase, “screen-capture software or other non-circumventing alternatives,” which suggests that 
screen-capture software is an example of non-circumventing technology. See 37 C.F.R. 
§§ 201.40(b)(1)(i)(B), 201.40(b)(1)(ii)(B), 201.40(b)(1)(iii)(B), 201.40(b)(1)(iv)(B), 
201.40(b)(1)(v)(B), 201.40(b)(1)(vi)(B).  
The Register and various commenters during the 2015 rulemaking proceeding frequently 
referred to screen-capture technology as an “alternative to circumvention.” (See, e.g., 2015 
Recommendation, at 57, 84, 87.) For example, the DVD Copy Control Association (“DVD 
CCA”) made the following unqualified statement in opposition to any proposed expansion of 
Class 1, “Video Capture Recording Is an Alternative to Circumvention.” (2015 DVD CCA 
Comments, p. 8.) Similarly, the Advanced Access Content System Licensing Administrator LLC 
(“AACS LA”) made the following unqualified statement, “Video Capture Recording of DVD 
Playback Is an Alternative to Circumvention.” (2015 AACS LA Comment, p. 9.)  
In the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, the Office invited comment on “whether there is 
common understanding that screen-capture technology is non-circumventing.” (Exemptions to 
Permit Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted Works, 82 Fed. Reg. 49560 (Oct. 26, 
2017). Federal Register: The Daily Journal of the United States. Web. 18 Dec. 2017.) 
[PAGE 6]
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Commenters believe there is common understanding in at least the following acknowledgment 
made by the Register in 2015, “at least some types of screen-capture software are ‘comparable to 
camcording the screen—a process that has been identified as a noncircumventing option to 
accomplish noninfringing uses’ because the images are captured after they have been decrypted.” 
(2015 Recommendation, at 88.) Because screen-capture technologies “enabling the reproduction 
of motion pictures after content has been lawfully acquired and decrypted” do not involve 
circumvention, they are beyond the scope of these rulemaking proceedings. Yet, these are the 
very types of screen-capture technologies that the current DMCA exemptions repeatedly suggest 
may be circumventing. See 37 C.F.R. §§ 201.40(b)(1)(i)(A), 201.40(b)(1)(ii)(A), 
201.40(b)(1)(iii)(A), 201.40(b)(1)(iv)(A), 201.40(b)(1)(v)(A), 201.40(b)(1)(vi)(A), 
201.40(b)(1)(vii), 201.40(b)(1)(viii).  
Commenters believe the references to screen-capture technologies in the current exemptions are 
confusing and sometimes contradictory. As set forth above, Commenters recommend resolving 
the confusion by eliminating all references to screen-capture technology.  
IV. Conclusion 
In summary, Commenters propose revising the current DMCA exemptions for motion pictures 
used for educational purposes, to align with the statutory conditions for noninfringing 
performances set forth in 17 U.S.C. §§ 110(1) and 110(2). Such an approach would simplify the 
DMCA exemptions and increase the likelihood that instructors and pupils would be able to use 
the educational performance exemptions in the manner contemplated by Congress when they 
were enacted into law.  
