[PAGE 1]
This is a Word document that allows users to type into the spaces belo w. The comment may be single-spaced, but 
should be in at least 12-point type. The italicized instructions on this template may be deleted.  
 
 
Please submit a separate comment for each proposed class. 
NOTE: This form must be used in all three rounds of comments by all commenters not 
submitting short-form comments directly through regulations.gov, whether the commenter is 
supporting, opposing, or merely providing pertinent information about a proposed exemption. 
When commenting on a proposed expansion to an existing exemption, you should focus your 
comments only on those issues relevant to the proposed expansion.  
[   ] Check here if multimedia evidence is being provided in connection with this comment 
Commenters can provide relevant multimedia evidence to support their arguments. Please note 
that such evidence must be separately submitted in conformity with the Office’s instructions for 
submitting multimedia evidence, available on the Copyright Office website at 
https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2018. 
ITEM A.  COMMENTER INFORMATION  
Consumers Union 
George P. Slover 
Senior Policy Counsel 
1101 17th St., NW, Suite 500 
Washington, DC  20036 
(202) 462-6262 
 
ITEM B.  PROPOSED CLASS ADDRESSED 
Class 7 – Computer Programs – Repair 
ITEM C.  OVERVIEW 
[See below] 
ITEM D.  TECHNOLOGICAL PROTECTION MEASURE(S) AND METHOD(S) OF CIRCUMVENTION 
 [See below] 
ITEM E.  ASSERTED ADVERSE EFFECTS ON NONINFRINGING USES 
  
[PAGE 2]
 
 
2 
 
Supporting Comments for New Exemption Under 17 U.S.C. § 1201 
Class 7 – Computer Programs – Repair 
December 18, 2017  
 
Consumers Union, the policy and mobilization division of Consumer Reports,1 submits 
this statement in support of proposed Class 7, to expand the current exemption for diagnosis, 
repair, and lawful modification of motorized land vehicles, to more broadly cover a broader 
range of products, and to clarify that third parties can provide these services to consumers. 
 
   As we have stated in previous submissions to the Copyright Office, and in our Digital 
Testing Standard launched in March 2017,2 when a consumer purchases a product, the consumer 
should obtain genuine ownership of the product and its parts, including the ability to make 
effective use of the product, and the ability to effectively resell it.3   We believe consumers 
should have the ability to use the products they have purchased in all these respects, as they see 
fit.  We have successfully made this case with respect to mobile devices, both in Congress and 
before the Copyright Office.  And we believe it also applies here. 
 
Congress enacted the prohibition in section 1201 of the Digital Millennium Copyright 
Act in response to concern that the digital age would otherwise usher in a massive deluge of 
copyright infringement.  But this response has proven, with experience, to be overbroad.  Its 
proliferating use to block access to software that enables and governs – and restricts – the 
functioning of everyday consumer products in which it is embedded, and their interoperability 
with other products, is causing far-reaching harm to fundamental consumer rights. 
 
We recognize the value of copyright law in nurturing and protecting incentives for 
innovation, both generally and in particular with respect to computer software.  At the same time, 
it is important that the monopoly rights conferred on creators by the copyright laws be kept 
appropriately contained, so they do not spill over into broader, unjustified and counterproductive 
restraints on competition and consumer choice, and do not undermine long-established, 
                                                      
1 Consumers Union is the policy and mobilization division of Consumer Reports, an expert, independent, non -profit 
organization whose mission is to work for a fair, just, and safe marketplace for all consumers and to empower 
consumers to protect themselves.  It conducts its policy work in the areas of antitrust and competition 
Policy, financial reform, food and product safety, privacy and data security, telecommunications reform, health care 
reform, and other areas.  Consumer Reports is the world’s largest independent product-testing organization. Using 
its dozens of labs, auto test center, and survey research department, the non -profit organization rates thousands of 
products and services annually.  Founded in 1936, Consumer Reports has over 7 million subscribers to its magazine, 
website, and other publications. 
2 The Digital Testing Standard (theDigitalStandard.org) was launched on March 6th, 2017 and is the result of a 
collaboration with our cybersecurity partners, Disconnect, Ranking Digital Rights, and the Cyber Independent 
Testing Lab.  The Standard is designed to hold companies accountable and equip Consumer Reports and other 
organizations to test and rate products for how responsibly they handle our private data.  This is a collaborative and 
open source effort.  The Standard is designed to empower consumers to make informed choices about the connected 
products, apps, and services consumers use every day.  
3 The Standard, THE DIGITAL STANDARD, https://www.thedigitalstandard.org/the-standard. 
[PAGE 3]
 
 
3 
 
fundamental rights and expectations of consumers regarding their ownership and dominion over 
the products they have lawfully acquired.  Beyond these immediate effects on consumer rights 
and expectations, broader innovation is impeded if a product’s manufacturer is given 
inordinately sweeping power to control how it is used once it has been released into the 
marketplace. 
 
We also recognize that some product changes can have serious implications for safety.  
Ensuring product safety has been a bedrock objective of Consumers Union’s mission since its 
founding 80 years ago.  Safety must of course be at the forefront of concerns carefully monitored 
and vigorously addressed as we move to increasingly complex and interactive technologies.  
Likewise, pro-consumer data privacy and data security practices must be a top priority, for 
manufacturers and for policymakers; consumers should receive sufficient information to exercise 
informed choice, and companies should compete and be held accountable on the basis of the data 
privacy and security protections they incorporate into the design of their products and services.   
 
But these considerations generally do not implicate copyright law, and generally fall 
outside the Copyright Office’s expertise.  And we are concerned that they are more apt to be 
used by companies as a pretext for blocking competition and consumer choice and undermining 
rights of ownership.  So in our view, they should generally not be part of the Copyright Office’s 
own deliberations in considering exemptions under section 1201.  We recommend that the 
Copyright Office instead consider, when safety and privacy issues are implicated, referring those 
issues to regulatory agencies whose missions and expertise are directed at those issues. 
 
There may be times when delaying the availability of a new exemption is warranted, to 
give the regulatory agency prior notice and a reasonable opportunity to establish appropriate 
conditions on accessing and altering a product’s software, in keeping with the need to ensure 
safety and privacy protections.  For example, in the most recent Triennial Review, the Copyright 
Office subjected this repair exemption to regulations promulgated by the Department of 
Transportation and the Environmental Protection Agency, and delayed the effective date in order 
to enable the agencies to consider and develop appropriate regulations.  We would anticipate that 
in many instances, appropriate input could be obtained from the regulatory agency during the 
Copyright Office’s consideration of the exemption, so that a further delay would not be 
necessary.  
 
The same kinds of unjustified harms to consumers and the marketplace that resulted from 
blocking access to vehicle software for purposes of diagnosis, repair, and lawful modification are 
also present with respect to access to the software in other consumer products for those purposes.  
We therefore urge the Copyright Office to look favorably on recommendations to extend the 
current repair exemption to other products, and clarify that third parties can provide these 
services. 
[PAGE 4]
 
 
4 
 
 
Respectfully, 
 
George P. Slover 
Senior Policy Counsel 
Consumers Union 
1101 17th St., NW, Suite 500 
Washington, DC  20036 
(202) 462-6262 
 
 
DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE 
[See above] 
