[PAGE 1]
LONG COMMENT REGARDING 
A PROPOSED EXEMPTION UNDER 17 U.S.C. § 1201
ITEM A.  COMMENTER INFORMATION 
Commenter:
The Motor & Equipment Manufacturers Association 
(“MEMA”)
1030 15th Street, NW
Suite 500 East
Washington, DC 20005
Contact:
Sarah Bruno
Arent Fox LLP
1717 K Street, NW
Washington, DC 20006
Sarah.bruno@arentfox.com
(202) 775-5760
ITEM B.  PROPOSED CLASS ADDRESSED
Class 7 (Computer Programs – Repair)
ITEM C.  OVERVIEW
The Motor & Equipment Manufacturers Association (“MEMA”) represents 1,000 vehicle 
suppliers that manufacture and remanufacture components and systems for use in passenger cars 
and heavy trucks, providing original equipment (“OE”) to new vehicles as well as aftermarket 
parts to service, maintain and repair vehicles on the road today. MEMA represents its members 
through four divisions:  Automotive Aftermarket Suppliers Association (“AASA”); Heavy Duty 
Manufacturers Association (“HDMA”); Motor & Equipment Remanufacturers Association 
(“MERA”); and, Original Equipment Suppliers Association (“OESA”). 
Vehicle suppliers are the largest manufacturing sector in the United States directly employing 
over 871,000 Americans in all 50 states plus the District of Columbia. Together with indirect and 
employment-induced jobs, the total employment impact of the motor vehicle parts manufacturing 
industry is 4.26 million jobs. Nearly $435 billion in economic contribution to the U.S. GDP is 
generated by the motor vehicle parts manufacturers and its supported activity.
More than 77 percent of the value in today’s vehicles comes from motor vehicle suppliers, who 
innovate and develop advanced, transformative technologies for the global marketplace. These 
technologies enable safer, smarter, and more efficient vehicles while meeting increased 
regulatory and customer demands. 
MEMA represents every supplier segment in the automotive industry, including original 
equipment, aftermarket, and remanufactured components and systems. This diverse group of 
member companies gives MEMA a unique perspective on the real-world impact of vehicle 
software exemptions on the automotive industry. MEMA believes that any proposed exemptions 
affecting the automotive industry must strike a careful balance between three key priorities:
consumer safety; protection of valuable intellectual property; and, protection of consumer choice 
in the automotive aftermarket, which includes remanufactured goods.1
                                                     
1 Congress has also expressly recognized the importance of remanufactured goods in the automotive aftermarket. 
See Federal Vehicle Repair Cost Savings Act of 2015, Pub. L. No. 114-65.
[PAGE 2]
Long Comment – DMCA Seventh Triennial Rulemaking
The Motor & Equipment Manufacturers Association (“MEMA”)
December 18, 2017
2
During the sixth triennial rulemaking proceeding, MEMA opposed the proposed exemptions for 
vehicle software for purposes of repair and security/safety research. MEMA was concerned that 
the proposed exemptions were too broad and would undermine critical consumer safety systems 
and regulatory objectives. MEMA was therefore pleased that the final exemptions adopted by the 
Copyright Office after the sixth triennial rulemaking were narrower in scope than the proposed 
exemptions and included safeguards to help ensure that the exemptions do not undermine safety 
and regulatory standards. For this reason, MEMA supported renewal of these more-limited 
exemptions. 
Although MEMA is satisfied that the current exemptions have adequate safeguards to protect 
consumer safety, MEMA continues to believe that the exemptions could improve balancing the 
interests of copyright owners with the rights of consumers to make non-infringing uses of 
lawfully-acquired copies of protected works. 
For this reason, MEMA supports the adoption of a new temporary exemption that would make it 
easier for consumers to have their vehicles serviced by third parties. To be clear, MEMA agrees 
with petitioners that a new temporary exemption would help clarify that the DMCA does not bar 
consumers from having their vehicles repaired by third parties. That said, MEMA does not agree 
with some petitioners that the new Class 7 exemption should permit the creation and distribution 
of tools primarily designed to circumvent Technological Protection Measures (“TPMs”). The 
proposed Class 7 exemption would help ensure that consumers can benefit from a vehicle repair 
exemption. It should not be used to foster a new market in devices that would undermine the 
ability of copyright owners to protect their rights.  
ITEM D.  TECHNOLOGICAL PROTECTION MEASURE(S) AND METHOD(S) OF CIRCUMVENTION
Automobiles contain a suite of electronic control units (“ECUs”) and modules that control 
various vehicle functions. Each ECU and module contains computer software that enables 
vehicle parts’ functionality and ensures that the vehicle operates within the confines of safety and 
environmental regulations. The ECUs and modules control numerous aspects of the vehicle, such 
as the fuel ratios, ignition timing, seat position settings, and a variety of other functions.  
The software of ECUs is protected by TPMs, such as encryption. The TPMs help ensure that the 
ECUs are not improperly tampered with. Also, TPMs protect the valuable intellectual property 
underlying these systems, namely the proprietary computer software embedded in the ECUs. 
ITEM E.  ASSERTED ADVERSE EFFECTS ON NON-INFRINGING USES 
Under the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (“DMCA”), 17 U.S.C. § 1201, the Copyright 
Office is empowered to issue a temporary exemption from the DMCA’s prohibition on 
circumvention of TPMs if it determines that “persons who are users of a copyrighted work are, 
or are likely to be in the succeeding 3-year period, adversely affected by the prohibition . . . in 
their ability to make non-infringing uses under [title 17] of a particular class of copyrighted 
works.”2 Thus, with respect to the proposed Class 7 exemption for vehicle software, the 
                                                     
2 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C).
[PAGE 3]
Long Comment – DMCA Seventh Triennial Rulemaking
The Motor & Equipment Manufacturers Association (“MEMA”)
December 18, 2017
3
Copyright Office should issue the exemption if it determines that consumers are likely to be 
adversely affected by prohibition on circumvention of TPMs in vehicle ECUs and that vehicle 
repair is a non-infringing use of the copyrighted software. 
The Copyright Office addressed most of the key issues under this legal standard when it issued a 
temporary exemption for repair of vehicle software after the sixth triennial review. In the final 
Rule issued on October 28, 2015, the Copyright Office concluded that “owners of vehicles and 
agricultural machinery are adversely impacted as a result of TPMs that protect the copyrighted 
computer programs on the ECUs that control the functioning of their vehicles.”3 It also 
concluded that “reproducing and altering the computer programs on ECUs for purposes of 
facilitating diagnosis, repair and modification of vehicles may constitute a non-infringing activity 
as a matter of fair use and/or under the exception set forth in section 117 of the Copyright Act.”4
There is no reason for the Copyright Office to revisit these issues that were settled during the 
sixth triennial rulemaking proceeding. 
The critical issue during the seventh triennial rulemaking is, therefore, whether current law 
prohibits third-party assistance for exemption beneficiaries. MEMA respectfully urges the 
Copyright Office to conclude that the DMCA does not prohibit such third-party assistance and 
therefore to issue a new exemption that defines the class beneficiaries less restrictively. 
Such an exemption would be supported by existing law in two ways. First, the DMCA’s anti-
trafficking provisions do not prohibit vehicle repair services provided by third parties. Second, 
the Copyright Office is not obligated to define exemption beneficiaries as narrowly as it did 
during the sixth triennial rulemaking. 
i. The DMCA’s anti-trafficking provisions do not prohibit vehicle repair services 
provided by third parties
The Copyright Office concluded during the sixth triennial review that allowing third parties to 
engage in circumvention activities on behalf of others would be “in tension with the anti-
trafficking provisions of section 1201(a)(2) and (b)” of the DMCA.5 These provisions prohibit, 
inter alia, “offer[ing] to the public, provid[ing] or otherwise traffic[king] in any technology, 
product, service, device, component, or part thereof that is primarily designed or produced for 
the purpose of” or “has only limited commercially significant purpose or use other than” to 
circumvent a TPM that controls access to a protected work or protects the rights of a copyright 
owner.6 According to the Copyright Office, the anti-trafficking provisions preclude it from 
adopting exemptions that would allow circumvention to be performed by third parties on behalf 
of those who are actually entitled to an exemption.7  
                                                     
3 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 80 
Fed. Reg.  65944-01, at 65954 (Oct. 28, 2015).
4 Id.
5 Id. 
6 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(2) and (b). 
7 U.S. Copyright Office, Section 1201 of Title 17, A Report of the Register of Copyrights, at 247 (2017).
[PAGE 4]
Long Comment – DMCA Seventh Triennial Rulemaking
The Motor & Equipment Manufacturers Association (“MEMA”)
December 18, 2017
4
This conclusion has a significant adverse effect on consumers and members of the automotive 
aftermarket industry who keep over 260 million of our country’s vehicles on the road. Under this 
restrictive reading of the anti-trafficking provisions thousands of independent auto repair shops 
would conceivably be violating the DMCA when they access vehicle computer software in order 
to return a vehicle to working order. Not only is this reading of the DMCA unworkable in the 
real world, it is also unsupported by the law. 
The DMCA’s legislative history materials clearly state that Congress’s primary concern in 
enacting 1201(a)(2) and (b) was “black boxes” that are expressly intended to facilitate 
circumvention:
The Committee believes it is very important to emphasize that Section 102(a)(2) is aimed 
fundamentally at outlawing so-called “black boxes” that are expressly intended to 
facilitate circumvention of technological protection measures for purposes of gaining 
access to a work. This provision is not aimed at products that are capable of 
commercially significant non-infringing uses, such as consumer electronics, 
telecommunications, and computer products–including videocassette recorders, 
telecommunications switches, personal computers, and servers–used by businesses and 
consumers for perfectly legitimate purposes.8
As stated above, Congress did not intend for the anti-trafficking provisions to restrict “perfectly 
legitimate” services, such as the diagnosis, repair and modification of vehicles.9 These provisions 
are targeted toward devices and services that are “expressly intended to facilitate 
circumvention.”  
The conclusion that legitimate vehicle repair services must by necessity be excluded from the 
DMCA’s “services” ban is supported by the Supreme Court’s recent decision in Impression 
Products, Inc., v. Lexmark International, Inc.10 In that case, the Court considered whether 
Lexmark’s patent rights entitled it to restrict post-sale use of patented ink cartridges. Citing the 
principle of patent exhaustion, the Court ruled that Lexmark’s patent rights in its ink cartridges 
are exhausted after the products are sold to consumers. Lexmark’s patent rights therefore do not 
allow it to restrict use of the product post-sale. 
Although a patent case, Lexmark has important implications here. The DMCA’s anti-trafficking 
provisions extend only to cognizable rights under U.S. copyright law. Lexmark suggests that 
once a vehicle is sold (or leased) to a consumer, the consumer is entitled to make lawful use of 
                                                     
8 H.R. Rep. 105-551(II), 38 (July 22, 1998). See also id. at 39-40 (“As previously stated in the discussion of Section 
102(a)(2), the Committee believes it is very important to emphasize that Section 102(b)(1) is aimed fundamentally at 
outlawing so-called “black boxes” that are expressly intended to facilitate circumvention of technological protection 
measures for purposes of gaining access to a work. This provision *40 is not aimed at products that are capable of 
commercially significant noninfringing uses, such as consumer electronics, telecommunications, and computer 
products–including videocassette recorders, telecommunications switches, personal computers, and servers–used by 
businesses and consumers for perfectly legitimate purposes”).
9 In MEMA’s view, “diagnosis, repair and modification of vehicles” encompasses the remanufacturing of vehicle 
components, as Congress defined and supported that activity in the Federal Vehicle Repair Cost Savings Act of 
2015, Pub. L. No. 114-65.
10 137 S. Ct. 1523 (2017)
[PAGE 5]
Long Comment – DMCA Seventh Triennial Rulemaking
The Motor & Equipment Manufacturers Association (“MEMA”)
December 18, 2017
5
his or her lawfully-acquired copy of the software contained within that vehicle, including by 
having that copy serviced by an authorized third party. Notably, the Court in Lexmark drew a 
direct comparison to an auto repair shop when it explained the negative consequences that would 
result from too restrictive of an interpretation of patent rights:
Take a shop that restores and sells used cars. The business works because the shop can 
rest assured that, so long as those bringing in the cars own them, the shop is free to repair 
and resell those vehicles. That smooth flow of commerce would sputter if companies that 
make the thousands of parts that go into a vehicle could keep their patent rights after the 
first sale. Those companies might, for instance, restrict resale rights and sue the shop 
owner for patent infringement. And even if they refrained from imposing such 
restrictions, the very threat of patent liability would force the shop to invest in efforts to 
protect itself from hidden lawsuits. Either way, extending the patent rights beyond the 
first sale would clog the channels of commerce, with little benefit from the extra control 
that the patentees retain. And advances in technology, along with increasingly complex 
supply chains, magnify the problem.11
Lexmark tells us that the anti-trafficking provisions of the DMCA, which extend only to 
cognizable rights under the Copyright Act, do not prohibit third parties from servicing vehicles 
because copyright law does not permit a copyright owner to prevent such use of lawfully 
acquired copies of protected vehicle software. This is not to say that copyright owners do not 
have valid and enforceable rights in the vehicle software – just that those rights do not prevent 
consumers from having their cars serviced by third parties. 
Thus, contrary to the Copyright Office’s conclusion after the sixth triennial rulemaking, the 
DMCA’s anti-trafficking provisions do not pose a bar to authorizing third parties to repair 
vehicles on behalf of consumers. 
ii. The Copyright Office is not obligated to define exemption beneficiaries as narrowly as 
it did during the sixth triennial rulemaking.
As an alternative, MEMA urges the Copyright Office to be less restrictive in how it defines its 
exemptions, as it suggested in its Report on Section 1201.12 For example, rather than specifying 
who may engage in the actual circumvention, the Copyright Office could instead remain silent as 
to who is authorized under a temporary exemption to engage in circumvention.13 In the words of 
the Copyright Office, it could “where appropriate, [] seek to avoid recommending unduly narrow 
definitions of exemption beneficiaries.”14
MEMA believes it would be reasonable for the Copyright Office to issue an exemption that 
defines exemption beneficiaries without expressly restricting how beneficiaries may take 
advantage of that exemption. 
                                                     
11 Id. at 1532.
12 U.S. Copyright Office, Section 1201 of Title 17, A Report of the Register of Co pyrights, at 61 (2017). 
13 Id. 
14 Id. at 62.
[PAGE 6]
Long Comment – DMCA Seventh Triennial Rulemaking
The Motor & Equipment Manufacturers Association (“MEMA”)
December 18, 2017
6
iii. Proposed Exemption
Considering the foregoing arguments, MEMA respectfully requests that the Copyright Office 
adopt a proposed Class 7 exemption, such as the following:
Computer programs that are contained in and control the functioning of a motorized land 
vehicle such as a personal automobile, commercial motor vehicle or mechanized 
agricultural vehicle, except for computer programs primarily designed for the control of 
telematics or entertainment systems for such vehicle, when circumvention is a necessary 
step to allow the diagnosis, repair or lawful modification of a vehicle function; and where 
such circumvention does not constitute a violation of applicable law, including without 
limitation regulations promulgated by the Department of Transportation or the 
Environmental Protection Agency.15
This proposed exemption very closely mirrors the exemption that the Copyright Office adopted 
after the sixth triennial rulemaking, while merely deleting the requirement that circumvention to 
be undertaken “by the authorized owner of the vehicle.” Such an exemption would not require 
the Copyright Office to expressly endorse circumvention of TPMs “on behalf of” consumers and 
would not conflict with the DMCA’s anti-trafficking provisions. 
Dated:  December 18, 2017 Respectfully submitted,
By_____________________
Sarah Bruno
Marc L. Fleischaker 
Dan Jasnow
ARENT FOX LLP
1717 K Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20006
(202) 857-8967 (telephone)
(202) 857-6395 (facsimile)
Attorneys for MEMA
                                                     
15 MEMA has used the language of the existing vehicle repair exemption as the basis for the proposed exemption in 
order to demonstrate that only minor changes would be necessary to permit third parties to assist consumers with 
repair of their vehicles. That said, use of the existing exemption language is intended for illustrative purposes only 
and does not necessarily reflect MEMA’s endorsement of any particular aspect or interpretation of the existing 
exemption. In particular, in MEMA’s view, the carve out for telematics and entertainment systems does not and 
should not be interpreted as precluding the automotive aftermarket from accessing non -entertainment-related 
telematics systems.
