[PAGE 1]
 
ITEM A.  COMMENTER INFORMATION  
American Farm Bureau Federation  
Mary Pat Weyback 
Deputy General Counsel 
600 Maryland Ave SW Suite 1000W 
Washington DC 20024 
(202) 406-3619  
marypatw@afb.org.  
 
National Corn Growers Association 
Jon Doggett 
Vice President of Public Policy 
20 F Street NW, Suite 600 
Washington, DC 20001 
(202) 628-7001 
doggett@ncga.com  
 
National Farmers Union  
Rob Larew 
Senior Vice President of Public Policy and Communications 
20 F Street NW, Suite 300 
Washington, DC 20001 
(202) 554-1600 
rlarew@nfudc.org  
 
Of counsel: 
USC Intellectual Property & Technology Law Clinic  
Valerie Barreiro 
Clinical Assistant Professor of Law and Director, Intellectual Property and Technology Law Clinic 
With assistance from law students Corinne Fierro, Kate Hahm and Jake Myung 
University of Southern California, Gould School of Law   
(213) 740-7613 
ipt@law.usc.edu  
 
Robert S. Schwartz 
Constantine Cannon LLP 
1001 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 1300N 
Washington, D.C. 20004 
(202) 204-3508 
rschwartz@constantinecannon.com 
[PAGE 2]
 
 
2 
 
ITEM B.  PROPOSED CLASS ADDRESSED 
Proposed Class 7:  Computer Programs – Repair  
ITEM C.  OVERVIEW 
Unlike some other petitioners as cited in the NPRM, these farmer, rancher and grower 
commenters (hereinafter, Farmers) have not sought to broaden the categories of device covered 
by the Sixth Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention 
(the “Sixth Round”) exemption for necessary circumvention for the repair and upgrade of 
motorized vehicles and associated implements (“equipment”).  Rather, Farmers now focus on the 
pressing need to make this exemption useful to their businesses and livelihoods.1 This can occur 
only by interpreting this exemption as including the assistance of expert local mechanics when 
equipped with the necessary software tools.   
In some localities, Farmers see the price of older and otherwise obsolete farm equipment rising 
because obsolete, non-software-dependent vehicles are the only equipment that a Farmer can 
expect to have fixed without risking catastrophic delay or severe financial loss.   
The following Overview is supported by the attached Declarations of: 
 Kevin Kenney – Software Engineer for Agricultural Vehicles 
 Guy Mills, Jr. – Farmer  
 Jason Pratt – Farmer 
 Kyle Schwarting – Farmer  
 Paul Shamblin – Lead Mechanic at Talley Farms 
 “John Doe” – Large scale Farmer
2 
1. Functions that are entirely mechanical on older vehicles and agricultural implements are, on 
newer vehicles, controlled and restricted by embedded, proprietary software, passwords, and 
computer memory modifications.3 
 
2. Internal electronic control units (“ECUs”) or engine control modules (“ECMs”) increasingly 
govern the operation of agricultural equipment.  Where maintenance, upgrade, or repair is 
                                                        
1 Farmers, with livelihoods at stake, are a core example of what the Register has identified as the 
“legitimate concern for exemption beneficiaries, many of whom may be increasingly frustrated 
by a lack of access to the tools or skills required to make use of exemptions, particularly when 
trying to engage in activities, such as automobile repair, that simply did not implicate copyright 
in the analog world.”  U.S. Copyright Office, Section 1201 of Title 17, at 59 (2017) (“1201 
Study”). 
2 Declaration provided on condition of anonymity by farmer known to American Farm Bureau 
Federation.  See Declaration of Mary Pat Weyback, American Farm Bureau Federation. 
3 Mills Declaration (“Mills”) ¶ 2.b, Pratt ¶¶ 3,6, Shamblin ¶¶ 4, 5, Doe ¶ 3. 
[PAGE 3]
 
 
3 
 
necessary, the ECU may control the ability to diagnosis, access, and repair, and whether the 
equipment, once repaired, will recognize the user and accept commands.4 
 
3. Proprietary embedded software frustrates the ability of Farmers and local servicers to 
maintain equipment that is owned by the Farmer and which the Farmer would like to 
maintain himself, with assistance of a local servicer as may be necessary.
5 
 
a. Original Equipment Manufacturers (“OEMs”) commonly use Technical Protection 
Measures (“TPMs”) in order to limit access to and control over the ECU software and 
firmware.  The TPMs are designed to limit access and control to only OEM-authorized 
dealers, to the exclusion of independent local dealers and servicers.6 
 
b. Due to these TPMs, as well as manufacturer restrictions on distribution of necessary 
codes, information, and software, Farmers cannot maintain their equipment themselves, 
as was possible with older equipment that is less dependent on embedded software, or to 
which TPMs were not applied.
7 
 
c. Some major OEMs do not license necessary software to local, independent dealers and 
repair shops.8 
 
Coding / handshake / connectors 
 
4. Some ECUs are configured to refuse commands unless a “challenge-response” condition, 
such as a correct 16-32 bit response, is completed.  This “virtual handshake” limits access to 
and control over the ECU.
9   
 
a. Farmers need local expert assistance and tools in order to accomplish a “virtual 
handshake” by either modifying a version of the OEM software, or developing 
compatible software that identifies the user so as to be accepted by the ECU of the 
Farmer’s own vehicle.
10 
 
b. OEMs also limit access to ECUs through restrictive connectors designed to enable only 
proprietary software to interface with the vehicle.11 
 
Passwords / resets / code clearing 
 
                                                        
4 Id. and Kenney ¶¶ 2, 3. 
5 Kenney ¶¶ 1 – 5, Mills ¶ 4.b, Pratt ¶ 6, Schwarting ¶ 3, Shamblin ¶ 4, Doe ¶ 3.  
6 Kenney ¶¶ 1 – 5 and Mills ¶¶ 2.b, 3.a; Schwarting, ¶ 3. 
7 Mills ¶¶ 2.b, 3.a, Pratt ¶ 6, Shamblin, ¶ 4, Doe, ¶ 3.  
8 Kenney ¶¶ 6,7, Mills ¶¶ 2.b, 3.a. 
9 Kenney ¶¶ 2, 6; see, Electronic Frontier Foundation Class 21 Supp. at 3 (2015) (“EFF 2015 
Comment”). 
10 Kenney ¶ 2, Mills ¶¶ 2.b, 3.a, Pratt ¶ 3, Doe, 3. 
11 Kenney ¶ 5, Doe ¶ 2. 
[PAGE 4]
 
 
4 
 
5. Many common maintenance and repair tasks, such as diagnosis and tuning, now require 
passwords to embedded software.12  Passwords may be necessary to access or program 
ECUs, or even to clear fault codes once a repair has been completed.  After  paying tens or 
hundreds of thousands of dollars for farm equipment, Farmers are not given access to these 
passwords, nor are these passwords provided to local independent dealers and servicers.13 
 
6. If a code cannot be cleared the equipment might not function, or might function at lower 
capacity or efficiency, such as “limp mode” with limited power.
14   
 
7. Methods tried in the past – obtaining passwords from other farmers or mechanics with 
similar machines, shared in-person or through online forums, hacking the passwords by 
manually guessing, or using “brute force” methods which employ software scripts that would 
attempt tens of thousands of guesses until the correct password is discovered15 – are less and 
less likely to succeed today.16   
 
8. Unless a local mechanic or servicer has acquired tools from an authorized dealer or an 
unauthorized third party, the local mechanic cannot render expert assistance to the Farmer in 
operating, maintaining, or repairing agricultural equipment.17 
 
9. Third parties outside of the United States have modified and developed versions of software 
to bypass password requirements, or at least to reveal fault codes, so some repairs can be 
undertaken if the user relies on expert local servicers to whom such tools have become 
available.18 
 
10. Farmers are unaware of whether the engineering of such software or tools involved the 
making of a copy of OEM software and have no interest in making any copy other than may 
be necessary for operating their own equipment.19  
 
Memory modifications 
 
11. OEMs restrict access to the ECUs by modifying memory to disable data access ports, such as 
the industry standard Joint Test Action Group (“JTAG”) port.  A particular code or “bit” is 
added to the ECU’s volatile memory, thus closing the rest of the computer memory off from 
access.20 OEMs can put further protection on the ECUs by modifying it with a type of 
                                                        
12 Kenny ¶ 3, Pratt ¶ 3, Schwarting ¶ 3, See USC Intellectual Property & Technology Law Clinic 
2015 Class 21 (“IPTC USC 2015”) at 7. 
13 Kenney ¶ 7, Pratt ¶3, Schwarting ¶ 3, Shamblin ¶ 2. 
14 Kenney ¶ 6, Schwarting ¶ 3. 
15 See IPTC USC 2015 Comment at 7. 
16 Kenney ¶¶ 5, 6, Mills ¶¶ 2, 3, Pratt ¶ 3, Schwarting ¶ 3, 
17 Pratt ¶ 3, Mills ¶ 1, Schwarting ¶6, Doe ¶ 2. 
18 Kenney ¶ 5, Schwarting ¶ 3. 
19 E.g. Kenney ¶¶ 2, 3. 
20 IPTC USC 2015 Comment at 7. 
[PAGE 5]
 
 
5 
 
permanent memory called a “fuse” – for example a JTAG fuse, which will disable extraction 
of firmware.21 
 
12. Farmers require expert assistance and tools to obtain access to an ECU protected by memory 
modification. 
 
a. Attempts to circumvent volatile and permanent memory modifications can involve “fault 
injection.”  An expert would disturb the ECU’s electrical signals so as to bypass the 
required “bit” checking step.  This would enable access to the firmware to be re-
programed with a different set of instructions.
22 
 
b. To circumvent a volatile memory modification, a non-invasive fault injection method 
such as clock or power glitching is sufficient. 
 
c. To circumvent the permanent memory fuse, an invasive fault injection method such as 
voltage or optical glitching is required.
23 
 
d. Neither of these techniques involves copying embedded software, or performing 
modifications to the proprietary software.   
 
e. As is the case with codes and passwords, without expert assistance and necessary tools 
Farmers are not capable of performing necessary circumvention on the agricultural 
machines upon which they rely for their livelihoods, because they cannot control their 
operation or perform the simplest maintenance.   
 
13. Local servicers are conveniently available to most Farmers, over relatively short distances.  
Local servicers can make on-site visits at relatively minimal expense and delay to the 
farmer.
24 
 
14. Manufacturer-authorized dealers are located much further from most farms than local 
repairmen or servicers, in some cases at great distance.  This trend is increasing in some 
areas, as dealerships move or close.25 
 
15. Increasingly, maintenance and repair of farm equipment can be performed only by 
manufacturer-authorized dealers and servicers because neither Farmers nor independent local 
repairmen or servicers are afforded access to necessary information and tools.26 
                                                        
21 EFF 2015 Comment at 6.  
22 Id. 
23 See IPTC USC 2015 Comment at 8; Jasper G.J. van Woudenberg, Marc F. Witteman, Federico 
Menarini, Practical Optical Fault Injection, pp. 91–92, available at 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6076471(“Practical Optical Fault 
Injection”). 
24 Mills ¶ 2, Pratt ¶ 3, Schwarting ¶¶ 5,6, Shamblin ¶ 3, Doe ¶ 2. 
25 Id. 
26 Kenney ¶¶ 5, 6, Mills ¶ 1, Pratt ¶ 3, 5, Schwarting ¶ 7, Shamblin ¶ 3, Doe ¶ 2. 
[PAGE 6]
 
 
6 
 
16. It is often severely burdensome for a Farmer to transport equipment to an authorized dealer 
or, alternatively, to pay for a dealer’s authorized servicer to travel to the farm. 
 
a. During growing seasons there is often a substantial wait for an authorized servicer’s 
availability.27 
 
b. In some regions growing seasons are short.28 
 
c. It is increasingly the case that vital equipment cannot be economically maintained, 
controlled, or repaired during a growing season.  This has impacted the viability of both 
large and small farms and ranches, and has threatened the livelihoods of many Farmers.29  
 
17. One indication of the challenge to farm viability posed by manufacturer control of essential 
maintenance and repair is that the price of used, relatively obsolete agricultural equipment 
has been rising,
30 because Farmers and their local servicers are better able to maintain older 
equipment that is less reliant on the embedded, proprietary software to which Farmers and 
local servicers have no or limited access. 
 
18. To the extent Farmers and their local servicers can operate, maintain, or fix the Farmer’s 
newer equipment, they often must rely on software tools obtained from third parties.  These 
tools initially may have been distributed on an authorized basis in another jurisdiction, such 
as Canada, where they have not been as closely controlled by the manufacturer.31  
Proposed New Exemption Language 
Farmers have welcomed the Copyright Office focus, as set forth in the 1201 Study and this 
NPRM, on making exemptions truly useful to petitioners, rather than useful only in theory.  With 
this objective in mind, and with respect only to mechanized agricultural equipment,32 Farmers 
propose that the relevant exemption read as follows: 
Computer programs that are contained in and control or assist the functioning of a 
mechanized agricultural vehicle or implement, where the owner or authorized 
user of the vehicle or implement, or one rendering expert assistance toward 
maintaining or improving its use, determines that circumvention lawful under the 
copyright law or an enabling tool for such circumvention is necessary for the 
diagnosis, repair, or lawful modification of the vehicle or implement’s function, 
and such assistance or tool is to be applied to this lawful purpose. 
                                                        
27 Mills ¶ 1, Pratt ¶ 5, Schwarting ¶ 3, Shamblin ¶2. 
28 Mills ¶ 1, Schwarting ¶ 5, Pratt ¶ 5, Shamblin ¶ 3. 
29 Mills ¶¶ 1 – 7, Schwarting ¶ 5, Pratt ¶¶ 4 – 7, Shamblin ¶ 2. 
30 Mills ¶ 4.a, see Doe ¶ 2. 
31 Kenney ¶¶ 5, 6, Schwarting ¶ 3. 
32 Farmers take no position on whether or to what extent the new exemption should apply to 
other devices. 
[PAGE 7]
 
 
7 
 
ITEM D.  TECHNOLOGICAL PROTECTION MEASURE(S) AND METHOD(S) OF CIRCUMVENTION 
 
ECUs and ECMs increasingly govern the operation of agricultural vehicles and 
implements.  When there is a malfunction, these control mechanisms may control diagnosis, 
access, repair, and, further, whether the vehicle or implement will recognize the user, and 
function, once repaired.  Functions that are entirely mechanical on older vehicles are, on newer 
vehicles, controlled and restricted by proprietary software, passwords, and computer memory 
modifications. 
 
Proprietary Software Restricts Access to the ECUs and Methods of 
Circumvention 
 
OEMs commonly restrict access to ECUs by ensuring that they respond only to 
proprietary firmware and software.
33  Some ECUs are configured to refuse commands unless 
“challenge-response” conditions such as correct 16-32 bit responses are met, which act as a 
virtual “handshake” allowing access and control of the ECUs.34  OEMs also limit access to ECUs 
through restrictive connectors designed to enable only proprietary software to interface with the 
vehicle.35 
 
Farmers need local expert assistance and tools in order to accomplish a “virtual 
handshake” by either modifying a version of the OEM software, or developing compatible 
software that identifies the user so as to be accepted by the ECU of the Farmer’s own vehicle.  
Third parties outside the United States have modified and developed versions of software to 
accomplish this, or at least to reveal fault codes, so repair can be undertaken by the user with 
expert assistance.
36  Farmers are unaware of whether the engineering of such software has 
involved making a copy of OEM software.37  
 
Passwords Restrict Access to the ECUs and to Essential Re-sets 
 
Common maintenance and repair activities, such as diagnosis and tuning, now require 
passwords to embedded software.38  Passwords are often required in accessing and reprograming 
ECUs, and even to clear fault codes.  Failure to clear a code means that if the vehicle works at all 
it may function at lower capacity or efficiency; it may be put into “limp mode” with limited 
power.39  After buying this equipment at great expense, Farmers are not given access to the 
passwords vital to the efficient function of their equipment.  Even where there is no interest in or 
capability of copying any software, Farmers often cannot perform once routine and simple 
maintenance or control vehicle operating modes after repair.  Nor, unless they have acquired 
                                                        
33 Kenney ¶ 4  
34 See EFF 2015 Comment at 3 (2015). 
35 Kenney  ¶ 5. 
36 Schwarting ¶ 3.  
37 Kenney ¶ 5. 
38 IPTC USC 2015 Comment at 7. 
39 Kenney ¶ 6. 
[PAGE 8]
 
 
8 
 
tools from an authorized dealer or a third party, can the local independent mechanic or servicer 
who may be the Farmer’s only economic alternative. 
 
Methods tried in the past – obtaining passwords from other farmers or mechanics with 
similar equipment shared in-person or through online forums,  hacking the passwords by 
manually guessing or using “brute force” methods which employ software scripts that would 
attempt tens of thousands of guesses until the correct password is discovered
40 – are less and less 
likely to succeed.41   
 
Computer Memory Modifications Restrict Access to the ECUs  
 
OEMs also restrict access to the ECUs by modifying memory, to disable data access 
ports, such as the industry standard Joint Test Action Group (“JTAG”) port.  A particular code or 
“bit” is added to the ECU’s volatile memory, thus closing off the rest of the computer memory 
from access.42 OEMs can put further protection on the ECUs by modifying it with a type of 
permanent memory called a “fuse” – for example a JTAG fuse, which will disable extraction of 
firmware.43 
 
Attempts to circumvent such volatile and permanent memory modifications can involve 
“fault injection.”  An expert would disturb the ECU’s electrical signals so as to bypass the 
required “bit” checking step.  This would enable access to the firmware to be re-programed with 
a different set of instructions.
44  To circumvent the volatile memory modification, a non-invasive 
fault injection method such as clock or power glitching is sufficient, but to circumvent the 
permanent memory fuse an invasive fault injection method such as voltage or optical glitching is 
required.45  Without expert assistance, Farmers are not capable of accomplishing this, even 
though it clearly does not involve copying software and is covered by the Sixth Round 
exemption.   
 
ITEM E.  ASSERTED ADVERSE EFFECTS ON NONINFRINGING USES  
 Farming does not infringe copyright.  Farm ers and ranchers running equipment lawfully 
acquired at enormous expense and owned by the farmer or rancher does not infringe copyright.  
The only issue is whether maintaining, repairing, or upgrading such equipment in aid of the 
purposes for which it was acquired infringes copyright.  Farmers’ answers to the NPRM’s 
specific questions show that (1) all of the activities for which an exemption is sought are lawful 
under the copyright law, and (2) an exemption for these activities, including expert assistance 
with necessary tools, would not entail any purported Copyright Office approval of “trafficking” – 
                                                        
40 IPTC USC 2015 Comment at 7. 
41 Id. 
42 Id. 
43 EFF 2015 Comment at 6. 
44 Id. 
45 N.23, supra. 
[PAGE 9]
 
 
9 
 
an issue that, as the Register of Copyrights (the “Register”) has noted,46 the Copyright Office 
lacks the authority to resolve one way or the other. 
 Whether the proposed class includes at least some works protected by copyright. 
 Farmers assume that the software and firm ware that control the operation of farm and 
ranch equipment is protected by copyright.  The codes and passwords that inhibit access to 
software or firmware may or may not be protected by copyright.47 
 Whether the uses at issue are noninfringing under title 17. 
 In the Sixth Round the Register found that a us er’s repair of motor vehicles that involves 
the repair of functions that were previously controlled by mechanical or analog techniques is 
noninfringing under title 17.48  By renewing the exemption in this NPRM, the Register has 
obviated the need to make this case again.  The only issue now is whether necessary expert 
assistance from farm or ranch employees and contractors or local independent mechanics or 
repair shops, with such software or other tools as may be required to make necessary repairs, 
should be construed as included within this “user” exemption. 
 In the 1201 Study the Register r ecognized that lack of expert assistance could impair or 
destroy the utility of the user exemption.  The Study suggested that Section 1201(a)’s text 
references “users” as opposed to “owners” of a work, may support a “less restrictive” definition 
of “eligible user.”49  Thus the Register,  
… where appropriate, will seek to avoid recommending unduly narrow definitions 
of exemption beneficiaries.  This may provide greater opportunity for the courts 
to provide guidance on the proper construction of the anti-trafficking provisions.50     
Farmers welcome this approach and have a compelling case for its application in this Seventh 
Triennial Section 1201 Proceeding (2018) (this “Round”).   
With the renewal of the Sixth Round Class 21 exemption, the only issues to be decided in this 
Round pertaining to farm equipment repair are (1) whether local, specific, and necessary expert 
repair assistance falls within a circumstantial definition of “user,” and (2) whether, due to 
concern over “trafficking,” the Register must exempt from such assistance acquisition of the very 
                                                        
46 1201 Study at 61 – 62 and n. 338. 
47 “Generally speaking, ‘lock-out’ codes fall on the functional-idea rather than the original-
expression side of the copyright line.” Lexmark International, Inc. v. Static Control Components, 
Inc., 387 F.3d 522, 536 (6th Cir. 2004).   
48 Farmers do not agree with the Register’s exception for telematics and media.  Indeed, as 
discussed in the Overview, because farms are geographically dispersed and it is very expensive 
and time-consuming to transport equipment or to schedule dealer visits, remote telematic 
diagnosis and repair interoperability will be particularly valuable to Farmers.  Farmers also have 
little interest in adding to memory storage for any infringing purpose. 
49 1201 Study at 61 and n. 335.  
50 Id., noting a May 20, 2016 Roundtable observation that a Librarian’s exemption cannot 
foreclose or impair court action against “trafficking.”  
[PAGE 10]
 
 
10 
 
tools that would enable such assistance.  The Declarations of large and small farmers and 
industry experts attached to these comments establish that (1) local and beneficial repair 
assistance, including use of necessary tools, should fall within the definition of noninfringing 
use, and (2) acquisition and application of tools necessary to make this exemption meaningful 
need not be excluded as “trafficking.”  
 Whether users are adversely affected….  . 
As the Register concluded in the Sixth Round, motor vehicle repair is adversely affected by an 
inability to make noninfringing uses of vehicle software and firmware, and this affects the users 
of the vehicles.51  With respect to the factors listed in section 1201(a)(1)(C), the only remaining 
issue for this Round is whether circumvention of the technological measures applied to motor 
vehicle software would have an “effect … on the market for or value of copyright works.” 
The Declarations provided with these Comments establish that: 
(1) Local expert assistance for noninfringing farm equipment repair does not diminish the 
value of copyrighted works embedded in farm equipment. 
 
(2) Use of specific and necessary software tools in the repair of farm equipment does not 
diminish the value of copyrighted works embedded in farm equipment. 
 
(3) Acquisition and application of the necessary repair tools is not trafficking such as to 
diminish the value of works embedded in farm equipment. 
 
Access to software tools and their expert use do not diminish their value 
 
The experience of other industries shows that access to software tools by independent 
dealers does not diminish their worth, as intellectual property, to OEMs.  In the auto industry, for 
example, while multi-brand software tools are not generally available on an authorized basis, 
OEM-proprietary software, including necessary circumvention tools, is widely available due to 
the 2014 Memorandum of Understanding (“MOU”) expansion of a 2002 agreement between 
automobile manufacturers and independent servicers.52  The Reply Comments of the Auto 
Alliance made during the 2015 Sixth Round at 11 – 12 show that, although the MOU has 
resulted in widespread availability of software tools to independent dealers, there is no evidence 
that auto manufacturers have chosen to be less reliant on embedded functional software in 
designing vehicles and components, or that the value of their intellectual property has suffered.  
Rather, the 2002 agreement was expanded in 2014.  No complaint was raised regarding 
expanded circumvention as a result of these tools being in the hands of independent repair 
persons.  The availability of the tools was, in fact, cited only as evidence of reduced harm to 
independents.    
                                                        
51 “TPMs protecting computer programs on ECUs have a substantial adverse impact on the 
ability of vehicle owners to engage in lawful diagnosis, repair and modification of their 
vehicles.”  2015 Recommendation at 240.  
52 See Memorandum of Understanding, Jan. 25, 2014, 
http://www.nastf.org/files/public/OtherReference/MOU_SIGNED_1_15_14.pd.f.  
[PAGE 11]
 
 
11 
 
DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE -- Sworn Declarations Attached.  
[PAGE 12]
 
 
12 
 
 Declaration of Kevin Kenney 
Software Engineer for Agricultural Vehicles 
 
1. My name is Kevin Kenney and I am a software engineer in Nebraska specializing in low-
emission systems for agricultural and commercial vehicles.  
 
2. I have developed and patented a clean diesel system (Patent # 8826888) that I would like to 
offer to owners of agricultural and commercial vehicles, however any attempts to install this 
system led to a shut-down of the vehicle due to TPMs, as the manufacturer software 
recognizes the modifications. Moreover, I am prevented from installing any replacement 
parts on a vehicle, as it requires configuring a calibration code before the ECU will recognize 
the new part and allow it to function. 
 
3. The system for which I received a patent is designed to be in compliance with EPA 
regulations and has been praised, as an improvement over present technology, by experts 
knowledgeable in the field. However without a code to crack the manufacturer’s code, this 
legal system is unusable. Vehicle owners seeking to lower their fuel emissions may be forced 
to take out the emissions systems from their vehicles, send it away to Canada for 
programmers to modify the code, and then reinstall the systems in their vehicles. 
 
4. Software that would allow access to the ECUs of John Deere vehicles called “John Deere 
Service Adviser” is available only to authorized dealers, and my request for access to this 
software have been denied when I have contacted their local John Deere dealer per 
instruction on their website. 
 
5. I have seen third-party repair technicians operate programs developed overseas that may have 
been developed from scratch or is a modified version of John Deere Service Adviser to get 
around the TPMs of agricultural vehicles. This circumvention software is however 
incompatible with any tractor that has a tier 4 emissions system, and typically will not work 
on tractors that are less than five years old. This software is installed in a laptop and is 
connected to the ECU through a USB cable. Some tractors require a J1339 port, but for the 
most part John Deere tractors have a USB port that interfaces with the laptop software. 
 
6. The circumvention software is able to re-set error codes that alert the system when the 
sensors indicate some problems in the tractor. Even though the physical problems in the 
tractor may be fixed, unless the error code is re-set, the system puts the tractor in a “limp” 
mode where the functions of the machine are severely limited.  Without this software that is 
able to talk to the ECU and re-set the code, farmers normally would have to call a John Deere 
dealer to send out a technician, which is expensive and could cost more than $1000 an hour 
due to loss in crop.   
 
7. The JD Service Adviser itself is very simple to use and the users do not need to have much 
technical knowledge to use it, but because of the lack of access to this software & ever-
changing user id/password updates from the OEMs, there is an essential monopoly of these 
tractor companies on farm equipment repair.  
  
[PAGE 13]
 
 
13 
 
 
This Sworn Declaration accurately reflects my belief & knowledge. 
 
       / s/Kevin Kenney 
       Kevin Kenney 
       S o f t w a r e  E n g i n e e r  
         
  
[PAGE 14]
 
 
14 
 
Declaration of Guy Mills, Jr. 
Farmer 
December 4, 2017 
 
My name is Guy Mills, Jr. and I am a fifth generation Nebraska farmer. Some of the current 
3810-acre operation has been in the family for four generations. I own 5 John Deere tractors 
(including a John Deere 8360R), a Case IH tractor, a John Deere combine, baler, planter, 4 
semi-trucks with a mix of Caterpillar and Cumming motors, and other equipment. I became 
aware of the DMCA a few years ago when my son informed me of a Wired Magazine article 
in which John Deere claimed that farmers do not own their tractors. 
 
This Declarative Statement, which includes personal accounts, summarizes some of the 
problems perpetuated by the DMCA: 
 
1. Being at Mercy of Dealers Increases Farming Costs while Hindering Economy 
  
a. Time is of the essence for farmers for a couple of reasons. We are harvesters of 
sunlight and have a very short window to get our crops planted and harvested. 
Since other farmers are using their equipment during the same short windows, 
dealers are extremely busy with repair demands. This leaves farmers literally at 
the mercy of dealers who are in a position to charge exorbitant prices to 
accommodate their customers’ urgent needs. This lack of competition, takes 
business away from local repair shops and hurts the local economy.  
 
b. Since the Case dealership in Broken Bow closed its doors last year because of 
stagnant sales and a poor farm economy, the nearest dealership is 35 away. But, 
sometimes there is a need to travel additional miles to other dealerships if parts 
are not in stock. There are many local, independent shops in my area, the closest 
being only eight miles away. Their labor rate is $70/hour compared to the 
$109/hour dealership rate plus. If there is a need to pay someone to come to the 
farm for repair work, having someone travel less than 20 miles round trip 
compared to someone traveling over 100 miles is substantial to the overall cost. 
The repair cost differential between local repair shops and dealerships is 
substantial.  
 
2. Lack of Competition Does not Incentivize Production of Competitive, Weather  
             & Customer-Friendly Equipment 
 
a. Three years ago, I replaced the software on my 2630 John Deere monitor with a 
competitor’s brand SMS. The new software is superior to John Deere’s APEX as 
it has less problems while allowing me to run regression analysis on variables 
collected in the harvest, planting and soil data. In this data-driven era, correlation  
of variables are used to reduce costs and increase yield while producing more 
with less inputs.  
[PAGE 15]
 
 
15 
 
 
Page Two 
Guy Mills, Jr. Declaration 
December 4, 2017 
 
b. Before agricultural vehicles ran on software, I used to be able to repair my 
machines myself. For example, if an alternator on one of my tractors 
malfunctioned, it cost approximately $35 to replace the armature and 45 minutes 
of my time. Now, if the alternator malfunctions the dealer’s solution is a $1,200 
dollar new alternator.  Last fall, my John Deere combine would not shut down 
when I tried to turn it off. I had to call the nearest dealer who traveled 40 miles to 
the combine site at one of my farms to diagnose the problem. The technician said 
I needed to replace the ECU or “brain” (a small 8 x 6 x 1” box inside the 
machine). But, there was only one dealership in Nebraska who had that particular 
part in inventory. I drove five hours to the second dealer to buy the part. Upon 
returning to the site with the ECU, the technician returned and unlocked the code. 
The solution could have been greatly simplified had I been able to plug in the part 
myself, without having to have the dealer enter the code in order for the combine 
to run.  
 
c. In Nebraska, the wind blows quite often. Last week, one of my tractors wouldn’t 
work because a fault code was triggered during a windstorm. I had to call a John 
Deere technician to clear the codes, even though nothing was actually wrong with 
the machine. I haven’t received the bill yet from the dealer but I expect it will cost 
me around $500.  The technician warned me about cleaning the ECU after a 
windstorm as static electricity from an air hose or brush could cause even more 
damage.  
  
3. Farmers Have No Recourse for Manufacturer & Dealer Error 
  
a. Last winter I took my John Deere tractor into the dealership for an annual service 
program. The dealer ran diagnostics and their equipment indicated that a 
transmission O ring inside the tractor was out of place. I was reluctant to let the 
dealer replace this because everything was working fine on this tractor. However, 
the purpose of these service programs is to identify potential problems and fix 
them to reduce if not eliminate down time. They gave me an estimate of $12,000 
to fix the o ring in the transmission. The dealer implied that if he didn’t fix it at 
the time, he may not be inclined to come out later to fix it on site during planting. 
I acquiesced and returned two days later to check on the progress of my tractor. 
The service manager was out but a young mechanic let me into the repair shop 
area. He told me they had opened up the tractor and found that the O ring was not 
bad. When asked if their diagnostic software was out of calibration, the service 
manager claimed that it was not, yet he had no other explanation for the 
misdiagnosis. Ultimately, I was charged $12,995.14 the majority of which is 
attributable to the O ring. 
  
[PAGE 16]
 
 
16 
 
Page Three 
Guy Mills, Jr. Declaration 
December 4, 2017 
 
b. I also had an issue with my 24-row John Deere planter. The 2630 monitor on the 
planter showed that each row was planting, but in actuality there were intermittent 
blank spaces of 60-feet-wide by 20-to-30-feet-long .The monitor did not register 
this skip. I had to go out into the field with my foreman, check for blank spots, 
and re-plant the rows the machine missed once the corn emerged. I brought this 
issue up with the dealer, who conferred with John Deere’s D TACH 
troubleshooting center in Iowa. Neither the dealer nor John Deere could come up 
with any answer as to why my planter was skipping. The ECU on the planter was 
replaced. All electrical connections were fine. The second year the service 
manager was very frustrated trying to solve this problem. He exhausted all 
remedies John Deere offered. He then decided to try blogs on the internet. A 
farmer from Texas responded saying it was not the planter at all but rather a 
hydraulic fitting under the armrest in an 8330 tractor. This fitting was replaced 
and the problem was solved.  Allowing farmers to collaborate with others in the 
farm community to access and share information about their own machinery is 
necessary, especially when the manufacturers themselves are at a loss as to how to 
repair their own equipment. It took the help of another farmer and over two years 
to eventually solve this problem. The $10,000 2630 monitor did not show these 
skips whereas a simpler monitor with blinking lights of a few years ago would 
have alerted me that the planter not planting. A monitor’s primary function is to 
alert the operator of a planting malfunction.  
 
c. Recently, after baling 1,200 bales over a couple day period, the 569 baler stopped 
because a code triggered the knife used to cut the net wrap. It was a costly 
malfunction as the technician drove 80 miles round trip and took three hours to 
clear the code.  
 
4. Poor Manufacturing Decisions Puts Financial Burden on Farmers  
 
a. The secondary market for used, pre-software equipment is expensive and such 
older equipment is in high demand because they do not need such repairs that can 
be done only by the manufacturer. Older tractors, like the John Deere 4030, can 
cost more than they were sold for when they were brand new. 
 
b. I use my semi-trucks for hauling corn and soybeans at harvest. A Caterpillar C 12 
diesel engine was intermittently sputtering. I took it to the local dealer. The dealer 
kept misdiagnosing the problem. First the ECU was replaced at $2,800. That did 
not work. Next the wires leading up to the ECU were replaced at a $600 cost. 
That did not work.  Next the Jake brake was worked on for at an $800 cost. That 
did not work. Then the dealer said the cause of the diesel engine sputtering was 
the transmission. At this time I questioned his rationale as I have had many diesel  
  
[PAGE 17]
 
 
17 
 
Page Four 
Guy Mills, Jr. Declaration 
December 4, 2017 
 
engines on pivots which run fine without a transmission. The dealer claimed the 
super-ten-speed transmission in the truck has an ECU between the 9 and 10th gear 
which goes bad. It was manufactured by Eaton in Kearney Nebraska but Eaton no 
longer manufactures them. The dealer’s solution for a sputtering diesel engine 
was to replace the transmission at a cost of $12,000 dollars. While the part was 
still being manufactured, it cost around $100. The gears in the transmission are 
fine. This example shows the absolute lunacy seen in equipment manufacturing 
today. The dealer complained to me that a similar situation happened to them on 
one of their company trucks. 
 
Recently, I gave input to the Kansas City Federal Reserve regarding the current 
risks to a healthy agricultural economy. I have requested that the KCFR and UNL 
economists collect data on the DMCA issue.  
 
I believe the adverse impact caused by the DMCA extends well beyond the 
agriculture sector and makes our entire economy more vulnerable. Since I have 
been asked to address this situation, I have received thank you letters from various 
leaders—from hospital   administrators to business CEOs; confirming that this is 
not just an agriculture problem. History has already taught us that monopolies 
thwart American ingenuity; resulting in the customer paying more for less reliable 
and inferior equipment.    
 
 
 Under penalty of perjury I affirm that this Declaration accurately reflects my knowledge. 
       / s / Guy Mills, Jr. 
       Guy Mills, Jr. 
       F a r m e r  
 
  
[PAGE 18]
 
 
18 
 
Declaration of Charles “Jason” Pratt  
Farmer 
 
1. My name is Jason Pratt, and I run a small farm in Virginia.  
 
2. I have John Deere, McCormick, and Ferguson tractors.  
 
3. In particular, I have had issues with repair of my McCormick tractor.  I initially bought 
my tractor from a dealership an hour away from where I live. However, that dealership 
closed.  Now, to get to a dealership that is able to service my McCormick, I have to travel 
five or fifteen hours to get to the two closest dealerships. Two mechanics live 
approximately ten minutes from me. The mechanics can do all the repairs up to having to 
reset some software or needing to use the diagnostic machine. As time has gone by, 
however, the mechanics are able to repair fewer and fewer problems with the tractors 
because of software advancements, and physical aspects of the tractors being entirely 
controlled by software.  
 
4. In one instance, my McCormick tractor broke down in the field. I could either send it to 
the dealership or attempt to fix it myself. I did not send it to the dealership, because the 
dealership that was able to fix it was two states away. To get the tractor to that dealership, 
I would have had to pay someone to ship it there because my trucks wouldn’t be legal to 
leave VA with the weight of that tractor. Instead, I worked with a local mechanic to 
bypass the wires to try to determine what the problem was. It took ten hours for us to 
determine that the problem was the voltage regulator.  
 
5. I make sure I have a back-up tractor in the case of a breakdown because I cannot rely on 
dealerships providing me with a replacement right away, if at all.  
 
6. On several occasions I, along with my local mechanics, have been unable to fix physical 
issues with the tractors, such as issues with voltage regulators, because we are unable to 
determine the issue without the diagnostic software.  
 
7. Local mechanics cost approximately $25/hr., whereas dealerships cost $85/hr.  
 
Under penalty of perjury I affirm that this Declaration accurately reflects my knowledge. 
        
/s/Jason Pratt 
       C h a r l e s  J a s o n  P r a t t  
       F a r m e r  
  
  
[PAGE 19]
 
 
19 
 
Declaration of Kyle Schwarting 
Farmer 
 
1. My name is Kyle Schwarting and I am a farmer in Nebraska engaging in custom 
fertilization. 
 
2. I own and utilize my own equipment, mainly CASE IH and John Deere tractors.  
 
3. I mostly do my own repairs on my vehicles and own a primitive diagnostic software that 
may be an OEM version released in a foreign country. This software however can only 
read out the ECU’s fault codes. The version that I use is unable to change the engine 
parameters, update the firmware, or modify the embedded ECU software in any way.  My 
current software does not allow me to reset the ECU to its original state after any 
problems have been repaired. 
 
4. If I am forced to go to a dealer, it could be up to two weeks before they can see to my 
vehicle because the dealers in his area prioritize the bigger farms that bring in more 
business for the dealers. Bigger farms have the resources to buy new, expensive 
equipment, but I go to the dealer only occasionally. This has only been getting worse in 
this area because many of the dealers are consolidating into larger entities.  
 
5. The fertilization window in Nebraska is very short, thus I have one-month period in the 
fall before the ground freezes or snow begins to fall to cover as many acres as possible. 
Therefore, if my vehicle breaks down and the local John Deere dealer is unable to fix it in 
the next two weeks, I would have lost half of my business for that season. Additionally, 
this would mean that I would lose repeat business in other farms because they will not 
hire me in future seasons due to the risk of inconsistency.   
 
6. Logistics of using a dealer in my area are often difficult and expensive. A dealer 
technician would sometimes come to where my vehicle has broken down, but in most 
cases the technician will only diagnose the vehicle at the dealership. The dealer will 
arrange to haul my vehicle to the dealership, take two weeks to repair it, and then haul it 
back—all of this is expense. I have on occasion arranged the haul myself, but hiring 
special haulers that can handle a 55,500-lb tractor and obtaining special permits to carry a 
heavy load over the roads have cost $3000 in transportation alone.   
 
7. I do not have particular preference between a local mechanic and a dealer technician as 
long as my equipment is fixed quickly at a reasonable price, but local mechanics are 
closer and more readily available in my area.  The nearest Case IH dealer is 75 miles 
away.  
 
Under penalty of perjury I affirm that this Declaration accurately reflects my knowledge. 
 
       / s/Kyle Schwarting 
       K y l e  S c h w a r t i n g  
       F a r m e r   
[PAGE 20]
 
 
20 
 
 
Declaration of Paul Shamblin 
Lead Mechanic at Talley Farms 
 
 
1. My name is Paul Shamblin, and I am an employee of Talley Farms in San Louis Obispo, 
CA. I am the lead mechanic there. Talley Farms owns 30-40 John Deere tractors, 
including a 7810 tractor. We also own several Caterpillar and Kabota tractors. 
 
2. When one of the agricultural machines stops working, it slows things down on the farm. 
When a field needs preparation, a vehicle malfunction can set the farm back one or two 
weeks, which has downstream effects on production. 
 
3. Sometimes it can take 3 weeks for the John Deere dealer to even get a malfunctioning 
vehicle onto their schedule, and then another 3-4 weeks for the repair to be done. For 
smaller, simpler fixes, I would consider going to an independent repair shop if I were 
confident they were competent and could get the job done faster. 
 
4. I’ve been having trouble with the John Deere 7810 tractor: it has 16 speeds but has been 
skipping 5 speeds in the middle (it’ll function at speeds 1 through 7 and then skip straight 
to speed 13). I called a John Deere technician and diagnosed the issue as a problem with 
the electronic solenoids on the transmission, but because of the wait time (7-8 weeks), 
I’m considering replacing the transmission with a rebuilt one. I think this will only 
require a mechanical fix—however if there are software implications with replacing the 
transmission, I will have to go to the dealer for that. 
 
5. Talley Farms also owns Caterpillar and Kobota tractors. These are older models, with the 
Kobota ones from around 2000, 2005, and 2008. I’m mostly able to fix these tractors 
myself because they are older and use less software. 
 
Under penalty of perjury I affirm that this Declaration accurately reflects my knowledge 
as Lead Mechanic at Talley Farms. 
       / s/Paul Shamblin 
       P a u l  S h a m b l i n  
       Lead Mechanic at Talley Farms. 
 
  
[PAGE 21]
 
 
21 
 
Declaration of John Doe 
Large-Scale Farmer 
 
 
1. My name is John Doe (actual name is known to counsel) and I operate a larger-scale farm 
(one of the top three biggest in my county) in Kansas. I own approximately twelve 
tractors, which are a mix of John Deere and New Holland brand. I own a total of 20-25 
pieces of agricultural equipment, including a Case IH columbine. Most of my machinery 
is newer, bought within the last 6-7 years. I do not experience many issues with the right 
to repair because I live within twenty-five miles of a dealership. 
 
2. If I have a physical problem that isn’t controlled by software, a local mechanic can fix it. 
But when an error code appears, they can’t help with those issues. More often than not, I 
have to take my equipment to the dealership. None of my local mechanics have attempted 
to use crack software, but one of them has a computer that is able to communicate with 
older equipment. This computer was not compatible with my 2011 tractor when we 
attempted to use it. 
 
3. In one instance, my combine had an error code, and I was very close to the dealership, so 
I took it to the dealership. The dealership used its diagnostic software and determined the 
problem was a plugged filter. I bought the filter but couldn’t find where the filter was in 
the machine to install it. The service manager couldn’t find it either without looking at 
their program. Therefore, without that software technology, someone couldn’t even find 
where the filter was supposed to be installed physically.  
 
Under penalty of perjury I affirm that this Declaration accurately reflects my knowledge. 
 
       / s/ “John Doe” 
Farmer 
 
   
[PAGE 22]
 
 
22 
 
 
Declaration of Mary Pat Weyback 
Deputy General Counsel, American Farm Bureau Federation 
 
I am Mary Pat Weyback, Deputy General Counsel, American Farm Bureau Federation 
(“AFBF”). 
 
1. The Declarants above are known to AFBF and each Declaration is as reviewed and 
digitally signed by the Declarant.  This includes the Declaration of “John Doe,” a farmer 
who wishes to be known in this proceeding only by that name. 
 
2. On behalf of AFBF and with respect to this proceeding I have engaged in or reviewed 
additional interviews with farmers and other industry members that are all consistent with 
and supportive of the facts, observations, and assertions contained in these Comments, 
and in the above Declarations. 
 
As counsel I affirm that this Declaration accurately reflects my knowledge. 
 
           / s/ Mary Pat Weyback 
    Deputy General Counsel 
                American Farm Bureau Federation 
 
 
 
 
         
 
