[PAGE 1]
 
 
December 21, 2023 
 
Proposed Class: Class 7 (Computer Programs–Vehicle Operational 
Data) 
The Specialty Equipment Market Association (SEMA) respectfully 
supports MEMA’s new exemption petition for Class 7, Computer 
Programs – Vehicle Operational Data that would allow for 
“circumvention of technological protection measures on computer 
programs that are contained in and control the functioning of a 
lawfully acquired motorized land vehicle or marine vessel such as a 
personal automobile or boat, commercial vehicle or vessel, or 
mechanized agricultural vehicle or vessel to allow lawful vehicle 
owners and lessees, or those acting on their behalf, to access, store, 
and share vehicle operational data, including diagnostic and 
telematics data.” 
Formed in 1963, SEMA is a non-profit trade association representing 
over 7,000 mostly small businesses nationwide that manufacture, 
distribute, and retail specialty parts and accessories for motor 
vehicles. The specialty automotive aftermarket industry supports over 
1.3 million jobs across the U.S. and contributes over $336 billion to 
the American economy each year through the production and sale of 
performance, functional, restoration, and styling-enhancement 
products for use on passenger cars, trucks, SUVs, and special interest 
collector vehicles. 
 
MEMA’s petition for Computer Programs – Vehicle Operational Data 
would create a necessary extension of an existing DMCA exemption 
for Computer Programs - Repair of Motorized, Land Vehicles, Marine 
Vessels, or Mechanized Agricultural Vehicles or Vessels. This 
exemption was created in 2015 for lawful vehicle owner(s) and was 
expanded in 2018 to both cover third-party service providers and 
remove the limitation prohibiting circumvention of technological 
protection measures (TPMs) to access computer programs primarily 
designed to control vehicle telematics and entertainment systems. 
The copyright office renewed this exemption in 2021 and is again 
recommending that it be renewed in the ninth triennial review of 
Section 1201 exemptions.  
 
SEMA supports the proposed Class 7 exemption for circumvention of 
technological protection measures on computer programs to allow 
vehicle owners and lessees, or those acting on their behalf, to access, 
store, and share vehicle operational data, including diagnostic and 
telematics data. In recent years, motor vehicles, which are 
increasingly software-defined vehicles, require integration of vehicle 
computer systems, including integrated software that controls the 
Chairman of the Board 
• Kyle Fickler 
Chair-Elect 
* Melanie White 
Immediate Past Chairman 
& Secretary 
• James Lawrence 
Treasurer 
* Tim McCarthy 
Board of Directors 
Rich Butler 
Lindsay Hubley 
Norris Marshall 
Larry Montante 
Kim Pendergast 
Brian Reese 
Kathryn Reinhardt 
Marcus Umlauff 
Ted Wentz Ill 
Steve Whipple 
President and CEO 
Mike Spagnola 
General Counsel 
David P. Goch 
* Executive Committee 
1575 S. Valley Vista Dr. 
Diamond Bar, CA 91765-3914 
909-610-2030 
E-mail: sema@sema.org 
Website: www.sema.org 
[PAGE 2]
 
 
parts and operation of the vehicle. Modern vehicles are generating massive amounts of 
information that has the potential to improve vehicle repair and service, safety, and 
customization. However, vehicle owners are not currently able to benefit from the telematic 
data that they create when driving their vehicle(s). 
 
Despite the changing nature of the technology in motor vehicles, millions of Americans continue 
to work on and fix their own vehicles. Accordingly, it is necessary that they are able to review 
their vehicle’s  performance data in order to diagnose any problems that may arise and 
ensure that their vehicle is operating safely. For people who do not have the time, knowledge, 
and ability to work on their own vehicles, it is critical that their repairer of choice has access 
to this information and is protected from copyright infringement for accessing a vehicle’s 
operational data. 
While the electronic control unit (ECU) and vehicle software are copyrightable, data is 
generally a fact and not an expression, and as such is not subject to copyright.  The data 
that a vehicle owner generates when they drive their vehicle is theirs and should not be 
subject to copyright infringement when accessed by the vehicle’s owner or their designee. 
The data that a vehicle generates is created both after the technology on a vehicle is 
copyrighted and the vehicle is sold.  
 
It is important that this exemption is granted to ensure vehicle owners and their designees 
can download, copy, and use the non-copyrightable data that is stored on the ECU and 
other copyrightable works in their vehicles. This exemption is critical to maintaining 
consumer choice by ensuring that vehicle owners can decide who works on their vehicles 
and the parts that are used.  Without this exemption, vehicle owners will have fewer 
vehicle repair and service options, resulting in higher prices to repair and maintain their 
vehicles. 
 
With the continued advancements in driver assistance technology, it is critical that there is 
an exemption to ensure consumers and their third-party service providers are not locked 
out of obtaining access to vehicle operational data, including diagnostic and telematics 
data. This would help to ensure that vehicles with driver assistance technology can 
continue to be repaired or modified by vehicle owners and their designated service 
providers who need to access vehicle operational data to ensure that repairs can be made 
safely and keep the vehicle in compliance with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards. 
 
SEMA appreciates this opportunity to support the exemption request for Class 7, Computer 
Programs – Vehicle Operational Data.  
 
