[PAGE 1]
December 22, 2023
OpenPolicy comments to the Copyright Ofﬁce concerning the Ninth Triennial Proceeding on
section 1201 exemptions, Class Four
Item A. Commenter Information.
OpenPolicy appreciates the opportunity to provide commentary concerning the Ninth Triennial
Proceeding 1201 exemptions, class 4.
OpenPolicy1 is the world’s ﬁrst policy intelligence and engagement technology platform, aiming to
democratize and simplify access to policy engagement for entities of all sizes, by leveraging scale
and technology including AI. We strive to make policymaking accessible, affordable, and inclusive
for all. We believe that the open and collaborative nature of dialogue and convenings are essential
to further policymaking work, which can be signi ﬁcantly contributed by the participation of
innovative companies and startups. Indeed, many if not most of the technologies used to evaluate
the measurements, testing and audibility of AI, or to secure AI, are currently developed by such
innovative companies and startups – these are the communities OpenPolicy represents and
engages. OpenPolicy is also in the process of forming a non-pro ﬁt entity for policy engagement,
with a focus on technology policy in areas of AI and security. In this proceeding, OpenPolicy
represents the broad interests of leading innovative companies that develop cutting-edge
technologies speciﬁcally in the area of AI safety, security and governance, and security research.
Indeed, our commitment to promoting trusted AI and working collaboratively with the
administration is documented in the White House webpage concerning the AI Executive Order,
and we will take part in the NIST-established AI safety institute consortium. 2 In addition,
OpenPolicy is committed to advancing good-faith security research and processes that advance
vulnerability disclosure and handling. In this proceeding, the group is represented by Dr. Amit
Elazari, J.S.D. amit@openpolicygroup.com.
Dr. Elazari is also the co-founder of Disclose.io, an initiative dedicated to advocating for legal
protections and “safe harbors” for security researchers, which brief has been cited in the CFAA
decision in the Supreme Court decision of Van Buren. Disclose.io contract language geared to
create legal protections for security research has been adopted across 1,000s of bug bounty and
vulnerability disclosure programs, including programs managed by federal agencies, and is
2 See the White House, What are they saying, https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/brie ﬁng-room/statements-
releases/2023/10/31/what-they-are-saying-president-biden-issues-executive-order-on-safe-
secure-and-trustworthy-artiﬁcial-intelligence/ (Oct. 31, 2023).
1 www.openpolicygroup.com.
openpolicygroup.com info@openpolicygroup.com
{::-Open policy 
UNITED STATES COPYRIGHT OFFICE 
Long Comment Regarding a Proposed 
Exemption Under 17 U.S.C. § 1201 
[PAGE 2]
referred to in regulatory requirements such as DHS CISA Binding Operating Directive 20-01, and
DHS “Secure by Design” best practices.
Dr. Elazari algorithmic and data privacy auditing work, during our research time at U.C. Berkeley
has been published in leading academic press, and awarded by policymakers. She was also
awarded “data abuse” bounties for Meta and Google for her research.
Item B. Proposed Class Addressed.
OpenPolicy commentary supports the petition for a newly proposed exemption for Class 4:
“Computer Programs–Generative AI Research”. 3 In addition, OpenPolicy would like to express
support of the comments submitted by the “Hacking Policy Council” (HPC), represented by Harley
Giger, on Dec. 21, 2023, in support of the proposed exemption.
Item C. Overview.
OpenPolicy supports the proposed exemption for generative arti
ﬁcial intelligence (AI) research
under Section 1201 of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA). 4
We believe such exemption can be further expanded to good-faith research performed on
broader categories of AI systems or deployments, that extend beyond generative AI. We further
believe, similar to HPC, that the research permitted should not be con ﬁned to ﬁndings or
concerns related to “bias”, but can include broad sets of undesirable social impacts, and other
harmful or undesirable unintended outputs in AI systems, from discrimination to “untrustworthy”
behavior.5
Notably, while a broad set of research activities, or techniques used, and results garnered, can be
covered under the existing security exemption, 6 The potential chilling effect resulting from
uncertainty if such activities are exempted, and the need to expand the category to broader sets
of
ﬁndings and research methods (some still emerging), suggest consideration of such exemption
is warranted.
6 As HPC submission clari ﬁes, some forms of research about AI bias and misalignment are already exempt under
the good-faith security research exemption, this may include cases where if the researched risks or harm found
are related to con ﬁdentiality, integrity, or availability of information, or the physical safety of the users of the
machines on which the AI system operates, or otherwise can be categorized as a security vulnerability ﬁnding.
5 “AI risk management calls for addressing many other types of risks” NIST, Arti ﬁcial Intelligence Risk
Management Framework, AI Risks and Trustworthiness, pgs. 12, 39, Jan. 2023,
https:/ /nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ai/NIST.AI.100-1.pdf. See also []
4 Copyright Ofﬁce, Notice of proposed rulemaking, Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access Controls on
Copyrighted Works, 88 F.R. 72013, 72025 (Oct. 19, 2023).
3 Jonathan Weiss, Petition for New Exemption Under 17 USC 1201, Copyright Of ﬁce,9th Triennial Rulemaking,
https:/ /www.copyright.gov/1201/2024/petitions/proposed/New-Pet-Jonathan-Weiss.pdf (last accessed Dec. 12,
2023).
openpolicygroup.com info@openpolicygroup.com
{::-Open policy 
UNITED STATES COPYRIGHT OFFICE 
Long Comment Regarding a Proposed 
Exemption Under 17 U.S.C. § 1201 
[PAGE 3]
Notably, the last year has marked unprecedented recognition by policymakers, academics, and
industry experts - as well as civil society, of the need to facilitate at-scale third-party auditing of
AI. This recognition builds on decades of research in this domain, and is cultivated by the rise of
new AI risks (among others, given generative AI), and adoption of AI systems more broadly.
More notably, the U.S. Administration, Executive Order 14110 on AI, included multiple references
and taskings related to AI red teaming, the development of new best practices in this domain, and
has elevated the need to perform third-party red teaming of AI, as part of the voluntary
commitments for AI. Indeed. AI audits are emerging as key requirements in state and federal
requirements under proposed and enacted policies, international standards, and industry best
practices.7
Policy, civil society., academic, and industry research all indicated, across the security, safety and
AI domains — the value that is added when such assessment, audit and testing is done by third
parties, external to the organization, often absent the “organization consent”, as well as potential
barriers to obtaining consent for such research.
Ultimately the consideration of an exemption is consistent with industry best practices for AI red
teaming and auditing and will advance the Administration priorities articulated across multiple
policies, including in Executive Order 14110.
By performing research, and identifying and disclosing issues,
ﬂaws and vulnerabilities so they
can be addressed, AI research practices advance the security, safety, trustworthiness,
transparency and fairness of AI systems, including generative AI.
While many categories of such research may fall under existing exemptions, the ambiguity rather
current prohibition of section 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(A) on circumvention of technological measures
that control access to computer programs can restrict independent AI research, id such research
identiﬁes broader unintended consequences or leverage methods that extend from security
research, can create a sti ﬂing effect on such research, chilling a critical societal activity at a time
it is needed most. It is well documented that legal concerns arise and can restrict such research if
permission of the computer program copyright holder is required to conduct such research.
Finally, we believe such exemption should be expanded to research applicable to all AI systems,
not just generative AI. Notably, policies such as Executive Order 14110 recognize, such testing and
7 See also, Hacking Policy Council, AI red teaming - Legal clarity and protections needed, Dec. 12, 2023,
https:/ /assets-global.website-
ﬁles.com/62713397a014368302d4ddf5/6579fcd1b821fdc1e507a6d0_Hacking-Poli
cy-Council-statement-on-AI-red-teaming-protections-20231212.pdf.
openpolicygroup.com info@openpolicygroup.com
{::-Open policy 
UNITED STATES COPYRIGHT OFFICE 
Long Comment Regarding a Proposed 
Exemption Under 17 U.S.C. § 1201 
[PAGE 4]
red-teaming activities are recommended for AI systems, not just emerging generative AI or
foundation models. We therefore propose the good faith research exemption applies to AI
systems broadly de
ﬁned, which further includes generative AI.
The below proposal, building on HPC proposal, encourages the Register of
Copyrights to formulate an exemption in support of research where the researched
“unintended consequence”, undesirable outcome, bias or “misalignment” (to borrow
HPC term), may not directly affect security or safety (e.g. a prompt injection or data
position attack on generative AI system to produce undesirable societal impact,
where the AI engages in discrimination, or creates synthetic abusive material).
We propose the following exemption which builds on HPC proposal, leveraging the
de
ﬁnitions used in the Executive Order, with slight adaptation to expand the scope
to all AI systems and broader research categories:
(i) Computer Programs, where the circumvention is undertaken on a lawfully
acquired device or machine on which an AI system operates, or is undertaken
on a computer, computer system, or computer network on which an AI
system operates with the authorization of the owner or operator of such
computer, computer system, or computer network, for the purpose of
good-faith AI research.8
[Note: given concerns regarding the ambiguity associated with the use of the
term “solely” in the security research exemption, we suggest removing it or
clarifying it, given it is expected much of the social research on AI may be
performed in commercial auditing or assessment settings (e.g. as ordered by
a third party, including a regulatory agency, or in a “bug bounty”)].
(ii) For purposes of paragraph (i), the term “arti
ﬁcial intelligence” or “AI” has
the meaning set forth in 15 U.S.C. 9401(3): a machine-based system that can,
for a given set of human-de ﬁned objectives, make predictions,
recommendations, or decisions in ﬂuencing real or virtual environments. 9
(iii) For purposes of paragraph (i), the term “AI system” means any data
system, software, hardware, application, tool, or utility that operates in whole
or in part using AI. 10
10 Id. at Section 3(e).
9 See White House, Executive Order on the Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development and Use of Arti
ﬁcial
Intelligence, Section 3(b), Oct. 30, 2023,
www.whitehouse.gov/brieﬁng-room/presidential-actions/2023/10/30/executive-order-on-the-safe-secure-and
-trustworthy-development-and-use-of-artiﬁcial-intelligence.
8 Id. at 201.40(b)(16)(i).
openpolicygroup.com info@openpolicygroup.com
{::-Open policy 
UNITED STATES COPYRIGHT OFFICE 
Long Comment Regarding a Proposed 
Exemption Under 17 U.S.C. § 1201 
[PAGE 5]
(iv) For purposes of paragraph (i), “good-faith AI research” means accessing
a computer program solely for purposes of good-faith testing, investigation,
audit or assessment of biased, discriminatory, or otherwise unintended
consequence or harmful outputs in, or of, an AI system, where such activity is
carried out in an environment designed to avoid any harm to individuals or
the public, and where the information derived from the activity is used
primarily to promote the trustworthiness of the AI system, or the safety of
those who use such systems, or their trust in such systems, and is not used
or maintained in a manner that facilitates copyright infringement. 11
(v) Good-faith AI research that quali
ﬁes for the exemption of this section
may nevertheless incur liability under other applicable laws, including without
limitation the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986, as amended and
codiﬁed in title 18, United States Code, and eligibility for that exemption is not
a safe harbor from, or defense to, liability under other applicable laws. 12
Item D. Technological Protection Measures and Methods of Circumvention.
As articulated in algorithmic auditing research work, various AI auditing methods
can entail circumvention of technological protection measures on code, or software.
In the matter of Sandvig v. Barr, it was documented how the copyright owner an AI
system may under its terms of service, require a user account or gateway, where by
the terms of use of prohibit bypassing any protective measures, prohibit reverse
engineering, or limited to ability to create users or scrape data, which limits certain
AI auditing methods.
Other terms may prohibit research altogether. These barriers are documented in the
context of the Sandvig v. Barr proceedings, cited by the Supreme Court decision in
the matter of Van Buren, in the context of the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act, and
referred to in legal and broader academic surveys and research. HPC submission
well documented some of the other methods that may entail access to the AI
system for Audit, as we are delighted to facilitate a meeting with such communities
to provide an additional overview.
12 Id. at 201.40(b)(16)(iii).
11 See 37 CFR 201.40(b)(16)(ii).
openpolicygroup.com info@openpolicygroup.com
{::-Open policy 
UNITED STATES COPYRIGHT OFFICE 
Long Comment Regarding a Proposed 
Exemption Under 17 U.S.C. § 1201 
[PAGE 6]
Item E. Asserted Adverse Effects on Noninfringing Uses.
On this item we refer the Copyright Of ﬁce to HPC comments and express support
in their articulation of adverse effects.
Notably, the administration, industry and best practices already identi ﬁed the need
for such AI research, as well as prominence to society – ensuring a proper
exemption for AI research is a critical, consistent step in ensuring a robust
ecosystem of safety and trustworthiness AI community needed to ensure AI
advancements align with societal interests, and would drive coherence with U.S.
broader policies. It is essential that policies that seek to encourage and require such
as AI audits and research– do so while protecting the research community that
performs such research, and cultivating its diversity. .
Finally, we believe the consideration of such exemption is essential for the U.S.G
continued leadership in promoting the secure, safe, and trusted deployment of
Arti
ﬁcial Intelligence.
Regards,
Dr. Amit Elazari, OpenPolicy
openpolicygroup.com info@openpolicygroup.com
{::-Open policy 
Pri, •acy Act Advisory Statement: Required by the Privacy Act of 1974 (P.L. 93-579) 
UNITED STATES COPYRIGHT OFFICE 
Long Comment Regarding a Proposed 
Exemption Under 17 U.S.C. § 1201 
The authorit y for requesting this information is 17 U.S.C. §§ 120 I (a)(l) and 705. Furnishing the requested information is voluntary. The principal use of the requested informat ion is publication on the 
Copyrigh t Office website and use by Copyright Office staff for purpose s of the rulemaking proceeding conducted under 17 U.S.C. § 1201 (a)( I). NOT E: No other advisory statement will be given in connection 
with this submission. Please keep this statement and refer to it if we commu nicate with you regard ing this submission . 
U.S. Copyright Office Library of Congress 101 Independence Avenue SE Washington , DC 20557-6400 copyright .gov 
LONG COMMENT REGARDING A PROPOSED EXEMPTION UNDER 17 U.S.C. § 1201 REV: 10/2023 
[PAGE 7]
openpolicygroup.com info@openpolicygroup.com
{::-Open policy 
UNITED STATES COPYRIGHT OFFICE 
Long Comment Regarding a Proposed 
Exemption Under 17 U.S.C. § 1201 
