[PAGE 1]
AFDOCS:199224415.1 
DRAFT  
 
 
Comments of  
MEMA, The Vehicle Suppliers Association 
to the U.S. Copyright Office on a Proposed Exemption Under 17 U.S.C. § 1201 
 
ITEM A.  COMMENTER INFORMATION  
Commenter: 
MEMA, The Vehicle Suppliers Association 
1425 K Street, NW 
Suite 910 
Washington, DC 20005 
 
Contact: 
Dan Jasnow 
Julia Ambros 
ArentFox Schiff LLP 
1717 K Street, NW 
Washington, DC 20006 
dan.jasnow@afslaw.com 
(212) 492-3302 
 
ITEM B.  PROPOSED CLASS ADDRESSED 
Class 7 (Computer Programs— Vehicle Operational Data) 
ITEM C.  OVERVIEW 
MEMA, The Vehicle Suppliers Association, is the leading trade association in North America for vehicle 
suppliers, parts manufacturers, and remanufacturers. Automotive and commercial vehicle suppliers are 
the largest manufacturing sector in the United States and lead the way in new vehicle innovations. MEMA 
has been the voice of the vehicle supplier industry since 1904. Its more than 1,000 members are Strong 
by Association. MEMA Aftermarket Suppliers, a group of MEMA, exclusively serves manufacturers of 
aftermarket components, tools and equipment, and related products, an important part of the 
automotive parts manufacturing industry which supports 907,000 American jobs in all 50 states. MEMA 
Aftermarket is a recognized industry change agent – promoting a collaborative industry environment, 
providing a forum to address issues and serving as a valued resource for members across all areas of the 
aftermarket including light vehicle, commercial vehicle, and remanufacturing. Members supply the 
aftermarket with the parts that keep millions of vehicles on the road, fueling international commerce and 
meeting society’s transportation needs. MEMA members are committed to safety and sustainability.  
MEMA submits these comments in support of its proposed new class 7 exemption, which would permit 
circumvention of technological protection measures (“TPMs”) that control access to electronic control units 
(“ECUs”) that are contained in and control the functioning of a lawfully acquired motorized land vehicle or 
marine vessel such as a personal automobile or boat, commercial vehicle or vessel, or mechanized agricultural 
vehicle or vessel to allow lawful vehicle owners and lessees, or those acting on their behalf, to access, store, 
and share vehicle operational data, including diagnostic and telematics data.  
ITEM D.  TECHNOLOGICAL PROTECTION MEASURE(S) AND METHOD(S) OF CIRCUMVENTION 
Modern vehicles are equipped with ECUs that monitor and control vehicle functions. A vehicle may have several 
ECUs that facilitate its operation. The individual ECUs are programmed to fulfill specific vehicular functions, such 
as engine control, fuel efficiency and braking. The software programs contained in ECUs are copyrightable as 
“literary works,” but copyright protection is limited to the programs’ “source code,” which consists of words, 
The Vehicle Suppliers Association 
[PAGE 2]
AFDOCS:199224415.1 
DRAFT  
MEMA Long Comment  
December 22, 2023     Page 2 of 7 
 
numbers, and symbols typed by a programmer, as well as the compiled “object code,” which is used by the 
computer to carry out the instructions, but generally cannot be read by a human being.1 
As has been well-documented in prior DMCA triennial rulemakings, there are several types of TPMs that restrict 
access to ECUs, including challenge-response mechanisms, encryption, and disabled access ports on the circuitry 
itself.2  
ITEM E.  ASSERTED ADVERSE EFFECTS ON NON-INFRINGING USES  
I. Adverse Effects 
The pace of change in the automotive industry is nothing short of astonishing. According to data from the 
International Energy Agency, the share of electric vehicle sales globally has grown from around 4 percent 
in 2020 to an expected 18 percent for calendar year 2023.3 In the U.S., sales of electric cars are expected 
to reach 1.6 million units in 2023, up from 300,000 in 2020.4 Along with electrification, vehicles are also 
being built with increasingly powerful hardware units and software,5 which together are capable of 
collecting exponentially more data and performing an ever-increasing number of vital tasks, from 
autonomous driving to entertainment. In short, “the era of the software-defined vehicle is upon us.”6 
As the line between vehicles and tech products fades, it will be increasingly important for vehicle owners 
and lessees to have access to the computer programs that control those vehicles—subject to prudent 
restrictions to ensure safety and regulatory compliance—so that they can access, view, share, and 
otherwise utilize their own vehicle operational and telematics data.  
Unfortunately, TPMs and section 1201(a)(1)(A) restrict vehicle owners and lessees from accessing and 
utilizing this data. The adverse effects of these restrictions are evident today and they are likely to become 
even more so over the next three years. This includes: 
- Stifling competition. As vehicles generate more and more data, exclusive control over that data 
by the original equipment manufacturer will make it more difficult for owners and lessees to 
 
1 See U.S. Copyright Office, Software-Enabled Consumer Products, A Report of the Register of Copyrights, p. 12 (Dec. 
2016) available at https://www.copyright.gov/policy/software/software-full-report.pdf.  
2 U.S. Copyright Office, Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the 
Prohibition on Circumvention, Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights, (Oct. 2015) (“2015 
Recommendation”) p. 220 (describing TPMs and recommending adoption of repair exemption); U.S. Copyright 
Office, Section 1201 Rulemaking: Seventh Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the Prohibition on 
Circumvention, Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights, (Oct. 2018) (“2018 Recommendation”) p. 25 (citing 
continuing justification for repair exemption due in part to TPMs); U.S. Copyright Office, Section 1201 Rulemaking: 
Eighth Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention, Recommendation of the 
Register of Copyrights, p. 26 (Oct. 2021) (“2021 Recommendation”) (citing continuing justification for repair 
exemption). 
3 IEA, Electric Vehicles, available at www.iea.org/energy-system/transport/electric-vehicles.   
4 Id.  
5 S&P Global Mobility, Be Ready for the Coming Shift in Automotive Computing Power (April 2023) available at 
www.spglobal.com/mobility/en/research-analysis/be-ready-for-the-coming-shift-in-automotive-computing-
power.html; Automotive Edge Computing Consortium, General Principle and Vision, White Paper (Sept. 2023), 
available at https://aecc.org/resources/publications/.   
6Motor Trend, In-Car Ethernet: Untangling the Wads of Wires to Enable Ever More Data (August 22, 2023) available 
at  https://www.motortrend.com/features/what-is-ethernet-for-cars/.  
[PAGE 3]
AFDOCS:199224415.1 
DRAFT  
MEMA Long Comment  
December 22, 2023     Page 3 of 7 
 
exercise genuine choice in the service and aftermarket parts markets, which will ultimately result 
in less competition and higher prices for consumers.  
- Restricting access to driving records and vehicle logs that could be used to, for example, monitor 
or evaluate the driving habits of new drivers using the family car. 
- Creating inefficiencies in vehicle repair and maintenance processes. For example, the proposed 
class 7 could allow a vehicle owner or lessee to share service alerts or vehicle performance metrics 
with his or her preferred service provider. Using this information, the service provider could 
ensure that it has all necessary replacement parts on hand (e.g., brake pads, sparkplugs, air filters, 
tires, etc.) before the owner or lessee’s next service appointment. Rather than leaving a car in the 
garage for days or weeks awaiting replacement parts or making multiple trips to the garage, the 
service provider would know which specific replacement parts are needed and have them ready.  
- Preventing vehicle owners from personalizing or customizing their vehicles, such as preventing 
owners with disabilities from enhancing accessibility; improving vehicle energy efficiency; 
changing audio settings; eliminating distracting software features or functions; and turning off or 
customizing self-driving and driver-assist technologies.   
The Copyright Office has already recognized that TPMs and Section 1201(a)(1)(A) adversely affect the 
ability of vehicle owners and lessees, including those acting under their direction, to engage in diagnosis, 
repair, and lawful modification of their vehicles. The proposed class 7 simply recognizes that as computer 
programs become more integral to vehicles and perform more functions, the TPMs that restrict access to 
those programs will adversely affect more non-infringing uses. As such, a new, broader exemption is 
warranted in this era of the “software-defined vehicle.” 
II. Non-Infringing Uses 
a. The Proposed Use 
As an initial matter, it is important to clarify what proponents are seeking. Vehicle ECUs consist of software 
and hardware that control vehicle functions. As noted, software programs contained on the ECUs are 
copyrightable works, with protection extending not only to the “literal” elements of computer software—
the source code and object code—but also to a program’s “non-literal” elements, including its structure, 
sequence, organization, user interface, screen displays, and menu structures.7  
 
In addition to these protectible elements, vehicle software programs also collect and process a large 
amount of raw data generated as a direct result of the owner or lessee’s use of and operation of the 
vehicle. This data may be stored as unmodified raw data or it may be processed and stored as part of an 
organized database schema. While the copyright owner may be able to claim copyright protection in the 
 
7 See, e.g., General Universal Systems, Inc. v. Lee, 379 F.3d 131, 142 (5th Cir. 2004) (“It is settled that computer 
programs are entitled to copyright protection. This protection extends not only to the ‘literal’ elements of computer 
software—the source code and object code—but also to a program’s non-literal elements, including its structure, 
sequence, organization, user interface, screen displays, and menu structures.”); Whelan Assoc., Inc. v. Jaslow Dental 
Lab., Inc., 797 F.2d 1222, 1248 (3d Cir. 1986) (holding that copyright protection of computer programs “extend 
beyond the programs' literal code to their structure, sequence, and organization”). 
[PAGE 4]
AFDOCS:199224415.1 
DRAFT  
MEMA Long Comment  
December 22, 2023     Page 4 of 7 
 
database schema, the raw and processed data is not capable of copyright protection because it is purely 
factual and the owner or lessee plays a significant role in producing that data.8  
 
Proponents of class 7 seek the ability to circumvent TPMs that restrict access to copyrighted vehicle 
software programs solely to allow vehicle owners and lessees or those acting under their direction to 
copy, download, and otherwise utilize the non-copyrightable data stored within those copyrightable 
works.  
 
Proponents acknowledge that in order to access and utilize the non-copyrightable data contained within 
the copyrightable software programs, incidental copying of protectible elements of the software may 
occur. For example, owners and lessees may download copies of protectible database schema or source 
as a necessary step of retrieving that data. In such cases, copying is likely to be of a limited and fleeting 
nature, such as making copies in the random access memory (“RAM”) of an owner or lessee’s computer. 
Such copies, however, could be deleted after the target vehicle operational or telematics data has been 
retrieved and saved into a separate file. As further discussed below, any such use of the copyrighted 
computer software is fair use. 
 
b. Fair Use 
The proposed uses constitute fair use under the Copyright Act. As noted above, the proposed class 7 
exemption would allow vehicle owners and lessees to, for example, review critical vehicle performance 
data, evaluate the safety of their and their family members’ driving, and better understand vehicle 
operations, including safety features and fuel efficiency. All of these uses, when undertaken by or at the 
direction of the vehicle owner or lessee, constitute fair use under the Copyright Act. 
  
The first fair use factor—the purpose and character of the use—looks at the commerciality of the use and 
whether it is transformative. Although not a prerequisite for a fair use finding, “the more transformative 
the new work, the less will be the significance of other factors, like commercialism, that may weigh against 
a finding of fair use.”9 As noted above, the proposed class 7 exemption would allow vehicle owners and 
lessees to, for example, evaluate how their vehicle is serving their unique needs, grant aftermarket 
services providers access to certain vehicle performance metrics, and monitor use of the family car. These 
uses are primarily non-commercial in nature when undertaken by or on behalf of the vehicle owner or 
lessee for his or her own personal use. Consumers with access to their operational and telematics data are 
able to analyze and make important determinations about their own driving practices, the safety and efficiency 
of their vehicles, the timing and possible causes of accidents and malfunctions, and potential replacement parts 
that may improve the performance and longevity of their vehicles—all uses that are non-commercial.  
 
Moreover, the purpose of the proposed use differs significantly from that of the original work. The 
copyrightable elements of vehicle software work in concert to perform pre-defined tasks and process 
data. In contrast, proponents seek to use only such limited portions of the copyrightable work as may be 
 
8 Digital Drilling Data Sys. LLC v. Petrolink Servs. Inc., No. 4:15-CV-02172, 2018 WL 2267139, at *9 (S.D. Tex. May 16, 
2018), aff'd sub nom. Digital Drilling Data Sys., L.L.C. v. Petrolink Servs., Inc., 965 F.3d 365, 378 (5th Cir. 2020), citing 
Feist Publications, Inc. v. Rural Tel. Serv. Co., 499 U.S. 340, 344, 111 S.Ct. 1282, 1287, 113 L.Ed. 2d 358 (1991) (“That 
there can be no valid copyright in facts is universally understood”). 
9 Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 114 S. Ct. 1164, 1166, 127 L. Ed. 2d 500 (1994). 
[PAGE 5]
AFDOCS:199224415.1 
DRAFT  
MEMA Long Comment  
December 22, 2023     Page 5 of 7 
 
necessary to access non-copyrightable data, and only so that they may derive new insight and 
understanding about their own driving habits and vehicle performance. These insights will be limited to 
the user’s own vehicle, with little, if any, value to anyone other than the vehicle owner or lessee. As such, 
the proposed use will not result in new works that “supersede” the original, but will instead add something 
new, with a further purpose of different character.  
The second factor—the nature of the copyrighted work—also favors a finding of fair use. The second 
factor “calls for recognition that some works are closer to the core of intended copyright protection than 
others, with the consequence that fair use is more difficult to establish when the former works are 
copied.”10 Courts consider “whether the work is expressive or creative, … with a greater leeway being 
allowed to a claim of fair use where the work is factual or informational,” and “whether the work is 
published or unpublished, with the scope for fair use involving unpublished works being considerably 
narrower.”11 As the Acting Register of Copyrights (the “Register”) has concluded in the past, vehicle 
software is a functional work used for the limited purpose of operating a vehicle, rather than a creative 
work with expressive or artistic value.12    
The third factor—the amount and substantiality of the portion of the work used—also favors a finding of 
fair use. Owners or lessees are unlikely to reproduce or otherwise use any substantial portion of the 
copyrighted computer software. Rather, owners and lessees will be accessing the copyrighted works 
merely to retrieve the non-copyrightable data—vehicle telematics or operational data generated by their 
own vehicles. None of the data that owners or lessees are likely to obtain under the proposed class 7 
exemption would have been part of the copyrighted work, whether at the time of registration, 
publication, or when the vehicles left the factory or dealership. Rather, owners and lessees primarily seek 
to access the copyrighted works to retrieve data generated by the copyrighted work about their own 
vehicles. Moreover, courts have held that the third factor does not necessarily weigh against fair use when 
using software is necessary to understand its function.13  
As to the fourth factor—the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the copyrighted 
work—this factor, like the others, favors a finding of fair use. The fourth factor requires the Register to 
consider “not only the extent of market harm caused by the particular actions of the alleged infringer, but 
also ‘whether unrestricted and widespread conduct of the sort engaged in by the [user] . . . would result 
in a substantially adverse impact on the potential market.’”14 There is limited, if any, market for vehicle 
software as a standalone product that is separate and distinct from the market for vehicles. In 2015, the 
Register concluded that “computer programs on the majority of ECUs are only meaningful in connection 
with the vehicle, that the copies are generally sold only with the vehicle, and that the consumer pays for 
those copies when purchasing the vehicle.” 
 
10  Campbell, 510 U.S. at 586.  
11 Cariou v. Prince, 714 F.3d 694, 709–10 (2d Cir. 2013).  
12 2015 Recommendation at 257. 
13 See e.g., Sony Comp. Entertainment, Inc. v. Connectix Corp., 203 F.3d 596, 599–601 (9th Cir.2000) (holding that a 
competitor may create copies of copyrighted software for the purpose of analyzing that software and discovering 
how it functions). 
14 Campbell, 510 U.S. at 590. 
[PAGE 6]
AFDOCS:199224415.1 
DRAFT  
MEMA Long Comment  
December 22, 2023     Page 6 of 7 
 
III. The statutory prohibition on circumvention prevents vehicle owners and lessees from using 
telematics or vehicle operational data in a non-infringing manner. 
The statutory prohibition on circumvention prevents vehicle owners and lessees from using telematics 
and vehicle operational data in a non-infringing manner.  
While there are several exemptions and safe harbors to 1201(a)(1)(A), including the temporary exemption 
for diagnosis, repair, or modification of the vehicle, none of these existing exemptions or safe harbors 
clearly apply to telematics and operational data, despite the clearly non-infringing nature of the proposed 
uses.  Section 117(a)(1), for example, provides a limited exemption for an “owner of a copy of a computer 
program” to circumvent TPMs, but the exemption is not available to owners of a given vehicle. The Ninth 
Circuit and the Register have held that for purposes of Section 117 of the Copyright Act, owning a “device” 
does not make one the “owner” of the copy of software on the device. Rather, the Register has advised 
that “vehicle owners may more properly be considered lessees of at least some telematics and 
entertainment system software.”15 Consumers are unable, then, to enjoy the safe harbor that Section 
117(a)(1) provides to circumvent TPMs for non-infringing use.  
Similarly, while Section 1201(i) allows users to circumvent technological protection measures that collect 
personal data, the exemption is unavailable to the vehicle owners who desire to circumvent TPMs to 
access their telematics and vehicle operational data. Under Section 1201(i), a  user may circumvent a 
work’s TPMs if (1) the measure is capable of collecting personal information, (2) the measure collects 
personal information without notice to users and without the ability for users to opt out of that collection, 
(3) the act of circumvention has the “sole effect” of disabling the information collection and “has no other 
effect on the ability of any person to gain access to any work,” and (4) the act of circumvention is only 
carried out for the purpose of preventing the collection of personal information.”16 1201(i) provides no 
solution for a vehicle owner who does not want to disable the collection of data, but rather use it and 
allow others to assist with analysis thereof. 
Thus, the TPMs that restrict access to onboard computer systems and ECUs prevent vehicle owners and 
lessees from accessing and using telematics and vehicle operational data for non-infringing purposes and 
the statutory prohibition on circumvention places consumers at risk of incurring liability under 
1201(a)(1)(A). The proposed class 7 exemption is therefore warranted.  
Should the Register deem it necessary or appropriate, it could propose an exemption that contains 
reasonable limitations to protect third party intellectual property rights and to ensure safety and regulatory 
compliance, such as in the following proposed language:  
A proposed exemption for circumvention of technological protection measures on computer 
programs that are contained in and control the functioning of a lawfully acquired motorized land 
vehicle or marine vessel such as a personal automobile or boat, commercial vehicle or vessel, or 
mechanized agricultural vehicle or vessel to allow lawful vehicle owners and lessees, or those 
acting on their behalf, to access, store, and share vehicle operational data, including diagnostic 
and telematics data, where such circumvention is not accomplished for the purpose of gaining 
unauthorized access to other copyrighted works. Eligibility for this exemption is not a safe harbor 
 
15 2018 Recommendation at 201. 
16 17 U.S. Code § 1201(i). 
[PAGE 7]
AFDOCS:199224415.1 
DRAFT  
MEMA Long Comment  
December 22, 2023     Page 7 of 7 
 
from, or defense to, liability under other applicable laws, including without limitation regulations 
promulgated by the Department of Transportation or the Environmental Protection Agency.17 
IV. Conclusion 
In a rapidly evolving automotive market defined by increasingly sophisticated software, car owners and lessees 
are currently excluded from benefiting from the data they themselves have generated by driving. Such 
potential benefits to everyday consumers are numerous, from the ability to customize a vehicle to promote 
accessibility or fuel efficiency, to providing aftermarket services providers real-time access to certain vehicle 
performance metrics. At present, the restrictions under section 1201(a)(1)(A) yield detrimental results for 
these consumers, allowing TPMs to gatekeep consumer-generated, factual data which is unprotected by U.S. 
copyright law.  
The proposed use of protected elements of vehicle software (which may be incidentally copied in the process 
of obtaining one’s raw data) by vehicle owners and lessees, and those acting on their behalf, constitutes fair 
use under the Copyright Act. Such use is limited in scope, transformative, likely to be non-commercial, and 
does not threaten the effectively non-existent market for vehicle software as a standalone product. Further, 
any incidental copying of protectible data is likely to be fleeting and for the limited purpose of retrieving 
unprotectable data that would not exist but for the car owner/lessee.  
The new class 7 exemption would allow car owners and lessees to personalize their vehicles (subject to 
reasonable safety limitations), streamline the repair and maintenance process, access driving records to 
monitor family driving habits, and otherwise learn from their raw data in a non-infringing manner in plain 
furtherance of the purpose and spirit of the DMCA triennial rulemakings.   
 
 
 
17 See, e.g., 37 CFR § 201.40(b)(13). 
