[PAGE 1]
  
 
[   ] Check here if multimedia evidence is being provided in connection with this comment. 
ITEM A.  COMMENTER INFORMATION  
This Comment is submitted on behalf of Peter Decherney, Professor of Cinema and 
Media Studies and English, University of Pennsylvania; Sarah Banet-Weiser, Ph.D., Professor 
and Dean, Annenberg School for Communication, University of Pennsylvania; Nate Harrison, 
Ph.D., Dean of Academic Affairs and Professor of the Practice, Media Arts, School of the 
Museum of Fine Arts at Tufts University; Lauren van Haaften-Schick, Ph.D. Student in History 
of Art, Department of History of Art and Visual Studies, Cornell University; Shiv Gaglani, Ed 
Tech Entrepreneur and Medical Student; and the Society for Cinema and Media Studies (SCMS) 
hereinafter known as “Joint Educators.” 
  
Represented by:  
Glushko-Samuelson Intellectual Property Law Clinic   
Professor Victoria Phillips, Director  
Jill Crosby, Student Attorney 
Kristin Rheins, Student Attorney 
 
Parties interested in contacting Peter Decherney should reach him at decherney@sas.upenn.edu 
(215.746.3156). 
 
ITEM B.  PROPOSED CLASS ADDRESSED 
Proposed Class 2: Audiovisual Works— Online Learning 
ITEM C.  OVERVIEW 
Under 17 U.S.C. § 1201, the Joint Educators propose to add an exemption to allow 
educators and preparers of online learning materials offered by qualified educational entities to 
use short, high-quality excerpts of motion pictures and television shows. This exemption 
advances educational purposes because these excerpts will contribute to students’ learning 
through criticism, comment, illustration, and explanation. The Joint Educators’ proposed 
exemption is analogous to existing 1201 exemptions in its educational goals, use, and TPMs 
employed, but this separate class of innovative, nontraditional educational entities, specifically 
for-profit, nonaccredited learning programs, is distinct in the educators and students it represents. 
Currently, Massive Open Online Courses (“MOOCs”), K-12 schools, and universities have an 
exemption to use short, high-quality motion picture excerpts to teach. The utilization of the 
UNITED STATES COPYRIGHT OFFICE 
Long Comment RegaTding a PToposed 
Exemption UndeT 17 U.S.C. § 1201 
Pri vacy Act Advisory Statemen t: Required by the Privacy Act of 1974 (P.L. 93-579) 
The authority for requesting this information is 17 U.S.C. §§ 1201(a)(l) and 705. Furnishing the requested information is voluntary. The principal use of the requested informatio n is publication on the 
Copyright Office website and use by Copyright Office staff for purposes of the rulemaking proceeding conducted under 17 U.S.C. § 1201 (a)( 1 ). NOTE: No other advisory statement will be given in connection 
with this submission. Please keep this statement and refer to it if we communicate with you regarding this submission. 
U.S. Copyright Office Library of Congress 101 Independence Avenue SE Washington, DC 20557-6400 copyright.gov 
LONG COMMENT REGARDING A PROPOSED EXEMPTION UNDER 17 U.S.C. § 1201 REV: 10/2023 
[PAGE 2]
 
 
2 
 
audiovisual clips by these exempted entities serves as concrete evidence that shows how other 
legitimate educational entities could thrive in a similar manner. 
In the Eighth Triennial Rulemaking, the Register found that the Joint Educators’ 
inclusion of these online learning platforms in their proposed exemption “lack[ed] support to 
expand its existing exemption to for-profit and/or unaccredited educational companies or 
organizations,” because “it would seemingly encompass any online video that could be 
characterized as an educational experience.”1 For this reason, the Register found the balancing of 
factors one and four slightly tipping against fair use. However, the Register’s analysis 
misconstrued the proposed exemption’s educational uses. The Joint Educators hope to clarify 
that the proposed exemption should only apply to “educational entities that employ educators or 
demonstrate that they themselves are educators that provide or develop content” regardless of 
whether they are accredited or of a for-profit status, and this limitation is in accordance with the 
guidelines suggested by the National Telecommunications and Information Administration 
(NTIA) in its letter supporting the Joint Educators’ proposed exemption in the previous 
rulemaking.2 As detailed more below, the NTIA identified clear requirements for the types of 
qualified educational entities who would be eligible to use the proposed exemption. The Joint 
Educators believe the inclusion of these additional safeguards will ensure that the uses requested 
are truly for educational criticism, comment, illustration, and explanation by qualified online 
providers and will easily qualify as fair use under the four factors of Section 107 of the 
Copyright Act. The educational entities will also limit these online learning materials, to the 
extent technologically feasible, to registered learners of the online learning platform, institute 
copyright policies, and provide copyright information to educators and preparers of online 
learning materials, learners, and relevant staff members. These additional safeguards will allow 
for the extension of this vital exemption to a broader scope of legitimate educational entities and 
help to level the education playing field.3 
 
The educational ecosystem has also continued to change dramatically in the past three 
years as the digital migration has taken firm hold in this field now. Learning plans offered by 
these nontraditional online educational entities are increasingly sought after by students of all 
ages and backgrounds. The pandemic accelerated a trend in online learning that was already 
present. Due to their flexible, personalized, practical skill approaches, students of all 
backgrounds and ages are seeking an education from these nontraditional educational entities. 
Further, employers now recognize the productive value of these certificate programs, bootcamps, 
and professional development courses. Nontraditional educational entity registered students 
include adults continuing their education to reskill, K-12 children supplementing their learning 
or being homeschooled, and young adults looking to receive a much more affordable and job-
ready education. In addition to the increasing prevalence, there are proven psychological benefits 
from incorporating motion picture excerpts into learning plans. High-quality audiovisual clips 
can increase learning retention and student engagement by providing compelling visual stimulus. 
Every year that students are denied these benefits, they are adversely impacted by this restriction. 
 
1 Section 1201 Rulemaking: Eight Triennial Proceeding, Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights, 59 (2021). 
2 Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted Works, NTIA, 10, 11 (October 1, 2021), 
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2021-10-28/pdf/2021-23311.pdf. 
3 Id. 
[PAGE 3]
 
 
3 
 
With the noninfringing nature and meeting of the 1201 statutory factors by the Joint 
Educators’ proposed exemption, the U.S. Copyright Office possesses the authority to address the 
adverse effects impacting qualified but nontraditional educational entities in their ability to make 
noninfringing uses of short excerpts of motion pictures for educational purposes. The Copyright 
Office has an important role to play in the ongoing federal and state effort to advance educational 
and digital equity for the students and educators currently left behind with restricted access to 
high-quality pedagogy and educational materials. Efforts to advance equity are being carried out 
across administrative agencies and branches of government, and the Copyright Office can 
support these efforts with this exemption. The Joint Educators urge the Register to implement the 
proposed exemption for qualified nontraditional educational entities regardless of their status as a 
for-profit or their educational accreditation to use short, high-quality excerpts of motion pictures 
for the transformative educational purpose of criticism, comment, illustration, and explanation. 
ITEM D.  TECHNOLOGICAL PROTECTION MEASURE(S) AND METHOD(S) OF CIRCUMVENTION 
There are numerous technological protection measures (TPMs) that control access to 
copyrighted audiovisual works. As described in the Joint Educators’ comments in the previous 
rulemakings, the TPMs employed vary based on whether they are protecting copyrighted content 
on digital video discs (DVDs), Blu-Ray Discs, or streaming platforms.4 With current multimedia 
trends, audiovisual works are now most viewed through video streaming platforms, such as 
Netflix, Hulu, Amazon Prime Video, etc.5 
DVDs may employ Analog Protection System (APS) scrambling, Content Scramble 
System (CSS) encryption, or disc corruption. Of course, APS scrambling has become irrelevant 
with the move towards digital rather than analog videos.6 In terms of CSS encryption, an 
authentication process occurs between the DVD drive and the DVD player software where the 
player uses a key to decrypt the video data.7 Meanwhile, disc corruption installs a scheme where 
portions of DVD discs are mangled in a manner that renders them unreadable, and copying the 
disc sequentially causes corrupted areas to skip and get stuck.8 
Blu-Ray discs use Advanced Access Content System (AACS) encryption as a first level 
TPM. The AACS system uses keys that can be revoked if it is determined they are 
compromised.9 As a second level of protection, BD-Plus or Cinavia is used. BD-Plus further 
mangles stream files with instructions on how to repair the mangled files on the disc.10 
Meanwhile, Cinavia protection involves steganography or watermarking where a special 
encrypted data signal is placed within an audio channel in an audio track, which the video player 
 
4 Learning Center, Miraizon, http://www.miraizon.com/support/info_copyprotection.html (last visited Nov. 28, 
2023). 
5 Id. 
6 Id. 
7 Id. 
8 Id. 
9 Id. 
10 Id. 
[PAGE 4]
 
 
4 
 
detects to verify whether playback should be allowed.11 Generally, online streaming platforms 
use protected streaming as a TPM. This measure uses encryption to protect audiovisual works. 
Concerning the relevant methods of circumvention to gain access to a copyrighted work, 
technical programs are widely available online to disable TPMs. These decryption programs 
rewrite the protected work in a manner that preserves the video data, frame, and resolution. The 
Joint Educators’ proposed exemption acknowledges that TPMs are necessary to protect 
copyrighted audiovisual works. The Joint Educators’ petition proposed employing the same TPM 
policy granted in the exemption for MOOCs to use motion pictures for educational uses.12 
The educational entity will limit these online learning materials, to the extent  
technologically feasible, to registered learners of their online learning platform, institute 
copyright policies, and provide copyright information to educators and preparers of 
online learning materials, learners, and relevant staff members, and to the extent 
technologically feasible, will work to reasonably prevent unauthorized further 
dissemination of the materials in accessible form to others.  
Ultimately, this TPM policy will effectively limit illegal uses of copyrighted audiovisual 
works as it has done with current exemptions.  
ITEM E.  ASSERTED ADVERSE EFFECTS ON NONINFRINGING USES  
THE PROPOSED EXEMPTION WILL ENSURE THAT NO EDUCATORS OR 
STUDENTS ARE LEFT BEHIND 
As stated in their petition,13 the Joint Educators propose to add an exemption under 17 
U.S.C. § 1201 that would allow all online educators and preparers of online learning materials 
offered by qualified educational entities to use short excerpts of motion pictures, which includes 
television shows and videos. The purpose of this exemption would be for criticism, comment, 
illustration, and explanation in offerings to registered students of online learning platforms when 
the use of the excerpt constitutes transformative fair use and contributes significantly to learning. 
With the inclusion of movies and television shows in learning materials, this proposed class of 
audiovisual works for online learning includes works protected by copyright.  
This proposed exemption builds off existing 1201 educational exemptions in its goals, yet 
the separate proposed class is distinct in the educators and students it represents. Currently, 
within the realm of motion picture copyright exemptions for educational purposes, there is an 
exemption for college and university faculty, students, or employees acting at the direction of 
faculty, or K-12 educators and students to use motion pictures for educational purposes.9 
Additionally, there is an exemption for faculty and employees acting at the direction of faculty in 
MOOCs to use motion pictures for educational uses.10 The Joint Educators propose to expand 
motion pictures used for educational purposes in online learning beyond the non-profit or 
accredited educational institutions to include online learning platforms offered by qualified 
 
11 Id. 
12 37 CFR 201.40(b)(1)(ii)(B)). 
13 Joint Educators, Petition for New Exemption Under 17 U.S.C. § 1201 9th Triennial Rulemaking (Aug. 25, 2023), 
https://www.copyright.gov/1201/2024/petitions/proposed/New-Pet-Joint-Educators.pdf.  
[PAGE 5]
 
 
5 
 
educational entities that offer supplemental education, upskilling, retraining, recharging, and 
lifelong learning regardless of their status as a for-profit or their educational accreditation. 
The proposed exemption has the very same goal as the renewed educational exemptions 
in providing students access to high-quality audiovisual learning materials. However, the 
DMCA’s statutory prohibition on circumvention still stands in the way of achieving complete 
educational and digital equity across all educational entities. The proposed exemption can 
achieve this universal goal in promoting equal access and high-quality educational materials 
across the United States and close the gap for the educators and students currently left behind. 
The Joint Educators’ proposal would also promote innovation in the nontraditional online 
educational field allowing qualified educational entities, such as 2U, LinkedIn Learning, 
Skillshare, Udemy, etc., to utilize motion picture excerpts for legitimate educational purposes. 
These online education providers design various programs to teach students of all ages and 
educational backgrounds across a wide array of subject areas and skillsets. The programs include 
learning plans, which may be formatted as certificate programs, bootcamps, or training and 
development courses. 
Participation in a certificate program, accredited or nonaccredited, helps students develop 
or strengthen career skills in a specific subject.14 Certificate programs cover countless skills 
across subject areas such as business, marketing, language learning, film, data science, etc. 
Regardless of whether students possess prior education, they will benefit from a certificate 
program because they are taught technical skills that prepare them for practical skills at either a 
beginner or advanced level.15  A certificate notation on a resume signals to employers that the 
job candidate has the on-demand, applicable skills for a role. Meanwhile, bootcamps teach 
students skills at a fast pace, and they are typically aimed at teaching computing and other 
technical skills. Bootcamps tend to focus on a single computer area like cybersecurity or a 
coding language like Python.16 Like certificate programs, bootcamps teach students job-related 
skills through practical learning. Due to the confidence in the relevant, high-demand skills taught 
to students, bootcamps often offer a tuition-back guarantee for students that do not land a job 
after the program’s completion.17 Beyond certificate programs and bootcamps, there are general 
learning and development courses, which are sometimes called microdegrees or nanodegrees. 
These courses provide educational videos for students seeking personal and professional growth 
and for businesses looking to create custom online training courses to upskill their employees. 
These courses support and advance students’ careers as continuous professional development is 
now desired by employers in the modern workforce.  
The nontraditional educational entities described above are adversely affected in their 
ability to make noninfringing uses of short excerpts of motion pictures, yet these entities account 
for a crucial and growing part of the education sector.  Students’ driving motive to acquire an 
education is to increase their prospects for securing and succeeding at a job, and these 
 
14 What Are Certificate Programs? A 2023 Guide, Coursera (Nov. 9, 2023), 
https://www.coursera.org/articles/certificate-programs.  
15 Id. 
16 Michelle Jones et al., What Is A Bootcamp? Getting Into Tech Without A Degree, FORBES (Aug. 15, 2023, 11:57 
AM), https://www.forbes.com/advisor/education/what-is-a-bootcamp/.  
17 Id. 
[PAGE 6]
 
 
6 
 
nontraditional learning paths appeal to students and employers because they provide practical 
skills.18 Major companies like Accenture, IBM, Google, and Bank of America are not requiring 
college degrees for numerous entry-level jobs to remove a paper ceiling, which will build a 
diverse workforce and address talent gaps that are plaguing industries.19 The role that this class 
of online educators and preparers of online learning materials plays in the education sector is 
meaningful, and the proposed exemption would ensure that these nontraditional educational 
entities are no longer adversely affected. 
EDUCATIONAL EQUITY IS HINDERED BY THE STATUTORY PROHIBITION ON 
CIRCUMVENTING ACCESS CONTROLS 
Beyond the meaningful role that these innovative, nontraditional educational entities play 
in providing students with practical skills, the demand for the online learning opportunities 
described above has skyrocketed. The COVID-19 pandemic drove educators and students to 
online learning; although, the pandemic simply accelerated a trend that was already there. In 
2012, 25% of United States college students took at least one distance learning course.20 This 
number rose to 36% by 2019 according to NCES.21 The trend in online education is predicted to 
continue growing. For instance, 2U has expanded to 76 million people globally in its learner 
network.22 Also, the eighth annual Changing Landscape of Online Education (CHLOE) report 
indicates an increased demand for online and hybrid learning along with a decrease in demand 
for face-to-face courses.23 With more students increasingly turning to online learning, it is time 
to treat all educational entities equally. 
In recognizing the need for the Joint Educator’s proposed exemption, the students of 
these educational entities are the central consideration. The students suffer consequences when 
nontraditional educational entities are adversely affected in their ability to make noninfringing 
uses of high-quality motion pictures excerpts. Educational innovations enable students of any 
age, educational level, and circumstance to learn. These are the same students who would 
otherwise not be able to receive a degree from a traditional institution, but are empowered by 
certificate programs, bootcamps, or training and development courses. 
In addition to the practical skills that nontraditional educational entities teach, numerous 
characteristics of these learning programs help to expand education to underserved students. 
First, the cost of these online learning programs is significantly less expensive than a traditional 
 
18 Michael T. Nietzel, New Coursera Survey: Industry Certificates Hold Strong Appeal For College Students And 
Employers, FORBES (Sept. 27, 2022, 7:44 AM), https://www.forbes.com/sites/michaeltnietzel/2022/09/27/new-
coursera-survey-industry-certificates-hold-strong-appeal-for-college-students-and-employers/?sh=7d71db6f2e29.  
19 Id.  
20 Ilana Hamilton & Veronica Beagle, By The Numbers: The Rise Of Online Learning In The U.S., FORBES (May 
24, 2023, 1:31 PM), https://www.forbes.com/advisor/education/student-resources/online-learning-stats/.  
21 Id. 
22 2U Releases 2022 Transparency & Outcomes Report, 2U (July 27, 2023), https://2u.com/latest/2022-
transparency-outcomes-report/.  
23 Quality Matters & Eduventures Research, CHLOE 8: Student Demand Moves Higher Ed Toward a Multi-Modal 
Future (Aug. 15, 2023), https://www.qualitymatters.org/qa-resources/resource-center/articles-resources/CHLOE-8-
report-2023.  
[PAGE 7]
 
 
7 
 
degree. Certificate programs can cost anywhere from $50 a month to $6,000 for the program.24 
In comparison, in 2023-2024, the average estimated budgets (tuition and fees, housing and food, 
and allowances for books and supplies, transportation and other personal expenses) for full-time 
undergraduate students range from $19,860 for public two-year in-district students and $28,840 
for public four-year in-state students to $46,730 for public four-year out-of-state students and 
$60,420 for private nonprofit four-year students.25 Another consideration for traditional degree 
programs at colleges and universities is that it is difficult for students who must work a full-time 
job to attend. The nontraditional educational entities’ learning programs are typically much more 
flexible in offering a variety of paces and asynchronous learning options. Furthermore, these 
programs provide flexibility to learn at your own pace and in just a few weeks or months rather 
than years.26 The cost, flexibility, time, and practical skills taught through these learning 
programs enable marginalized groups to seek an education and career advancement regardless of 
their location, employment, education, and income status. 
As these learning programs become a more viable and increasingly sought replacement 
for college and university degrees,27 young adults can consider nontraditional education routes. 
Students considering a pivot to a different career or advancement in their current role can greatly 
benefit from what these online educational entities have to offer. For example, Skillshare, a 
learning community for creators, found that 60% of individuals identifying as creative 
professionals are looking to switch companies or careers in light of the current economy.28 
Professionals today must continue to learn new skills for both job retention and career 
advancement. These nontraditional educational entities are designed to enable the life-long 
learning approach, which is already required in certain professions like law and medicine and are 
becoming increasingly necessary in other technological sectors as well.29 Skill sets for jobs have 
changed approximately 25% since 2017, which is expected to double by 2027, and 89% of 
learning and development proponents believe proactively building skills will support the 
navigation of this work evolution.30 With the new wave of automation and generative artificial 
intelligence, jobs are threatened as skill gaps widen and reskilling is made imperative.31 Life-
long learning and reskilling are now more necessary than ever before, and these nontraditional 
educational entities are a large part of the solution.  
In consideration of automation and artificial intelligence, nontraditional educational 
entities can improve learning capabilities for students by personalizing learning experiences. 
 
24 What Are Certificate Programs? A 2023 Guide, Coursera (Nov. 9, 2023), 
https://www.coursera.org/articles/certificate-programs. 
25 Trends in College Pricing and Student Aid 2023, CollegeBoard (Nov. 2023), 
https://research.collegeboard.org/media/pdf/Trends%20Report%202023%20Updated.pdf.  
26 See What Are Certificate Programs? A 2023 Guide, supra note 24. 
27 See Nietzel, supra note 18. 
28 2023 Trendshare, Shillshare (2023), https://www.skillshare.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2023/02/Skillshare-
Trendshare-Report-2023.pdf.  
29 Bernard Marr, The Top 5 Education Trends In 2023, FORBES (Feb. 17, 2023, 2:26 AM), 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2023/02/17/the-top-5-education-trends-in-2023/?sh=6ce19da64d39.  
30 2023 Workplace Learning Report, LinkedIn Learning (2023), 
https://learning.linkedin.com/content/dam/me/learning/en-us/pdfs/workplace-learning-report/LinkedIn-
Learning_Workplace-Learning-Report-2023-EN.pdf.  
31 Jorge Tamayo et al., Reskilling in the Age of AI, Harvard Business Review (Sept.-Oct. 2023), 
https://hbr.org/2023/09/reskilling-in-the-age-of-ai.  
[PAGE 8]
 
 
8 
 
Through data-driven insights and algorithms, online educational entities can adapt to each 
learner’s pace, preferences, and strengths to enhance engagement and boost retention rates by 
catering to individual needs.32 This customization helps break down barriers for any student in 
pursuit of an education.  
Primary and secondary students also utilize these online educational entities. Students use 
these learning programs alongside their college or high school curriculum.33 With the flexibility, 
interactive nature, and personalization of these nontraditional educational entities, primary and 
secondary students can benefit from these entities in ways that they cannot in traditional 
classrooms. Examples of these innovative educational entities that are geared towards pre-
kindergarten, primary, secondary, and homeschooling students include ABCmouse and Create & 
Learn in addition to the platforms previously mentioned. Additionally, ensuring that young 
learners have equal access to high-quality audiovisual learning materials has never been more 
necessary in light of the national teacher crisis. Administrators say that to deal with the staffing 
shortfalls, they are relying again this year on long-term substitute teachers, hiring emergency 
certified teachers with no teaching qualifications or experience, bringing in teachers from 
overseas, and increasing class sizes.34 With the increase in edtech, nontraditional educational 
entities are one of the solutions to this crisis as students, parents, and schools turn to these 
platforms.  
Recognizing the value of what these platforms have to offer, colleges and universities 
have already partnered with these nontraditional educational entities. Through a partnership, 2U 
will launch 50 new degree programs with six universities.35 Traditional higher education 
institutions and their career services departments are recognizing and promoting the value of 
these innovative educational entities as well. The educational landscape is evolving. As 
innovation continues, these nontraditional educational entities are becoming more prominent 
learning institutions. Education is a right that students of all ages and backgrounds should have 
access to. The DMCA’s statutory prohibition on circumventing access controls adversely 
impacts these educational entities uses of short excerpts of motion pictures to provide access to 
quality educational materials in achievement of equity across the United States education sector. 
 
 
32 Aaleen F, Revolutionizing Education: The Power of EdTech and Online Learning Platforms, MEDIUM (Aug. 11, 
2023), https://medium.com/@aaleen.f01/revolutionizing-education-the-power-of-edtech-and-online-learning-
platforms-6e9e6fc55f82.  
33 Cory Stieg, 7 Ways Students Use Codeacademy to Get Ahead in Class (& Life), Codecademy (Sept. 5, 2023), 
https://www.codecademy.com/resources/blog/learn-to-code-on-your-own-in-
college/#:~:text=Lots%20of%20our%20learners%20use,and%20start%20gaining%20practical%20experience. See 
also High School Camps Powered by 2U, 2U, https://bootcamps.2u.com/highschool/ (last visited Nov. 19, 2023). 
34 Shannon Pettypiece, From ’crisis‘ to ’catastrophe,’ schools scramble once again to find teachers, NBC News 
(Aug. 13, 2023, 7:00 AM), https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/economics/crisis-catastrophe-schools-scramble-find-
teachers-rcna98083.  
35 2U Signs 50 New Online Degrees with Six University Partners, 2U (Nov. 10, 2023), https://investor.2u.com/news-
and-events/press-releases/news-details/2023/2U-Signs-50-New-Online-Degrees-with-Six-University-
Partners/default.aspx.  
[PAGE 9]
 
 
9 
 
THE QUALITY OF EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS IS HINDERED BY THE 
STATUTORY PROHIBITION ON CIRCUMVENTING ACCESS CONTROLS 
The Joint Educators’ proposed exemption directly impacts the quality of educational 
materials provided by the nontraditional educational entities. Most importantly, none of the 
benefits of using motion picture excerpts can be reaped if they are not of the highest quality. 
Screen capture is a technology that enables encrypted works to be used without a license. 
However, screen capture has a reduced image resolution, jumbled audio synchronization, and 
frame incoherence. Screen capture is not a suitable alternative for high-quality motion picture 
excerpts due to the degraded picture quality, distorted image and audio, and dropped frames. 
Providing screen capture to nontraditional educational entities would widen the learning gap 
amongst students and further exacerbate inequalities. Opponents have previously argued that 
screen capture is an adequate alternative to circumvention since high-quality images are not 
necessary for analysis in learning programs. This assumption fails to register the dramatic shift in 
educational practice that has taken place since the advent of the Internet.36 Low quality screen 
captures defeat the purpose of the Joint Educators’ proposed exemption entirely. Learners are 
accustomed to high video quality in their lives outside of education with the prevalence of 
streaming services and social media. The connections, analysis, and comprehension of students 
is decreased with the poor quality of screen captures. High-quality motion picture excerpts are 
necessary to improve students’ ability to learn across disciplines, as described below. 
First, high-quality motion picture excerpts are necessary parts of curricula given the 
increasingly digital society students now face. Being literate in our society requires that students 
can read and analyze audiovisual media.37 Regardless of the context, exposure to videos in 
learning plans ensures students can digest audiovisual clips, which play a crucial role in modern 
media. The benefits of using high-quality motion picture excerpts to teach can enhance learning 
and retention while providing students with necessary perspectives and skills to succeed in both 
their professional and personal lives. 
Second, high-quality motion picture excerpts promote student engagement.38 
Incorporating a television show or motion picture into a lesson quickly peaks students’ interest, 
especially when pulled from popular media. Educational materials that are both engaging and 
interesting to students grab their attention and increase their willingness to learn. Watching these 
clips can improve retention according to psychology. For instance, “two presentations of the 
same information should lead to better retention than a single presentation.”39 This variability in 
the information encoded through multiple modalities, such as viewing a video clip and reading a 
text, should enhance retention.40 Additionally, visual depiction of learning material can facilitate 
 
36 Lyndon Seitz, How Did the Internet Change the Way We Learn?, Broadband Search (Dec. 4, 2023), 
https://www.broadbandsearch.net/blog/how-internet-changed-learning-education. 
37 Jon Goodspeed, Support students’ learning, and find the best video streaming sites for schools and classrooms, 
Common Sense Media (Nov. 10, 2022), https://www.commonsense.org/education/articles/teachers-essential-guide-
to-showing-movies-and-videos-in-the-classroom. 
38 Id. 
39 Andrew C. Butler et al., Using Popular Films to Enhance Classroom Learning: The Good, the Bad, and the 
Interesting, Psychological Science 20(9), p. 1162 (2009), http://psychnet.wustl.edu/memory/wp-
content/uploads/2018/04/Butler-et-al-2009_PsychSci.pdf.  
40 Id.  
[PAGE 10]
 
 
10 
 
dual coding, which is the psychological concept that visual information in addition to verbal 
information leads to better retention.41  
Evidence supports the benefits of using high-quality motion picture excerpts to teach. 
Two experiments showed that when the information depicted in a film was consistent with the 
information read within text, “watching the film clip increased correct recall by about 50% 
relative to reading the text alone.”42 Considering that repeatedly reading information-dense 
passages provides limited retention improvement after a single reading, the use of high-quality 
films in this study showed increased learning likely due to encoding variability and dual 
coding.43 There can be concerns as to whether the film is historically accurate, especially when 
used in history lessons; however, this study overall demonstrated that popular films could 
increase learning and interest, and educators can mitigate effects from misinformation present in 
films when showing them in the classroom.44 
High-quality audiovisual clips can also be used to present perspectives that would be 
difficult to convey through a different medium. Films can present multiple perspectives to 
students and enable them to gain an understanding of and empathize with the experiences of 
individuals and communities far removed from their reality.45 Students will be able to make 
much better connections to individuals depicted on a screen rather than through text. When 
teaching human rights, film depicts experiences of survivors and underscores the human capacity 
for resilience, which can have a memorable impact on students where other teaching mechanisms 
would struggle to do so.46 High-quality audiovisual clips can provide a first-hand depiction of an 
experience rather than reading a second-hand account through text. Movies, television shows, 
and videos can facilitate the sharing of diverse stories and highlight experiences and perspective 
of individuals from under-represented groups.47 Ultimately, including high-quality television 
shows and film clips will further equity initiatives. 
The benefits of high-quality motion picture clips extend across subject areas. Petitioner 
Peter Decherney has long used short motion picture excerpts to facilitate the comment and 
criticism of films as these clips are a crucial component of the multimedia criticism field’s 
existence. Beyond multimedia interpretation and analysis, the audiovisual clips can be used in 
history and human rights courses as explained above. Additionally, motion picture excerpts are 
essential in language learning programs. A study indicated that movies are a valuable source of 
input for English language learning as watching improves English oral skills and vocabulary 
acquisition.48 Learners imitated native speakers in movies and learned how to pronounce English 
 
41 Id. 
42 Id. at 1166. 
43 Id.  
44 Id. at 1167. 
45 Noam Schimmel, Using films to encourage reflection and critical thinking in your teaching, Time Higher 
Education (Oct. 15, 2021), https://www.timeshighereducation.com/campus/using-films-encourage-reflection-and-
critical-thinking-your-teaching.  
46 Id.  
47 Goodspeed, supra note 37. 
48 Norwati Roslim et al., Exploring Movies for Language Teaching and Learning at the Tertiary Level, Asian 
Journal of University Education 17(3), p. 278-79 (July 2021), https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1309430.pdf.  
[PAGE 11]
 
 
11 
 
words, and most importantly, the students enjoyed using movies to learn English and felt 
motivated.49  
The Joint Educators’ exemption can improve language learning clips with high-quality 
motion picture excerpts. Udemy, a for-profit, nonaccredited online educational entity, currently 
has a lesson entitled “Learn English with Movie Clips,” which is intended to help students learn 
English from the real-world context of a movie scene.50 Although, when watching a preview of 
the course, only a still from the movie is provided and then the script of a scene is read rather 
than a motion picture excerpt being played.51 Providing only a screenshot of the movie clearly 
limits the effectiveness of the course and adversely impacts students trying to learn English 
pronunciation, accents, and gestures within the culture. A high-quality audiovisual clip could 
achieve the intended objective of this course since students could hear and watch a conversation 
carried out in English and additionally learn from the actors’ body language. 
The extent to which movies can be utilized to learn is limitless. In another example, high-
quality motion picture excerpts can also be used to teach the art of storytelling as demonstrated 
by the course entitled “Storytelling” that is facilitated by the MOOC Khan Academy.52 In Unit 2, 
high-quality motion picture excerpts are utilized to highlight the importance of storytelling as 
explained by the directors, storyboard artists, and animators at Pixar.53 This unit “Pixar in a Box: 
the art of storytelling” includes clips from well-known Pixar movies as the practitioners explain 
how, for instance, in the introduction, to use personal experiences to make a story come to life.54 
Beyond these important subject matters, motion picture excerpts can be utilized to learn 
about psychology. For instance, the children’s advocacy group Common Sense provides a lesson 
plan for teachers looking to explain social psychology concepts to students.55 Clips from the 
miniseries Maid can be used to teach about the United States social welfare system. Meanwhile, 
clips from the popular television show Succession can be used to teach about corporate 
compliance. Law school classes often utilize the proverbial expert testimony scene from My 
Cousin Vinny to teach about the rules of evidence. These are only a few examples in which high-
quality motion picture excerpts can contribute to students’ learning as the list is endless. 
As demonstrated below, MOOCs, K-12 schools, and universities possess a fair use 
exemption to use these copyrighted motion picture clips for educational purposes. The Joint 
Educators offer these covered entities’ uses as real-word examples. For-profit, nonaccredited 
entities’ use of such motion picture excerpts in learning programs would be used in the same 
manner as MOOCs, K-12 schools, and universities in advancing student learning. Most of the 
 
49 Id.  
50 See Zahed Besharati, Learn English with Movie Clips, Udemy (Nov. 2023), 
https://www.udemy.com/course/learn-english-with-movie-clips/.  
51 Id. 
52 Storytelling, Khan Academy, https://www.khanacademy.org/humanities/hass-storytelling/storytelling-pixar-in-a-
box/ah-piab-we-are-all-storytellers/v/storytelling-introb (last visited Dec. 12, 2023). 
53 Id. 
54 Id. 
55 See Christine Elgersma, Inside Out and SEL: A Movie Guide and Lesson Plan for Your Classroom, Common 
Sense (July 7, 2023), https://www.commonsense.org/education/articles/inside-out-and-sel-a-movie-guide-and-
lesson-plan-for-your-classroom.  
[PAGE 12]
 
 
12 
 
uses by these remaining educational entities can only be hypothetical as copyright laws currently 
stand in the way of these educators and students.  
The use of copyrighted motion picture excerpts by these educational entities is currently 
illegal. Those who run these educational entities must grapple with the adversity they already 
face in light of their wages, limited time, and difficult jobs, especially in the face of the national 
teacher shortage, to also overcome the complex process of getting copyright permission or a 
license to use the audiovisual clips. Educators would have to navigate the lengthy legal process 
to identify the permission they need, identify and locate the copyright owner, and then negotiate 
permissions to license.56 This is not a feasible pursuit for teachers creating a learning plan to 
follow. The statutory prohibition on circumventing access controls clearly hinders the quality of 
educational materials teachers can present to students by putting unnecessary blocks in front of 
nontraditional educators.  
THE USES BY QUALIFIED EDUCTIONAL ENTITIES ARE NONINFRINGING 
UNDER 17 U.S.C. § 107 
The Joint Educator’s proposed exemption is consistent with the requirements of fair use 
under the Copyright Act. Section 107 permits the use of copyrighted work “for purposes such as 
criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research.”57 The Librarian upheld 
the Joint Educator’s two renewals for MOOCs, K-12 schools, and colleges and universities in the 
Eighth Triennial Rulemaking, noting that the use of motion picture excerpts falls within the 
bounds of fair use.58 Also, the current Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) acknowledged 
that both of these exemptions still fulfill fair use requirements with the Copyright Office’s 
recommendation of renewal.59 These renewals have been repeatedly determined to be 
noninfringing.  
Both of these existing exemptions have allowed non-profit or accredited educational 
institutions to expand learning boundaries by incorporating short excerpts of motion pictures into 
course curriculum. The Joint Educators seek an analogous allowance for qualified but 
nontraditional educational entities regardless of their status as a for-profit or their educational 
accreditation. These nontraditional educational entities currently would need to pay licensing 
fees to utilize copyrighted motion picture excerpts in learning plans. The current market for short 
clip for educational purposes seems to still be essentially nonexistent if an educator does not 
want to use the entire film. More importantly, these educators could currently face criminal 
sanctions if they implement such material in their courses without permission even though it 
qualifies as fair use. All educational entities should possess an equal right to the fair use of short, 
high-quality excerpts of motion pictures, so all teachers can effectively educate students of all 
backgrounds and ages.  
 
56 How To Get Copyright Permission or a License?, Copyright Alliance, 
https://copyrightalliance.org/faqs/copyright-permission-or-license/ (last visited Nov. 28, 2023). 
57 17 U.S.C. § 107. 
58 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 
86 Fed. Reg. 59,627, 59,529 (Oct. 28, 2021). 
59 Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted Works, 88 Fed. Reg. 72,013, 72,017 
(Oct. 19, 2023) (to be codified at 37 C.F.R. pt. 201). 
[PAGE 13]
 
 
13 
 
An examination of the four factors of fair use indicates that the educational uses of the 
Joint Educator’s proposed exemption are noninfringing fair uses. Under § 107 of the Copyright 
Act, courts evaluate four factors on a case-by-case basis to determine whether a use constitutes 
fair use: (1) the purpose and character of the use, including whether such use is of a commercial 
nature or is for non-profit educational purposes; (2) the nature of the copyrighted work; (3) the 
amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the copyrighted work as a whole; and 
(4) the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the copyrighted work.60 
The first factor weighs in favor of a fair use finding. The proposed class of uses is strictly 
for educational purposes by qualified educational entities as suggested by the NTIA, which is 
one of the acceptable fair use examples listed in the preamble of § 107. Any use permitted under 
this exemption would be solely for the purpose of educating learners that fall outside the bounds 
of accredited, non-profit educational spaces. Rather than utilizing the copyrighted works for their 
original entertainment purpose, these educators use motion picture excerpts to teach students 
through tailored learning plans and discussions. In Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., the 
Supreme Court ruled that the more transformative the use, the more likely a court is to find for 
fair use, regardless of commercial nature.61 Educators regularly repurpose motion picture 
excerpts into educational tools in a fashion that is highly transformative.62 Moreover, the 
collateral commercial benefit of some of these nontraditional educational entities covered by this 
proposed exemption does not create a bar to fair use as many of the activities covered in the 
preamble of § 107 have a for-profit basis.63 The Register acknowledges that fair use is valid in 
commercial contexts if transformative. 
The Register has expressed concern and denied the Joint Educators’ exemption in 
previous filings because it believes the exemption to be over-broad by including for-profit 
educators.64 The commercial nature of any of these qualified for-profit educational entities does 
not undermine their legitimacy or their entitlement to fair use protections. The qualified 
educational entity will limit these only learning materials, to the extent technologically feasible, 
to registered learners of their online learning platform, institute copyright policies, and provide 
copyright information to educators and preparers of online learning materials, learners, and 
relevant staff members. Further, these entities will work to reasonably prevent unauthorized 
further dissemination of the materials in accessible forms to others. 
Second, the nature of these copyrighted works lends themselves to fair use. Films and 
television shows are created for mass audiences’ entertainment both across the United States and 
abroad. The specific educational uses requested by the Joint Educators advance the goal of 
 
60 17 U.S.C. § 107. 
61 See generally Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 580 (1994) 
62 Id. at 580 (stating that the key purpose of the first factor in a fair use assessment is to determine whether the new 
work merely “supersede[s] the objects” of the original creation, or instead adds something new, with a further 
purpose of different character). 
63 Id. at 569 (“The language of the statute makes clear that the commercial or nonprofit educational purpose of a 
work is only one element of the first factor enquiry into its purpose and character.... If, indeed, commerciality 
carried presumptive force against a finding of fairness, the presumption would swallow nearly all of the illustrative 
uses listed in the preamble paragraph of § 107, including news reporting, comment, criticism, teaching, scholarship, 
and research, since these activities “are generally conducted for profit in this country.”). 
64 Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted Works, supra note 2. 
[PAGE 14]
 
 
14 
 
promoting educational equity. These motion picture excerpts can be transformed to be an 
effective learning tool because the engaging and appealing nature of television and film can 
illustrate difficult concepts for students in ways that a slide deck, oral lecture, or textbook cannot. 
For example, watching clips of a nature documentary can provide the highest quality visual 
imagery for a biology course attempting to explain abstract concepts like animal evolution or 
photosynthesis. Transformative uses like this may seem inconsequential, but they are invaluable 
to students and educators. 
The third statutory factor also weighs in favor of fair use. The Joint Educators only 
request an exemption for the nontraditional educational entities to incorporate short excerpts of 
motion pictures for educational purposes. These excerpts would be used for criticism, comment, 
illustration, and explanation in offerings to registered students of the nontraditional educational 
entities when the use of the excerpt would contribute significantly to learning. Any incorporation 
and use of the motion picture excerpts would be appropriately concise and limited to the extent 
necessary for the aforementioned purposes. 
Finally, the last factor is most contentious for copyright owners but still weighs in favor 
of fair use. The Copyright Office has already acknowledged that the use of motion picture 
excerpts for educational purposes by K-12 schools, universities, and MOOCs has a minimal 
effect on the content market at best.65 Also, the use of motion picture excerpts for educational 
purposes does not substitute for the entire work in the marketplace.66 It is a stretch to argue that 
the use of very short motion picture excerpts by qualified educators in online learning for 
educational purposes usurps or even harms the market for films and television shows for 
entertainment.  
In the Eighth Triennial Rulemaking, the NTIA communicated its view on each of the 
proposed exemptions from the DMCA’s prohibition against circumvention because the NTIA, as 
contemplated by Congress, can contribute its subject matter expertise.67 Overall, the NTIA’s 
letter addresses the difficulty of creating precise language that protects content providers from 
being taken advantage of and supports the Copyright Office in doing so.68 Regardless, the NTIA 
“believes the established safeguards articulated in the MOOC exemption provides good 
guidance.”69 The Joint Educator’s proposed exemption limits the use of copyrighted clips to 
short excerpts of motion pictures for educational purposes, fulfilling the fourth fair use factor.  
With the suggestion that these educational entities within the Joint Educators’ proposed 
exemption should be required to acquire an accreditation or become a nonprofit to take 
advantage of the exemption, the NTIA responded that “it would be sufficient to qualify for this 
exemption if the entity is registered with their state or local jurisdiction as an entity, for-profit or 
 
65 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 
83 Fed. Reg. 54,010, 54,010 (Oct. 26, 2018). 
66 See Campbell, 510 U.S. at 591 (‘‘cognizable market harm’’ is limited to ‘‘market substitution’’). 
67 See Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted Works, supra note 2; See, e.g., H.R. 
Rep. No. 105–551, pt. 2, at 23 (July 22, 1998) (noting NTIA’s “expertise in the area of telecommunications and 
information services and technologies”); 144 Cong. Rec. E2136–02 (Oct. 12, 1998) (in which the Chair of the House 
Commerce Committee “consider[ed] it vital for the Register to consult closely” with NTIA).  
68 Letter from Evelyn L. Remaley, Assistant Sec‘y of Com. for Commc‘n and Info., NTIA, to Shira Perlmutter, Reg. 
of Copyrights and Dir. of U.S. Copyright Off., 11 (Oct. 1, 2021). 
69 Id. 
[PAGE 15]
 
 
15 
 
not-for-profit, with an educational purpose or mission,” especially in consideration of the 
expanded opportunities for new small business and online learning opportunities.70 In terms of 
technological protection methods articulated, the NTIA believed the safeguards articulated in the 
MOOC exemption provided good guidance as the “institutional and technological limitations 
continue to be appropriate to prevent infringing uses of the short clips created for this 
exemption.”71 The Joint Educators endorses these requirements and clarifies that qualified 
educational entities should meet these standards. 
With these educational registration and mission safeguards and all four statutory factors 
leaning towards a fair use finding, the use of short motion picture excerpts for educational 
purposes by these qualified educational entities for criticism and comments should be deemed a 
non-infringing transformative use. 
THE PROPOSED EXEMPTION MEETS THE §1201(a)(1)(C) STATUTORY FACTORS  
The Joint Educator’s proposed exemption meets the statutory factors enumerated in 
§1201(a)(1)(C). Accordingly, and as requested, below is a general analysis of the statutory 
factors, which are more thoroughly explored and evidenced in the sections above. 
(i) The availability of the copyrighted works: 
The Joint Educator’s proposed exemption is not premised upon a general lack of 
availability of copyrighted works but rather the unavailability of works made inaccessible by 
TPMs for specific educational uses that would benefit students of nontraditional educational 
entities. As online learning grows, the digital content that can be used for effective learning 
measures also increases. For example, online learning platforms may use clips from the public 
domain, DVDs, and various streaming services. Despite current availability, the DMCA’s 
prohibition on circumventing TPMs on copyrighted works prevents nontraditional educational 
entities from equitable access to digital sources. 
(ii) the availability for use of works for nonprofit archival, preservation, and 
educational purposes: 
As discussed in detail above, the Joint Educators continue to petition for this exemption 
to promote students’ ability to learn and the continued innovation of education. The use of 
motion picture excerpts is a proven tool for educational success. Combining film clips with 
learning programs has positive impacts on learning progress. High-quality motion picture 
excerpts encourage student engagement with popular and relatable media content. More 
importantly, not all students learn the same way. Further, students are far more likely to learn 
best when they take in information through multiple modalities.72 Using multiple modalities to 
explore a particular subject engages different senses, which can deepen students’ understanding. 
Presenting learning material through the various contexts of multiple modalities increases 
learning retention and recall. Additionally, allowing all educational entities to use decrypted film 
 
70 Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted Works, supra note 2. 
71 Id. at 12. 
72 Youki Terada, The Science of Drawing and Memory, Edutopia (Mar. 14, 2019), 
https://www.edutopia.org/article/science-drawing-and-memory. 
[PAGE 16]
 
 
16 
 
clips supports dual coding theories. Dual coding increases retention when a visual depiction of 
material taught is presented with verbal or text presentations. 
(iii) the impact that the prohibition on the circumvention of technological measures 
applied to copyrighted works has on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, 
scholarship, or research: 
As described in the sections above, the inability of the nontraditional educational entities 
to legally circumvent TPMs significantly undermines their ability to provide students with a 
quality educational experience. Adding motion picture excerpts to courses that currently do not 
have access without licensing agreements will promote engaging and effective learning 
experiences for students of all backgrounds and ages. A large portion of the population is turning 
toward online learning or using alternative learning methods to augment traditional education. 
These educators and students will always remain at a disadvantage if the Copyright Office does 
not install this exemption to close the gaps that exist in the American education system. 
(iv)  the effect of circumvention of technological measures on the market for or value of 
copyrighted works:  
Allowing educators to circumvent technological measures to access film clips would be 
strictly limited to minimize any potential effect on the market or value of copyrighted works. The 
Joint Educator’s proposed exemption requires that all educational entities requesting access to 
copyrighted material limit their sharing to registered learners, implement copyright policies, 
provide clear copyright information, and work to reasonably prevent unauthorized sharing of 
such materials. Also, the TPM policy instituted in the proposed exemption is the same policy as 
the MOOC exemption. 
These motion picture excerpts are meant only for the limited purpose of educating 
students by emphasizing or illustrating a specific concept as part of an enhanced learning 
experience. Because the clips being used are short in duration and not meant to replace the 
experience of viewing the work in its entirety, the incorporated clips should actually encourage 
students to purchase streaming subscriptions or rent the larger works, which would undoubtedly 
increase the market value of the copyrighted works excerpted. Overall, the limitations imposed 
regarding an institution’s accreditation or for-profit status harm presently excluded educators and 
students far more than they benefit copyright holders. 
(v) such other factors as the Librarian considers appropriate:  
The TEACH Act may be a relevant consideration for the Librarian, but it can ultimately 
be determined to not apply to the 1201 exemption pertaining to online education. 
Copyright law has always sat at the intersection between creators and consumers, serving 
as the arbiter of how creative works should be distributed among the public. With this 
responsibility comes the need to adapt the law to new technological demands and methods of 
digital dissemination. The Technology, Education and Copyright Harmonization Act of 2002, 
colloquially known as the TEACH Act, was formulated to address the challenges that online 
educators faced when they sought to make copies of creative works to use in their lessons, 
[PAGE 17]
 
 
17 
 
similar to the ways face-to-face teachers were doing with photos, tapes, and other recordings.73 
The TEACH Act was undoubtedly a remedy for a pressing problem, one that has only grown and 
changed as online learning has become commonplace in the United States. However, the 
dimensions of online learning have shifted dramatically, and students’ needs have far outgrown 
the confines of the statute. 
Further, the Act authorizes online educational entities to digitize works for online 
education, but only to the extent that they are allowed to use those works in Section 110(2) of the 
Copyright Act.74 Thus, the material allowed by the Act remains significantly limited by 
antiquated restraints. The TEACH Act revolutionized the impact that copyrighted materials have 
on different classroom settings, but this occurred over twenty years ago and must be adapted to 
suit its initial purpose: equity among students and educators. 
The NTIA noted that the TEACH Act is an important, but dated, resource for the 
Copyright Office to consider. The NTIA argued that the TEACH Act “can be instructive, but this 
exemption process is designed to be flexible and innovative,” and therefore does not need to 
work within the confines of a statue that “may be dated or irrelevant to the circumstances at 
hand.”75 Further, the NTIA acknowledged the need for an exemption that is “appropriately 
inclusive” while affording copyright owners adequate protections against infringement for their 
works.76 In an effort to strike an ideal balance, the Joint Educators endorse the NTIA 
recommendation that the exemption be limited to “educational entities that employ educators or 
demonstrate that they themselves are educators that provide or develop content whether or not 
they are accredited or are for-profit or not-for-profit.”77  
The legislative history of the TEACH Act does more than suggest the Internet had 
already and would continue to revolutionize educational practices in years to come. In 2002, the 
internet was still in its relative infancy. In his report to the Committee on the Judiciary on the 
Teach Act, Senator Hatch and the Senate Judiciary Committee expressed a desire for the United 
States to remain competitive by expanding education beyond a traditional brick-and-mortar 
building and normalizing learning at all ages and for all trades.78 If all educational entities do not 
have access to the same materials to make their lessons vibrant and effective, the most 
disadvantaged students will fall further behind than they already are. Granting the Joint 
Educator’s exemption carries forth the spirit of the TEACH Act into the modern era of 
education. 
Also, as detailed in the section below, the Copyright Office has a role to play in 
advancing educational and digital equity. 
 
73 Technology, Education and Copyright Harmonization (”TEACH”) Act: Hearing Before the Senate Committee on 
the Judiciary, 107 Cong. 1 (2001) (Statement of Marybeth Peters). 
74 Id. 
75 Exemptions to Permit Circumvention of Access Controls on Copyrighted Works, supra note 2. 
76 Id. at 11. 
77 Id.  
78 (Committee on the Judiciary Report on Technology, Education and Copyright Harmonization Act of 2001) S. 
Rep. No. 107-31, at 4 (2001). 
[PAGE 18]
 
 
18 
 
THE PROPOSED EXEMPTION WILL PLAY A CRUCIAL ROLE IN BROADER 
GOVERNMENT EFFORTS TO ADVANCE DIGITAL EQUITY 
The Copyright Office has a role to play in advancing the public interest through copyright 
law. In balancing the monetary interests of creators with the responsibility to enable adversely 
impacted users to make noninfringing uses of high-quality motion picture excerpts, it is essential 
to also consider the need for copyright law to keep up with technological advancements and 
educational needs. Most importantly, the adverse effects resulting from the prohibition on 
circumventing access controls for motion pictures hinder both educational equity and digital 
equity. The Joint Educators’ proposed exemption builds off existing 1201 exemptions to allow 
nontraditional educational entities to use motion pictures excerpts for educational purposes.79 
Enabling the remaining qualified online educators and preparers of online learning materials to 
use short excerpts of motion pictures for educational purposes would ensure the goal of equity 
across educational and digital contexts is fully promoted. The actions and filings by other 
agencies and previous legislation can provide background information on the prevalence of 
equity considerations and the need to evolve with technological advancements. 
The NTIA communicated its view on each of the proposed exemptions from the 
DMCA’s prohibition against circumvention in the last triennial rulemaking. As the Joint 
Educators’ proposed exemption stands to address technological advancement, the NTIA’s 
comments are a highly relevant consideration. In their analysis of the Joint Educators’ proposed 
exemption, the NTIA recognized that “without the exemption it is likely that innovation in online 
learning will be hampered,” so the NTIA recommended granting the expansion of the exemption 
to include online educators with some modifications.80 The NTIA found that the Joint Educators 
demonstrated “these for-profit online educational entities should be treated equally with not-for-
profit educational entities.”81 The NTIA argued “this change will permit greater access to quality 
content to more learners as more and more content is accessed virtually” while repairing the 
disparity created by the current exemptions since permitting the new group to take short clips of 
audiovisual works will enhance learning in these online environments in exactly the same way.82  
The NTIA recommended the exemption for online educational entities should contain 
minimal changes to strike the right balance and drawing from the existing MOOC exemption: 
By educators and preparers of online learning materials offered by educational entities to 
registered learners of online learning platforms when use of the film and media excerpts 
will contribute significantly to learning, including for the purpose of criticism, comment, 
illustration and explanation, where the online provider will limit these online learning 
materials, to the extent technologically feasible, to registered learners of the online 
learning platform, institute copyright policies, and provide copyright information to 
educators and preparers of online learning materials, learners, and relevant staff 
members, and the online provider, to the extent technologically feasible, will work to 
 
79 See 37 CFR 201.40(b)(1)(ii)(A)); 37 CFR 201.40(b)(1)(ii)(B)). 
80 Id. at 8, 9. 
81 Id. at 10. 
82 Id. 
[PAGE 19]
 
 
19 
 
reasonably prevent unauthorized further dissemination of online learning materials in 
accessible form to others, including after the registration period ends.83 
The Joint Educators wholeheartedly support the NTIA’s suggestions concerning the 
proposed exemption. Additionally, it is important to note the NTIA recognized “that screen 
capture seldom provides the clip quality required for the users of this exemption.”84 Overall, the 
NTIA draws meaningful conclusions about the Joint Educators’ filing for this proposed 
exemption in the last rulemaking proceeding, especially as the NTIA has subject matter expertise 
in technology initiatives. With the additional evidence provided above in this rulemaking, the 
Joint Educators emphasize the proposed exemption will advance educational and digital equity.  
Beyond the NTIA’s filing on this proposed exemption, initiatives by this executive 
agency provides perspective on the landscape of educational and digital inequities persisting 
across the United States and how they are being addressed across the government. As established 
in the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, the NTIA is leading the Broadband Equity, 
Access, and Deployment (BEAD) Program, which will provide $42.45 billion in funding to build 
equitable access to universal, reliable, affordable, and high-speed Internet coverage throughout 
the United States.85 The BEAD program will help close the digital divide as Broadband Now 
reports that 42 million Americans have no access to broadband technology, which includes 
everything from WiFi and satellite to fiber-optic cables.86 BEAD is just one of many initiatives 
led by the NTIA as the department also leads the Tribal Broadband Connectivity Program 
(TBCP), the Broadband Infrastructure Program (BIP), Connecting Minority Communities 
(CMC) Program, Enabling Middle Mile Broadband Infrastructure Program, and Digital Equity 
Act Programs. With all these programs geared toward increasing broadband access, the digital 
divide will improve. The increased access to the internet may result in even more students using 
the online educational entities for learning, and the proposed exemption will ensure that the 
educational materials are of the highest quality. 
The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) also plays a major role in advancing 
digital equity. On November 15, 2023, the FCC approved rules to prevent and eliminate digital 
discrimination of access to broadband services as required by the Infrastructure Investment and 
Jobs Act.87 With these digital equity efforts passed by Congress and carried out by the federal 
agencies, ensuring equal access is a top priority; although, the executive branch is the initiator of 
these efforts as Executive Order 13985 of January 20, 2021 entitled Advancing Racial Equity 
and Support for Underserved Communities Through the Federal Government was implemented 
by the Biden-Harris Administration with the goal of embedding a focus on equity into the fabric 
 
83 Id. at 13.  
84 Id. at 16. 
85 See Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act of 2021, Division F, Title I, Section 60102, Public Law 117-58, 135 
Stat. 429 (Nov. 15, 2021). 
86 Natalie Campisi & Korrena Bailie, Millions Of Americans Are Still Missing Out On Broadband Access And 
Leaving Money On The Table-Here's Why, FORBES (May 26, 2023, 1:58 PM), 
https://www.forbes.com/advisor/personal-finance/millions-lack-broadband-access/.  
87 Task Force to Prevent Digital Discrimination, FCC, https://www.fcc.gov/task-force-prevent-digital-
discrimination (last visited Nov. 19, 2023).  
[PAGE 20]
 
 
20 
 
of federal policymaking.88 The Administration reaffirmed this continued commitment when 
President Biden signed a new Executive Order on February 16, 2023, entitled Further Advancing 
Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities Through the Federal Government.89 
Delivering equity means ensuring “all can participate, prosper, and reach their full potential.”90 
The Joint Educators believe their proposed exemption furthers this goal because the online 
educational entities will no longer be inhibited by the DMCA’s statutory prohibition on 
circumventing access controls, so these educators and students currently left behind can access 
quality audiovisual learning materials through high-quality short motion picture excerpts. 
Ultimately, the equity initiatives across the federal government and state governments 
demonstrate that advancing equitable access to education is a worthy objective for the Copyright 
Office.  
 
CONCLUSION  
The Joint Educators ask that the Librarian implement the circumvention exemption for 
the described nontraditional but qualified educational entities. Remote learning has the potential 
to bridge the massive gaps that exist in the United States education system. However, if for-
profit, nonaccredited educational entities do not have access to the use of high-quality motion 
picture excerpts that their accredited, non-profit counterparts do, students using the 
nontraditional educational entities will be at a stark disadvantage. The Joint Educators urge the 
Copyright Office to follow other federal agencies in leveling the educational playing field and 
promoting digital equity across all American populations. As alternative learning methods 
become more mainstream, it is increasingly important that educators have free and efficient ways 
of accessing high-quality motion picture excerpts to educate populations often left behind. 
 
 
88 FACT SHEET: President Biden Signs Executive Order to Strengthen Racial Equity and Support for Underserved 
Communities Across the Federal Government, White House (Feb. 16, 2023), https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/statements-releases/2023/02/16/fact-sheet-president-biden-signs-executive-order-to-strengthen-racial-equity-
and-support-for-underserved-communities-across-the-federal-government/. 
89 Id. 
90 Id.  
