[PAGE 1]
Joint filing of R Street Institute, FreedomWorks, and Niskanen Center; comment in 
Docket No. 2015-8 
 
Before the  
U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 
Washington, DC 
 
 
___________________________________ 
      ) 
In the Matter of    ) 
      ) 
Section 1201 Study    ) Docket No. 2015-8 
      )  
      )   
____________________________________) 
 
COMMENT OF JOINT LIBERTARIAN ORGANIZATIONS  
 
I. Preliminary Statement 
The signatories listed below are libertarian organizations whose mission is to 
engage in policy research and o utreach to promote free markets, individual liberty  and 
limited, effective gover nment. As part of that mission we regularly advocate  for the 
removal of arbitrary legal and regulatory barriers that threaten free and open 
technological innovation.  
In furtherance of that mission we hereby submit this comment to “Section 1201 
Study” (“ 1201 study”) (Docket No. 2015 -8), noting its additional relevance to the 
“Software-Enabled Consumer Products Study” (“software  study”) (Docket No. 2015 -6). 
We submit in this way because of the degree the two studies interrelate, thereby requiring 
them to be addressed together . When contemplating the role copyright law has in 
affecting innovation policy, overly segregating related issues creates artificial barriers 
that prevent the effective telling of what is one coherent story and which needs to be 
treated as such. 
Although certain aspects discussed below may be more specific to one study or 
another, the entirety of this comment should be considered part of the record this study. If 
the Copyright Office finds it necessary to ascribe this comment to a specific question

[PAGE 2]
 
 
 
 
posed, it is  most applicable to Question #11 of the 1201 study  (“Please identify any 
pertinent issues not referenced above that the Copyright Offi ce should consider in 
conducting its study.”).1  We also highlight where portions of this comment may also be 
applicable to other questions asked, such as Question #2 of the 1201 study  (“How 
should section 1201 accommodate interests that are outside of cor e copyright concerns, 
for example, in cases where circumvention of access controls protecting computer 
programs implicates issues of product interoperability or public safety?”), to which we 
respond unequivocally, for the following reasons, that it should not.2   
II. The Overarching Issue Relevant to Both Studies 
The essential question raised by both studies is, “What is copyright law doing 
here?” Copyright law can be traditionally understood to create limited monopolies of a 
limited set of exclusive rights fo r limited times for the authors of creative works . And, to 
the extent that it is not precluded by doctrines such as merger, scènes à faire  or the 
idea/expression dichotomy, software may in some cases be deemed an independent, 
creative work . But the ques tions contemplated by both studies are not limited to 
exploring the bounds of that potential copyrightability of software.  
What this comment addresses is where the issues transcend the question of the 
copyrightability for software and instead investigate the role copyright law plays in 
affecting how people may use and develop computing technology in general . It is that 
question there that requires the most attention, and, indeed, alarm. 
                                                 
1 It is also applicable to Question #2 of the software study (“Whether, and to what extent, the design, 
distribution, and legitimate uses of products are being enabled and/or frustrated by the application of 
existing copyright law to software in everyday products”).   
2 Question #3 of the 1201 study asks whether Section 1201 should be adjusted to allow for a presumption 
of renewal of previous exemptions, to which we would say yes.  In fact, there should be a presumption of 
validity for all sought exemptions.  Relatedly, Question #4 of the 1201 study contemplates shifting 
burdens from proponents of a class to opponents, which we would also agree is a needed improvement.  
However, small changes like these are mere Band-Aids that do not adequately address the fundamental 
problem of copyright inserting itself in how technology is used and developed, which is what our co mment 
challenges.

[PAGE 3]
 
 
 
 
The problem was illustrated in the most recent 1201 rulemaking . There were 
essentially two types of classes for which exemptions were sought: exemptions that 
would enable non-infringing consumption of copyrighted works, and exemptions seeking 
the ability to bypass a technical protectiv e measure (“TPM”) preventing access to the 
computing logic of onboard hardware (which, for brevity, will generally be referred to as 
“hardware” or “computing logic” throughout) . While we would of course advocate for 
liberal granting of exemptions of the former, it is the latter type of classes on which this 
comment focuses. 
What we saw was essentially a regulatory land -grab by copyright law to insert 
itself over the legal ability of people to use the computing devices legitimately available 
to them as the y would choose. The rationale for this insertion appeared to be as follows: 
because software is ostensibly copyrightable, and because software sits between the 
hardware and the user’s ability to control the function of the hardware, the anti -
circumvention provisions of 1201 were implicated because modifying the software meant 
bypassing the TPM controlling access to the underlying computing logic of the device 
that ran the copyrighted software.  
Everything about that presumption needs to be challenged . The difficulty with 
doing it within these studies, however, is that they search for solutions within copyright 
law, when these are problems created by copyright having extended its reach far beyond 
where it was intended and entitled to be in the first place . The better answer is ultimately 
to get copyright out of the way. 
III. Comments applicable to each study 
(1) Copyright law should not interfere with how people may freely use, modify  
or transfer electronic devices generally. 
Underpinning the software study is the  presumption that copyright is necessary to 
incentivize the creation of software . This presumption must be questioned . Given that 
software, particularly embedded software, is so often bound up in directing the technical

[PAGE 4]
 
 
 
 
operation of companion hardware, s ignificant restraint should be exercised before 
allowing monopoly rights in the software affect what the legitimate possessor of the 
object it runs can do with it.  
This restraint is particularly warranted in the case of software -enabled consumer 
products. As the most recent 1201 rulemaking itself demonstrated, there is no longer any 
meaningful difference between a computer as one was understood at the time the DMCA 
was passed and any other device capable of computing logic . There are now TV -shaped 
computers, car -shaped computers, pacemaker -shaped computers, toaster -shaped 
computers,3 even sneaker -shaped computers, 4 and more. 5  Chips capable of processing 
electronic signals are cheap and something that can be added to essentially any object . 
Although as of now the computing logic that each resulting device runs may be tailored 
to the intended purpose of each such device (for instance, smart TVs are designed to do 
different things than smart medical devices) the distinctions are not meaningful ones, and 
they are definitely not meaningful for purposes of copyright law . In all these examples 
software is controlling the operation of onboard computing logic, and nothing about that 
particular device’s operation, be it what the manufacturer intended or otherwi se, should 
affect the question of whether copyright is needed to regulate that operation . In all such 
cases the answer should be no. 
The increasing convergence between formerly non -computerized objects and 
“smart” versions illustrates why there should be this limitation on the role of copyright . 
Copyright is designed to be a solution to market failure, or the situation where no one 
                                                 
3 See, e.g., the “Breville Die-Cast 2-Slice Smart toaster” marketed for its “intelligent” ability to know just 
how much to brown bread.  http://www.brevilleusa.com/die-cast-2-slice-smart-toastertm.html (last 
reviewed Feb. 12, 2016). 
4 See, e.g., the Sketchers 10900L “Game Kicks” sneaker, which feature a “[f]ully functional game feature!” 
where  “[f]our colorful flowers light up and make sounds in a classic 'match the pattern' game .”  The shoe 
also comes with “a [r]eset button and [a] sound on/off button.”  https://www.skechers.com/en-
us/style/10900/game-kicks/gumt (last reviewed Feb. 12, 2016). 
5 See various other examples of “more,” including computer-shaped air conditioners, clothes washers, and 
lightbulbs at http://www.crookedbrains.net/2014/03/smart-and-awesome-wi-fi-gadgets.html (last reviewed 
Feb. 12, 2016).

[PAGE 5]
 
 
 
 
will make the investment in creating an expressive work if the sole basis for potentially 
profiting from that effort can easi ly be usurped by another party . The prototypical 
example is a book, where the intrinsic value of the book is the expression contained 
within, not the physical object containing it . Such is not the case, however, regarding 
embedded software in objects cap able of computing logic . In these cases it is the object, 
or device itself, that is what’s valuable.  
The producers of these physical objects are selling physical objects that do things, 
be it toasting bread, shielding feet, or merely processing electron s as any computing 
device does. The devices compete on the market based upon their objects’ ability to do 
what the consumer wants to put them to, at the cost the consumer is willing to pay, more 
optimally than those of their competitors . Thus there is no need to artificially insulate the 
manufacturer from competitive market forces with a copyright monopoly, particularly not 
when such a monopoly will consequently hobble how a user can purchase, use, or adapt 
the product in the way that they might choose. Even to the extent that embedded software 
may be somewhat copyrightable, that copyrightability should not serve to limit the 
control people have over the physical goods they choose to have in their lives.  
In fact, it is anathema to copyright that it shou ld even have begun to: even in the 
case of a book, under the first sale doctrine the owner of a physical book had traditionally 
retained the right to dispose of it has he chose, regardless of the copyright status of the 
expressive content within . It shoul d not require a statutory amendment to ensure that 
people can dispose of the other objects in their lives freely as well, even electronic 
devices with embedded software, but to the extent that it may, we support legislation such 
as the You Own Devices Act, which aims to restore that important freedom to users. 
(2) Section 1201 should not interfere with how people may freely use, modify  or 
transfer electronic devices generally. 
 Incongruously attached to the copyright statute is Section 1201 . Ostensibly it is 
intended to prohibit the interference with “digital rights management” (“DRM”)

[PAGE 6]
 
 
 
 
mechanisms controlling the access to digital copies of copyrighted works . In practice, 
however, it effectively chills behaviors that have nothing to do with copyright or the 
infringement thereof. 
The first problem stems from the overbroad definition of what constitutes a TPM . 
It is problematic enough when it is DRM that obstructs access to a work, particularly 
when that access is non-infringing or otherwise legitimate. This problem is aggravated by 
the fact that Section 1201 does not actually punish an infringing use of a work – other 
sections of the copyright statute provide punitive consequences for that infringement – 
but rather the mere act of circumventing a TPM, regardles s of why it was done. Worse, it 
imposes not just a civil sanction but a potentially criminal one, and it is a sanction that 
can attach even when the circumvention was done in furtherance of a non -infringing use 
or one with no connection to a use of a copyrighted work at all.  
As we see from these rulemakings, Section 1201 is presumed to reach all sorts of 
circumventions done by people simply trying to fully use, modify, or otherwise explore 
the computing logic of the devices they legitimately possess . Whether it is to be able to 
connect a mobile device to another network, discover the vulnerabilities of a medical 
device, repair a broken tractor, or simply ensure that one’s TV is not spying on them , 
Section 1201 deters all these non -copyright activities be cause of the overly expansive 
definition of a TPM. A default assumption appears to have evolved that for all intents and 
purposes a TPM is anything that controls any access, including access to the computing 
logic of a device . This definition appears to  be predicated on the fact that a TPM may 
itself be a piece of software, and software may be copyrighted, even though the 
circumvention has little to do with affecting the exclusive rights of whatever copyright 
that software  might have .6  In other words, p resumptions are built upon presumptions, 
first by presuming that embedded software controlling computing device is itself eligible 
                                                 
6 See discussion Part II.1 supra of why the entitlement of software to copyright should be extremely 
limited.

[PAGE 7]
 
 
 
 
for copyright, and then by considering that copyright to be the copyright interest Section 
1201 is intended to protect, when it is not. The software is merely the TPM, not the thing 
that the TPM is designed to control access to.  
The Section 1201 study contemplates a number of improvements to the statute 
that might offer some relief: presumptive renewal of previously granted e xemptions 
(Question #3 ), reducing the enormous burdens of petitioning for, and substantiating, 
needed exemptions (Question #4), and creating permanent exemptions ( Questions #8 & 
#9). These changes would help alleviate some of the difficulty faced by the p ublic to 
obtain the legal relief necessary to perform the circumventions of TPMs for non -
infringing activities, including activities simply involving the ability of legitimate 
possessors of computing devices to freely use them as they so choose, including in ways 
that don’t affect  a copyright interest . But, as noted in footnote 4 supra, these proposed 
changes are not enough, particularly where these non -infringing activities in no way 
implicate copyright interests . Every exemption sought, even if ultimately granted, 
represents a use that has already been chilled, and no amount of hardcoded exemptions 
baked into the statute will ever be able to cover all the uses that have yet to be imagined. 
The fact that it was necessary to petition for exemptions covering security 
research of medical devices and automobiles, even though “security research” is already 
a hardc oded exemption in Section 1201, shows why a much more definitive solution, 
making it absolutely clear that Section 1201 has no place regulating circumventions 
involving access to computing logic, is needed . Hardcoding activities such as “security 
research” is simply not sufficient to keep up with a rapidly changing technology frontier. 
Computing faculties are becoming better, faster, and more ubiquitous all the time . There 
is no way for the Copyright Office to keep up, nor should it have to. 
Question #2 asks how non-copyright interests should be accommodated during a 
1201 rulemaking proceeding, as if it in any way makes sense to empower the Librarian of 
Congress via the Copyright Office to act as a gatekeeper entitled to either bless, or

[PAGE 8]
 
 
 
 
effectively forbid, any of the purposes for which someone might want to bypass a TPM, 
particularly when those purposes are simply to get access to the computing logic of a 
device. Neither the Librarian nor the Office is endowed with the authority or expertise to 
be an all -purpose evaluator of how people use their computing technology or judge its 
effects. On the contrary, the more present non -copyright issues, the more important it is 
that copyright law not interfere with those uses, and especially not when that interference 
is motivated by the desire to protect society from unwanted consequences arising from 
technology use and development . First, there are many other regulatory bodies, state and 
federal, capable  and indeed better able, to address whatever harm that may arise from 
innovation. And secondly, the ubiquity of computing devices in an increasing, even 
infinite number of items, illustrates the critical need for people to have complete 
dominion over them, to discover the full extent of their effects and vulnerab ilities.7  The 
Copyright Office is not in the position to police when bad actors have deployed software 
on their devices that spy on users 8 or cheat on emissions tests .9  But the public is, and it 
must be unambiguously legally able to. 
  
                                                 
7 Few would likely have ever argued that a parent should not be able to adjust their child’s footwear as 
needed.  The mere introduction of a microchip to that shoe should not make that parent suddenly legally 
unable to do so. 
8 See, e.g., Trevor Timm, “The Government Just Admitted It Will Use Smart Home Devices for Spying,” 
The Guardian, Feb. 9, 2016, available at http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/09/internet-
of-things-smart-devices-spying-surveillance-us-government. 
9 See, e.g., Karl Russell, Guilbert Gates, Josh Keller, and Derek Watkins, “How Volkswage n Got Away 
With Diesel Deception,” New York Times, Jan. 6, 2016, available at 
http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015/business/international/vw-diesel-emissions-scandal-
explained.html.

[PAGE 9]
 
 
 
 
 
IV. Conclusion 
Both studies skirt around the ultimate issue: the role and purpose of copyright (and 
consequently the agency charged with administering it) . Copyright law derives its 
constitutional authority from the progress clause, which charges it to advance the 
progress of science and the useful arts . Anything that copyright law attempts to do must 
always be tested against that directive (and limitation) . When, as we see now, copyright 
is interfering with that progress, chilling people’s ability to use and develop t echnology 
as they would freely choose, it cannot pass that test . The statute defining copyright’s 
reach must therefore be changed to remove it from the path of progress.  
 
Dated:  March 1, 2016 Respectfully submitted, 
 /s/ Michael W. Godwin 
  
Michael W. Godwin  
(DC Bar # 432639) 
1050 17th St. NW #1150 
Washington, DC 20036 
mgodwin@rstreet.org 
 
General Counsel for the R Street 
Institute 
  
 
Dated:  March 1, 2016 Respectfully submitted, 
 /s/ Ryan Hagemann 
  
Ryan Hagemann 
820 First St. NE #675 
Washington, DC 20002 
 rhagemann@niskanencenter.org 
 
Technology and Civil Liberties Policy 
Analyst for the Niskanen Center

[PAGE 10]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dated:  March 1, 2016 Respectfully submitted, 
 /s/ Wayne T. Brough, Ph.D. 
  
Wayne T. Brough, Ph.D. 
400 North Capitol St. NW #765 
Washington, DC 20001 
wbrough@freedomworks.org 
 
Chief Economist and Vice President of 
Research at FreedomWorks
