[PAGE 1]
 
ACM US Public Policy Council (USACM) 
1828 L Street NW, Suite 800 
Washington, DC 20036 
Tel:  +1-212-626-0541 
Fax:  +1-202-667-1066 
acmpo@acm.org 
usacm.acm.org 
 
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) 
ACM US Public Policy Council (USACM) 
 
usacm.acm.org 
facebook.com/usacm 
twitter.com/usacm 
 
March 3, 2016 
 
Hon. Maria A. Pallante 
Register of Copyrights 
United States Copyright Office 
Library of Congress 
101 Independence Ave., S.E. 
Washington, D.C. 20559 
 
Re:  Section 1201 Study: Notice and Request for Public Comment – Docket No. 2015-8 
 
Dear Ms. Pallante: 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on the operation of Section 1201 of Title 17 (NOI), 80 Fed. 
Reg. 81369 (Dec. 29, 2015), Docket No. 2015-8. We appreciate your efforts to examine and consider 
improvements to the triennial rulemaking process established under the Digital Millennium Copyright 
Act (DMCA) to adopt exemptions to the prohibition against circumvention of technological measures of 
copyrighted works.  
 
With more than 100,000 members, ACM (Association for Computing Machinery) is the world’s largest 
educational and scientific computing society, uniting computing educators, researchers, and 
professionals to inspire dialogue, share resources, and address the field’s challenges. These comments 
were developed by the ACM U.S. Public Policy Council (USACM), which serves as the focal point for 
ACM's interaction with the U.S. government in all matters of U.S. public policy related to information 
technology. The membership of the ACM U.S. Public Policy Council is comprised of computer scientists, 
educators, researchers, and other technology professionals. ACM U.S. Public Policy Council statements 
represent the views of the Council and do not necessarily represent the views of the Association. 
 
Responses to Specific Questions 
2.  How should section 1201 accommodate interests that are outside of core copyright concerns, for 
example, in cases where circumvention of access controls protecting computer programs implicates 
issues of product interoperability or public safety? 
 
Public policies meant to reinforce copyright should be limited to applications where copyright interests 
are actually at stake. We agree with the recommendation for the treatment of non-copyright policy 
issues submitted by the National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA) during the 
sixth triennial proceeding.1 NTIA urged the Copyright Office to focus primarily on questions relevant to 
                                                           
1 National Telecommunications and Information Administration, Recommendations to the Register of Copyrights in 
Response to the Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, Docket No. 2014-07 (Sept. 18, 2015), 
http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/2015_NTIA_Letter.pdf.

[PAGE 2]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
copyright law and not to interpret the statute as extending to acts that do not implicate copyright laws. 
The NTIA referred to the examples of medical device safety, vehicle emissions standards, and best 
practices in software vulnerability disclosures raised during the latest triennial proceeding as being 
among issues not contemplated in copyright law. Further, similar to the NTIA, we feel that consideration 
of privacy and security measures used for non-copyright reasons during the triennial rulemaking process 
could reduce those beneficial functions in the marketplace while inappropriately overprotecting 
copyright.2  
 
We urge the Copyright Office to conclude that non-copyright policy issues are outside the scope of 
Section 1201. The Copyright Office should clarify that this includes privacy and security measures used 
for non-copyright purposes, reverse engineering, security and privacy research, and other research and 
development activities. These activities should not require exemptions because they do not constitute 
infringement. If the Copyright Office concludes that they are within the scope of Section 1201, they 
should be protected as permissible activities under expanded permanent exemptions. (See response to 
Question 8.) 
 
The Copyright Office should affirm that technological measures controlling access to copyrighted works 
under Section 1201 should not be misused to impede innovation and market competition by unduly 
hindering hardware and software interoperability. Public policy should enable a variety of approaches 
and systems to emerge, should allow and facilitate competition among them, and should encourage 
interoperability among them.     
 
We concur with NTIA that the Copyright Office should limit its examination to copyright issues and defer 
on non-copyright policy issues to Congress, relevant federal regulatory bodies, and state agencies. These 
other entities are "well-equipped to deal with these non-copyright issues in the appropriate settings and 
under legal authorities focused on those issues."3 
 
3. Should section 1201 be adjusted to provide for presumptive renewal of previously granted 
exemptions—for example, when there is no meaningful opposition to renewal—or otherwise be 
modified to streamline the process of continuing an existing exemption? If so, how? 
 
We favor presumptive renewal of exemptions in cases where there is no credible opposition as a means 
to improve the efficiency of the triennial rulemaking process. The current requirements to provide the 
factual and legal evidence anew each time can result in significant inefficiencies and duplication of effort 
by all parties and your office. Shifting the burden to require interested parties to show why the renewal 
should not be granted could help focus the examination on any significant changes, such as in the 
marketplace or in technological advancements. Further, the more efficient processes of presumptive 
renewals could allow your office to more effectively examine petitions for new exemptions.   
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
2 Id. at 7. 
3 Id. at 5.

[PAGE 3]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
Question 7. Should section 1201 be amended to allow the adoption of exemptions to the prohibition 
on circumvention that can extend to exemptions to the anti-trafficking prohibitions, and if so, in what 
way? For example, should the Register be able to recommend, and the Librarian able to adopt, 
exemptions that permit third-party assistance when justified by the record? 
 
Appropriate and tailored exemptions to the anti-trafficking prohibitions could have a positive effect by 
promoting legitimate research and development of improved software tools to support socially 
beneficial purposes, such as security research, education, and accessibility. In addition, many consumers 
lack the knowledge and expertise to develop tools that would enable them to benefit from granted 
exemptions.  
 
8. Please assess whether the existing categories of permanent exemptions are necessary, relevant, 
and/or sufficient. How do the permanent exemptions affect the current state of reverse engineering, 
encryption research, and security testing? How do the permanent exemptions affect the activities of 
libraries, archives, and educational institutions? How might the existing permanent exemptions be 
amended to better facilitate such activities? 
 
The existing categories of permanent exemptions provide inadequate protections for many 
noninfringing uses of digital computing and computing research. Such activities are needed to analyze 
and identify shortcomings in security systems, defend patents and copyrights, discover and fix 
dangerous bugs in code, facilitate consumer safety, enable access for people with disabilities, and 
conduct beneficial educational activities. In some instances, the threat of legal action under the DMCA 
has deterred scientists and technologists from publishing scholarly work or even publicly discussing their 
computing research, both fundamental tenets of scientific discourse.4  
 
To the extent that the Copyright Office finds noninfringing activities as within the scope of Section 1201, 
we would favor statutory amendments that provide more effective exemptions to enable socially 
beneficial reverse engineering, encryption research, computer privacy and security research, 
accessibility for people with disabilities, and educational activities. This would ensure that Section 1201 
targets only those circumventions that enable copyright infringement.  
 
As related to the current permanent exemptions, we urge the Copyright Office to conclude that reverse 
engineering, security and privacy research, and other research and development activities are beyond 
the scope of Section 1201. These activities do not implicate significant copyright interests and provide 
legitimate benefits to society by helping to advance a more resilient, robust, and secure digital 
ecosystem. These activities should not require exemptions because they do not constitute infringement, 
as also discussed in response to Question 2. If the Copyright Office concludes that they are within the 
scope of Section 1201, they should be protected as permissible activities under expanded permanent 
exemptions. 
                                                           
4 E.g., Steven Bellovin et al., Long Comment: Proposed Class 25: Security Research, Response to the Register of 
Copyrights in Response to the Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access 
Control Technologies, Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, Docket No. 2014-07 (Feb. 6, 2015), 
http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/comments-020615/InitialComments_LongForm_SecurityResearchers_Class25.pdf.

[PAGE 4]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Should the Copyright Office conclude that reverse engineering and research activities fall within the 
scope of Section 1201, the current permanent exemptions should be revised to provide more effective 
exemptions. Researchers have sought triennial exemptions for significant categories of reverse 
engineering, encryption research, and software privacy and security research due to lack of adequate 
legal protections under the respective permanent exemptions given in 1201(f), 1201(g) or 1201(j). 
 
Computer security research is and will become even more vital to society, including for essential 
governmental and business functions. Computer security plays an indispensable role in maintaining 
national security, continuity of operations for mission critical infrastructure (e.g., the power grid, air 
traffic control), trustworthy electronic voting, safety of automotive and avionic systems, the integrity of 
financial transactions, proper operation of medical and consumer devices, business operations, 
maintenance of personal privacy, and the overall stability of the U.S. economy. Computer security and 
data protection will only become more critical as we see increasing deployment of the “Internet of 
Things.” Security research is critical to maintaining the cybersecurity of networks and systems and must 
be protected and encouraged to further develop and ensure such security going forward. 
 
We urge you to recognize the distinctions between circumvention for the purposes of: (a) obtaining 
unauthorized access to a work, (b) engaging in or facilitating infringement, and (c) developing new 
techniques to protect computer systems and networks against attacks, negligence, malfeasance, and 
vandalism, or to advance the continued innovation of software and digital computing. 
 
9. Please assess whether there are other permanent exemption categories that Congress should 
consider establishing—for example, to facilitate access to literary works by print-disabled persons? 
 
We support the adoption of permanent exemptions to enable people with a range of disabilities to 
access copyrighted works in accessible formats when the lawfully obtained work is inaccessible. Digital 
content that is not readily available in multiple modalities may be inaccessible to individuals with 
disabilities. In the triennial rulemakings, the Librarian has granted recurring specific exemptions for 
multiple classes of works to improve accessibility. Exemptions have included access to literary works 
using assistive technologies and to movies through captioning and descriptive audio. Further, 
exemptions have allowed for limited research and development of devices to render captions and 
descriptive audio for audiovisual works. These specific exemptions have benefited people who are blind, 
visually impaired, deaf, or hearing impaired.  
 
Despite gains in accessible software and devices, copyrighted works largely continue to be sold and 
distributed in inaccessible formats. Thus, we recommend consideration of permanent exemptions to 
enable broader accessibility by people with disabilities and to facilitate research to improve accessible 
technologies.  
 
Permanent exemptions to facilitate accessibility would be consistent with the demonstrated 
commitment by Congress to promote accessibility and nondiscrimination. As one example, Congress 
passed the Twenty-First Century Communications and Video Accessibility Act (CVAA) in 2010 to update 
affirmative protections for people with disabilities to access modern technologies and digital content, 
including through captioning and video descriptions for video programming.

[PAGE 5]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Further, the United States is a signatory to the Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works 
for Persons Who Are Blind, Visually Impaired, or Otherwise Print Disabled. The treaty, adopted under 
the auspices of the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) in 2013, aims to increase 
accessibility to written works through mandatory limitations and exceptions to copyright rules. As a 
signatory, the United States supports the object and purpose of the treaty. 
 
Thank you again for the opportunity to comment on the operation of Section 1201 and the triennial 
rulemaking process. The staff and members of the ACM U.S. Public Policy Council are available if you 
have questions or would like additional information about the issues raised in this public comment. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
Eugene H. Spafford, Ph.D. Paul Hyland, M.A. 
Chair Chair, Intellectual Property Committee 
ACM U.S. Public Policy Council ACM U.S. Public Policy Council
