[PAGE 1]
1 
 
Before the  
United States Copyright Office 
Library of Congress 
Washington, D.C. 
 
In the Matter of    ) 
Section 1201 Study:     ) Docket No. 2015-8 
Request for Additional Comments   ) 
 
Additional Reply Comments of Auto Care Association  
Auto Care Association (“Auto Care”), in reply to the additional comments submitted in 
response to the September 27, 2016 Notice of Inquiry (“NOI”), notes that there was little 
opposition to resolving the specific issues addressed in Auto Care’s comments to date. Repair 
and customization products and service by consumers and businesses are lawful under the Patent 
Act for physical vehicle parts. Where digital code or data controls or performs the function of 
physical parts, that lawful repair should not be thwarted by overbroad application of Section 
1201. 
 
With few exceptions, by parties with opposing economic interests, commenters generally 
recognize that the Copyright Act presents no convincing policy reasons why Section 1201 should 
deprive consumers and businesses the right to access software to repair and customize motor 
vehicles. Auto Care replies to these comments below, and explains why there is no policy or 
legal justification not to grant a permanent exemption for vehicle repair and enact legislation that 
clearly exempts such repair from the threat of liability for anticircumvention and antitrafficking.    
 
1. Comments Support the Goal of Legislation or a Permanent Exemption Securing 
the Right to Repair. 
 
As Auto Care has explained,
1 modern motor vehicles increasingly rely on software 
routines, embedded as firmware in scores of part modules networked throughout a vehicle, to 
control the operations of physical equipment. Over the last few years, original equipment 
manufacturers of motor vehicles (OEMs) have attempted to wield Section 1201 of the DMCA as 
an offensive weapon to stop consumers and businesses from competing to repair or customize 
their vehicles, or to supply replacement parts for these vehicles. These technological measures by 
design prevent repair or replacement of the part, not access to copyrighted software. In some 
cases, the allegedly protected “software” is uncopyrightable data, not a copyrightable program.2 
In others, the anticompetitive motive is even clearer, by assuring that every module must be tied 
                                                            
1 Additional Comments of Auto Care Association, In the Matter of Section 1201 Study: Notice of 
Inquiry and Request for Additional Comments, Dkt. No. 2015-8 (Oct. 27, 2016) (“Additional 
Comments”), available online at https://www.regulations.gov/document?D=COLC-2015-0012-
0120. 
2 See, Ford Motor Company v. AUTEL US Inc., No. 14-13760, Opinion and Order, (E.D. Mich. 
Sept. 30, 2015).

[PAGE 2]
2 
 
by the OEM to the vehicle’s VIN number, so that no replacement part installed by a non-OEM or 
dealer would function.      
 
Auto Care in its Additional Comments therefore proposed a permanent exemption for, 
and a specific legislative solution to exempt, repair activities from Section 1201(a)(1) and (2) 
and (b). Several commenters suggested an alternative approach which relied upon the existing 
terms of the software maintenance exemption from infringement under Section 117.
3  Others 
suggested that the Copyright Office promulgate a permanent exemption for repair activities.4  
Several comments recommended legislation to clarify that Section 1201 does not prevent access, 
repair and modifications of functional software, or expert assistance in doing so.5    
 
To be clear, Auto Care would support a permanent exemption or an express legislative 
exemption only if it can address all of the key needs of consumers and businesses with respect to 
products and parts whose functions are controlled by embedded software:   
 
 Circumventing technological protection measures in order to access the software 
 Making interim copies of the software 
 Analyzing the code 
 Altering the code for purposes of repair or modification, or to develop an 
alternative program to replace the OEM-supplied software 
 Making a replacement copy of the software with any alterations, as applicable 
 Embedding that replacement copy in either the original repaired or refurbished 
part or a replacement part 
 Permitting skilled third parties to develop, market, and use circumvention tools 
for the specific purpose of performing these activities 
 
Any proposed permanent exemption that falls short with respect to any of these essential rights 
will effectively deny all of these rights to many, if not most, of the consumers within a proposed 
class. Any proposed legislation that does not ensure each of these rights to consumers and 
businesses will similarly fail to accommodate the needs of consumers and fair competition. 
Given the number of software routines in each car, the complexity of the software, and the 
robustness of technological measures, a single consumer would find it daunting to circumvent 
and repair every possible module in a motor vehicle without assistance. Similarly, it is unrealistic 
to expect that every independent repair shop would be able to perform these tasks for literally 
hundreds of makes and models of motor vehicles over their useful life. 
 
                                                            
3 See Comments of Public Knowledge, and Comments of Motor & Equipment Manufacturers 
Association (MEMA).   
4 See Comments of Owners’ Rights Initiative, Comments of The Repair Association and iFixit, 
Comments of Electronic Frontier Foundation, and Comments of International Imaging 
Technology Association and Static Control Components, Inc. 
5 See Comments of Consumer Technology Association (rationale of DMCA, as applied in the 
Unlocking Act, supports auto repair exemption).

[PAGE 3]
3 
 
 Therefore, the rationales supporting an excepti on for vehicle repair only can be realized 
by supporting, in addition to an individual right to circumvent, a right for that individual to 
acquire both circumvention tools and circumvention and repair services.6  
 
2. Legislative and Regulatory Exemptions to Copyright Law Should Not Depend 
on Non-Copyright Considerations.  
 
The majority of opponents to a motor vehicle repair exemption articulate no basis for 
their opposition under the Copyright Act.7 Instead, their comments rely on unfounded and 
amorphous fears of the consequences of an exemption upon environmental or safety concerns.  
The Copyright Office should reject all these arguments. 
 
As a matter of law, the Copyright Office cannot and should not consider any arguments 
that are not based under the Copyright Act. Auto Care already has explained in this proceeding 
that the Copyright Office lacked authority to base its exemption decisions under laws other than 
the Copyright Act, for four reasons:   
 
(1) Exemptions under Section 1201(a)(1)(B) are granted to safeguard the ability 
of “users of a copyrighted work” to engage in “noninfringing uses under this 
title,” so must be based on considerations of copyright law.      
(2) The statutorily-defined duties of the Librarian and the Copyright Office 
include no general legal authority outside of copyright.  To the extent any non-
copyright considerations pertain, Section 1201(a)(1)(C) allocates that 
responsibility to the Assistant Secretary for Communications and Information 
of the Department of Commerce. 
(3) Under principles of statutory interpretation, all factors listed under Section 
1201(a)(1)(C)(i)-(v) must be confined to considerations of copyright law and 
policy.
8 
(4) Consideration of extraneous laws is unnecessary. A Librarian-granted 
exception does not abrogate or excuse compliance with other legal 
requirements, including those imposed under environmental and commercial 
regulation.9   
 
 As a factual matter, none of these argument s is new. Virtually since the dawn of the 
automobile, OEMs and dealers baselessly have criticized consumers and independent repair 
                                                            
6 Accord, Comments cited at nn. 1-3, supra; Comments of Institute of Scrap Recycling 
Industries, Inc. 
7 See Comments of Association of Equipment Manufacturers/Equipment Dealers Association 
(“AEM Comments”), Comments of Business Software Alliance. 
8 See Circuit City Stores, Inc. v. Adams, 532 U.S. 105, 114-115 (2001) (residual clause must be 
read in light of previously-cited categories under statutory interpretation canon of ejusdem 
generis). 
9  Comments of Auto Care Association, In the Matter of Section 1201 Study: Notice and 
Request for Public Comment, Dkt. No. 2015-8 at 7-8 (March 3, 2016), available online at 
https://www.regulations.gov/document?D=COLC-2015-0012-0036.

[PAGE 4]
4 
 
shops that service the overwhelming majority of vehicles in the United States, in an attempt to 
boost their own market share and profitability. Indeed, the AEM Comments explicitly argue the 
economic impact on their businesses as a purported justification for the Copyright Office to 
restrain aftermarket competition. The only “novelty” of the argument is that parts that 
traditionally have been replaced and repaired by these “unauthorized” technicians are now 
controlled by embedded software. But Auto Care members have their own software engineers 
who have the technical skill to diagnose and repair parts with embedded software, and to design 
and deploy software fixes and improvements to the OEM code.  There is no reason to assume, 
and no proof has been submitted to suggest, that third party software on the market is any less 
protective of the environment or of public safety.10  And while the AEM Comments profess 
concerns over “counterfeit” auto parts, no such considerations pertain here. Replacement parts 
manufactured and sold by Auto Care members are lawful, not “counterfeit”; and fears of some 
counterfeiting do not justify denying the rights of consumers and Auto Care members to repair 
and customize motor vehicles using lawful non-OEM parts. 
 
Indeed, even the government agencies entrusted with responsibility for environmental 
and highway safety apparently have no qualms about allowing consumers to repair and replace 
software in their vehicles or to circumvent technological protection measures. Although the 
Librarian interposed (erroneously, in Auto Care’s view) a one-year delay in the effective date of 
the limited exception granted under Classes 21 and 22, to obtain further input from those 
government agencies, that year now has elapsed—with no objections, warnings, or contrary 
recommendations.  
 
Auto Care therefore respectfully submits that too much credence already has been given 
to those who, failing to find any copyright law basis for their opposition, seek to forestall repair 
rights under non-copyright laws. That their oppositions are based solely on extraneous laws, and 
not on copyright factors, provides additional support for Auto Care’s copyright-based arguments 
in favor of legislation or permanent exemptions.   
 
3. Comments Opposing Creation of Tools, or Proposing Licensing of Tools, Do Not 
Resolve the Legitimate Concerns for Vehicle Repair. 
   
Several commenters suggest danger lurks in any exemption from antitrafficking, 
repeating past arguments that tools that enable one exemption could be employed for 
unauthorized purposes.
11  The exemptions proposed by Auto Care expose the flaws in that 
argument. Software that consumers and Auto Care members seek to access is not only specific to 
a particular make and model, but is often tied by the technological protection measure to a 
                                                            
10 Conversely, use of OEM software hardly guarantees compliance with environmental or public 
safety regulations. Independent automotive website, Edmunds.com, identifies nearly 300 
instances of software recalls to fix a wide variety of mechanical, safety, and environmental 
problems. http://www.edmunds.com/search/results.html?q=software+recall. See Jeff S. Bartlett, 
Michelle Naranjo, and Jeff Plungis, “Guide to the Volkswagen Emissions Recall,” Consumer 
Reports, Nov. 1, 2016, http://www.consumerreports.org/cro/cars/guide-to-the-volkswagen-
dieselgate-emissions-recall-  
11 See, Comments of Copyright Alliance, Comments of SIIA.

[PAGE 5]
5 
 
particular vehicle VIN.  Circumvention tools by necessity are equally specific to those particular 
technological measures, and are useless except to access that software. There is no evidence that 
a tool used to access and diagnose the software in a Ford automobile or John Deere tractor would 
create risks for copyrighted software or media for personal computers, mobile devices, eBook 
readers, or devices or platforms intended to transmit, perform, or display the typical literary, 
audio, and audiovisual works that Section 1201 was designed to protect.   
 
Finally, a proposal to facilitate licensing or availability of “authorized” circumvention 
tools may be successful for academic users or consumers, who do not compete against the 
authors of those works. However, experience shows that such solutions do not fully address the 
needs of motor vehicle users and repair businesses.
12 As Auto Care observed in its Additional 
Comments, existing voluntary agreements or state “right to repair” laws do not alleviate the 
copyright-based concerns implicated by Section 1201 or allegations of copyright infringement. 
Auto Care Additional Comments at 7. Had those agreements and laws been sufficient, 
manufacturers would not already have been sued by major automobile manufacturers for 
engaging in ordinary aftermarket competition that otherwise was permissible under patent law. 
Id. at 4 & nn. 13-14. 
     
 
Auto Care thanks the Copyright Office for its continuing efforts in furtherance of this 
Study.  Should the Office have any questions, please feel free to contact us at your convenience. 
  
     Respectfully submitted,  
 
Date:  November 16, 2016  /s/ Aaron Lowe 
Aaron Lowe 
Senior Vice President, Regulatory and Government Affairs 
Auto Care Association 
7101 Wisconsin Ave., Suite 1300 
Bethesda, MD 20814 
301-654-6664, ext. 1021 
www.autocare.org 
 
                                                            
12 See Comments of AACS LA and DVD CCA.
