[PAGE 1]
Commenting Party: Competitive Carriers Association (“CCA”)
Contact: Rebecca Murphy Thompson, EVP & General Counsel
Email: rthompson@ccamobile.org
Telephone: (800) 722-1872
Comment Submission: Section 1201 Study: Notice and Request for Public Comment
Notice of Inquiry
U.S. Copyright Office Docket No. 2015-8
Docket ID: COLC-2015-0012
Date: March 3, 2016
COMMENTS OF COMPETITIVE CARRIERS ASSOCIATION
Competitive Carriers Association (“CCA”) submits the following comments in response 
to the Notice of Inquiry (“Notice”), in which the United States Copyright Office seeks comment 
on the operation and effectiveness of the Section 1201 rulemaking process under the Digital 
Millennium Copyright Act (“DMCA”).  These comments focus on the proposal to create a 
presumption in favor of renewal when there is no meaningful opposition to the continuation of
an exemption (Subject of Inquiry # 3) and on the proposal seeking other permanent exemption 
categories (Subject of Inquiry # 9).  
CCA has been an active participant in several triennial rulemaking proceedings and
supports adoption of a presumption of renewal. A presumption will streamline the rulemaking 
process, thereby easing the burden of participation in rulemaking proceedings for all 
stakeholders.  CCA also submits that the wireless device unlocking exemption should be 
recommended for a permanent exemption category.
I. INTRODUCTION
CCA is the nation’s leading association for competitive wireless providers and 
stakeholders across the United States.  CCA’s membership includes nearly 100 competitive

[PAGE 2]
2
wireless providers ranging from small, rural carriers serving fewer than 5,000 customers to 
regional and national providers serving millions of customers.  The licensed service area of 
CCA’s carrier members covers more than 95 percent of the nation.  CCA also represents nearly 
200 associate members consisting of small businesses, vendors (including manufacturers and 
distributors), and suppliers that serve carriers of all sizes.
CCA applauds the Register of Copyrights (the “Register”) for recommending that 
Congress revise Section 1201 to create a presumption in favor of renewal when there is no
meaningful opposition to the continuation of an exemption.1  CCA has long advocated for this
presumption. The unlocking exemption for wireless devices fosters competition in the mobile 
broadband marketplace, benefitting consumers and carriers alike.  The exemption also eases the 
burden on those seeking to participate in the resource-intensive triennial rulemaking proceeding.2  
CCA also agrees that it is time for Congress to review and revamp its permanent exemption 
categories, and that exemptions to the prohibition on circumvention for wireless devices are ripe 
for permanent consideration.  
   
1 See The Register’s Perspective on Copyright Review: Hearing Before the H. Comm. on the 
Judiciary, 114th Cong. 21 (written statement of Maria A. Pallante, Register of Copyrights and 
Dir., USCO) (2015) http://judiciary.house.gov/_cache/files/1c82a3a6-3b1b-4a51-b212-
281454d1e56e/written-testimony-of-register-maria-a-pallante.pdf (“The Register’s Perspective 
on Copyright Review Hearing”); U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, SECTION 1201 RULEMAKING:  SIXTH 
TRIENNIAL PROCEEDING TO DETERMINE EXEMPTIONS TO THE PROHIBITION ON CIRCUMVENTION,
RECOMMENDATION OF THE REGISTER OF COPYRIGHTS 4 (2015), available at
http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/registers-recommendation.pdf  (“2015 Recommendation”); See 
also U.S. Copyright Office, Library of Congress, Section 1201 Study: Notice and Request for 
Public Comment, Notice of Inquiry, Docket No. 2015-8 at 11 (rel. Dec. 22, 2015) (the “Notice”).  
2 See Testimony of Steven Berry before the United States Copyright Office, at pps. 33 – 34 
(May 31, 2012), available at http://copyright.gov/1201/2012/hearings/transcripts/hearing-05-31-
2012.pdf; see also Testimony of Steven Berry before the United States House of Representatives 
Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property and the Internet, H.R. 
1123, the “Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act” (June 6, 2013), available 
at http://judiciary.house.gov/index.cfm/hearings?ID=379A2DB0-9D53-E193-4DBB-
9687D1DFA54C.

[PAGE 3]
3
The triennial rulemaking proceeding is a burdensome process, which requires a great deal 
of time and resources from organizations like CCA to ensure that consumers continue to have the 
ability to use unlocked devices on networks of their choice, thus promoting competition and 
innovation.  There are steps that Congress and the Copyright Office can take to ease these 
burdens for both commenters like CCA and the Copyright Office itself, to ensure a more 
efficient path to achieving the goals of the Section 1201 triennial rulemaking process.  
Specifically, Section 1201 should be revised to provide for presumptive renewal of previously 
granted exemptions when there is no meaningful opposition to the renewal. Congress also 
should consider the adoption of new permanent exemptions, including for unlocking wireless 
devices.
II. CCA HAS BEEN AN ACTIVE PARTICIPANT IN THE SECTION 1201 
TRIENNIAL RULEMAKING PROCEEDINGS
Over the past decade, CCA has participated in several rounds of the Section 1201 
triennial proceedings, due in large part to the considerable adverse effect that the outcome of the 
proceedings may have on competition in the wireless broadband marketplace and, therefore, on
consumers.  Specifically, CCA has sought exemptions that would allow circumvention of access 
controls on wireless devices such as mobile phones and tablets to permit users to connect to 
wireless networks through the carrier of their choice. These efforts have largely been successful;
the Librarian of Congress adopted exemptions permitting unlocking of wireless handsets in 
2006, 2010, 2012, and 2015.3  
   
3 See 2015 Recommendation at 138.  In 2012, the adopted exemption was more restrictive and 
limited to wireless handsets obtained by January 26, 2013.  In response to vocal public 
disapproval and advocacy from stakeholders, Congress passed the Unlocking Act, which, among 
other things, reinstated the more broad 2010 unlocking exemption for wireless handsets.  
Congress also directed the Copyright Office to examine and consider in the 2015 rulemaking 
proceeding whether additional types of devices should be included under this exemption.  See

[PAGE 4]
4
In the most recent proceeding, CCA pursued a continuation of the unlocking exemption 
for wireless telephone handsets and sought to extend the exemption to other types of wireless 
devices through five separate petitions for the following classes of “unlocking” exemptions:  (1) 
wireless telephone handsets; (2) all-purpose tablet computers; (3) mobile connectivity devices 
(i.e., mobile hotspots); (4) wearable wireless devices; and (5) consumer machines (the Internet of 
Things).4  In addition, CCA submitted several rounds of comments for each proposed 
exemption,5 and provided testimony during a hearing before the Copyright Office concerning the
renewal of the exemption for unlocking handsets.6 To prepare the written submissions and oral 
testimony, CCA and other participating organizations invested a great deal of time and resources 
in reviewing the record and meeting the extensive requirements necessary to qualify for an 
exemption.  While CCA recognizes the Copyright Office’s intent of creating a more robust 
record by subdividing the categories, increased burdens associated with more granular divisions, 
particularly where it does not make sense “from a technology perspective,”7 in fact make 
     
Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act, Pub. L. No. 113-144, 128 Stat. 1751 
(2014) (the “Unlocking Act”).
4 For consistency and efficiency, CCA also requested that th ese exemptions and other similar 
exemptions be consolidated int o a single ”wireless device” exemption, as they all involve 
computer programs used in devices that connect to a telecommunications and/or broadband 
network.  
5 See Comments of the Competitive Carriers Association, Proposed Class 11 Unlocking –
Wireless Telephone Handsets, Sixth Triennial Section 1201 Proceeding (filed Feb. 6, 2015); 
see also Comments of the Competitive Carriers Association (“CCA”) and TracFone 
Wireless, Inc. (“TracFone”), Proposed Class 11 Unlocking  –  Wireless Telephone Handsets, 
Sixth Triennial Section 1201 Proceeding (filed May 1, 2015).
6 See Statement of Michael Lazarus to the Library of Congress United States Copyright Office,
Proposed Class 11-12: Unlocking – wireless telephone handsets and tablet, Sixth Triennial 
1201 Rulemaking Hearing, (May 26, 2015), available at http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/hearing-
transcripts/1201-Rulemaking-Public-Roundtable-05-26-2015.pdf.
7 See Oversight of the United States Copyright Office Before the Subcomm. on Courts, Intellectual 
Prop., & the Internet of the H. Comm. on the Judiciary, 113th Cong. 113-116, p. 57 (2014) 
(testimony of the Hon. Maria A. Pallante, Register of Copyrights and Director, U.S. Copyright 
Office).

[PAGE 5]
5
participation harder and can be a barrier to technological innovation that has nothing to do with 
infringement.    
Ultimately, the Copyright Office recommended an unlocking exemption that covered a 
variety of portable wireless devices, including handsets, tablets, mobile hotspots, and wearable 
devices, which corresponded with Congress’s directive in the Unlocking Act.  The Register of 
Copyrights’ recommendation for this exemption was due in large part to the fact that there was 
no meaningful opposition to the majority of these classes.8  
Notably, after reviewing the record and offering recommendations for exemptions, the 
Register also recognized that “a number of proposals essentially seek renewal of existing 
exemptions – for example, unlocking of cellphones.”9  Therefore, the Register called for 
Congress to revise Section 1201 to “create a presumption in favor of renewal when there is not 
meaningful opposition to the continuation of an exemption.”10
III. SUBJECT INQUIRY #3:  ADOPTING A PRESUMPTION IN FAVOR OF 
RENEWAL WHEN THERE IS NO MEANINGFUL OPPOSITION WILL 
EASE SIGNIFICANT BURDENS ON PARTICIPANTS AND THE 
COPYRIGHT OFFICE, AND WILL MINIMIZE UNCERTAINTY FOR 
CONSUMERS
Under the current framework of the Section 1201 triennial review process, the burden of 
proof for extending an existing exemption rests on the proponents of the exemption.  The 
   
8 Although TracFone initially filed comments in opposition to the handset unlocking 
exemption, as the Register recognized, “at bottom it [was] not opposed to a narrow ‘pro -
consumer’ exemption.”  2015 Recommendation at 156.  In fact, CCA and TracFone worked
collaboratively to prepare and submit reply comments in support of the proposed exemption, 
which eliminated TracFone’s original concerns. 
9 2015 Recommendation at 4.
10 Id.

[PAGE 6]
6
Copyright Office conducts each triennial proceeding de novo because it believes that Congress 
“made clear” this standard of review was required.11  This is not correct.  
While CCA is in favor of a congressional solution, CCA believes the Copyright Office 
has the authority to revise its procedures if congressional intervention is not obtained.  The 
Copyright Office relies on legislative history to guide its understanding of the de novo review, 
which does not appear in the statute itself.12  Indeed, the DMCA is silent as to whether or not the 
Copyright Office can establish a presumption in favor of existing exemptions.  
A de novo review further burdens proponents as it requires a fresh new case to be made 
to continue exemptions every three years.  The cost involved to take part in this effort often 
proves too onerous for meaningful participation by all stakeholders. CCA can attest that many 
regional and rural competitive carriers— who are placed at a competitive disadvantage when 
nationwide carriers are allowed to lock up the marketplace with exclusive access to the most 
sought-after devices— are ill-equipped to mobilize every three years. To decrease the burdens 
placed on proponents, the Register should abandon its de novo review requirement for existing 
exemptions, and should permit a presumption of renewal.  
Indeed, the Register has previously found that, where similar facts are presented, the 
Register is likely to reach a similar conclusion with respect to the renewal of a particular 
exemption.  Specifically, absent a significant change in circumstances and given the adverse 
effects that will result in allowing exemptions to expire, the Copyright Office should presume 
that the exemption remains valid, and opponents should have the burden of proving otherwise.  
Therefore, it is important that previous decisions to approve and extend an exemption have 
   
11 Notice at 8.
12 See H.R. Rep. No. 105-551, pt. 2, at 37 (explaining that for every rulemaking, “the 
assessment of adverse impacts on particular categories of works is to be determined de novo”); 
Cf. 17 U.S.C. § 1201.

[PAGE 7]
7
precedential value.  Such an approach would be consistent with the overarching goals of the 
Copyright Act and would minimize uncertainty for individuals affected by the exemptions.  
a. A Presumption of Renewal Would Ease The Burdens Associated With The 
Resource-Intensive Triennial Rulemaking Process 
The Copyright Office should specifically establish a presumption in favor of existing 
exemptions.  The triennial rulemaking proceedings are extremely resource- and time- intensive,
requiring the preparation of several rounds of written submissions, reviewing a substantial 
written record,13 and potentially participating in a hearing before representatives of the Copyright 
Office. While CCA appreciates the Copyright Office’s recent adjustment to the administrative 
procedures surrounding the Section 1201 exemption review, it agrees that “[e]ven with these 
improvements, however, the rulemaking procedure, as enacted by Congress, is resource-
intensive for both participants and the Office.”14  This is because proponents for existing 
exemptions must seek re-approval of uncontroversial exemptions – that is they must 
continuously prove their case every three years.  Proponents seeking an exemption must establish 
that “persons who are users of a copyrighted work are, or are likely to be in the succeeding 3-
year period, adversely affected by the prohibition . . . in their ability to make non-infringing uses 
under this title of a particular class of copyrighted works.”15  If proponents are seeking an 
exemption for more than one proposed class, even if the classes are substantially similar, they 
must file separate submissions for each proposed class during each stage of the public comment 
period.16  
   
13 Nearly 40,000 comments were submitted in the sixth triennial rulemaking.  Notice at 5. 
14 Id. at 11.
15 See 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C).
16 See 79 FR 73856, at 73857 (Dec. 12, 2014) (“NPRM”).

[PAGE 8]
8
On several occasions, CCA has expressed concern over the administrative burdens 
associated with the triennial rulemaking proceedings and requested adoption of a presumption of 
renewal.17  As the Register has recognized, other stakeholders have also expressed frustration at 
the lack of a presumptive renewal.18  CCA agrees that the “public record supports amending 
Section 1201 to make it easier to renew exemptions that have been previously adopted and are in 
force at the time of the triennial rulemaking proceeding.”19  CCA’s experience also supports 
adoption of a presumption in favor of existing exemptions.  Although many of the different 
unlocking classes proposed by CCA in the 2015 rulemaking proceeding possessed similar 
attributes – that is, they had similar asserted non-infringing uses and similar asserted adverse 
effects20 – CCA still was required to prepare and file separate petitions and rounds of comments 
   
17 See Testimony of Steven Berry before the United States Copyright Office, at pps. 33 – 34 (May 
31, 2012), available at http://copyright.gov/1201/2012/hearings/transcripts/hearing-05-31-
2012.pdf; see also Testimony of Steven Berry before the United States House of Representatives 
Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property and the Internet, H.R. 
1123, the “Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act” (June 6, 2013), available 
at http://judiciary.house.gov/index.cfm/hearings?ID=379A2DB0-9D53-E193-4DBB-
9687D1DFA54C. 
18 See The Register’s Perspective on Copyright Review Hearing21 n.86; Chapter 12 of Title 17: 
Hearing Before the Subcomm. on Courts, Intellectual Prop., & the Internet of the H. Comm. on 
the Judiciary, 113th Cong. 19-20 (2014) (statement of Mark Richert, Director of Public Policy, 
American Foundation for the Blind) (“[W]e we urge Congress to take action to relieve the burden 
of repeatedly seeking re-approval of uncontroversial exemptions like the one we must re-propose 
during each review.”). Representatives of copyright owners likewise agreed that the process of 
renewing uncontroversial exemptions could be streamlined. Id. at 64 (statement of Christian 
Genetski, Senior Vice President and General Counsel, Entertainment Software Association) (“I 
think that we all share the frustration expressed by Mr. Richert in his testimony about the need to 
return repeatedly and use extensive resources to seek a renewal of an exemption where no one is 
opposing the exemption.”); Id. at 79 (statement of Jonathan Zuck, President, ACT | The App 
Association) (“I certainly think that the renewal process of an exemption is something that could 
be modified and streamlined especially when there are no objections to that renewal which is very 
often the case.”); Id. at 125 (written statement of Allen Adler, General Counsel & Vice President 
for Government Affairs, Association of American Publishers) (noting that “stakeholders broadly 
agree that reauthorization of non-controversial exemptions could be more efficient”).
19 See The Register’s Perspective on Copyright Review Hearingat 21. 
20 Indeed, even the presented arguments under the statutory factors were the same or similar 
and accordingly, in addressing these factors in the Recommendation, the Register

[PAGE 9]
9
for each class, even if an exemption was already in place.  CCA, as noted above, filed five 
separate petitions all essentially seeking the same exemption.  In addition, CCA also prepared
five separate sets of initial comments for each proposed class, and one set of reply comments for 
one proposed class.  This is a requirement that even the Copyright Office has recognized requires 
“added effort.”21 Here, the five proposed classes were all forms of wireless devices that contain 
computer programs used in devices that connect to a telecommunications and/or broadband 
network, which is at the forefront of the exemption.  If the proposed presumption of renewal is 
not adopted, then CCA and other potential proponents will need to decide in 2018, and then 2021 
and so on, whether it can expend substantial resources that may be otherwise directed in a more 
efficient manner. 
b. A Presumption of Renewal Is In The Public Interest 
Exemptions are recommended by the Register (and ultimately adopted by Congress) 
based on several factors, but largely on whether the inability to circumvent the technological 
measure at issue has or is likely to have adverse effects on the proposed non-infringing uses.22  
Indeed, a reason that proponents initially seek an exemption is to avoid adverse effects that are 
not in the public interest.  While CCA can specifically attest to the technological measures and 
exemptions that it has direct knowledge of – that is, exemptions permitting the unlocking of 
wireless devices – it stresses that a failure to extend any exemption, whether due to the inability 
     
combined four of the device classes together in its response (which were ultimately 
included under the exemption).  2015 Recommendation at 154 (noting that “[p]roponents of 
all of the unlocking classes ma[de] the same basic arguments under the 1201(a)(1) 
statutory factors.”).  
21 Id.
22 See 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(D).

[PAGE 10]
10
of resource-strained proponents to participate or otherwise, could likely have substantial adverse 
effects on the attested non-infringing uses.23  
Absent an exemption to wireless device unlocking, wireless device owners may be forced 
to purchase a new wireless device, which are getting increasingly expensive, to change service 
providers and connect to the wireless network of their choice.  This may result in substantial 
consumer costs in the form of the price paid for a new wireless device (while their current device
becomes obsolete), and in the form of lost personal information stored on the device such as 
contacts, music, apps, and other investments made in peripheral items.  Further, unlocking is 
particularly important for rural and regional carriers that lack the scope and scale to gain access 
to the latest, most in-demand devices directly from the equipment manufacturers, which then 
prevents millions of consumers from accessing the latest devices, and stifles competition and 
innovation. Consumers should not be forced to choose between keeping their devices and being 
locked to an undesirable network or losing their device and the data that comes with it.  
Moreover, without a presumption of renewal, consumers and beneficiaries of the adopted 
exemption would live in an uncertain world where the rules may change every three years.  
Consumers should not have to worry about losing the right to use their devices on a network of 
their choosing every few years.  Without this exemption, consumers would be forced to purchase 
a new wireless device to change service providers, which may result in substantial costs to the 
consumer – both in price as well as in the replacement of purchased features specific to the 
   
23 In short, the exemption(s) for which CCA advocates allow consumers to unlock certain used 
portable wireless devices they purchased from wireless carriers or their authorized dealers in 
order to use them on other carriers’ networks.  In this instance, a failure to extend the exemption 
would have a substantial adverse effect on non-infringing uses of wireless devices and their 
associated firmware, software, and data.

[PAGE 11]
11
device.  These costs may hinder a consumer’s ability to switch service providers, thus stifling 
competition.
In addition, there is no harm to adopting a presumption.  A presumption would only be in 
place if meaningful opposition was not presented during a proceeding.  Thus, if meaningful 
opposition to an exemption was presented, parties would then have to justify the continuation of 
the exemption.  This provides a fallback option in the instance that there are significant changes 
in circumstances between proceedings.  If no meaningful opposition arises, it is in the public 
interest for an exemption to be preserved.   
IV. SUBJECT MATTER INQUIRY #9:  THE 2015 EXEMPTION ALLOWING THE 
UNLOCKING OF PORTABLE WIRELESS DEVICES SHOULD BE 
INCLUDED IN THE PERMANENT EXEMPTION CATEGORY
The Notice also seeks comment on whether Congress should consider establishing other 
permanent exemption categories for the statute.24  An exemption permitting the unlocking of 
portable wireless devices is a prime candidate for a permanent exemption.  Notably, Congress 
has continuously provided its stamp of approval for this exemption.  In passing the Unlocking 
Act, Congress “permanently established” that circumvention under any exemption to permit a 
wireless telephone handset or other wireless device to connect to a different telecommunications 
network may be initiated by the owner of the handset or device, or other specific individuals. 25  
While the Copyright Office has expressed concern that current Section 1201 permanent 
exemptions “have failed to keep up with changing technologies,”26 the unlocking exemption is 
quite the opposite.  The 2015 unlocking exemption as adopted is broad and covers a wide array 
of wireless devices, from mobile phones to “smart watches.”  As such, this exemption is 
   
24 Notice at 18. 
25 Id. at 9; Unlocking Act, § 2(a), (c), 128 Stat. at 1751-52; see also 37 C.F.R. 201.40(b)(3) (2012). 
26 Notice at 13.

[PAGE 12]
12
designed to evolve alongside devices using the underlying software.  The Register should 
therefore recommend that Congress adopt a permanent wireless device unlocking exemption.  
V. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, CCA supports a revision of Section 1201 to provide for
presumptive renewal of previously granted exemptions when there is no meaningful opposition 
to renewal, or the adoption of a permanent exemption for wireless device unlocking, consistent 
with the 2015 exemption.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Rebecca Murphy Thompson        
Steven K. Berry
Rebecca Murphy Thompson
COMPETITIVE CARRIERS ASSOCIATION
805 15th Street NW, Suite 401
Washington, DC 20005
March 3, 2016
