[PAGE 1]
1 | Page
Comments	to	the	United	States	Copyright	Office	(COLC)
Re: Request for Public Comments: Digital Millennium Copyright Act, Access to Copyrighted 
Works
Submitted by Steve Noble on behalf of the Learning Disabilities Association of America 
Steve.noble@louisville.edu / 502-969-3088 
Date: February 25, 2016
Section 1201 Study Submission of Comments
I. Background
SUMMARY: The United States Copyright Office is undertaking a public study to assess the 
operation of section 1201 of Title 17, including the triennial rulemaking process established 
under the DMCA to adopt exemptions to the prohibition against circumvention of technological 
measures that control access to copyrighted works. To aid this effort, and to ensure thorough 
assistance to Congress, the Office is seeking public input on a number of key questions.
The Learning Disabilities Association of America provides the following comments regarding the 
interests of people with language-based learning disabilities who routinely use assistive 
technologies, such as computerized text-to-speech software, in order to access information. 
Americans with learning disabilities which impact reading, including but not limited to such 
conditions as dyslexia and visual processing disorder, arguably constitute the largest 
percentage of people with "print disabilities" in the United States, making their access needs 
highly pertinent to the accessibility implications of the DMCA.  
II. Subjects of Inquiry
Rulemaking	Process
3.	Should	section	1201	be	adjusted	toprovide	for	presumptive	renewal	ofpreviously	granted	
exemptions—forexample,	when	there	is	no	meaningfulopposition	to	renewal—or	otherwise	be	
modified	to	streamline	the	process	ofcontinuing	an	existing	exemption?	If	so,how?
Yes. This is particularly true when circumvention is required to meet the accessibility needs of 
people with print disabilities who would not otherwise be afforded the effective use of literary 
works when electronic materials have been locked by Digital Rights Management (DRM) 
techniques. The circumstances surrounding the need for this exemption have remained 
essentially unchanged since the inception of the DMCA, and having to repeat the regulatory 
process every three years represents an unfair burdening of disability advocacy organizations 
who must submit comments which will remain essentially unchanged each time a Request for

[PAGE 2]
2 | Page
Public Comments is issued. This is certainly true for this specific exemption, as it was 
unchallenged during the last triennial rulemaking process. At the very least, Congress should 
amend the rulemaking process to create a presumption in favor of renewal when there is no 
meaningful opposition to the continuation of an exemption.
Anti-Trafficking	Prohibitions
7.	Should	section	1201	be	amended	to	allowthe	adoption	of	exemptions	to	the	prohibitionon	
circumvention	that	can	extendto	exemptions	to	the	anti-traffickingprohibitions,	and	if	so,	inwhat	
way?	For	example,	should	theRegister	be	able	to	recommend,	and	theLibrarian	able	to	adopt,	
exemptions	thatpermit	third-party	assistance	whenjustified	by	the	record?
Yes. As neither the vast majority of persons with learning disabilities nor the majority of agency 
staff who may assist them will have the advanced technical knowledge needed to circumvent 
DRM mechanisms, they will rely heavily on the assistance of third parties who have the ability to 
create and distribute the advanced tools and services needed to make locked e-books and 
other digital materials accessible. Extending the exemption to the DMCA anti-trafficking 
prohibitions for the explicit purpose of making DRM-unlocking technology for accessibility more 
widely available would be of great assistance to persons with learning disabilities. Congress 
should amend the DMCA accordingly.
Permanent	Exemptions
9.	Please	assess	whether	there	areother	permanent	exemption	categoriesthat	Congress	should	
considerestablishing—for	example,	to	facilitateaccess	toliterary	works	by	print-disabledpersons?
Yes. The ability to override DRM locking mechanisms in order to facilitate access to literary 
works by print-disabled persons should be a permanent exemption. This issue is especially 
pertinent to the needs of students with learning disabilities who are enrolled in courses at the 
elementary, secondary and postsecondary level. In these settings, students with learning 
disabilities are commonly assisted by disability resource staff, teachers, or other school 
personnel who are obligated to provide accessible educational material to students under other 
laws, such as Section 504, the IDEA and the ADA. Sometimes these educational materials are 
purchased by the school, but in other cases (especially in postsecondary settings) these 
materials are purchased directly by the student. In cases where these materials are only 
available in a digital format which has been locked through DRM, educational institutions (as 
well as third-party access organizations or contractors who may assist in providing such 
services to the school) are left with the difficult legal position of requiring personnel or 
contractors to violate the anti-circumvention provisions of the DMCA in order to provide 
accessible materials to their students, as required under such other federal laws.
In some cases, a digital resource such as an e-book which has been locked through DRM will 
have to be "unlocked" through the use of third-party software or services in order to allow an 
assistive technology, such as a computerized text-to-speech application, to access the textual 
content for reading by a person with a learning disability. In other cases, even if the digital 
product has some form of embedded speech tool which will facilitate computerized reading of 
the words, the text may nonetheless require human editing for accessibility due to the way it has

[PAGE 3]
3 | Page
been assembled, such as the use of inaccessible images used to express mathematical 
formulas instead of accessible digital text such as Mathematical Markup Language (MathML). In 
either case, school personnel will have to utilize DRM circumvention which is currently not lawful 
under the DMCA without the benefit of temporary exemptions granted by the Register. The 
same can be said for businesses that need to make training and resource materials accessible 
so that their employees with learning disabilities can effectively do their job. Further, people with 
learning disabilities who are simply trying to access digital materials for enjoyment or self-
development deserve similar equitable access to information as those with disabilities enjoy. 
The Register has previously determined that converting e-books into accessible formats is likely 
a non-infringing use both as a matter of fair use and under 17 U.S.C. 121, also known as the
‘‘Chafee Amendment,’’ which allows authorized entities to create accessible versions of works 
exclusively for use by persons who are blind, visually impaired, or print-disabled. In light of the 
common application of these two mechanisms of non-infringing use for the purpose of disability 
access, Congress should amend the DMCA to explicitly exempt DRM circumvention actions 
when they are done so to provide such access.
