[PAGE 1]
 
International Association of Scientific, Technical and Medical Publishers 
Prama House, 267 Banbury Road, Oxford  OX2 7HT, UK 
www.stm-assoc.org 
Registered at UK Companies House FC027474 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
March 31, 2016 
 
United States Copyright Office 
Section 1201 Study Comment Submission 
 
 
Section 1201 Study on the triennial rulemaking process to adopt exemptions to the prohibition 
against circumvention of technological measures that control access to copyrighted works 
Reply comment by the International Association of Scientific Technical and Medical Publishers 
(STM) 
 
Dear Sirs 
 
The International Association of Scientific Technical and Medical Publishers (STM) welcomes this 
opportunity to subm it reply comments in the S ection 1201 Study.  In this submission, we only 
propose to deal with a limited number of individual points raised by various contributors to the 
Study. 
 
STM is the leading global trade association for academic and professional publishers.  It has over 120 
members in 21 countries who each year collectively publish nearly 66% of all journal articles and 
tens of thousands of monographs and reference works, including many members who are either 
based or have places of business in the U nited States.  STM members include learned societies, 
university presses, private companies, new starts and established players.  The primary interest of 
STM and its members lies in published works intended for the academic and research markets. 
 
Reply to submission in opposing changes that would discourage innovation by copyright owners 
 
STM joins AAP, MPAA and RIAA 1 in submitting that the Copyright Office and Congress should 
proceed with great caution when considering whether to adopt exemptions to the prohibition 
against circumvention of technological protection measures and that it should oppose changes that 
would diminish the effectiveness of technological protection measures broadly and discourage 
innovation by copyright owners and their authorized licensees.  STM affirms the cases cited in this 
submission about how technological protection measures create new mod els for the dissemination 
of published works.2 
 
Reply to submissions advocating exemptions where licensed solutions for access already exist 
 
We have noted some submissions advocating broad exemptions to technological protection 
measures to facilitate the reproduction and making available of copyrighted works that are 
protected by those measures, even in cases where there is no authorization from the copyright 
                                                           
1 AAP, MPAA and RIAA submission at http://www.regulations.gov/#!documentDetail;D=COLC-2015-0012-
0045, p.3. 
2 AAP, MPAA and RIAA submission referred to above, at pp.6-8.

[PAGE 2]
2 
 
 
International Association of Scientific, Technical and Medical Publishers 
Prama House, 267 Banbury Road, Oxford  OX2 7HT, UK 
www.stm-assoc.org 
Registered at UK Companies House FC027474 
owner.3 In so far as these proposals relate to libraries and archives, the copyrighted works 
concerned would include publications by STM’s members and, as such, this proposal for exemptions 
must be read as being in addition to access to STM members’ copyrighted publications which is 
already afforded to libraries and archives under their respective subscription and license agreements 
with publishers or their vendors. 
 
One of the aforementioned submissions 4 speaks of exemptions allowing the reproduction for 
copyright works for use by MOOCs (“massive open online courses”).  We point out that publishers, 
service providers and reproduction rights organizations already provide licensed solutions for the 
use of copyrighted materials in MOOCs. 5  This point illustrates the need for careful consideration in 
the rulemaking process relating to exemptions, which must  include ascertaining whether there is an 
existing solution in commerce to the circumstance being postulated in the request for an exemption. 
 
Reply to submissions advocating broad exemptions relying on claims that uses are allowed by fair use 
and other exceptions 
 
We wish to draw your attention to a recent case of breaching of security measures to reproduce and 
make available copyrighted content, and claiming justification as an illustration, to support STM’s 
contention that the rulemaking process for cons idering exemptions should be limited to specifically 
crafted situations which are then carefully considered. 
 
STM publishers have noted various methods by unauthorized persons to extract journal articles and 
illicit creations from journal articles from sec ured sources and to reproduce them in a way that 
makes them available to the public in circumstances which do not constitute fair use and/or which 
are not justifiable by any other exception to the exclusive rights of copyright. 
 
The most recent case in the  United States to which we would like to draw your attention is the 
decision of the New York District Court in Elsevier v. Sci -Hub.org and LibGen.org et al .6 Elsevier, a 
prominent publisher and a member of STM, took action to hamper the online unauthorized offers by 
online platforms Sci -Hub and LibGen, facilitated by persons unknown, who had compromised the 
secure online platforms of publishers and of universi ty library subscribers to their publications in 
order to reproduce journal articles which they make available on the Sci-Hub and LibGen platforms. 
 
The technical methodology of accomplishing this was something not previously encountered by 
publishers, and is described in an article in Scholarly Kitchen: 
 
“[Sci-Hub] works in concert with a repository of pirated material called Library Genesis 
(LibGen)…  If you go to the current location of Sci -Hub … and input a DOI or article url Sci -
Hub will set you a captc ha to complete ... It then searches LibGen to see if it can find an 
existing copy of the item in question.  If it does, it delivers that copy to the user…  If Sci -Hub 
                                                           
3 By way of example, the submissions by the American Association of Law Libraries  at 
http://www.regulations.gov/#!documentDetail;D=COLC-2015-0012-0027, p.1, MIT at 
http://www.regulations.gov/#!documentDetail;D=COLC-2015-0012-0024, p.5, and t he Society of American 
Archivists at http://www.regulations.gov/#!documentDetail;D=COLC-2015-0012-0016, p.5, proposing that 
there should be a general exemption if the use is considered to be fair use.  
4 MIT referred to above at p.1-2. 
5 For example, ProQuest’s Courser a and SIPX ( http://www.sipx.com/coursera-sipx/), the Copyright Clearance 
Center’s MOOCs Content Licensing Solution ( http://www.copyright.com/academia/moocs/).  Both are 
members of STM. 
6 No. 1:2015cv04282 - Document 53 (S.D.N.Y. 2015), available at http://cases.justia.com/federal/district-
courts/new-york/nysdce/1:2015cv04282/442951/53/0.pdf?ts=1446304631.

[PAGE 3]
3 
 
 
International Association of Scientific, Technical and Medical Publishers 
Prama House, 267 Banbury Road, Oxford  OX2 7HT, UK 
www.stm-assoc.org 
Registered at UK Companies House FC027474 
cannot locate a copy in LibGen, it then uses multiple institutional access systems to sea rch 
across publisher platforms, bypassing any access control barriers, and it retrieves a copy of 
the item.  It then does two things.  One, it delivers a copy back to the user who requested it; 
two it stores a copy in LibGen so that it is easier to serve u p when the next request comes 
in... The access credentials appear to be username/password combinations that have been 
acquired by Sci-Hub and which enable access to institutional subscriptions.”7 
 
The judge, recognizing that the scholarly publishing ecosys tem depends on payment for content to 
sustain the production of high quality journals, described how copyright protection for scientific 
publications serves the public interest: 
 
“It cannot be denied that there is a compelling public interest in fostering scientific 
achievement, and that ensuring broad access to scientific research is an important 
component of that effort. ... [Sci -Hub’s representative’s] solution to the problems she 
identifies, simply making copyrighted content available for free via a for eign web site, 
disserves the public interest.  As the plaintiffs have established, there is a ‘delicate 
ecosystem which supports scientific research worldwide’ . . . and copyright law plays a 
critical function within that system. ‘Inadequate protection for  copyright owners can 
threaten the very store of knowledge to be accessed; encouraging the production of creative 
work thus ultimately serves the public interest in promoting the accessibility of such works.’ 
… Given the importance of scientific research a nd the critical role that copyright plays in 
promoting it, the public interest weighs in favor of an injunction.” 
(Citations omitted.) 
 
We thank you for this opportunity to contribute to the Section 1201 Study and we would be pleased 
to assist you in your further deliberations. 
 
Yours faithfully, 
 
 
 
Michael Mabe 
Chief Executive Officer 
STM, International Association of Scientific, Technical and Medical Publishers 
mabe@stm-assoc.org 
 
                                                           
7 Posting by David Smith in Scholarly Kitchen “Sci-Hub: How does it work?” at 
http://scholarlykitchen.sspnet.org/2016/02/25/sci-hub-how-does-it-work/.
