[PAGE 1]
 
Docket No. 2015-8 
Section 1201 Study 
Reply Comments of the Software and Information Industry 
Association 
April 1, 2016
Introduction 
 From SIIA’s perspective, the in itial comments fall into several 
general groups.  The first consists of copyright owners and technology 
companies who believe that the statute is working well, but 
acknowledge that the rulemaking has become cumbersome for the 
Office, and have suggested some wa ys that the proceeding can be 
streamlined.1  The second consists of comments that bemoan both the 
cumbersome nature of the rulemaking, and the fact that Congress 
passed the statute in the first instance, and urge its repeal.
2  The third 
sees problems with the statute because it theoretically prevents users 
from doing what they want with computer software contained in 
devices that they may own (regardl ess of their relationship to the 
software).
3 
Despite a large divergence of viewpoints on the wisdom of the 
statute itself, some co nsensus does exist over the desirability of 
streamlining the rulemaking process.   Nonetheless, commenters do 
not agree over the standard to be employed in that process, and 
whether streamlining the proceeding requires statutory amendment.4  
                                                 
1  E.g., Joint Comments of the AAP, MPAA and RIAA, at 4-9 
(listing variety of successful distribution models reliant on 1201) 
[hereinafter “Joint Creators”]; Comments of the Entertainment 
Software Industry at 2-4.  
2   E.g., Comments of the American Association of Universities et 
al. at 2; Library Copyright Alliance at 3; Comments of the Electronic 
Frontier Foundation at 2-3.   
3   E.g., Owner’s Rights Initiative Comments, at 3; Electronic 
Frontier Foundation Comments, at 3.   
4  Compare, e.g., American Intellectual Property Law 
Association Comments at 2 (suggesting amendment to the statute 
needed to streamline proceeding) with Alliance of Automobile

[PAGE 2]
2 
 
In several instances, that disagreement comes from divergent 
interpretations of the legislative history.5 
SIIA focuses its reply comments on two issues.  First, the 
interpretation of the statute (and it s legislative history) represents a 
question that the Office asked and answered correctly in the year 
2000.6  Indeed, despite dire predictions of gloom and doom at the time 
the statute passed, the existing reco rd provides ample evidence that 
the statute has functioned well, and largely as intended.  And despite 
the rulemaking’s growth, certain aspects of administrative law 
provide the office with the nece ssary leeway to streamline the 
proceeding and acknowledge marketplace realities. 
Second, several commenters insist that the DMCA is creating 
problems with software innovation, and that amendment of the 
statute is necessary to prevent it  from sweeping more broadly than 
intended. That premise assumes a false dichotomy between 
technology and content companies –a suggestion that SIIA 
wholeheartedly rejects.   
The Premise of Section 1201 has Proven Successful 
Some commenters have taken this opportunity to reassert their 
long-standing positions that Congre ss considered and chose to reject 
during the statute’s passage.  What is missing from these suggestions 
is evidence that section 1201’s anti-circumvention and trafficking bans 
have had a negative effect on the availability of motion pictures, books, 
educational materials, enterprise software, or consumer software.  
The evidence uniformly points in the other direction.
7 
In fairness to these dissatisfied groups, this particular point tends 
to be asserted, but not vigorously pursued.  Instead, it serves to frame 
requests to change the rulemaking such that proponents of 
                                                 
Manufacturers Comments at 6-7 (suggesting use of administrative notice).   
5  E.g.,  Harvard Cyberlaw Clinic Comments at 2, 5-7.  
6   Exemption to Prohibition from Circumvention on Copyright 
Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 65 Fed. Reg. 64556, 
64558 & n. 4 (Oct. 27, 2000). 
7  E.g., Comments of the Copyright Alliance at 5-10 (listing a variety 
of businesses dependent on section 1201); Joint Creators, supra n. 1, at 4-9.  
Kernochan Center Comments, at 2 (noting development of different means 
of providing works to consumers digitally).

[PAGE 3]
3 
 
exemptions have an easier time in making their case.  The justification 
for that position stems from a reading of the legislative history 
asserting that the House Manager’s Report has no bearing on the 
meaning of section 1201. 8  These arguments, however, fail to discuss 
the fact that the language of section 1201 changed between the time 
of the Commerce Committee report and its ultimate enactment.9 
Significantly, the rulemaking’s focus changed from any adverse 
effects involving “implementatio n of technological protection 
measures“ to only those caused “by virtue of such prohibition [on 
circumvention] in their ability to make non-infringing uses of that 
particular class of works under this title.”
10  Under its plain language, 
the statute requires the prohibition on circumvention to be the cause 
of an alleged adverse effect, not the mere presence of a technological 
measure. The intention behind that language is explained in the 
House Manager’s Report, which instructs the Secretary of Commerce 
(later changed to the Register of Copyrights) to exclude other possible 
causes, such as changes in ways of distributing works.
11  The provision 
of strong protection against circ umvention to all copyright owners, 
Congress reasoned, would result in  the proliferation of different 
business models.  Where the law caused problems for users, the 
rulemaking has acted in its intended role as a fail-safe. 
                                                 
8  See Harvard Cyberlaw Clinic Comments, at 5. 
9  These changes are noted in other comments.  See Comments of the 
University of Southern California Cyberlaw Clinic at 9 (stating that the 
Commerce Committee report is not “trustworthy” due to the fact that the 
text of the rulemaking provision changed between reporting out of 
Committee and enactment).  
10  Compare H.R. Rep. No. 105-551, at 2 with 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(A), 
(B). 
11  See House Manager’s Report, at 6 (“Adverse impacts that flow from 
other sources-including market- place trends, other technological 
developments, or changes in the roles of libraries, distributors or other 
intermediaries-or that are not clearly attributable to such a prohibition, are 
outside the scope of the rulemaking. So are mere inconveniences, or 
individual cases, that do not rise to the level of a substantial adverse 
impact.”).  See also, e.g., Comments of the Software and Information 
Industry et al, Docket No. RM 99-7, at 6 (March 31, 2000); Comments of the 
American Film Marketing Association et al, at 11-12 & n. 4 (March 31, 
2000) (discussing legislative history of the “prohibition” language).

[PAGE 4]
4 
 
Nonetheless, some commenters (as well as the Office) have 
suggested that the anti-circumvention provisions have begun to be 
applied outside the areas in which Congress intended, specifically as 
applied to computer software.  As the Office reviews section 1201, we 
urge it to reject knee-jerk sugges tions that the emergence of new 
technologies and functionalities necessarily justifies amending the 
copyright laws to accommodate them.   
The copyright laws generally are designed to be medium-neutral. 
With respect to computer programs, they receive the same, medium-
neutral protection as any other kind  of work except for exceptions 
permitting an owner of a copy to cr eate a copy or adaptation “as an 
essential step in the utilizatio n of the computer program in 
conjunction with a machine” and to make a backup copy. 12  The DMCA 
follows the same pattern: in the 1201 context, the sole additional 
exception relates to interoperability. 13  In all other respects, section 
1201 and its exemptions apply to co mputer programs based upon the 
same general principles that apply to other kinds of works. 
The decision to keep the DMCA technology-neutral and to provide 
the opportunity that future works will be afforded the same 
protections as known works is important to continued innovation. By 
keeping the laws medium-neutral, those that develop new 
technologies and new works are guaranteed to receive the same 
protections as the developers of ex isting works. Similarly, companies 
that, as discussed above, heavily inve st in existing technologies are 
able to rely upon the fact that copyright law will continue to protect 
their investments to the same extent as newer technologies. 
The suggestion to revise the copyright laws each time a new 
technology is developed would threaten this careful balance. Instead, 
as crafted by the current legal regime, the courts have proven perfectly 
capable of applying the DMCA’s general principles to new 
technologies. To the contrary, adv ances in digital technologies have 
made the unauthorized copying and widespread distribution of 
                                                 
12  17 U.S.C. § 117.  Of course, computer programs are not the only 
kinds of works subject to particular limitations.  E.g., 17 U.S.C. § 113 
(describing limits of protection for pictorial, sculptural, and architectural 
work); 115 (compulsory license for musical works); 111 (cable license).   
13  17 U.S.C. § 1201(f).

[PAGE 5]
5 
 
copyrighted works easier. Software  piracy remains an enormous 
threat to the United States’ position as a leader in computer 
innovation. If anything, additional protections are needed to 
safeguard the investments made by  copyright holders against such 
acts. Such changes, like any other changes to the copyright laws, 
should only be made after carefu l reflection. Thus, those who would 
frame the essential copyright debates as between the content 
community, on the one hand, and the technology community, on the 
other hand, are missing an essential point: technology companies rely 
on copyright law protections just as media and entertainment 
companies do.  
Against that backdrop, we view suggestions about the perceived 
need to amend the law through a particular lens: one in which 
technological protection measures  have enabled legitimate DVDs, 
educational technologies, databases , and software as a service to 
proliferate.   In particular, we agree with suggestions that the 
exemption in section 1201(f), combined with the rulemaking function, 
sufficiently handles any needs of interoperability.  Thus, while we 
share the general consensus that the statute provides discretion to 
streamline the proof required to  renew previously granted 
exemptions, nothing in this record has persuaded us that existing law 
should be changed.
14    
Thank you for considering our views. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
     
/s/ 
    
Christopher A. Mohr 
Vice President for Intellectual Property  
and General Counsel 
Software and Information Industry 
Association 
 
                                                 
14  See generally Koch and Murphy, 1 Admin. L. & Prac. § 4:44 (3d ed.) 
(describing the leeway that agencies have with respect to informal records).
