[PAGE 1]
 1 
 
BEFORE THE UNITED STATES COPYRIGHT OFFICE 
COMMENTS OF THE ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN UNIVERSITIES, THE AMERICAN 
COUNCIL ON EDUCATION, THE ASSOCIATION OF PUBLIC AND LAND-GRANT 
UNIVERSITIES, AND EDUCAUSE ON SECTION 1201  
OF THE DIGITAL MILLENNIUM COPYRIGHT ACT 
 
Association Descriptions 
The Association of American Universities (“AAU”) is a non-profit association of 60 
U.S. and two Canadian public and private research universities. Founded to advance the 
international standing of U.S. research universities, AAU today focuses on issues that are 
important to research-intensive universities, such as funding for research, research 
regulations, and graduate and undergraduate education. 
The American Council on Education (“ACE”) is a non-profit, national educational 
association that represents all sectors of American higher education. Its approximately 
1,700 members reflect the extraordinary breadth and contributions of degree-granting 
colleges and universities in the United States. Founded in 1918, ACE’s public policy 
advocacy advances its purpose to serve education, believing that a strong higher 
education system is the cornerstone of a democratic society.   
The Association of Public and Land-grant Universities (APLU) is a non-profit 
research, policy, and advocacy organization representing 235 public research 
universities, land-grant institutions, state university systems, and affiliated 
organizations. Founded in 1887, APLU is North America's oldest higher education

[PAGE 2]
 2 
association with member institutions in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, four U.S. 
territories, Canada, and Mexico. 
EDUCAUSE is a non-profit association and the foremost community of 
information technology (IT) leaders and professionals committed to advancing higher 
education. Our membership includes over 2,000 colleges and universities, over 350 
corporations serving higher education IT, and dozens of other associations, state and 
federal agencies, system offices, and not-for-profit organizations. EDUCAUSE strives to 
support IT professionals and the further advancement of IT in higher education through 
analysis, advocacy, community/network-building, professional development, and 
knowledge creation. 
 
Introduction 
The aforementioned associations collectively represent a significant number of 
copyright creators and consumers, with an enduring and critical interest in access to and 
use of copyrighted materials for scholarly research, education, and instruction. The 
associations were also active participants in the policy conversations leading up to the 
enactment of the DMCA, as well as in the first section 1201 triennial rulemaking and 
subsequent rulemakings, submitting extensive written comments and providing witness 
testimony. Today, we remain concerned that section 1201 is adversely affecting the 
ability of the educational community to access copyrighted works for the purpose of 
engaging in lawful, noninfringing uses of those works and using uncopyrighted materials 
integrated in those works.

[PAGE 3]
 3 
Thus, we share the Copyright Office’s view that the time is ripe for a serious 
reconsideration of the anticircumvention provisions in section 1201, as well as the 1201 
rulemaking process. And for reasons that we will discuss in greater detail below, we 
urge the Copyright Office and Congress to consider the following proposals for 
reforming section 1201 and the section 1201 rulemaking process: 
(1) Attach section 1201 liability to circumvention only where that act of 
circumvention results in infringement of the underlying copyrighted work(s). 
(2) Expand the rulemaking process to apply to sections 1201(a)(2) and 1201(b) in 
order to allow beneficiaries of exemptions to acquire the tools to utilize 
those exemptions. 
(3) Create a regulatory presumption for existing section 1201 exemptions, 
whereby the burden is shifted to those opposed to renewal of a previously 
granted exemption. 
(4) Create an “equitable rule of reason” framework wherein previously granted 
exemptions are treated as illustrations of the types of uses permitted. 
(5) At a minimum, draft broader and simpler exemptions that are easier for the 
public to interpret and apply. 
 
History of Section 1201 
The World Intellectual Property Organization’s “Internet” treaties, which the 
United States implemented as the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, require contracting 
parties to provide legal remedies against the circumvention of technological measures

[PAGE 4]
 4 
that protect authors’ copyrights. The treaties, however, only instruct parties to “provide 
adequate legal protection and effective legal remedies against the circumvention of 
effective technological measures that are used by authors in connection with the 
exercise of their rights under this Treaty or the Berne Convention and that restrict acts, 
in respect of their works, which are not authorized by the authors concerned or 
permitted by law.”1 The treaties are silent about regulating circumvention where there 
is no copyright infringement. Nor do the treaties direct parties to address the 
circumvention of access-control technologies in addition to the circumvention of copy-
control technologies; certainly, the exercise of authorial rights under the treaties and 
the Berne Convention does not encompass an exclusive right to permit or prohibit 
access to a publicly distributed work.  
At the time Congress deliberated over implementation of the WIPO treaties, it 
expressed apprehension that access-control technology could be applied to frustrate or 
prevent lawful, noninfringing uses of copyrighted works. The House Commerce 
Committee expressed particular unease about the prospect of chilling legitimate 
educational and scholarly uses, noting: 
“The growth and development of the Internet has already had a significant 
positive impact on the access of American students, researchers, consumers, and 
the public at large to informational resources that help them in their efforts to 
learn, acquire new skills, broaden their perspectives, entertain themselves, and 
                                                 
1 See WIPO Copyright Treaty, adopted Dec. 20, 1996, WIPO Doc. CRNRIDC/94; WIPO 
Performances and Phonograms Treaty, adopted Dec. 20, 1996, CRNR/DC/95.

[PAGE 5]
 5 
become more active and informed citizens….Still, the Committee is concerned 
that marketplace realities may someday dictate a different outcome, resulting in 
less access, rather than more, to copyrighted materials that are important to 
education, scholarship, and socially vital endeavors.” [Committee on Commerce, 
House of Representatives, Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 1998, H.R. Rep. 
No. 105-551 at 35-36 (1998) (emphasis added)]. 
Significantly, the Committee further emphasized that “[f]air use…provides the basis for 
many of the most important day-to-date activities in libraries, as well as in scholarship 
and education.” [Id. At 25-26]  
Congress attempted to balance the rights of authors and users by structuring a 
complex set of exceptions and limitations as part of section 1201.2 Congress also 
recognized that, beyond those enumerated exceptions and limitations, there may be 
additional legitimate reasons to circumvent technological protection measures 
(“TPMs”). For this reason, Congress included in section 1201 a provision requiring the 
Librarian of Congress to conduct a triennial rulemaking proceeding to consider potential 
limited exemptions to section 1201’s general prohibition against circumvention of 
access controls. Specifically, the Librarian must determine whether the prohibition on 
circumvention will adversely affect the ability of users of a given class of copyrighted 
                                                 
2 Signally, Congress offered special protections to nonprofit educational institutions, libraries, 
and archives by exempting them entirely from criminal liability for violations of Section 1201 or 
1202 (Section 1204(b)) and by entitling them to a complete remission of civil damages where 
violations of Section 1201 or 1201 were innocent (Section 1203(c)(5)(B). Nevertheless, these 
protections do not provide sufficient reassurance to the educational community, because they 
do not address circumstances in which, say, a faculty member or researcher breaks a 
technological protection measure in order to lawfully incorporate a copyrighted work in a “non-
work-for-hire” product (such as an e-textbook openly licensed to a state or local elementary 
school system).

[PAGE 6]
 6 
works to make noninfringing uses of that class of works in the subsequent three-year 
period.  
Congress made clear that the section 1201 rulemaking process was meant to 
temper the restrictive effects of section 1201 by ensuring that access controls would not 
be used to impede users’ rights to use the copyrighted works in lawful, noninfringing 
ways. Unfortunately, as we will describe in further detail below, this triennial 
rulemaking procedure has not only impeded users’ ability to legitimately use 
copyrighted works, but has also proved to be cumbersome and burdensome, resulting 
in increasingly lengthy, technical exemptions that are difficult for the public to 
understand and implement.  
 
Section 1201 is Substantively Flawed 
 Despite evidence that Congress did not want section 1201 to encumber or 
prevent noninfringing uses of copyrighted works in educational and scholarly contexts, 
since its inception section 1201 has done exactly that.3 First, section 1201 does not offer 
any meaningful permanent exemptions for nonprofit educational institutions, libraries, 
and archives – some of the very entities that Congress prospectively singled out as 
requiring relief from overbroad anticircumvention provisions. Second, section 1201 is 
inherently prejudicial to innovative educational approaches. 
Section 1201(d) permits nonprofit educational institutions, libraries, and archives 
to circumvent TPMs solely for the purpose of making a good faith determination as to 
                                                 
3 Since 1998, several bipartisan bills have been introduced that would prevent section 1201 from 
inadvertently restricting legitimate activities.

[PAGE 7]
 7 
whether they wish to obtain authorized access to the work. But this exemption is of no 
practical utility, because any qualifying institution that wants to evaluate such a work for 
purchase merely asks the relevant vendor for a limited-time trial. Moreover, even if a 
vendor does not make such a trial available, it is unclear how a university or library 
would gain access in the first instance to a commercially exploited work, such as a 
database, that it had not yet purchased. Indeed, most universities and their libraries 
report that they are aware of no instances in which this provision has ever been 
employed.   
Of even greater concern, perhaps, is that section 1201 is becoming progressively 
more problematic for institutions of higher education as scholarly, educational, and 
instructional models and attendant technologies rapidly evolve. Online and 
asynchronous instruction is growing explosively on almost all higher education 
campuses, along a number of dimensions, and across a variety of fields (including Art, 
Biology, Communication, English, Foreign Language and Literature, Film and Cinema 
Studies, and Music, to name just a few). “Traditional” classroom courses now often 
include parallel online elements, such as student discussion boards, live chat, or online 
notes from the instructor. There are also many more fully-online courses and degree 
programs for enrolled students, as well as many free online courses produced by 
universities and available to the public in a range of forms. 
The boundaries between traditional classroom settings and online and distance 
education are dissolving as MOOCs, flipped classrooms, and other teaching models have 
come to be recognized as critical complements to and, in some instances, substitutes for

[PAGE 8]
 8 
in-person instruction. Asynchronous interactions through learning management systems 
and other online tools are the norm in higher education today; such systems improve 
learning and the quality and quantity of the face-to-face engagement in the traditional 
classroom. In addition, changing student demographics – such as increasing numbers of 
older students who work full- or part-time and greater numbers of veterans with 
disabilities who are returning to school – call for the kinds of flexible and dynamic 
learning environments that online and asynchronous education makes possible.  
Online and asynchronous course providers are particularly disadvantaged by 
section 1201. Fearful of violating section 1201’s anticircumvention prohibitions, 
instructors who design and teach these courses often forego use of certain materials or 
they alter the content they provide, whether by choosing different content from that 
provided in a face-to-face teaching environment or by choosing less relevant or lower 
quality content than they might otherwise fairly use. Section 1201 should not require 
instructors teaching the same course to choose different content for different platforms 
and environments. Nor should section 1201 create barriers to developing novel and 
transformative instructional methods. Research and best practices show that much 
instruction can and should be moved to online or asynchronous platforms and yet, 
thanks to section 1201, such educational modalities must be treated as second-tier, 
lower-quality forms of instruction than in-person instruction.  
Some have argued that the TEACH Act (17 USC § 110(2)) could be used to 
determine what is and what is not authorized in this area. We do not believe, however, 
that the TEACH Act provides a helpful guidepost in the section 1201 context. Although

[PAGE 9]
 9 
the TEACH Act was intended to accommodate sharing content in distance education 
contexts, many of its restrictions are unworkably limited. In particular, the requirement 
that content shared via TEACH Act provisions be made inaccessible to students after a 
“class session” is over is inconsistent with best practices in online education (which 
allow students to review materials throughout the time they are enrolled in a course, or 
even throughout an integrated degree program). The requirement is also increasingly 
difficult to apply to online instruction at all – in a disintermediated course, when does 
the “class session” begin or end? In short, very few universities employ or rely on the 
TEACH Act’s outdated and labyrinthine provisions when deciding how and what uses to 
make of copyrighted works. Contrary to the objective of the TEACH Act, it is simpler (but 
by no means simple) to wade into the complexities of a fair use analysis.  
Fair use, which Congress took care to reference in the language of section 1201, 
is more flexible than the TEACH Act. And it has proven to be a reliable tool for 
implementing new educational practices that embrace technologies to enrich the 
educational experience and provide efficiencies for institutions and students. Especially 
in online instructional videos, for instance, fair use is often relied on to reproduce 
images on slides and may incorporate video or audio clips under a fair use rationale. 
Accordingly, we urge that any changes to section 1201 explicitly state that section 1201 
should in no way hinder uses that may fall within the ambit of 17 USC § 107. 
 
Section 1201 is Procedurally Flawed

[PAGE 10]
 10 
The Section 1201(a)(1) rulemaking process, which authorizes the Librarian of 
Congress to consider possible temporary exemptions to section 1201(a)(1)’s prohibition 
on the circumvention of access controls, is arduous for participants and adjudicators 
alike.4 And it is disproportionately burdensome for nonprofit and individual participants. 
Moreover, as we will explain below, it is unclear that the extraordinary effort required 
to participate in the section 1201 rulemaking process yields exemptions that are useful 
either for intended beneficiaries of the exemptions or for the authors of the underlying 
copyrighted works. 
For nonprofit educational institutions, participation in the rulemaking process 
demands an investment of substantial scarce resources, including multiple sophisticated 
filings and appearances at in-person hearings in Washington, D.C. or Los Angeles. 
Developing fresh evidence of faculty need, of technological availability, of the state of 
the content market, and so forth is extremely taxing for nonprofit institutions. In the last 
rulemaking session, some exemptions were unopposed and yet proponents of certain 
non-commercial educational uses still had to marshal and present all of the evidence 
necessary for the exemption to be renewed.  
In addition, the exemptions granted are now so complex and verbose that they 
are difficult even for sophisticated university attorneys to parse and apply with any 
                                                 
4 Remarkably, during the course of the recently concluded sixth triennial rulemaking, the 
Copyright Office considered nearly 40,000 comments – a hundredfold increase from the 2000 
rulemaking. The majority of these comments comprised brief statements without legal or 
evidentiary support, but a number of the longer submissions included substantial supporting 
evidence, including multimedia files. See Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights, Section 
1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the Prohibition on 
Circumvention, U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE 21–22 (Oct. 8, 2015), 
http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/registers-recommendation.pdf.

[PAGE 11]
 11 
confidence. For instance, the exemption for using excerpts of audiovisual works for 
educational purposes increased from 44 words in 2006 to 96 words in 2010 to 752 
words in 2013 to 1055 words in 2015. Yet these increasingly wordy exemptions also 
tend to be very narrow, resulting in unfair distinctions that prejudice certain users and 
uses. Exemptions of different scope apply to an instructor teaching the same course at a 
university, in a MOOC, and at a library or museum.5 
Furthermore, educational institutions must prepare new policies and guidelines 
and recalibrate their budgets every three years after exhaustively reviewing these 
increasingly lengthy and convoluted exemptions. This is especially challenging in 
evolving online and asynchronous course environments. Even though an exemption was 
included for MOOCs during the 2015 sixth triennial rulemaking, for instance, colleges 
and universities cannot be sure that such an exemption will be recommended or 
modified in the next rulemaking.  
For MOOCs and other online classes where the content is delivered by taped 
lectures, the cost of re-filming lectures is high enough that educational institutions 
abstain from legitimates uses of certain works rather than rely on an exemption that 
may disappear in three years. As in other contexts, it is difficult to prove harm because – 
as indicated above – perceived risks associated with section 1201 have led educators 
                                                 
5 The exemption created for MOOCs during the 2015 sixth triennial rulemaking, discussed 
further below, provides an object lesson here. The exemption, though a laudable step forward 
for MOOC instructors and their students, requires MOOC providers to restrict access to the 
relevant material to enrolled students and to prevent further dissemination of that material 
outside of the course. Offering streaming rather than downloadable versions of the course 
content could reasonably limit unauthorized redistribution of the material, but streaming 
unfairly disadvantages learners with slower Internet access. In many instances, it is precisely 
those learners who are in greatest need of online or asynchronous educational opportunities.

[PAGE 12]
 12 
systematically to avoid teaching courses that raise any DMCA questions. In general, 
then, innovative educational approaches such as MOOCs and flipped classrooms are 
inherently disadvantaged by a system that requires each new kind of use to come 
before the Copyright Office to seek its own narrow dispensation to move forward. 
The uncertainty created by this cyclical process places significant impediments in 
the way of creating reliable, consistent policy decisions that can be promulgated to the 
entire educational community, particularly at very large and/or decentralized 
educational institutions. 
Perhaps most importantly, it is unclear that the 1201 rulemaking process is of 
practical effect. Section 1201(a)(1)(C) authorizes the Librarian of Congress to adopt 
exemptions to the section 1201(a)(1)(A) prohibition on the act of circumventing a TPM, 
but not to the section 1201(a)(2) prohibition on the development and distribution of 
circumvention tools. So while an entity granted an exemption might be legally allowed 
to perform an act of circumvention, there may be no legal way to obtain the 
technological tools necessary to perform that act. No educational institution granted an 
exemption wants to assume that a temporary exemption implicitly includes the right to 
develop the necessary circumvention tools to take advantage of that exemption. 
At the same time, in contexts where tools enabling circumvention are available, 
it is not clear that the exemptions granted through the rulemaking process have any 
impact on levels of infringement. For example, the technology necessary to circumvent 
the TPMs on DVDs and other storage media is widely available via the Internet and 
simple to use. If a user plans to unlawfully copy a DVD and the necessary tools to do so

[PAGE 13]
 13 
are readily available, there is no reason to think (s)he will be deterred by section 1201’s 
anti-circumvention provision or any narrow exemptions to that provision. But, because 
postsecondary institutions seek to operate in accordance with law, section 1201 limits 
uses Congress sought to encourage, while having minimal concrete impact on the 
misuses it sought to prevent. 
 
Proposed Changes to Section 1201  
 First, we urge Congress to adopt the approach proposed in the 114th Congress by 
Representatives Zoe Lofgren, Thomas Massie, Anna Eshoo, and Jared Polis in H.R. 1587, 
the Technology Unlocking Act, which would attach section 1201 liability to 
circumvention only if that act of circumvention results in infringement of the underlying 
copyrighted work(s). It is our view that the burdensome section 1201 rulemaking 
process would be rendered unnecessary if section 1201 operated solely to prohibit 
circumvention resulting in infringement.  
Alternatively, but less optimally, Congress could enact additional permanent 
exemptions for nonprofit educational uses or for certain “per se” educational works 
(such as scientific databases or academic monographs and treatises), and for uses by 
and for those with disabilities. We caution, however, that any such exemptions should 
be drafted so they are sufficiently adaptable to accommodate evolving technologies. 
 Second, the rulemaking process should be expanded to apply to sections 
1201(a)(2) and (b), to ensure that the tools necessary to effectuate any permitted 
circumvention can be developed and distributed.

[PAGE 14]
 14 
Third, as Register of Copyrights Maria Pallante herself has suggested,6 there are 
powerful arguments for why exemptions should not have to be reassessed de novo 
every three years.7 If exemptions are to be time limited, when a previously approved 
exemption is up for consideration, the default should be presumptive renewal with the 
burden shifting to those opposed to renewal to prove market harm or otherwise 
demonstrate why the exemption should not be continued. 
In fact, we would go one step further and suggest that previously granted 
exemptions should be treated as illustrations of the types of uses permitted. This 
framework would function, in essence, as an equitable rule of reason, providing 
subsequent users with a more reliable means of evaluating the likelihood that a given 
use will or will not be deemed permissible. At a minimum, certainly, we ask the 
Copyright Office to exercise its extant authority to draft broader and simpler 
exemptions. 
As a general matter, we believe that flexibility must be added to section 1201. As 
currently structured and interpreted, section 1201 hinders innovation through a lack of 
predictable results, creates redundant administrative burdens through a repetitive filing 
                                                 
6 See The Register’s Perspective on Copyright Review, Hearing Before the Subcomm. on Courts, 
Intell. Prop. and the Internet of the H. Comm. on the Judiciary, 114th Cong. (2015) (statement of 
Maria A. Pallante, Register of Copyrights).  
7 It is worth noting here that the de novo standard is set out only in the report of one committee 
that considered the DMCA. Nothing in section 1201(a)(1)(C) itself mandates that the renewal of 
an exemption be based on de novo review. See Report of the H. Comm. On Commerce on the 
Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 1998, H.R. Rep. No. 105-551, pt 2, at 37 (1998). Accordingly, 
the Copyright Office could disregard this report language or merely apply it in a less 
burdensome way, such as by automatically incorporating evidentiary records of past 
rulemakings into the records of present rulemakings.

[PAGE 15]
 15 
process, and interferes with likely legitimate fair uses of copyrighted works. Equally 
importantly, section 1201 fails to meaningfully protect copyright holders. 
 We thank the Copyright Office for soliciting the views of stakeholders as it moves 
forward with an in-depth legal and policy review of the impact and efficacy of section 
1201 and the section 1201 rulemaking process. We greatly appreciate this opportunity 
to share our perspectives.
