[PAGE 1]
  
 
March 3
,
 
U.S. Co
p
Docket N
Section 1
Notice of
Commen
 
T
Office’s 
1201(a) o
respect to
“trafficki
informal 
correct re
recomme
the vehic
decline to
 
C
billion U
represent
manufact
technolog
 
C
automoti
their cust
DMCA d
specific, 
               
1  U.S. C
for Publi
2  Comm
2015 “Fi
the Com
m
http://ww
3 A comp
https://ww
 
, 2016 
pyright Offic
No. 2015-8 
1201 Study: 
f Inquiry and
nts of the Co
The Consume
request for p
of the Digita
o the Registe
ing” provisio
assistance in
ecommendat
end an exem
cle or machin
o follow this
CTA is the pr
U.S. consume
tation.  CTA
turing and d
gy, multime
CTA member
ive products 
tomers’ or th
did not consi
expert assist
                   
opyright Off
c Comment,
merce Dept. L
nal Rule,” th
merce Depar
ww.copyrigh
plete list of C
ww.cta.tech/
 
  
ce 
  
d Request fo
nsumer Tech
er Technolog
public comm
al Millennium
er’s recomm
ons, to deny 
n exercising
tion was that
mption to mak
nery.”2  CTA
s sound and 
reeminent te
er technology
A members le
istribution o
dia, and acc
rs who offer 
should be fr
heir own com
ider it to be “
tance to a co
               
ffice Docket 
, 80 Fed.Reg
Letter to the 
he October 8
rtment to the
ht.gov/1201/.
CTA membe
/Membershi
 
or Public Com
hnology Ass
gy Associati
ment1 on the 
m Copyright
mendation, ba
lawful user 
g their rights 
t of the Depa
ke repairs or
A believes th
essential adv
echnology tra
y industry th
ead the consu
of audio, vide
essory produ
services to c
ree of DMCA
mmercial exp
“trafficking”
onsumer who
No. 2015-8,
g. No. 249, D
Register at 5
8 Recommen
e Register on
.    
ers is availab
ip/Membersh
 
  
mment 
sociation 
ion (CTA) is
Office’s inte
t Act (DMCA
ased on the O
petitioners i
under Sectio
artment of C
r modificatio
he Office had
vice.  
ade associati
hrough mark
umer techno
eo, mobile e
ucts, as well 
consumers in
A constraint
ploitation of
” for another
ose right to e
, Section 120
Dec. 29, 201
58 (emphasis
ndations of th
n behalf of th
ble at 
hip-Director
 
s pleased to r
erpretation a
A) generally
Office’s inte
in “Class 21
on 1201(a).  
Commerce, w
ons “by or at
d no basis in
ion, promoti
ket research, 
ology industr
electronics, c
as related se
n the repair, 
s that have n
f copyrighted
r person or a
engage in law
01 Study: No
5. (“NOI”). 
s added).  Th
he Register,
he Administ
ry.aspx.  
respond to th
and administ
y, and in part
rpretation of
” the benefit
CTA believ
which advise
t the request 
n law, policy
ing growth in
education an
ry in the dev
communicati
ervices sold 
replacement
nothing to do
d works.  Th
a company to
wful activity
otice of Inqu
he Librarian
 and the Sep
tration are al
he Copyrigh
tration of Sec
ticular with 
f Section 12
t of formal a
ves that the 
ed the Regist
t of the owne
y, or procedu
n the $285 
nd public po
velopment, 
ions, informa
to consumer
t, and safety
o with either
he drafters of
o provide 
y has been 
uiry and Req
n’s October 2
pt. 18 Letter 
ll linked at 
ht 
ction 
01’s 
and 
ter to 
er of 
ure to 
olicy 
ation 
rs.3 
y of 
r 
f the 
quest 
28, 
of

[PAGE 2]
2 
 
confirmed by the Librarian, but who lacks the knowledge or wherewithal to exercise that right.  
Accordingly, CTA respectfully disagrees with the Register’s recommendation that the Librarian 
lacks the power to exempt circumvention where expert help is required to gain lawful access to 
specific content or to software embedded in a device owned by the user.  The DMCA does not 
say or imply this, nor does, as the Register also suggested, the Unlocking Act. 4    
 
In its NOI the Office poses questions in four categories.  CTA comments on the first 
three – General issues pertaining to the Office’s interpretation of the statute and the scope of its 
own authority and discretion; the Rulemaking process; and whether the anti-trafficking 
provisions of the DMCA have been properly interpreted and applied and / or require legislative 
amendment.    
 
“General” Issues 
 
The NOI recognizes that the number of exemption petitions has grown in step with the in 
terrorem use of the DMCA to impair or threaten users’ access to their own devices:  
 
[I]t is … apparent that the prohibition on circumvention impacts a wide range of 
consumer activities that have little to do with the consumption of creative content 
or the core concerns of copyright. *** In the 2015 rulemaking, some of the 
proposed exemptions concerned the ability to access and make noninfringing uses 
of expressive copyrighted works ….  But others concerned the ability to 
circumvent access controls on copyrighted computer code in consumer devices.
5  
 
This is a severe understatement.  Of the 44 exemption petitions filed, the majority – 26 – 
had nothing to do with any user’s desire to copy or “consume” creative, expressive content.  
Simply put, the Office has lagged behind the Administration6 and Members of Congress, 
including drafters of the DMCA, in recognizing that the trend of using the DMCA as a vehicle of 
industrial protectionism is an unintended, unfortunate, and unnecessary imposition on users’ 
rights.  The drafters of the DMCA assured their congressional colleagues and the public that such 
abuse would not occur.  Those still serving in Congress in 2014 labeled lawsuits brought on this 
basis as “abuse.”7  When the Librarian denied consumers an exemption to control the 
interoperability of their own phones, the Congress swiftly reversed this decision in the Unlocking 
Act.   
                                                 
4 Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act, Pub. L. No. 113-144, 128 Stat. 
1751 (2014). 
5 NOI at 12 (emphasis added). 
6 The Commerce Dept. letter uniformly supports user rights in the absence of copyright 
infringement.  See also National Telecommunications and Information Administration, NTIA 
Petition for Rulemaking on Unlocking of Mobile Devices, Sept. 13, 2013, available at 
https://www.ntia.doc.gov/fcc-filing/2013/ntia-petition-rulemaking-unlocking-mobile-devices.  
7 Chapter 12 of Title 17:  Hearing Before the Subcomm. On Courts, Intellectual Property, and 
the Internet of the H. Comm. on the Judiciary, 113th Cong. at 1, 64, 77 – 78 (2014) (“House 
Section 1201 Hearing”).

[PAGE 3]
3 
 
In the 2015 round, the Librarian exceeded its authority in limiting the scope and period of 
a clearly deserved exemption for users to control the operation of their own autos, and erred in 
denying them the benefit of any expert assistance.  These limitations and denials have no basis in 
the text of Sections 1201(a)(1), 1201(a)(2), or 1201(b)(1), and are contrary to the legislative 
history of these provisions.   
 
1. The DMCA’s legislative history requires the Librarian to presume that users 
who do not copy expressive copyrighted works have not violated the DMCA, 
instead of presuming that they have. 
 
The drafters of Section 1201 emphasized that it was directed to the protection of specific 
copyrighted works from infringing replication, not to sheltering systems from being “hacked.”  
Rep. Bob Goodlatte in 1998 emphasized this in his remarks on the House floor: 
 
I would like to state for the record my understanding that [Sections 1201(a) and 
(b)(1)] are not intended to address computer system security, such as devices used 
to crack into computer security systems such as firewalls or discover log-on 
passwords that protect an entire system.  The ban contained in these provisions is 
intended to cover circumvention devices aimed at technological protection 
measures that protect particular works covered under Title 17 such as movies, 
songs or computer programs. Unauthorized hacking into computer programs is 
already covered by other laws.
8   
The Report of the Senate Judiciary Committee emphasized that Section 1201(a)(1), 
which addresses conduct of particular technology users, was even more narrowly targeted, 
toward directly infringing conduct, and not to potential consequences, or to secondary liability: 
Paragraph (a)(1) establishes a general prohibition against gaining unauthorized 
access to a work by circumventing a technological protection measure put in place 
by the copyright owner where such protection measure otherwise effectively 
controls access to a work protected under title 17 of the U.S. Code. This 
paragraph does not apply to the subsequent actions of a person once he or she 
has obtained authorized access to a copy of a work protected under title 17, even 
if such actions involve circumvention of other types of technological protection 
measures.9 
The Report of the House Judiciary Committee, as presented by then-subcommittee 
chairman Howard Coble, employs much the same language, and states flatly and with 
particularity that a user is not liable for circumvention under Section 1201(a)(1) if the user is 
entitled to that access as a matter of fair use: 
                                                 
8 144 Cong. Rec. H7095 (Aug. 4, 1998), Remarks of Rep. Goodlatte (emphasis added) 
(“Goodlatte”). 
9 S. Rep. 105-90 at 29 (1998).

[PAGE 4]
4 
 
Paragraph (a)(1) does not apply to the subsequent actions of a person once he or 
she has obtained authorized access to a copy of a work protected under Title 17, 
even if such actions involve circumvention of additional forms of technological 
protection measures. In a fact situation where the access is authorized, the 
traditional defenses to copyright infringement, including fair use, would be fully 
applicable. So, an individual would not be able to circumvent in order to gain 
unauthorized access to a work, but would be able to do so in order to make fair 
use of a work which he or she has acquired lawfully.10 
 The drafters also emphasized, in legislative history, that the “trafficking” provisions 
were not meant to frustrate lawful and assisted user access when that access is targeted to works 
to which the user has lawful rights.  All report and floor statements emphasize that the target of 
Sections 1201(a)(2) and (b)(1) was the potential commodification of “black box” technologies 
that are deployed for unlawful access to works.  The House Judiciary Committee Report goes on 
to say of Section 1201(a)(2): 
It is drafted carefully to target ‘‘black boxes,’’ and to ensure that legitimate 
multipurpose devices can continue to be made and sold. For a technology, 
product, service, device, component, or part thereof to be prohibited under this 
subsection, one of three conditions must be met. It must: (1) be primarily 
designed or produced for the purpose of circumventing; (2) have only a limited 
commercially significant purpose or use other than to circumvent; or (3) be 
marketed by the person who manufactures it, imports it, offers it to the public, 
provides it or otherwise traffics in it, or by another person acting in concert with 
that person, for use in circumventing a technological protection measure that 
effectively controls access to a work protected under Title 17. This provision is 
designed to protect copyright owners, and simultaneously allow the development 
of technology.11 
The Report of the House Commerce Committee said: 
The Committee believes it is very important to emphasize that Section 102(a)(2) 
is aimed fundamentally at outlawing so-called ‘‘black boxes’’ that are expressly 
intended to facilitate circumvention of technological protection measures for 
purposes of gaining access to a work. This provision is not aimed at products that 
are capable of commercially significant noninfringing uses, such as consumer 
electronics, telecommunications, and computer products—including videocassette 
                                                 
10 H. Rep. 105-551 Pt 1 at 18 (1998) (emphasis added) (“House Judiciary Report”).  
11 Id.

[PAGE 5]
5 
 
recorders, telecommunications switches, personal computers, and servers—used 
by businesses and consumers for perfectly legitimate purposes.12 
In presenting this Report, and the legislation, on the House floor, Commerce Committee 
Chairman Tom Bliley assured the house that legitimate retailers were not among the 
“trafficking” targets : 
 
Given our keen interest in the development of new products, in particular digital 
television monitors, the Committee is particularly concerned that the introduction 
of such measures not frustrate consumer expectations and that this legislation not 
be interpreted to in any way limit the authority of manufacturers and retailers to 
address the legitimate concerns of their customers.13 
Chairman Bliley went on to address, specifically, concerns that overbroad application of 
“trafficking” provisions could impair interoperability and consumer convenience, and noted 
specifically that the DMCA should not impair assistance from “servicers”: 
 
As advances in technology occur, consumers will enjoy additional benefits if 
devices are able to interact and share information. Achieving interoperability in 
the consumer electronics environment will be a critical factor in the growth of 
electronic commerce. In our view, manufacturers, consumers, retailers, and 
servicers should not be prevented from correcting an interoperability problem 
resulting from a protection measure causing one or more devices in the home or in 
a business to fail to interoperate with other technologies.14 
The denial of expert assistance from “retailers and servicers” was contrary to this explicit 
legislative history. 
 
 More generally, this legislative history explains the appalled reactions, 16 years later, of 
several of the House drafters of the DMCA, at a 2014 hearing called to review developments 
pertaining to Section 1201.  Rep. Goodlatte, now Chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, 
observed: 
 
As someone who was very active in negotiating all of the DMCA, I am not sure 
that anyone involved in the drafting would have anticipated some of the TPM 
uses that have been litigated in court. Such as replacement printer toner cartridges 
and garage door openers.15 
 
Judiciary Committee Ranking Member Conyers added: 
                                                 
12 H. rep. 105 – 551 Pt 2 at 38 (1998) (emphasis added) (“House Commerce Report”). 
13 144 Cong. Rec. H7094 – 7095 at 7094 (Aug. 4, 1998), Remarks of Rep. Bliley (emph. added) 
(“Bliley”).  
14 Id. at 7095 (emphasis added). 
15 House Section 1201 Hearing at 64; see also statement of Rep. Farenthold at 77 – 78.

[PAGE 6]
6 
 
For example, some critics contend that copyright owners use Section 1201, as a 
tool to stifle competition and repeatedly cite the laser printer cartridge 
replacement and garage door opener cases in support of their contention. 
Fortunately, courts in both these cases ruled against the companies who had 
attempted to use Chapter 12 to inhibit competition.
16   
Rep. Marino, in an opening statement on behalf of (1998 and 2014) Subcommittee 
Chairman Coble, said: 
As everyone knows, Mr. Coble has not been a fan of those who abuse the legal 
system using our Nation’s intellectual property laws whether they are copyright, 
patent or trademark laws. And I concur with him. So we’d like to hear more about 
ways to ensure that Chapter 12 is used to protect copyrighted works rather than 
printer cartridges and garage door openers as has been attempted before.17 
 
This review of statements of Members of Congress, then and now, shows that the drafters 
of Section 1201 have been more sensitive than the Copyright Office and the Register have been 
in assuring that the legitimate rights and expectations of users have been honored.  As CTA 
discusses further below, the Office, in its recommendations by the Register, has conflated the 
individual and limited elements of Sections 1201(a)(1), (a)(2), and (b)(1) into a monolith, 
standing in the way of interoperability, that the DMCA’s drafters explicitly did not intend to 
erect. 
 
As the Office has repeatedly reminded the public, the Librarian is afforded discretion in 
interpreting the Act and in granting exemptions.  But this discretion should be used to further the 
purposes of the Act.  As is shown above, these purposes specifically did not include (1) denying 
exemptions to a user under Section 1201(a)(1), where the object of circumvention was copyright 
fair use, and (2) labeling as “trafficking” assistance to a user by a retailer or a servicer to obtain 
lawful access to a specific work or to the user’s own device for purposes of interoperability.  
Denial of such consumer rights and assistance was disclaimed by the DMCA’s drafters at the 
time of its enactment.  Reading the DMCA to deny consumers functional access to their own 
products has been bemoaned by the drafters in the ensuing years. 
 
2. Section 1201 should neither advance nor constrain interests that lie outside 
core copyright concerns. 
 
CTA applauds the Office for seeking comment on these and other of its recommendations 
and on whether it was correct in the Class 21 petitions to consider external, non-copyright factors 
so as to impair the utility of and shorten the statutory term of exemptions.  CTA believes the 
Librarian was not granted the power to do this.   
 
Just as Section 1201 should not be an instrument of private sector industrial protection 
where expressive works are not being infringed, it should also not be turned into an instrument of 
public sector industrial policy where such policy is at best orthogonal to copyright.  Moreover, 
                                                
 
16 Id. at 4. 
17 Id. at 1 - 2.

[PAGE 7]
7 
 
even if it were appropriate to verge beyond copyright considerations in copyright exemption 
proceedings, Section 1201(a) places the responsibility to advise the Register only on the 
Department of Commerce, on behalf of the Administration.  It was contrary to the statute’s text 
and intent for the Register to seek and accept advice from other agencies of the Administration 
and to reject the advice of the Department of Commerce, which did not recommend any such 
limitations in scope or term of exemption. 
 
Rulemaking Process 
 
3. Previously granted exemptions should enjoy a presumption of renewal. 
 
It should not take an act of Congress for the Office to be able to channel its discretion in 
favor of efficiency.  A groundswell, including the past Register,18 has supported this outcome.  
CTA is not persuaded that there is any obstacle to the Office taking this common-sense step on 
its own motion.  There is no reason, however, to limit this presumption to unopposed petitions. 
 
Additionally, the Office should consider extending the renewal presumption to product 
extensions, such as the use of tablets employing operating systems similar to those of phones 
whose users previously have enjoyed exemptions.  Presumed renewal would free private sector 
and Office resources for more constructive contributions.    
 
4. The Copyright Office should not impose a heavy burden on exemption 
proponents. 
 
The legislative history and assurances of the drafters, reviewed above, do not support the 
Office’s practice of imposing heavy, and in some cases apparently arbitrary or at least 
discretionary, burdens on proponents of exemptions.  Nothing in the statute requires the 
imposition of such burdens.  Where opponents are in a better position to come forward with 
evidence, they should be obliged to do so.   
  
5. The Copyright Office should not credit opposition that is based on 
projections of secondary liability. 
 
CTA respectfully asserts that the Office misapplied Section 1201(a) and additionally 
committed both legal and procedural error by denying to Class 21 an exemption for access to 
“infotainment” systems.  The Office did so on the basis that a system, after circumvention, might 
be accessible to additional content from an infringing source.  Yet it was plainly stated by the 
legislation’s sponsors, as set forth above in CTA’s response to question 1, that user liability 
under Section 1201(a) cannot be based on infringements occurring after circumvention.   
 
As a matter of copyright law, the Office’s rationale is also directly contrary to the law as 
established by the Supreme Court in Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City Studios, Inc., 464 
U.S. 417, 442 (1984).  The Supreme Court held in Sony that it is lawful to provide consumers 
with a device that can store both infringing and non-infringing content, so long as there are 
                                                 
18 NOI at 11 & n. 40.

[PAGE 8]
8 
 
commercially significant non-infringing uses for the stored content.  In the Class 21 exemption 
discussion, it was only agricultural equipment provider John Deere that even suggested, without 
proof, that circumvention could result in infringing material being imported into vehicle 
infotainment storage.19  Hence the only copyright interest or concern that the Office could have 
had would be about a closed storage system becoming open to storing infringing content.  It was 
clearly established in Sony that allowing such capacity into the marketplace is not copyright 
infringement, even where accomplished by a third party with a commercial interest.  Moreover, 
the courts have recognized that any such importation may occur as a form of lawful 
timeshifting20 or placeshifting.21     
 
Even if it were not error to consider consequential activity when evaluating user conduct 
under Section 1201(a), at the very least the Office should have placed the burden on exemption 
opponents to come forward with some evidence of a copyright law interest being encountered as 
a result of the circumvention.  The Office’s denial of infotainment access to users was thus 
procedural error as to burden, legal error in misapplying Section 1201(a) to post-circumvention 
conduct, and legal error in construing the copyright law.     
 
Anti-Trafficking Provisions  
 
6. The DMCA anti-trafficking provisions of Sections 1201(a)(2) and 1201(b)(1) 
should not have deterred the Register from recommending that the 
Librarian grant exemptions in favor of users who receive assistance in 
accomplishing exempt objectives. 
 
Nothing in the trafficking provisions of the DMCA (Sections 1201(a)(2) and (b)(1)) or 
any other law requires that users be unable to receive expert assistance in accomplishing a lawful 
and exempt objective.  As was explained in the legislative history quoted above, these 
“trafficking” provisions were drafted “carefully to target ‘black boxes’ ….”
22  The legislative 
history is explicit that, unlike Sections 1201(a)(2) and 1201(b)(1), Section 1201(a)(1) pertains to 
particular users, particular uses, and particular works.  The hardware or software “black box” 
scenario addressed in Sections 1201(a)(2) and 1201(b)(1) as “trafficking” was never meant to 
apply to a user seeking interoperable access to a work embedded in an automobile that she owns.  
Nor was it meant to apply to a user seeking access to a vehicle’s system, because Section 
1201(a)(1) was not meant to lock users out of systems.23  Nor was it meant to deny retail and 
servicer-level direct assistance to a user in need of it. 
 
                                                 
19 No claim of inducement, contributory, or vicarious liability was made – indeed it would be 
comical to suggest that a user is capable of inducement with respect to his or her own vehicle’s 
radio.   
20 Sony 464 U.S. at 442 - 456.   
21 Recording Indus. Ass’n of Am. v. Diamond Multimedia Sys., Inc., 180 F.3d 1072, 1079  (9th 
Cir. 1999). 
22 House Judiciary Report at 18; see also House Commerce Report at 38.   
23 Goodlatte.

[PAGE 9]
9 
 
In presenting the DMCA on the floor of the House, Commerce Committee Chairman 
Bliley was explicit that the DMCA was not meant to impair retailer or servicer assistance to 
consumers, nor was it meant to be construed as impairing device interoperability: 
 
[T]he Committee is particularly concerned that the introduction of such measures 
not frustrate consumer expectations and that this legislation not be interpreted to 
in any way limit the authority of manufacturers and retailers to address the 
legitimate concerns of their customers.
24 *** Achieving interoperability in the 
consumer electronics environment will be a critical factor in the growth of 
electronic commerce. In our view, manufacturers, consumers, retailers, and 
servicers should not be prevented from correcting an interoperability problem 
resulting from a protection measure causing one or more devices in the home or in 
a business to fail to interoperate with other technologies.25 
 
The Unlocking Act became necessary only because the Librarian failed to renew previous 
exemptions that had been widely construed as authorizing assisted retail and servicer-level 
unlocking, so that phones could interoperate with new networks.  The result of this departure 
from previous presumptions was a Presidential Petition and congressional reversal.26  In the 
legislative history discussion of the Unlocking Act it was noted that servicer assistance in aid of 
interoperability was essential for many consumers.27 Yet when prior phone unlocking 
exemptions were granted there had been no public or congressional concern expressed that 
specific permission for such assistance was necessary and had been withheld.  Hence, there was 
no basis for the Office to assume that Congress, in specifying a right to such assistance, was 
under the impression that prior grants had excluded such a right.  Indeed, in reporting out the 
final version28 of the bill that reversed the Librarian’s denial, the Senate Judiciary Committee 
was emphatic that it intended no positive or negative inference with respect to the Librarian’s 
authority in other exemption proceedings: 
 
While there are larger ongoing debates about the scope and application of Section 
1201 of the DMCA, as well as other aspects of phone unlocking, those issues are 
not addressed by the legislation, which makes no changes to Section 1201 of the 
DMCA. The bill respects the independence of the Library of Congress under 
existing law to conduct the triennial rulemakings set forth in Section 1201(a)(1) 
and does not alter the authority of the Librarian in future rulemakings.
29 
 
Thus the Register was simply incorrect, in the recommendation as to Class 21, in reading 
the Unlocking Act as containing any “negative pregnant” preventing the Librarian from allowing 
assistance to users in appropriate cases, in order to achieve interoperability.  Given the explicit 
                                                 
24 Bliley at 7094 (emphasis added). 
25 Bliley at 7095 (emphasis added). 
26 See Senate Report No. 113-212 (Comm. On the Judiciary) at 3 & n. 9 (“Senate Unlocking Act 
Report”). 
27 Id. at 4, 6.   
28 See 160 Cong. Rec. S4510 – 11 (2014) and 160 Cong. Rec. H6835-36. 
29 Senate Unlocking Act Report at 5.

[PAGE 10]
10 
 
intent of the DMCA’s drafters that it should not be read to impair user interoperability for lawful 
purposes, the Unlocking Act could not and did not pose any barrier to the Librarian’s following 
the Administration’s specific advice to include a right to assistance in its Class 21 exemption, as 
it did for Class 11.    
 
To the extent the Unlocking Act is relevant to autos it should have been understood by 
the Office as furthering the rights of users generally, rather than constraining them.  The only 
caution and constraint cited by the drafters of the Unlocking Act was that the assistance must be 
rendered be for purposes of interoperability:  
 
[N]othing in the bill permits third parties to unlock devices independently of the 
device owner’s direction, or for a purpose other than allowing the owner or a 
family member to connect to a new wireless network.
30 *** Unlike many other 
situations where an exemption from the circumvention prohibition may be sought 
or granted, unlocking a cell phone to connect to a wireless network typically does 
not facilitate copyright infringement.31 
 
The rationale for the Unlocking Act simply recapitulates the rationale of the DMCA 
drafters in assuring that the DMCA would not impair device interoperability.  The Unlocking 
Act should have been viewed by the Librarian as an additional reason to specifically approve 
assistance to users of owned devices in exemptions, not one for denying it.  
 
7. Section 1201 should be clarified to confirm that expert assistance, whether formally 
or informally rendered, is not trafficking. 
 
The fact that the Copyright Office and the NTIA, the expert agencies identified by the 
Congress to administer exemptions from Section 1201, have not agreed on whether expert 
assistance to consumers in aid of lawful access is “trafficking” suggests that legislative 
clarification of this important issue would be helpful.  More generally, DMCA drafters have 
complained about lawsuits that would impair users’ ability to repair, upgrade, or replace 
components or media of their own devices.  Therefore CTA recommends that in addition to 
interpreting existing law as we propose, the Office should advocate for substantive, as well as 
procedural, reform of Section 1201. 
 
First, the scope of Section 1201 should be clarified so as to comport with the drafters’ 
intention that it should protect only access to and copying of expressive literary and musical 
works for the purpose of exploiting those works in ways that infringe copyright.  Second, the text 
should reflect the drafters’ intention that Section 1201(a)(1) constrains only user access to 
particular works, so it is not “trafficking” to assist such access so long as the user’s objective is 
lawful.  Third, the text should be clearer that access to a functional work embedded in a product 
that the user owns is lawful. 
  
                                                
 
30 Senate Unlocking Act Report at 4.   
31 Id. at 6.

[PAGE 11]
11 
 
CTA appreciates this opportunity to provide its views. 
 
 Respectfully submitted,  
 
 
  
 Michael E. Petricone 
 Senior Vice President 
      G o v e r n m e n t  A f f a i r s
