[PAGE 1]
1 
 
 
Docket No. 2015-8 
Section 1201 Study 
Surreply Comments of the Software and Information 
Industry Association 
October 27, 2016 
The Software and Information Industry Association (SIIA) 
appreciates the opportunity to respond to the Copyright Office’s 
additional request for comments. 1    SIIA is the principal trade 
association of the software and  information industries and 
represents over 800 companies that develop and market 
software and digital content for business, education, consumers, 
the Internet, and entertainment.   SIIA’s members range from 
start-up firms to some of the largest and most recognizable 
corporations in the world, and one of SIIA’s primary missions is 
to protect their intellectual property and advocate a legal and 
regulatory environment that bene fits the software and digital 
content industries. 
Our membership has a strong interest in the continued 
successful operation of section 1201. The record thus far 
indicates that the statute has been an enormous success, 
encouraging creators of films, educational works, databases and 
others to make their materials available in digital form, and by 
preventing the capital formation around businesses designed to 
circumventing those tools.  Whil e we have suggested that some 
adjustments to the rulemaking  could help to streamline 
procedures (and that such adjustments are within the Copyright 
Office’s regulatory discretion),  that record does not support 
amendments to existing law. 
The Federal Register notice as ks for input on a number of 
issues, falling into three general categories: (1) proposals for new 
permanent exemptions involvin g circumvention for the sight-
                                                 
1  81 Fed. Reg. 66296.

[PAGE 2]
2 
 
disabled, device unlocking, comp uter programs, and obsolete 
technologies; (2) amendment to the existing statutory 
permanent exemptions, and (3) existence of an implied right of 
manufacture under section 1201(a)(2) for those persons assisting 
the recipient of an exemption circumvent protections to a 
copyrighted work.  We have addressed many of these issues 
already in our reply comments, and will not reiterate our 
responses here, but do make th e following general comments 
with respect to some specific  areas raised in the Federal 
Register. 
Proposals for new permanent exemptions 
As the Office is well aware, Congress intended the 
rulemaking to function as a fa il-safe when technologies and 
business practices change.  Thus, if users are affected in their 
ability to make non-infringing uses over a three-year period, the 
office may exempt certain classes of works.  As importantly, if 
the exemption needs adjustment or has become a basis for abuse, 
its terms can be adjusted in three years with comparative 
efficiency.   
In light of that fact, it seems that the Office is asking the 
questions in the wrong order.  Legislative amendment eschews 
regulatory flexibility.  It would seem to us that the need for 
legislative change ought to be ev aluated in the context of the 
regulatory procedure as the Office has amended it. Indeed, it 
would seem to make more sense for those seeking amendment 
to the statute to explain both their need for a permanent 
exemption and why the Office’s changes to the procedure are 
insufficient.   As mentioned above, we do not believe that any 
such record exists, but look fo rward to reviewing what other 
commenters may say on this issue.   
Proposals for amendment of existing exemptions 
The request for additional comments also asks commenters to 
discuss amendments to existing permanent exemptions.  SIIA 
has a particular interest in those relating to computer software: 
our membership includes a variety of large and small software

[PAGE 3]
3 
 
providers.  The existing statutory exemptions in section 1201(f) 
(reverse engineering); 1201(g) (encryption research); and 1201(j) 
(security testing) were the result of careful negotiation.  Those 
negotiations successfully balance le gitimate interest in each of 
these activities against risks of infringement, and have 
prevented harmful activity from occurring under the guise of 
exempted activity.2    
Indeed, we note that enactment of the statute came complete 
with multiple predictions of impending doom for both encryption 
and first sale.  Congress ordered the Copyright Office to study 
both issues in consultations with the Department of Commerce, 
and the parade of horribles predicted by the legislation’s 
opponents simply did not appear. Once again, the record appears 
scant for amendments to these exemptions.  
Anti-trafficking provisions 
As we have mentioned, the anti-trafficking provisions are 
essential to implementing the st atute’s policy.  As SIIA (and 
others) discussed in our reply comments, Congress intended the 
trafficking provisions to prevent anti-circumvention tools from 
becoming a commercially viable activity.  
The request for additional comments asks whether an implied 
right for third-party activities exists. The text and structure of 
the statute foreclose that conclusion.  We note that, for example 
section 1201(g)(2) expressly applies only to acts of circumvention 
under section 1201(a)(1)(A), and not to acts of trafficking under 
section 1201 (a)(2).
3  In contrast, section 1201(f)(2) permits 
trafficking in devices designed  to circumvent technological 
                                                 
2  E.g., Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Reimerdes, 111 F. Supp. 
2d 294, 319 (S.D.N.Y.) (rejecting application of reverse engineering 
defense), judgment entered, 111 F. Supp. 2d 346 (S.D.N.Y. 2000), aff'd 
sub nom. Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Corley, 273 F.3d 429 (2d Cir. 
2001). 
3  See also, e.g.,  17 U.S.C. § 1201(j)(2) (limiting applicability of 
security testing exemption to acts of circumvention under 17 U.S.C. § 
1201(a)(1)(A)); 
id. § 1201 (f)(1) (containing a similar limitation to 
section 1201(a)(1)(A)).

[PAGE 4]
4 
 
measures for a lawful circumvention purpose.  The statute 
permits the creation of circumvention devices in some 
circumstances, and proscribes them in others.  While a limited 
sample of commenters might disagree with Congress’s choices in 
this respect, SIIA does not.  In any event, the legislature has 
made its intent plain. 
 Thank you for the opportunity to submit our views. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
     
 
    
Christopher A. Mohr 
Vice President for Intellectual 
Property and General Counsel 
Software and Information Industry 
Association
