[PAGE 1]
 
 
 
Juelsgaard Intellectual Property  
and Innovation Clinic 
Mills Legal Clinic 
Stanford Law School 
Crown Quadrangle 
559 Nathan Abbott Way 
Stanford, CA 94305-8610 
jipic@law.stanford.edu 
650.724.1900 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Before the 
 
U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 
 
In the Matter of Section 1201 Study 
 
 
Docket No. 2015-8  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Comments of the American Foundation for the Blind 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 Bethany Bengfort 
William C. Koch IV 
Brian P. Quinn 
 Certified Law Students 
Phil Malone 
Jef Pearlman  
 Counsel for Commenter

[PAGE 2]
2 
THE AMERICAN FOUNDATION FOR THE BLIND  
The American Foundation for the Blind (“AFB”) is a leading national advocate for blind, 
visually-impaired, and print-disabled individuals. AFB works to expand access and opportunity 
for those individuals via consumer publications, technology evaluation and development, public 
education, research, and public policy advocacy. As a publisher of conventional and electronic 
media and a holder of copyrights, AFB understands and remains committed to safeguarding the 
rights of producers of digital materials. At the same time, AFB is equally committed to ensuring 
that disabled individuals can make non-infringing, fair use of materials in all formats, including 
digital literary works. AFB has participated in every triennial rulemaking since the 2003 cycle, 
and has consistently advocated for an exemption class that would facilitate access to 
technologically locked eBooks.
1  
BRIEF OVERVIEW OF COMMENTS 
The following comments are responsive to questions 3 and 9 of the Office’s Notice and 
Request for Public Comment. AFB agrees with the Librarian of Congress that the Section 1201 
“regulatory process . . . is at best ill-suited to address the larger challenges of access for blind and 
print-disabled.”2 In fact, AFB believes that the access of blind, visually-impaired, and print-
disabled individuals to legally-purchased literary works should not hinge upon a positive 
outcome in the triennial rulemaking proceeding. The rulemaking has become a burdensome and 
uncertain process for the Office and for proponents and opponents of exemption classes. Over 
time, the Office’s inquiry has become unmoored from Congress’s ultimate goal: protecting 
copyrighted works from piracy without impinging on legal, non-infringing uses of those works.  
AFB is particularly well-positioned to describe this gradual mission-creep: it first 
advocated for an exemption class in 2003, and supported renewal of that class in the 2006 and 
2010 rulemakings. AFB was surprised when the Register declined to recommend renewal of the 
exemption class in 2010, particularly because there was no evidence that eBook manufacturers 
had changed their products in a way that obviated the need for the exemption, and because the 
Office appeared to impose novel evidentiary requirements that did not appear in the text of 
Section 1201. Although the Librarian ultimately intervened to save the exemption that year, the 
process is still characterized by pervasive uncertainty, burdensome evidentiary requirements, and 
                                                      
1 See generally Am. Found. for the Blind, Comment on Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright 
Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies [hereinafter 2003 AFB Comment], Docket No. RM 2002-4, 
http://copyright.gov/1201/2003/comments/026.pdf; Am. Found. for the Blind, Comment on Exemption to 
Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Systems for Access Control Technologies [hereinafter 2006 AFB 
Comment], Docket No. RM 2005-11, http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2006/comments/discipio_afb.pdf; Am. Found. 
for the Blind, Comment on Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access 
Control Technologies [hereinafter 2010 AFB Comment], Docket No. RM 2008-8, http://www.copyright.gov/1201/
2008/comments/american-foundation-blind.pdf; Am. Council of the Blind & Am. Found. for the Blind, Joint 
Comment on Exemption to the Prohibition of Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies [hereinafter 2012 AFB Comment], Docket No. RM 2011-7, http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2011/
initial/american_foundation_blind.pdf; Am. Found. for the Blind, Petition for Exemption: Ebook Accessibility for 
People Who Are Blind, Visually Impaired, or Print Disabled [hereinafter 2015 AFB Comment], Docket No. RM 
2014-07, http://copyright.gov/1201/2014/petitions/American_Foundation_for_the_Blind_et_al_1201_Initial_
Submission_2014.pdf. 
2 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 75 
Fed. Reg. 43,825, 43,839 (July 27, 2010) (codified at 37 C.F.R. 201.40) [hereinafter 2010 Final Rule].

[PAGE 3]
3 
disconnect from Congress’s purpose. With these problems in mind, and with the benefit of 
thirteen years of experience with the process, AFB submits the following comments on the 
Office’s notice of inquiry. 
NOI QUESTION 3: SHOULD SECTION 1201 BE ADJUSTED TO PROVIDE FOR PRESUMPTIVE 
RENEWAL OF PREVIOUSLY GRANTED EXEMPTIONS-FOR EXAMPLE, WHEN THERE IS NO 
MEANINGFUL OPPOSITION TO RENEWAL-OR OTHERWISE BE MODIFIED TO STREAMLINE THE 
PROCESS OF CONTINUING AN EXISTING EXEMPTION? IF SO, HOW? 
Yes, the Section 1201 process should be adjusted to provide for presumptive renewal of 
previously-granted exemptions. The process should provide for presumptive renewal even in the 
face of meaningful opposition, provided opponents do not show that the adverse impacts that 
initially justified the exemption are no longer relevant. In fact, the Copyright Office already has 
the authority under 17 U.S.C. § 1201 (“Section 1201”) to provide for presumptive renewal, and it 
should adjust its existing process accordingly. After designating an exemption class, the Office 
should renew the class unless opponents establish that market changes have resolved the adverse 
impacts that justified the initial grant.  
We understand that other comments have explained that the Office’s requirement of a de 
novo showing of adverse impact at each triennial proceeding is rooted in shaky legal 
foundations; this comment will not reiterate those arguments.3 Rather, AFB’s comment will 
explain how the triennial review process saddles exemption proponents with a significant 
practical burden. Even after AFB has successfully demonstrated that an exemption is warranted, 
and even when subsequent AFB exemption proposals have engendered no meaningful opposition 
(or no opposition at all),4 AFB still has had to invest significant amounts of time and resources, 
and the time and resources of legal representatives, to comply with the Office’s evidentiary 
prerequisites. The de novo review process—oste nsibly intended to serve as a “fail safe” 
mechanism that balances anti-circumvention with non-infringing use5—has become a never-
ending exemptions treadmill, even when the exemption occasions little to no opposition. This 
comment will describe the current 1201 exemption process, illustrate some of the ways in which 
the process impairs those seeking authorization or reauthorization of an exemption, and explain 
why a different exemptions paradigm is desirable. 
A. AFB has been a longstanding participant and advocate in the triennial Section 1201 
rulemaking proceedings, and is well positioned to provide prospective on the process 
as a whole. 
AFB has a long history of participation in the triennial rulemaking process under Section 
1201, proposing classes of exceptions ultimately designated by the Librarian in 2003, 2006, 
2010, 2012, and 2015. This participation comes with a cost, however, and AFB and its pro bono 
representatives have had to invest significant amounts of time and resources in explaining why 
these exemption classes are essential to ensuring equal access to digital literary works. 
                                                      
3 See Harvard Law School Cyberlaw Clinic, Comment Regarding Section 1201 Study, Docket No. 2015-8, at 3–7. 
4 See Section 1201 Study: Notice and Request for Public Comment, 80 Fed. Reg. 81,369, 81,371 (Dec. 29, 2015). 
5 See id. at 81,370.

[PAGE 4]
4 
2003 Proceeding. AFB first participated in the triennial rulemaking process in the 2003 
round (the second triennial process), requesting an exemption for a class simply defined as 
“literary.” In that first seven-page submission, AFB briefly described Congress’s solicitude for 
the blind and disabled in the copyright context, explained how technological protection measures 
were inhibiting access to eBooks and other digital literary works, and provided a succinct list of 
technologically locked digital works that illustrated the problem.6 The Association of American 
Publishers (AAP) opposed the proposed exemption class, drawing a distinction between “access” 
and “accessibility” that the Register ultimately dismissed as a “red herring.”7 Although AFB did 
not provide exhaustive evidence detailing “the number of works or the particular works that 
prevented accessibility,” and “[d]espite the difficulty in establishing the exact scope of the 
[inaccessibility] problem,” the Register ultimately recommended designation of a tailored 
exemption class to address Section 1201’s adverse impacts on blind, visually-impaired, and 
print-disabled individuals.8 The Librarian accepted the Register’s recommendation, and adopted 
an exemption class of: 
Literary works distributed in ebook format when all existing ebook editions of the 
work (including digital text editions made available by authorized entities) contain 
access controls that prevent the enabli ng of the ebook’s read-aloud function and 
that prevent the enabling of screen reader s to render the text into a “specialized 
format.” For purposes of this exemption, “s pecialized format,” “digital text” and 
“authorized entities” shall have the same meaning as in 17 U.S.C. 121.9  
2006 Proceeding. In the 2006 rulemaking, AFB submitted a one-page class exemption 
request seeking continuation of the 2003 exemption.10 In its supporting comment, AFB explained 
that the market situation remained largely the same: “copyright protection continue[d] to prevent 
access for people who [were] blind or visually impaired.”11 The Register applied more scrutiny 
to the AFB’s arguments in the 2006 comment round, castigating the AFB for providing only a 
small sample of digital literary texts and failing to provide statistical evidence that disabled 
individuals were actually using the 2003 exemption.12 Notwithstanding the perceived evidentiary 
lacunae, the Register—recognizing the dear th of meaningful opposition to renewal—
recommended that the Librarian reauthorize the existing exemption class for another three years, 
                                                      
6 See generally 2003 AFB Comment. 
7 See Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights in RM 2002-4 at 68, Rulemaking on Exemptions from 
Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies (Oct. 27, 2003) 
[hereinafter 2003 Recommendation], available at www.copyright.gov/1201/docs/registers-recommendation.pdf. 
8 Id. at 75–76, 80–82. 
9 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 68 
Fed. Reg. 62,011, 62,014 (Oct. 31, 2003) (formerly codified at 37 C.F.R. 201.40) [hereinafter 2003 Final Rule]. 
10 See Am. Found. for the Blind, Proposed Class or Classes of Copyrighted Work(s) to Be Exempted [hereinafter 
2006 AFB Proposed Exemption Class], Docket No. RM 2005-11, http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2006/comments/
discipio-sum.pdf. 
11 See 2006 AFB Comment at 2. 
12 Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights in RM 2005-11 at 39, Rulemaking on Exemptions from 
Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies (Nov. 16, 2006) 
[hereinafter 2006 Recommendation], available at www.copyright.gov/1201/docs/1201_recommendation.pdf.

[PAGE 5]
5 
and incorporated AFB’s suggested modifications to the exemption class.13 The Librarian agreed, 
and adopted the Register’s recommendation for the modified class.14 
2010 Proceeding. After proposing exemption classes in 2003 and 2006 that were 
supported more by first-hand anecdotal evidence than by extensive and expensive statistical 
studies, and having those exemptions recommended by the Register and adopted by the 
Librarian, AFB submitted a fifteen-page exemption proposal in the 2010 rulemaking cycle that 
was based on similar types and quantities of evidence.15 The Register upbraided the AFB for 
submitting an evidentiary record to renew a twice-granted exemption that she characterized as 
“even weaker than the minimal, borderline showing” made in AFB’s 2006 submissions.16 
Although there was no opposition to renewal of the existing exemption class,17 and despite 
AFB’s best efforts to provide representative examples of technological problems associated with 
locked eBooks, the Register concluded that AFB’s evidence “amount[ed] to the kind of de 
minimis showing that [did] not justify relief in [the Section 1201] proceeding.”18 Professing 
support for broad accessibility for the blind and disabled, the Register nevertheless made clear 
that AFB carried the burden of overcoming its “unwillingness or inability to survey a more 
substantial number of book titles and to determine whether the titles they presented were 
accessible in any format.”19 Finally, concluding that the absence of large-scale empirical 
evidence relating to use of the 2003 and 2006 exemption classes was evidence of the absence of 
a need for a continuing exemption, the Register declined to recommend the proposed exemption 
class for the following three-year period.20  
The Librarian of Congress, in an unprecedented and as yet unrepeated decision, 
ultimately rejected the Register’s recommendation with regard to the AFB’s proposed 
                                                      
13 Id. at 40. 
14 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 
71 Fed. Reg. 68,472, 68,475 (Nov. 27, 2006) (formerly codified at 37 C.F.R. 201.40) [hereinafter 2006 Final Rule]. 
The exemption class was modified to prioritize screen-reader accessibility, and was revised to include eBooks where 
all editions “contain access controls that prevent the enabling either of the book’s read–aloud function or of screen 
readers that render the text into a specialized format.” Id. at 68,475. 
15 See 2010 AFB Comment at 6, 8–9. 
16 Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights in RM 2008-8 at 255, Rulemaking on Exemptions from 
Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies (June 11, 2010) 
[hereinafter 2010 Recommendation], available at www.copyright.gov/1201/2010/initialed-registersrecommendation-
june-11-2010.pdf. At a May 8, 2009 hearing, the Copyright Office’s then-General Counsel David Carson suggested 
that AFB had either failed to take the Office’s evidentiary standards into account, or ignored them altogether. See 
Copyright Office Hearing Transcript, May 8, 2009, at 11–20, available at http://www.copyright.gov/1201/hearings/
2009/transcripts/1201-5-8-09.txt (“When you prepared this year, did you have -- did you take into account at all 
what the Register had said three years ago, what I just repeated to you? . . . And you decided to ignore it?”). 
17 See id. at 250 (“The Joint Creators . . . do not oppose renewal of the exemption related to literary works in ebook 
format if the Register and the Librarian conclude that the proponent meets its burden of persuasion during this 
proceeding.”) (internal quotations omitted). 
18 Id. at 259. 
19 Id. at 260–61. 
20 Id. at 260, 262 (“[T]he lack of evidence that an existing exemption has been used suggests that there is no need for 
such an exemption. . . . The AFB’s failure to inquire and report on the benefits or deficiencies of the existing 
exemption serves only to diminish the already inadequate evidentiary support for the need for an exemption.”).

[PAGE 6]
6 
exemption, and decided to extend the class for another three years.21 Setting aside the evidentiary 
concerns that served as the crux of the Register’s decision not to renew the exemption class, the 
Librarian explained that the record was adequate to support renewal of the exemption,22 and that 
the Office should have submitted follow-up questions to the AFB (as it had in the 2003 and 2006 
rulemakings) if it felt the record needed more development.23 
2012 Proceeding. In its proposed exemption class for the 2012 cycle, AFB and its joint 
commenter American Council of the Blind (“ACB”) did cite to some press reports and academic 
studies that demonstrated the extent of the eBook accessibility problem in an attempt to satisfy 
the Register’s strict evidentiary requirements and avoid a repeat of the unwarranted negative 
recommendation in 2010.24 While attempting to satisfy the Register’s evidentiary requirements, 
however, AFB also challenged the Register’s interpretation of Section 1201’s standard for 
adverse impact. AFB explained that—contrary to the Register’s unnecessarily strict approach 
and consistent with the Librarian’s 2010 decision—anecdotal first-hand evidence is entirely 
appropriate to satisfy the applicable legal standard:  
Granting an exemption is not conditioned by law on the ability of advocates to 
demonstrate that some arbitrary percentage  of the publishing industry violates the 
fair use rights of people with disabilities. Rather, the exemption we propose herein 
must be granted to ensure that even an isolated instance where an individual user 
with print disabilities cannot read the material without first circumventing access 
controls does not expose the user to seve re penalties. In pr evious proceedings, 
advocates presented the Copyright Office with a handful of examples of e-books 
inaccessible to people who are blind or vi sually impaired. In the most recent 
proceeding, the Copyright Office seemed to suggest that advocates ought to have 
presented dozens or even hundreds of such examples even though such an array of 
examples would represent decimal dust in  comparison to the total number of 
available e-book titles. While the exemption we propose herein is needed even if it 
only benefits a single user during the thre e-year term of the exemption, we know 
that the vast universe of inaccessible titles will make the exemption we propose of 
critical value to many.
25 
Although the Register did not directly address AFB’s interpretation of the appropriate 
evidentiary standard in the 2012 Recommendation, she did approve an expanded version of 
AFB’s proposed exemption class. Moreover, the Register relied primarily on press accounts and 
                                                      
21 2010 Final Rule at 43,838 (“The Librarian has considered but rejected the Register’s recommendation with 
respect to the proposed class of works consisting of literary works distributed in ebook format.”). 
22 Id. (“[T]he proposed exemption should be granted because: (1) the record includes statements on the likelihood of 
access not being available to blind individuals, (2) no one opposed the exemption, and (3) there are broad benefits to 
society in making works accessible to the visually impaired.”). 
23 Id. (“The Librarian notes that, in contrast with its actions in both 2003 and 2006, the Copyright Office did not 
submit any post–hearing questions on this proposed exemption. Such development of the record would have been 
helpful.”). 
24 See 2012 AFB Comment at 9–10 (“[T]he Nook and Kindle stores combined may carry approximately 1.8 million 
inaccessible e-book titles,”). 
25 Id. at 6–7.

[PAGE 7]
7 
public policy considerations rather than extensive statistical evidence to support that decision.26 
Finally, the Register explained that the exercise of analyzing individual literary works to 
determine indicia of accessibility was no longer necessary, given widespread understanding that 
eBooks were either inaccessible or only partially accessible.27 The Librarian approved the 
expanded exemption without alteration.28 
2015 Proceeding. After seemingly focusing more on the obvious, continuing realities of 
the eBook marketplace and usage, and thus endorsing less onerous evidentiary requirements in 
the 2012 cycle, the Copyright Office explicitly reinstituted many of the most burdensome 
evidentiary prerequisites in the 2015 proceeding. Unlike previous notices of proposed 
rulemaking (“NPRMs”), which simply listed proposed exemption classes and requested 
comments,29 the NPRM for the 2015 cycle tasked exemption proponents with compiling data in 
response to several specific evidentiary questions.30 In particular, the Office reinstituted the 
“sample” requirement that it had dispensed with in the previous cycle, and asked AFB and other 
proponents to compile “a significant representative sample of titles across various e-book 
formats that are otherwise inaccessible.”31 In response, AFB submitted a substantially longer and 
more detailed comment than it had in years past,32 even though its exemption renewal request 
was once again unopposed.33 Based on the Register’s Recommendation, the Librarian renewed 
the exemption for another three year period.34 
B. The current exemption process relies on unwarranted and overly strict evidentiary 
requirements that impose unnecessary burdens, costs, and uncertainty on 
participating parties. 
                                                      
26 See Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights in RM 2011-7 at 18, 21, Fifth Triennial Proceeding to 
Determine Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention (Oct. 12, 2012) [hereinafter 2012 Recommendation], 
available at http://copyright.gov/1201/2012/Section_1201_Rulemaking_2012_Recommendation.pdf (“Although 
precise figures remain elusive, press accounts cited by the proponents suggest that only a fraction of the publicly 
available ebooks are accessible. . . . Generally, public policy favors removing impediments to access for individuals 
with disabilities, and the notion that an individual ought to be required to invest in three (or more) competing 
electronic book platforms would appear to be contrary to that policy.”) (internal citations omitted). 
27 See id. at 21 (“[B]ecause the record indicates that the majority of ebooks available through commercial channels 
are either inaccessible or, at best, only somewhat accessible, there is no need to analyze specific titles to see if they 
are inaccessible, as done in the past.”). 
28 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 
77 Fed. Reg. 65,250, 66,262–63 (Oct. 26, 2012) (codified at 37 C.F.R. pt. 201) [hereinafter 2012 Final Rule]. 
29 See, e.g., Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, 73 Fed. Reg. 79,425 (proposed Dec. 29, 2008) (to be codified at 37 C.F.R. pt. 201) [hereinafter 2009 
NPRM].; Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, 76 Fed. Reg. 78,866 (proposed Dec. 20, 2011) (to be codified at 37 C.F.R. pt. 201) [hereinafter 2012 
NRPM]. 
30 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 
79 Fed. Reg. 73,856, 73,863 (proposed Dec. 12, 2014) (to be codified at 37 C.F.R. pt. 201) [hereinafter 2015 
NPRM]. 
31 Id. at 73,863. 
32 See generally 2015 AFB Comment. 
33 2015 Recommendation at 133 (“There was no opposition to renewing the 2012 exemption.”). 
34 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 
80 Fed. Reg. 65,944, 65,950 (Oct. 28, 2015) (codified at 37 C.F.R. pt. 201) [hereinafter 2015 Final Rule].

[PAGE 8]
8 
Starting with the 2003 Section 1201 rulemaking, AFB and its pro bono counsel have 
proposed exemption classes with a singular goal in mind: equalizing access so that individuals 
with print- and vision-disabilities can benefit from the exploding growth in literary digital 
publications by making non-infringing uses of those works. The needs of print- and vision-
disabled readers to make these uses have persisted over time, and yet each demonstration of 
those needs and the importance of a 1201 exemption has been short-lived. Even though there has 
been no opposition to the last four exemption requests, the Register has continued to insist on a 
full, de novo demonstration every three years that the previously granted exemption should be 
renewed. Furthermore, because the Register has failed to settle on one set of evidentiary 
standards by which it will judge exemption proposals, parties like AFB are largely unable to 
anticipate the Office’s cycle-to-cycle requirements with any certainty and prepare an appropriate 
evidentiary record.  
Moreover, each triennia process, particularly the most recent, has been governed by an 
unnecessary and overly strict adjudicatory-style process and a set of complex evidentiary 
burdens that simply are not required by the DMCA.35 As just one example, in the 2010 
rulemaking, the Register’s insistence that proponents demonstrate the absence of any alternatives 
before deeming an exemption warranted was particularly egregious: 
However, as the Joint Reply Commenters pointed out, AFB did not test all of the 
ebook formats in which the sampled book titles were available. For instance, AFB 
tested The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas A. Kempis, in the Microsoft Reader LIT 
Format and found that work to be inacce ssible whether or not Microsoft’s text-to-
speech product was installed. However, the Joint Reply Commenters pointed out 
that the same title appeared to be available in the Adobe format with the read-aloud 
function enabled.36 
The Office adopted an evidentiary standard that required AFB to establish that there were 
no versions of works that could be accessed without circumvention, even if that access might 
require the print-disabled reader to engage in burdensome or costly searches for different formats 
of works or to abandon their current eBook reader and invest in a different eBook platform (or 
several) to take advantage of a work accessible only in that format. These requirements were 
then, and are now, unwarranted, overly strict, and not required by the language of the DMCA.  
As a result of the Copyright Office’s strict demands on proponents in rulemakings, 
AFB—along with numerous other parties proposi ng exemption classes—has been hindered by 
the burden, cost, unpredictable and inconsistent results, and resulting uncertainty that have 
become the hallmarks of the Section 1201 triennial process.  
In the recently concluded sixth triennial rulemaking, AFB was fortunate to be represented 
pro bono by the University of Colorado Law School’s Samuelson-Glushko Technology Law and 
Policy Clinic (the “Clinic”). AFB did not seek any alteration of the exemption class designated in 
                                                      
35 For a detailed explanation of the lack of any statutory basis for many of the current rulemaking requirements, see 
Harvard Law School Cyberlaw Clinic, supra note 3.  
36 2010 Recommendation at 254. AFB and other proponents have subsequently convinced the Register to adopt an 
exemption that better addresses the reality of eBook products and the market as a whole.

[PAGE 9]
9 
the prior rulemaking; rather, it simply sought a “renewal of the exemption previously granted by 
the Librarian of Congress in the 2012 triennial review.”37 Although there was (again) no 
meaningful opposition to the AFB’s request for renewal,38 attempting to meet all of the 
requirements listed in the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking required a substantial investment of 
the AFB’s and the Clinic’s time and resources. Law students participating in the Clinic worked 
527.2 pro bono hours to prepare the AFB’s submissions, a figure that does not include any of the 
time of the supervising attorneys.39 At a conservative hourly rate of $180, those efforts would 
have cost AFB $94,896 (again, not even counting the hourly rates of supervisors) if it had not 
been able to secure the assistance of pro bono counsel.40 This cost would need to be repeated 
every three years. It is reasonable to expect that this cost and the difficulty of securing pro bono 
representation deters some individuals and organizations from participating in the triennial 
rulemaking process.  
Parties who can afford to craft exemption proposals or who can secure pro bono 
representation still have to grapple with the Office’s overly strict and inconsistent evidentiary 
standards. The Register’s responses to AFB’s submissions are illustrative of this problem: the 
Register largely adopted AFB’s proposed classes in the 2003 and 2006 rulemakings, even though 
AFB used anecdotal evidence and first-hand experience to substantiate many of its claims.41 In 
2010, the Register refused to renew the AFB’s proposed exemption class, and excoriated the 
AFB for (i) failing to provide a sufficient sample of inaccessible literary works and (ii) for 
omitting data detailing use of the existing exception.42 In the 2012 rulemaking, the Register 
dropped its earlier insistence on a sufficient sample of inaccessible literary works and returned to 
the 2003/2006 paradigm, accepting anecdotal evidence, media reports, and policy arguments as 
permissible evidentiary foundations for an exemption request.
43 Finally, in the 2015 cycle, the 
Office reinstituted its sample requirement, asking AFB and its fellow proponents to provide “a 
significant representative sample of titles across various e-book formats that are otherwise 
inaccessible.”44 
This whipsawing between evidentiary standards produces inconsistent results across 
rulemakings, muddies decision-making criteria, and creates additional burdens and costs for 
parties seeking to propose exemptions. Unlike many industry organizations or rights holders, 
public interest organizations like AFB are poorly positioned to spend thousands of dollars to 
compile statistical data and prepare extensive written comments. Nor can they rely on pro bono 
counsel for each successive round: legal clinics and private practitioners have limited resources 
and bandwidth. AFB’s access to, and chance of success in, the 1201 process should not be 
                                                      
37 2015 AFB Comment at 2. 
38 See Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights in RM 2014-07 at 133, Sixth Triennial Proceeding to 
Determine Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention (Oct. 8, 2015) [hereinafter 2015 Recommendation], 
available at http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/registers-recommendation.pdf. 
39 Email from Blake Reid, Director, Samuelson-Glushko Technology Law & Policy Clinic, to author (Feb. 29, 2016, 
9:42 AM PST) (on file with author). 
40 See LAFFEY MATRIX, http://www.laffeymatrix.com/see.html (last visited Mar. 1, 2016). 
41 See 2003 Recommendation at 75–79; 2006 Recommendation at 39–40. 
42 See 2010 Recommendation at 260. Fortunately, the Librarian saw no need for that type of evidence and rejected 
the Register’s recommendation. See supra notes 21–22 and accompanying text.  
43 See 2012 Recommendation at 18, 21. 
44 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 
79 Fed. Reg. 73,856, 73,863 (proposed Dec. 12, 2014) (to be codified at 37 C.F.R. pt. 201).

[PAGE 10]
10 
conditioned upon its ability to (i) spend tens of thousands of dollars, (ii) provide extensive 
empirical evidence that may or may not be required, or (iii) find effective pro bono 
representation. The Office should recognize these issues and address these problems by making 
some commonsense changes to its triennial rulemaking process.  
C. Exemptions should be presumptively renewed absent a compelling demonstration by 
opponents that they are no longer warranted 
AFB submits that the Office could address many of the Triennial Rulemaking’s recurrent 
problems by providing for presumptive renewal of existing exemptions, whether there is 
opposition or not. Once the Office has designated an exemption class, and if there is opposition 
to renewal, the burden should fall to the opponents of renewal to establish that factual conditions 
have changed and that the exemption class is no longer necessary to prevent adverse impacts on 
non-infringing use. Similarly, if factual conditions have changed such that an expansion or 
clarification of the previous exemption is sought, any new consideration should begin with the 
presumption of renewal at least for the existing portion of the exemption. While other comments 
explain in detail how the statutory language and legislative history support a reading of the 
statute that finds the Office has such authority,45 AFB’s comment provides insights into why 
such an approach would ease the burden on the Office as well as on prospective commenters. 
Embracing presumptive renewal and burden shifting would resolve the paradox at the 
heart of the current 1201 process: commenters seeking renewal of an existing exemption have to 
meet the adverse impact criteria anew every three years, even as the existing exemption is 
succeeding in facilitating non-infringing use of copyrighted works. In other words, it becomes 
more difficult to empirically demonstrate adverse impact resulting from a technological 
protection measure when an existing exemption is succeeding in addressing that very problem. 
Rather than requiring renewal proponents to provide exemption utilization rates as a proxy for 
continuing validity and merit, the Office should presume that the exemption is still needed and 
working. It should shift the burden to opponents to produce commensurately robust evidence that 
the market has changed in ways that eliminate the underlying barriers to non-infringing uses that 
justified to the exemption in the first place. In addition to resolving the evidentiary paradox, this 
approach would produce a much more equitable distribution of evidentiary burdens, would rely 
on market data that is more easily measured and readily available than exemption utilization 
rates, would ensure a more orderly and fair rulemaking process, and would effectuate Congress’s 
underlying market-oriented purposes.  
Adopting a framework that provides for presumptive renewal and burden shifting would 
also offer additional benefits. Budget-constrained organizations like AFB are much more likely 
to marshal resources, concentrate efforts, and provide extensively researched submissions if they 
know that they won’t be required to repeat the very same process three years later. Similarly, 
rights holders are unlikely to invest time and energy into challenging a presumption of 
renewability unless they have evidence, are able to demonstrate sufficiently changed market or 
usage conditions, and can provide a principled rationale for non-renewal. The Office stands to 
benefit from such a policy change as well, as it would significantly reduce the concomitant time 
and effort required to evaluate unopposed exemptions, or those exemptions for which opponents 
                                                      
45 See generally Inst. of Scrap Recycling Indus. Inc., Comments of the Institute of Scrap Recycling Industries, Inc., 
Docket No. 2015-8.

[PAGE 11]
11 
are unable to make a showing of substantial change from previous conditions. As addressed in 
the following section, such an approach would also bring the U.S. into compliance with its 
international commitments.  
NOI QUESTION 9: PLEASE ASSESS WHETHER THERE ARE OTHER PERMANENT EXEMPTION 
CATEGORIES THAT CONGRESS SHOULD CONSIDER ESTABLISHING— FOR EXAMPLE, TO 
FACILITATE ACCESS TO LITERARY WORKS BY PRINT DISABLED PERSONS? 
As the question suggests, the exemption which currently allows blind, visually impaired, 
and print-disabled people to access literary works is the quintessential example of an exemption 
category that should be made permanent. The Section 1201 rulemaking process imposes 
substantial burdens and considerable legal uncertainty on the millions of visually-impaired and 
print-disabled individuals who rely on these exemptions to conduct their everyday business, 
leisure, and study. This repeated triennial process is especially absurd given that the exemption 
for the blind and visually impaired enjoys near universal support. The United States played a 
“leadership role” in enacting the Marrakesh Treaty,46 which obliges member nations to provide 
this exemption and otherwise use their legal authority to facilitate access to published works for 
persons who are blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print disabled.47 The 1201 process, which 
currently fails to provide any presumption in favor of renewal of even universally accepted 
exemptions, puts the United States in a position of reliance on the continued successful 
participation of a private, nonprofit advocacy organization to prevent a breach of our treaty 
obligations. In fact, a permanent exemption may be required by the treaty, as placing the burden 
on individuals with disabilities or their representatives to obtain an exemption every three years 
contravenes the treaty’s main goal of creating “mandatory limitations and exceptions for the 
benefit of the blind, visually impaired, and otherwise print disabled.”48 
The burdens of the 1201 exemption process are even less justifiable because they acutely 
impact blind, visually-impaired, and print-disabled individuals. Digital accessibility is especially 
important for this population: gaps in resources and education can make it more difficult for 
these individuals to meaningfully participate in all aspects of social and democratic dialogue. 
Lack of accessibility can have powerful disenfranchising effects. Accordingly, the drafters of the 
Marrakesh Treaty made full access by the disabled a point of emphasis in their negotiations. The 
Treaty recognizes that roadblocks to full accessibility are: 
prejudicial to the complete development of persons with visual impairments or 
other print disabilities, [a nd] limit their freedom of expression, including the 
freedom to seek, receive and impart info rmation and ideas of all kinds on equal 
                                                      
46 Barack Obama, Message to the Senate -- The Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works for 
Persons Who Are Blind, Visually Impaired, or Otherwise Print Disabled, THE WHITE HOUSE (Feb. 10, 2016), 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2016/02/10/message-senate-marrakesh-treaty-facilitate-access-
published-works. 
47 Summary of the Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works for Persons Who Are Blind, Visually 
Impaired or Otherwise Print Disabled (MVT) (2013), WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROP. ASS’N (last visited Mar. 1, 
2016), http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/marrakesh/summary_marrakesh.html 
48 Id.

[PAGE 12]
12 
basis with others, including through all forms of communication of their choice, 
their enjoyment of the right to education, and the opportunity to conduct research.49 
Imposing further civic burdens on disabled individuals and requiring them or their 
representatives to repeatedly apply for exemptions as a precondition for equal access is deeply 
insensitive and harmful. 
CONCLUSION 
The foregoing demonstrates the fundamental and substantial flaws of the Section 1201 
rulemaking process as presently structured by the Copyright Office. The current framework 
imposes substantial burdens and costs on disabled individuals, on parties to the rulemaking, and 
on the Office itself. Visually-impaired persons should never have been required to seek 
permission to use vital assistive technology to read lawfully purchased copies of literary works in 
the first place. After fighting successfully for an exemption to facilitate this vital access, these 
same beneficiaries should not have to worry about losing it every three years. Those representing 
the beneficiaries should not be required to continuously collect and provide substantial evidence 
and arguments merely to maintain the status quo, especially when there is no opposition to 
renewing the exemption. 
 Accordingly, AFB urges the Copyright Office to recognize the significant and 
unnecessary burden that its current Section 1201 process imposes on print- and visually-disabled 
persons, as well as proponents of other exemptions for non-infringing uses of works. AFB 
recommends that the Office reconsider its previous determinations that it lacks the necessary 
authority to make these changes, and then adopt a policy that provides for presumptive renewal 
of existing exemptions and places the burden of justifying non-renewal on opponents. Such a 
policy would (i) ease the administrative burden on the Office, (ii) address Congress’s concern 
that Section 1201 not adversely impact non-infringing users of copyrighted works, and (iii) bring 
U.S. copyright law into conformity with international agreements. 
                                                      
49 Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works for Persons Who Are Blind, Visually Impaired, or 
Otherwise Print Disabled, pmbl., June 27, 2013, WIPO Doc. VIP/DC/8 Rev [hereinafter Marrakesh Treaty].
