[PAGE 1]
 
Before the 
U.S. Copyright Office 
Library of Congress 
 
 
In the Matter of: 
 
Section 1201 Study: Notice and 
Request for Public Comment 
 
 
 
Docket No. 2015-8 
 
REPLY COMMENTS OF THE ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE ASSOCIATION 
 
The Entertainment Software Association (“ESA”) is pleased to provide these Reply 
Comments in response to the Copyright Office’s Notice of Inquiry (“NOI”) concerning the 
operation of Section 1201 of the Copyright Act.1   
ESA’s initial comments in this proceeding explained how Section 1201 has benefitted 
both consumers and creators by providing important legal protection to back up the technological 
measures that protect creative works and enable new products, services and business models.  
Section 1201 has been critical in the development of the modern digital marketplace, and that is 
particularly so within the video game industry.  Video game publishers and online game platform 
providers rely on access and copy controls to limit infringement of their games, and protections 
applied to video game consoles have allowed them to become platforms for lawful distribution of 
a wide variety of game-related and non-game content.  Confronted with hackers working hard to 
break every new security measure, and with commercial operators seeking to profit from video 
game infringement enabled by circumvention, the video game industry has successfully invoked 
the Copyright Act’s protections against circumvention on numerous occasions.  
1 Section 1201 Study: Notice and Request for Public Comment, 80 Fed. Reg. 81,369 (Dec. 29, 2015).

[PAGE 2]
 
Despite this record of policy success, some of the initial comments in this proceeding 
seek to undermine Section 1201 in every way possible.  Commenters seek a narrower prohibition 
on circumvention per se,2 little or no protection against trafficking,3 broad permanent 
exemptions,4 and lower standards for granting further exemptions in triennial proceedings.5  In 
effect, they seek to render Section 1201 null and void.  ESA opposes any amendment to Section 
1201, because Section 1201 is fundamentally working.   
Other comments seek to relitigate specific issues addressed in previous triennial 
proceedings.  However, the purpose of this proceeding is “to assess the operation of section 
1201,”6 not to assess the merits of exemptions targeted to specific current products and uses.  
That is the function of the triennial rulemakings.   
Because ESA’s initial comments broadly addressed the issues raised in this proceeding, 
these Reply Comments address only a few points raised by other commenters that specifically 
concern video games. 
2 E.g., Library Copyright Alliance Comments, at 3-27; Owners’ Rights Initiative Comments, at 1-3; Public 
Knowledge Comments, at 1-3.  Among other things, these comments address the question whether Section 1201 
does (or should) prohibit circumvention of access controls when the access does not constitute copyright 
infringement.  An important case in that regard is the Ninth Circuit’s decision in MDY Industries, LLC v. Blizzard 
Entertainment, Inc., 629 F.3d 928 (9th Cir. 2010).  ESA disagrees with significant aspects of the decision in that 
case.  For example, when a copyright owner and licensee expressly agree that a license is conditioned on specified 
limits, exceeding any of those limits ought to be considered an infringement.  See id . at 937-42.  However, ESA 
believes that the court was right that Section 1201’s prohibition on circumvention is and should be independent of 
any claim of infringement.  See id. at 943-52; see also Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Corley, 273 F.3d 429, 443 (2d 
Cir. 2001) (“the DMCA targets the circumvention of digital walls guarding copyrighted material . . . , but does not 
concern itself with the use of those materials after circumvention has occurred”).  Circumvention of access controls 
undermines new business models and modes of distribution for creative works, regardless whether copying or other 
infringing activity is involved.  Thus, it is important to protect against circumvention as well as infringement.   
 
3 E.g., Consumer Technology Association Comments, at 8-10; Public Knowledge Comments, at 7-8; Organization 
for Transformative Works Comments, at 6-7. 
 
4 E.g., Electronic Frontier Foundation Comments, at 11-12; MIT Comments, at 5. 
 
5 E.g., Consumer Technology Association Comments, at 7-8; Electronic Frontier Foundation Comments, at 9-10; 
Library Copyright Alliance Comments, at 33-35; Organization for Transformative Works Comments, at 8-9; Public 
Knowledge Comments, at 5-7. 
 
6 80 Fed. Reg. at 81,369. 
2

[PAGE 3]
 
1. A new exemption for “assistive technology” is not necessary, at least as to video 
game products. 
DIYAbility’s initial comments propose a broad new exemption to allow circumvention of 
any technological protection applied to any kind of work, if the purpose is to accommodate a 
disability.  DIYAbility justifies this proposal based on “concern[]” that its project to develop an 
adaptable video game controller “could implicate” Section 1201.7 
To be clear, ESA and its member companies are deeply concerned about persons with 
disabilities, and seek to deliver engaging and innovative video game experiences to all 
consumers, including individuals with disabilities.  Not only is that the right thing to do, but 
there are good business reasons to do so, because games succeed when they reach the largest 
possible audience.  For that reason, the video game industry is pursuing many initiatives to 
improve game play accessibility, and communities of gamers are working to assist disabled 
persons to enjoy video games as well.8  While accessibility presents continuing challenges due to 
the diversity of game products and disabilities, and the fast pace of both technological change 
and game play, all the major console providers have included significant accessibility features in 
their systems.  These include features such as text to speech, remapping of controller buttons, 
and high contrast display modes.
9  On the software side of the industry, the International Game 
7 DIYAbility Comments, at 1 & 3 n.6. 
 
8 See, e.g., AbleGamers Foundation website, http://www.ablegamers.com/; D.A.G.E.R.S. website, 
http://www.dagersystem.com/; Accessible Video Gaming - XBox - Nintendo Wii – Playstation, 
http://www.apparelyzed.com/forums/forum/67-accessible-video-gaming-xbox-nintendo-wii-playstation/. 
 
9 See, e.g., Ease of Access settings on Xbox One, https://support.xbox.com/en-US/xbox-one/games/ease-of-access-
settings; Accessibility, Xbox One, and Kinect FAQ, http://support.xbox.com/en-US/xbox-one/games/accessibility-
faq; PlayStation4 User’s Guide, Accessibility, available at 
http://manuals.playstation.net/document/en/ps4/settings/accessibility.html; PS4 Accessibility Settings, 
https://support.us.playstation.com/articles/en_US/KC_Article/PS4-Accessibility-Settings; Craig Kaufman, 
AbleGamers’ WII U Accessibility Review (Dec. 12, 2012), http://www.unstoppablegamer.com/ablegamers-wii-u-
accessibility-review/; Nintendo & Accessibility: An Asset or Liability to Nintendo’s Game Design?, 
http://www.ign.com/boards/threads/nintendo-accessibility-an-asset-or-liability-to-nintendos-game-
design.452898373/. 
3

[PAGE 4]
 
Developers Association has long had a group devoted to game accessibility.10  Others also 
provide resources to assist developers in developing accessible games.11  These efforts are 
bearing fruit.  Over 350 games have documented accessibility features.12  And in announcing its 
2015 Accessible Game of the Year, AbleGamers explained that in 2015 “many advances 
occurred within the gaming industry to further allow gamers with disabilities options to improve 
their gaming experiences.”13  In short, the drive for game accessibility is a major movement 
among gamers and the game industry, and disabled persons have far greater access to game play 
today than ever before.   
Because the industry is increasingly working to design products for accessibility, 
independent third-party projects such as DIYAbility’s controller project represent a 
comparatively small feature on the overall game accessibility landscape.  In addition, 
DIYAbility’s initial comments do not provide sufficient information to know whether what it 
would like to do would actually violate Section 1201, rather than, for example, being permitted 
by Section 1201(f).  Under those circumstances, there is insufficient justification for a broad new 
permanent exemption to allow circumvention for accessibility purposes of any protection 
measure applied to any kind of work.  Moreover, this proceeding is supposed to concern the 
10 See IGDA Game Accessibility Special Interest Group website, http://igda-gasig.org/. 
 
11 See, e.g., Making Video Games Accessible: Business Justifications and Design Considerations, 
https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/desktop/ee415219(v=vs.85).aspx; Game Accessibility 
Guidelines, http://gameaccessibilityguidelines.com/; AbleGamers Foundation Game Accessibility Guidelines, 
http://www.includification.com/. 
 
12 International Game Developers Association, Game Accessibility Special Interest Group, Building a Manifesto for 
Game Accessibility, at 26 (2015). 
 
13 Announcing the AbleGamers 2015 Accessible Game of the Year (Jan. 21, 2016), 
http://www.ablegamers.com/ablegamers-news/announcing-the-ablegamers-2015-accessible-game-of-the-year. 
4

[PAGE 5]
 
operation of Section 1201,14 rather than to involve a searching examination of new proposed 
exemptions.  
2. The Office should not recommend a permanent repair exemption as to video game 
devices. 
Static Control’s initial comments propose a permanent exemption for “repair and 
interoperability” of manufactured goods.15  While its focus is on repair and interoperability of 
printer cartridges, its proposed solution to perceived problems in the printer cartridge market 
would extend to video game consoles and other devices as well.  iFixit similarly argued for broad 
rights to repair, and specifically asked that a repair exemption extend to “third-party agents.”16  
iFixit focused its comments on tractors, but mentioned ESA,17 and likewise couched its 
proposals in terms broad enough to encompass video game devices. 
However, in both the fifth and sixth triennial rulemakings, the Librarian rejected 
proposed exemptions for circumvention of video game console protections that had been 
justified in part based on claims concerning repair.18  Even proponents of such an exemption 
“conceded that consoles can also be repaired without circumvention, including through official 
repair channels.”19  In the end, the Register found that the record: 
still does not support the need for an exemption.  The major game 
console manufacturers appear to offer repair services for in- and 
out-of-warranty consoles either for free or at reasonable prices.  
14 80 Fed. Reg. at 81,369. 
 
15 Static Control Comments, at 1. 
 
16 iFixit Comments, at 3. 
 
17 Id. at 2. 
 
18 80 Fed. Reg. at 65,961; Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access 
Control Technologies, 77 Fed. Reg. 65,260, 65,272-74 (Oct. 26, 2012). 
 
19 Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights in the Sixth Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the 
Prohibition on Circumvention, at 196 (Oct. 2015) [hereinafter “2015 Register’s Recommendation”]. 
5

[PAGE 6]
 
Moreover, the record shows that proponents themselves are able to 
offer repair services without the need to circumvent.  Proponents 
did not provide any examples of an actual inability to repair a 
console through one of these means.
20 
The commenters in this proceeding provide no reason for the Office to reverse that 
finding.  Technological measures are critical to the protection of creative works on consoles and 
other gaming devices, and circumvention of those measures is closely linked to infringement.  To 
protect the security of these measures, the diagnostic repair tools used by device manufacturers’ 
in-house engineers are closely guarded.  Static Control and iFixit effectively ask for exemptions 
that would open up game platforms to infringement, and give anyone who claimed to provide 
repair services the power to assist others in opening up game platforms to infringement.  Such a 
result cannot be justified. 
3. This proceeding is not a proper forum for the Office to consider proposed 
exemptions targeting games. 
Mr. Peter Hunt’s initial comments generally criticize the overall structure of Section 
1201.  However, when those comments get down to specifics, the thrust of Mr. Hunt’s argument 
is that the Librarian should have adopted a broader exemption with respect to video games 
requiring server communications (Class 23) in the sixth triennial rulemaking.
21  Mr. Hunt’s 
request to, in effect, reconsider the scope of an exemption the Librarian just adopted is not what 
this study was intended to accomplish.  Moreover, the Register and Librarian specifically 
rejected exactly these arguments in their consideration of Class 23 only a few months ago.  The 
arguments have no more merit now. 
20 Id. at 200-01. 
 
21 Peter Hunt Comments, at 2-3; see Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems 
for Access Control Technologies, 80 Fed. Reg. 65,944, 65,956-58 (Oct. 28, 2015). 
6

[PAGE 7]
 
A Mr. or Ms. McKeehen commenting under the name “Starelikemckeehen Poker Club” 
professes to be a professional game player who wishes to circumvent access controls on 
unspecified “gaming software or web-based software” both (1) to determine if his or her 
“personal and non-personal data is being tracked or transmitted to third parties” and (2) to make 
certain game data “interoperable with other software tools.”22  Based on this commenter’s 
pseudonym, it appears that the comments may address gambling software and services, and raise 
regulatory and content protection issues distinct from those raised by the game products and 
services represented by ESA.  Moreover it is it is difficult to discern what kind of activities are 
being discussed in this comment, and thus not clear to what extent the actions this commenter 
wishes to take might already be covered by Section 1201(f) or (i).  The comment does not seem 
to raise the kinds of broad policy questions concerning the operation of Section 1201 that this 
proceeding was intended to address.
23  
Conclusion 
For the reasons set forth above and in ESA’s initial comments, ESA urges the Office to 
keep a clear eye on Section 1201’s record of success at reducing infringement and promoting the 
creation and dissemination of new creative works, and not to recommend changes to Section 
1201 that would, as a practical matter, eviscerate its important protections. 
 
22 Starelikemckeehen Poker Club Comments, at 1. 
 
23 The commenter also has not provided the kind of evidentiary foundation that would warrant serious consideration 
of an exemption. 
7

[PAGE 8]
April 1, 2016 
Stanley Pierre-Louis, 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Ben Golant, 
Chief Counsel for Intellectual Property Policy 
Entertainment Software Association 
575 7th Street, N.W., Suite 300 
Washington, D.C. 20004 
(v) 202-223-2400 
stan@theESA.com 
bgolant@theESA.com 
Of Counsel 
8 
Stewfl R. Englund 
Kenneth L. Doroshow 
JENNER & BLOCK LLP 
1099 New York Ave., N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20001 
(v) 202-639-6000 
senglund@jenner.com 
kdoroshow@jenner.com 
Counsel for the Entertainment Software 
Association
