Comment ID: COLC-2015-0012-0132
Title: Additional Reply Comments - Lu, Yifan
Posted: 2016-11-17T05:00:00Z
Submitter: Lu-Yifan

I am a security researcher who has written tools for users to &quot;unlock&quot; or &quot;jailbreak&quot; their devices. I am commenting on two of the issues raised in the inquiry. First, in regarding &quot;whether a person qualifies for the security testing exemption,&quot; I have run into experiences where I contact that party responsible for the physical device that I am researching and, even after repeated attempts, would not receive a response. In such a case, it is unknown whether I have &quot;authorization of the owner or operator.&quot; In order cases, usage of such devices require agreeing to an EULA which stipulates that the user may not reverse engineer the device&#39;s hardware or software. In either case I wish to research the device I purchased (not the internet connected component, of course) for security purposes but it is unclear that I will get authorization to do so. In such cases, it makes it difficult for security researchers to engage in auditing popular consumer electronics devices where the manufacturer does not wish to allow it. In the case of devices used by a majority of Americans, if the company that created it does not explicitly allow for outside security audit and there is no way to know the extent of their internal security audit, it puts the users at risk.<br/><br/>My second comment is regarding the anti-trafficking provisions. There are cases where I have developed software tools for &quot;unlocking&quot; or &quot;jailbreaking&quot; devices, have worked with the manufacturer of the device to fix vulnerabilities, and then release the tools as free open source projects for others to use and improve on. I believe that releasing research materials after the issues are resolved allows for the security community to improve. However, there are always instances where bad actors take these tools and redistribute them for malicious or copyright-infringing means. This is made complicated in that most security system conflate code integrity (running authorized code on the system) with DRM (licensing). It is usually impossible to bypass code integrity (the goal of penetration testing) without also bypassing DRM. In such circumstances, I am unsure of where I stand legally and am hesitant to publish my research. I believe the law should be amended such that as long as the trafficking of copyright circumvention technology isn&#39;t intended to bypass DRM, it should be exempted.
