[PAGE 1]
1
KERNOCHAN CENTER FOR LAW, MEDIA AND THE ARTS
COLUMBIA LAW SCHOOL
BEFORE THE
U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE
Section 1201 Study Docket No. 2015-8
Reply Comments of the Kernochan Center for Law, Media and the Arts
Columbia Law School
Introduction
The Kernochan Center for Law, Media and the Arts appreciates the opportunity to 
respond to the Request for Additional Comments by the US Copyright Office concerning its 
study of Section 1201, 81 Fed. Reg. 66,296 (Sept. 27, 2016).  
The Kernochan Center for Law, Media, and the Arts at Columbia Law School is one of 
the leading centers for intellectual property research in the United States. Its faculty and staff 
dedicate their research and writing to copyright, trademarks, and related areas as they concern 
traditional and emerging media, entertainment and the arts. The Center offers students an in-
depth program of instruction, lectures, internships and externships while providing symposia, 
lectures, research studies and publications to the broader legal community. Founded as the 
Center for Law and the Arts, it was renamed in 1999 to honor Professor John M. Kernochan, its 
founder and a pioneer in teaching copyright in American law schools.
Section 1201 of Title 17 was designed to encourage copyright owners to develop new 
distribution models for their content, and in particular, to encourage distribution of that content 
over the internet. Section 1201 has been a success, as many commenters have attested.  Section 
1201’s success should not immunize it from amendment, but it does indicate that the broad 
amendments offered by some commenters should be rejected, as they would unquestionably 
undermine the goals and effect of the law.  (We refer, for example, to suggestions that the anti-
circumvention laws be repealed in their entirety, that circumvention for any non-infringing 
purpose be allowed, etc.).  We believe all suggested amendments should be approached with

[PAGE 2]
2
caution, and that the Copyright Office should recommend amendments only on the basis of a 
well-established record.  New or expanded permanent exemptions should be recommended 
where, and only to the extent that, parties have consistently sought and been granted exemptions 
in the past through the rulemaking process.
1. Proposals for New Permanent Exemptions
Judged against these criteria, there are only two suggested new permanent exemptions that 
we would support:
Assistive Technologies for Use by Persons Who are Blind, Visually Impaired, or Print 
Disabled. In earlier comments, we stated that Congress should consider an appropriately drafted 
permanent exemption to facilitate access to literary works by blind, visually impaired or print-
disabled persons.  The history of the triennial rulemaking indicates that this is an exemption that 
has been regularly sought and granted, and there are strong public policy reasons for raising it to 
the level of a permanent exemption.  In our view, the exemption granted in the 2015 rulemaking 
is an appropriate formulation for a permanent exemption.  We recognize that some commenters 
would prefer a broader exemption, but they will still have the rulemaking process available to 
them if their ability to make lawful uses in this regard is unreasonably constrained.
Device Unlocking. The contours of the exemptions granted for this purpose in the 
rulemaking proceedings have changed over time (and will likely continue to change).  We 
nevertheless believe that a permanent exemption to allow circumvention to unlock mobile 
devices solely for the purpose of “enabling them to connect to the network of a different mobile 
wireless carrier” is warranted, based on the records in the rulemakings to date, as well as on 
Congressional action on this issue.1  Rather than creating a broad and open-ended description of 
the devices eligible for this exemption, it is preferable to use the exemption as formulated in the 
2015 rulemaking proceeding, and add devices pursuant to the triennial proceeding, to the extent 
justified by the evidence presented.
International considerations. As we observed in our earlier comments, the WIPO 
Copyright Treaty and the WPPT give contracting parties latitude with respect to the specific 
                                                     
1 See Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act, Pub. L. 113-144, sec. 2(b), 128 Stat. 1751 (2014).

[PAGE 3]
3
terms of their legislation.2  We believe that the two amendments we support here are consistent 
with US obligations under the WIPO treaties.  
As we discussed in our earlier comments, some of the bilateral trade agreements that the 
US has with other countries contain more specific obligations with respect to technological 
protection.3  The exemptions we support here, however, are based on an established track record 
in the triennial rulemaking proceeding, which should be an important consideration in evaluating 
implications for US obligations under such agreements, and the potential effect on other 
countries’ perceptions of their obligations under those agreements.
2. Proposed Amendments to Existing Exemptions
We are not in a position to judge the current state of reverse engineering, encryption 
research or security testing, or the extent to which such endeavors are seriously hampered by the 
proscriptions of chapter 12.  In general, however, we would not support an amendment to an 
existing exemption absent evidence that the beneficiaries have in triennial rulemaking 
proceedings consistently requested, and been granted, exemptions reasonably equivalent to the 
amendment they seek.  If the statutory structure is deficient, presumably the beneficiaries would 
have come forward with evidence to justify additional or broader exemptions in the rulemaking
process.  
Where the records of previous rulemaking proceedings indicate that the potential 
beneficiaries have not sought an exemption in past rulemaking proceedings, or sought an 
exemption but failed to provide adequate supporting evidence, there is insufficient basis to create 
or broaden a permanent exemption.
  
3. Anti-Trafficking Provisions
                                                     
2 WIPO Copyright Treaty, art. 11, Dec. 20, 1996, 36 I.L.M. 65 (1997), available at
http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/text.jsp?file_id=295166#P87_12240 (“Contracting Parties shall provide 
adequate legal protection and effective legal remedies against the circumvention of effective technological 
measures that are used by authors in connection with the exercise of their rights under this Treaty or the 
Berne Convention and that restrict acts, in respect of their works, which are not authorized by the authors 
concerned or permitted by law.”) The WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty has a similar 
provision.  WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty, art. 18, Dec. 20, 1996, 36 I.L.M. 76 (1997), 
available at http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/text.jsp?file_id=295577. 
3 See, e.g., the U.S.-Colombia Agreement, art. 16.7 (4) (2006), available at https://ustr.gov/trade-agreements/free-
trade-agreements/colombia-fta/final-text.

[PAGE 4]
4
The anti-trafficking provisions in section 1201 are an essential part of the statutory 
scheme.  There will almost always be technically-savvy individuals who can circumvent or 
override technological protection, but unauthorized access to copyrighted works can be kept in 
check if such persons are not permitted to circulate tools or provide services to enable the general 
public to circumvent.  Without protection against trafficking in devices or services, TPMs would 
be largely ineffective.  Any changes to the anti-trafficking provisions should be approached with 
great caution.
a.  Implied right for the beneficiary of an exemption to “make a tool” for his or her own 
use.  Concerning whether the Office should recommend that Congress clarify that the statute 
should expressly permit the beneficiary of an exemption to make a tool solely for his or her own 
use in circumventing:  We question whether there are examples of situations where the 
beneficiary of an exemption has stated that it has not taken, and cannot take advantage of an 
exemption to which it is entitled, even though it has the required expertise, because the law 
prevents it from creating a tool or mechanism.  It is unclear whether such a recommendation is 
necessary.  Most of the changes to the anti-trafficking provision provisions that commenters have 
suggested are far broader; this issue doesn’t seem to be the crux of their claims.
b.  Third-party assistance.  The Request for Additional Comments observed that some 
parties have argued that “in certain circumstances” third party assistance in circumventing 
technological access controls could “fall outside” the scope of the anti-trafficking provision and 
therefore be permissible.   Both 17 U.S.C. sections 512(a)(2) and 512(b)(1) are broadly worded.  
The parties urging such an interpretation apparently believe that third party assistance might not 
be embraced under providing a service or any of the other activities prohibited by these sections.  
The Merriam-Webster dictionary includes, among its definitions of “service,” “help, use, 
benefit,” “contribution to the welfare of others,” and “a helpful act.”4 It seems as though any 
plausible interpretation of “service” would include third party assistance, and we have not heard 
a persuasive argument to the contrary.
In conclusion, section 1201 was an attempt to provide protection to copyrighted works to 
foster innovation in content delivery.  Congress drafted section 1201, including its exemptions 
                                                     
4 Merriam Webster Dictionary, definition of “service,” http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/service. See 
also dictionary.com definition of service, http://www.dictionary.com/browse/services which includes “an act of
helpful activity; help; aid. . . .”

[PAGE 5]
5
and limitations, to balance the interests of the various stakeholders.  Congress included the 
rulemaking as a means to refine that balance when necessary.  Commenters have urged 
numerous permanent changes to section 1201 that would make it easier for users to legally 
circumvent technological access controls.  Before recommending any such changes, the Office 
should consider carefully whether they would undermine the fundamental goals of the statutory 
scheme.
Respectfully submitted,
June M. Besek
Executive Director,
Kernochan Center for Law, Media and the Arts
Columbia Law School  
435 West 116th Street
New York, NY 10027
