[PAGE 1]
Before the 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 
United States Copyright Office  
 
 
In the Matter of  
 
Section 1201 Study:  
Notice and Request for Public Comment  
 
) 
) 
) 
) 
)
) 
 
 
 
Docket No. 2015-08 
 
REPLY COMMENT
  
OF 
INTERNATIONAL DOCUMENTARY ASSOCIATION 
FILM INDEPENDENT  
KARTEMQUIN EDUCATIONAL FILMS 
INDEPENDENT FILMMAKER PROJECT 
INDIE CAUCUS 
THE NATIONAL ALLIANCE FOR MEDIA ARTS AND CULTURE 
NEW MEDIA RIGHTS  
WOMAN IN FILM & VIDEO 
 
 
Submitted By:  
UCI Intellectual Property, Arts, and 
Technology Clinic 
University of California, Irvine  
School of Law 
401 East Peltason Drive 
Irvine, CA 92697 
 
Jack I. Lerner, Director 
Noorean Gill and Daniel Silverman, 
Certified Law Students under the 
Rules of the California State Bar, 
Title 1, Division 1, Chapter 1 
 Donaldson & Callif, LLP 
400 South Beverly Drive 
Beverly Hills, CA 90212 
 
Michael C. Donaldson 
Dean Cheley

[PAGE 2]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Reply Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
April 1, 2016 
Page 1 of 9 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
We thank the Register for the opportunity to comment on this st udy. Criticism, 
commentary, and other forms of fair use are central to modern f ilmmaking, and without 
lawful access to material on today’s digital media, these vital activities would be severely 
compromised.  We are participating in this study because the se ction 1201(a)(1) 
exemptions are critically important to the independent filmmaking community. 
 
Several organizations have joined  the International Documentary  Association, Film 
Independent, and Kartemquin Educational Films in submitting thi s Reply Comment.  
These organizations, which co llectively represent over 300,000 filmmakers, artists, and 
arts institutions, join our Initial Comment
1 and urge the Register to adopt the 
recommendations made in the Comment.  
At the outset, we again urge t he Register to recognize the weig ht of eighteen years of 
experience with section 1201 of the DMCA: it does little to sol ve real problems we face 
with online copyright infringement while making it vastly more difficult for independent 
filmmakers to make their films.  For this reason, in our Initial Comment we recommended 
a change to section 1201 that w ould require a connection betwee n the circumvention and 
infringing conduct in order for a 1201 violation to occur.
2  In the alternative, we 
recommend that the Register re duce the burden of the process an d administer it more 
effectively in the ways we discuss below. 
 
The Register should implement a presumption of renewal for prev iously granted 
exemptions—but it must be structured effectively.  We recommend that the presumption 
of renewal be implemented in the following ways:  
 
 The presumption of renewal should either be automatic or based simply on an 
assertion.  No evidence should be required to trigger the presumption. 
 There need not be a requirement that the presumption can only b e applied when 
there is no opposition.  The only “meaningful opposition” neces sary is evidence 
sufficient to rebut the presumption. 
 The appropriate showing for reject ing a presumption should be w hether there is 
concrete evidence that there would be no adverse effects if the  previously granted 
exemption were withdrawn.  Absent such a showing, the Register should only 
                                                 
1 See International Documentary Association, et al., Initial Comment  on Section 1201 Study: Notice and 
Request for Public Comment at 2 (Dec. 29, 2015) (hereinafter “I nitial Comment”), http://www.copyright. 
gov/fedreg /2015/80fr81369.pdf (recommending that Congress amend section 1201 to include a requirement 
that circumvention of an access control is not a violation of section 1201 unless there is a connection between 
the circumvention and infringing conduct, and in the alternative, that the Register (1) establish a presumptive 
renewal of previously granted exemptions; (2) structure the pro ceeding as a rulemaking rather than an 
adjudication; (3) impose a workable standard for what constitutes a likely noninfringing use and ensure that 
the standard does not interfere with the development of fair us e law in the courts; and (4) strongly favor 
exemptions involving merged acce ss and use controls where the m erged control prevents a use such as 
copying, and the user does not seek to obtain the material unlawfully.). 
2 See id. at 7.

[PAGE 3]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Reply Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
April 1, 2016 
Page 2 of 9 
 
 
 
 
 
consider concrete evidence that the activities permitted by the  previously granted 
exemption are operating as a market substitute for works being protected by the 
TPM at issue in the exemption.   
 
We also urge the Register to keep in mind that, in light of the rapid pace of technological 
development, a presumption of renewal is only part of the solution; as industry practices 
and TPMs change rapidly, existing exemptions become less and less relevant.  Additional 
reforms to the section 1201 rulemaking process are still urgently needed, whether or not a 
presumption of renewal is part of the next rulemaking.  
 
The Register should heavily favor exemptions where merged access and use controls 
are at issue and users do not seek to view or listen to the material unlawfully.  
Nothing said in the initial comments undermines the case for a new approach that 
properly reflects Congress’s intent to distinguish between access controls and use 
controls, and to permit circumvention of use controls.  
 
In light of the enormous time and expense that it takes to part icipate in the process, 
the Register should streamline and shorten the exemption process.  We strongly urge 
the Register to account for the unique scheduling needs of part icipants, including law 
school clinics, when setting the calendar for the rulemaking.  In addition, given that the 
process is an administrative rulemaking, there is no need for a petition round or designated 
“proponents” or “opponents.”  
 
The Register should clearly defi ne the factors considered for g ranting an exemption 
and tie them more closely to the requirements of the statute.  If the following conditions 
are met, an exemption should issue:  
 
1. An activity that a user or group of users seeks to do with rega rd to a class of 
copyrighted works is likely to be noninfringing under copyright law. 
2. Users legitimately fear that the presence or planned presence of a technological 
protection measure makes this activity unlawful under 17 U.S.C.  §  
1201(a)(1)(A). 
3. The resulting effect on the activity in question is adverse.  “Adverse” should be 
defined as “more than de minimis,” meaning that if real cases e xist which are 
emblematic of a broader impact, an adverse effect has been shown.  In addition, 
if the TPM in question restricts both access and use, and the u se sought in the 
exemption does not involve viewing or consuming copyrighted content without 
permission, the effect should be presumed to be adverse absent concrete 
evidence of market substitution or other copyright-related harm s that would 
issue from the exemption.   
4. The §1201(a)(1)(C) statutory factors favor the exemption, with special attention 
to whether merged access and use controls are present.

[PAGE 4]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Reply Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
April 1, 2016 
Page 3 of 9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
The 1201 rulemaking proceeding is too burdensome and costly for  all involved; the 
Register should exercise her discretion to implement changes that will streamline the 
process. 
 
In the initial round of comments, many commenters pointed out t he exceedingly 
burdensome nature of the section 1201 exemption process. 3  Our experience is the same.  
The complexity of the process and the unnecessarily high burden  of proof on a subset of 
commenters forces participants to retain legal counsel that mus t spend hundreds of hours 
seeking exemptions.  In the 2015 rulemaking proceeding, the UCI  Intellectual Property, 
Arts and Technology Clinic and pro bono co-counsel Donaldson + Callif LLP, spent nearly 
2000 hours advocating for an exemption for filmmakers. The effo rt required three 
attorneys, seven Certified Law Students, 4 and two interns. At market rates, such services 
would cost hundreds of thousands of dollars, and that figure does not include the time spent 
by hundreds of filmmakers, organiz ational staff, and administra tive support who also 
contributed to the effort.  Suc h costs are prohibitively expensive for all but the wealthiest 
and the lucky few who can find pro bono representation.   
 
Participation in a process as important as this should not be restricted to such a small group.  
For this reason, the changes that we recommend in this Reply Co mment and in our Initial 
Comment are vitally important.  The Register has the authority to implement logistical and 
scheduling changes to alleviate these burdens without congressi onal action, and we 
encourage her to do so in the next rulemaking.  We recommend th ree simple changes that 
would ease the burden and costs of the rulemaking process on all involved. 
 
First, the initial petition r ound of comments should be elimina ted.  During the 2015 
rulemaking proceeding, the petition round was an unnecessary and burdensome additional 
step that had little practical e ffect on the proceedings. As we  d i s c u s s  i n  o u r  I n i t i a l  
Comment, the section 1201 exemption process is a rulemaking req uired by statute and 
                                                 
3 AAU, et al. Initial Comment at 6, 10, 13, 14–15; ACM U.S. Publ ic Policy Council Initial Comment at 2; 
AIPLA Initial Comment at 2; American Foundation for the Blind I nitial Comment at 9; Authors Alliance 
Initial Comment at 3; Center for Democracy & Technology Initial  Comment at 5, 13; Competitive Carriers 
Association Initial Comment at 3; Consumers Union Initial Comme nt at 1–2; Entertainment Software 
Association Initial Comment at 8–9; iFixit Initial Comment at 2; Institute of Scrap Recycling Industries, Inc. 
Initial Comment at 4; International Documentary Association, et  al. Initial Comment at 3, 7, 8; Knowledge 
Ecology International Initial Comment at 5; Learning Disabiliti es Association of America Initial Comment 
at 1–2; Library Copyright Alliance Initial Comment at 30; Maryna Koberidze Initial Comment at 2; Microsoft 
Corporation Initial Comment at 5; MIT Libraries, et. al. Initia l Comment at 3–4; New Media Rights Initial 
Comment at 3; Organization for Transformative Works Initial Comment at 5; Rapid7 Initial Comment at 4; 
University of Virginia Library Initial Comment at 3. 
4 Certified Law Students have special permission to practice under the Rules of the California State Bar, Title 
1, Division 1, Chapter 1.

[PAGE 5]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Reply Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
April 1, 2016 
Page 4 of 9 
 
 
 
 
 
initiated by the Librarian every three years, making petitions unnecessary.5 Instead, the 
Register can make the process easier and simpler by accepting c omments from all 
interested parties sixty to ninety days after issuing the Notic e of Inquiry.  The Register 
should also consider identifying proposed classes sua sponte in the Notice of Inquiry. 
 
Second, the Register should allo w three comment rounds in which  anyone can comment.  
As we emphasized in our Initial Comment,
6 future section 1201 rulemaking proceedings 
should be structured as traditional rulemakings, and there is no need to classify commenters 
formally as proponents or opponents.  The Register can simplify  the section 1201 
proceeding by requesting three rounds of comments and allowing any interested party to 
submit a comment at any time, which would allow ample opportuni ty for participants to 
respond to others’ comments.   
 
Last, in setting up the section 1201 rulemaking’s calendar, the Register should account for 
the fact that law school clinics represent a significant number  of participants in the 
rulemaking proceedings. In fact, because so few user groups can  o t h e r w i s e  a f f o r d  t o  
participate in the process, in the most recent rulemaking law c linics or pro bono counsel 
constituted the vast majority o f outside counsel representing p roponents. The Register 
should acknowledge this unique cha racteristic of the rulemaking  and should work to 
accommodate the academic schedule. For example, in addition to doing away with the 
petition requirement, the Register should build in extra time for comment periods that span 
the winter holidays, should commence the process in late early September, and should wrap 
up the process by April or early  May. In addition, the second a nd third comment periods 
can be shorter than the first round.   
 
 
The Register should include a presumption of renewal for previo usly granted 
exemptions, but such a presumption must be structured effectively. 
 
Most initial commenters agree with the Register that a presumptive renewal for previously 
granted exemptions is both necessary and appropriate.
7  We also agree, and we urge the 
                                                 
5 See 1 CHARLES H. KOCH, JR., ADMINISTRATIVE LAW AND PRACTICE § 4:31 (3d ed. 2016). 
6 See International Documentary Association, et al. Initial Comment at 11–12. 
7 See AAU, et al. Initial Comment at 3, 14; ACM U.S. Public Policy Council Initial Comment at 2; AIPLA 
Initial Comment at 2; American Foundation for the Blind Initial  Comment at 3; Authors Alliance Initial 
Comment at 2; Center for Democracy & Technology Initial Comment  at 5–6; Competitive Carriers 
Association Initial Comment 5–11; Consumer Technology Associati on Initial Comment at 7; Consumers 
Union Initial Comment at 4; DIYAbility Initial Comment at 5; iFixit Initial Comment at 3; Institute of Scrap 
Recycling Industries, Inc. Initial Comment at 8-9; Internationa l Documentary Association, et al. Initial 
Comment at 2, 3, 9–10, 17; Knowledge Ecology International Init ial Comment at 4; Learning Disabilities 
Association of America Initial Comment at 1–2; Maryna Koberidize Initial Comment at 2–3; MIT Libraries, 
MIT Press, and MIT Office of Digital Learning Initial Comment at 3–4; New Media Rights Initial Comment 
at 17–18; Organization for Transformative Works Initial Comment at 2; Public Knowledge Initial Comment 
at 4; Rapid7 Initial Comment at 3–4; R Street Initial Comment a t 7; R Street Institute, FreedomWorks, and

[PAGE 6]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Reply Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
April 1, 2016 
Page 5 of 9 
 
 
 
 
 
Register to implement such a presumption in a way that simplifi e s  a n d  s tr e a m lin e s  th e  
process—and that provides real relief to the participants.  The  presumption should either 
be automatic or based simply on an assertion; no new evidence should be required to trigger 
the presumption.8     
 
The Register has recommended a presumption of renewal on more t han one occasion, 
sometimes recommending that it apply when there is no “meaningful opposition” and other 
times when there is no “opposition.”
9  Although we agree that there should be a 
presumptive renewal, we do not agree that it should be restricted to cases in which there is 
no “opposition” or “meaningful opposition.”  Such a requirement is unnecessary, because 
the appropriate form of “meaningful opposition” is evidence suf ficient to rebut the 
presumption.  More importantly, an opposition requirement any m ore lenient than that 
would likely render the presumpt ion ineffectual, because anyone  could extinguish a 
presumption merely by expressing opposition.10   
 
We urge the Register to support a presumption of renewal that can only be overcome with 
concrete evidence that no adverse effects would result if the previously granted exemption 
were withdrawn.  This standard would also solve a significant f law in the exemption 
proceeding: as most recently implemented, proponents of exempti on renewals must show 
that adverse effects continue, despite the fact that the previously granted exemption is often 
mitigating those adverse effects.
11 Thus, without a presumption, proponents are required 
to show that adverse effects not c urrently felt would likely re turn—a showing for which 
the Copyright Office imposed a higher burden in the last rulemaking.12  
                                                 
Niskanen Center Initial Comment at 7; USC Intellectual Property  and Technology Law Clinic Initial 
Comment at 2–9; University of Virginia Library Initial Comment at 2. 
8 We also agree with other commenters that the presumption shoul d apply regardless of whether the 
contemplated exemption is a flat renewal of an existing exemption, or a modification of one.  See Microsoft 
Corporation Initial Comment at 6. Where a modification is conte mplated, all aspects of the proposed new 
exemption that preserve existing exemptions should be presumpti vely renewed.  For example, in 2015 the 
Librarian granted exemptions for documentary filmmaking that applied to TPMs on DVDs and Blu-ray.  In 
2018, filmmakers may seek to renew this exemption and modify it  to include other TPMs; in that case, the 
portion of the proposed exemption that applies to DVDs and Blu-ray should be presumptively granted. 
9 Compare 80 Fed. Reg. 81,371 (“the Register has recommended that Congre ss amend the rulemaking 
process to create a presumption in favor of renewal when there is no meaningful opposition to the 
continuation of an exemption.”) with 80 Fed. Reg. 81,369 n.7 (“We are therefore recommending a legislative 
change to provide a presumption in favor of renewal in cases where there is no opposition.”). 
10 In addition, a “meaningful opposition” standard would invite m ore uncertainty and expense due to the 
ambiguity of the term “meaningful.” 
11 See American Foundation of the Blind Initial Comment at 10 (“Embracing presumptive renewal and burden 
shifting would resolve the paradox at the heart of the current 1201 process: commenters seeking renewal of 
an existing exemption have to meet the adverse impact criteria anew every three years, even as the existing 
exemption is succeeding in facilitating non-infringing use of copyrighted works. In other words, it becomes 
more difficult to empirically demonstrate adverse impact resulting from a technological protection measure 
when an existing exemption is succeeding in addressing that very problem.”). 
12 See U.S. Copyright Office, Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennia l Proceeding to Determine 
Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention, Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 16 (2015), 
http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/registers-recommendation.pdf (“2 015 Recommendation”) (limiting

[PAGE 7]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Reply Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
April 1, 2016 
Page 6 of 9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the alternative, if the Register believes that this requirem ent is unworkable, the 
appropriate standard for overcoming a presumption should be concrete evidence that uses 
permitted by a previously granted exemption are operating as a market substitute for works 
protected by the TPM at issue in the exemption.  Mere assertions, such as those regarding 
perceptions, feelings, or fears, should not be sufficient to overcome the presumption. 
 
Finally, we urge the Register to keep in mind that, while a pre sumption of renewal is 
important, additional reforms to the section 1201 rulemaking process are still necessary in 
light of the rapid development of technology.  Between 2012 and 2015, industry standards 
changed so quickly that by the time the Librarian granted docum entary filmmakers an 
exemption for Blu-ray and other technologies in 2015, Blu-ray was on its way to becoming 
an obsolete standard and 4K was on its way to becoming the new norm.
13  Similarly, TPMs 
also change often and are rendered obsolete by newer TPMs.14 
 
 
The Register should revise the rulemaking process to ensure that it does not subvert 
Congress’s clear intent to prohibit circumvention of access con t r o l s  b u t  n o t  u s e  
controls: where merged access and use controls are at issue, an d the user seeking an 
exemption does not seek to view, listen to, or otherwise consume the material without 
permission, the Register should find an adverse effect and issue the exemption.  
 
In our Initial Comment, we argued that the Register should stro ngly favor exemptions 
involving merged access and use controls where the merged control prevents a use such as 
copying and the user does not seek to access the material unlaw fully.  This approach is 
necessary in order to avoid subverting Congress’s clear intent to prohibit the circumvention 
of access controls but not use controls. 15  Nothing submitted in the initial round of 
comments contradicts this argument.  In fact, the comments of the Association of American 
Publishers (“AAP”), Motion Picture Association of America (“MPA A”), and Recording 
Industry Association of America (“RIAA”) support our assertion that “access controls” are 
properly understood as controls that limit a user’s ability to obtain, consume, or perceive 
                                                 
exemptions based on anticipated i mpacts to “extraordinary circu mstances” and requiring evidence that is 
“highly specific, strong, and persuasive”).  
13 See 2015 Joint Filmmakers Comment, at app. B (Feb. 6, 2015), http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/comments-
020615/InitialComments_LongForm_IDA_Class06.pdf (“2015 Joint Fi lmmakers Comment”) (“Many 
documentary filmmakers are now shooting and editing programs in  the new Ultra High Definition (UHD) 
4K (3840x2160) format.”). 
14 Id. at app. J (encryption mechanisms used in digitally transmitted  videos vary across platform, device, 
browser, and provider, and are constantly changing.). 
15 International Documentary Association, et al. Initial Comment at 15.

[PAGE 8]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Reply Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
April 1, 2016 
Page 7 of 9 
 
 
 
 
 
copyrighted material without authorization16—not those that limit a user’s ability to copy 
the material.17  
 
The Register should strongly favor  an exemption where: (a) the user group does not seek 
to obtain or consume the material unlawfully; (b) the user group cannot engage in a lawful 
use such as copying for fair use purposes without violating a merged access and use TPM; 
and (c) there is not substantial evidence that the proposed exemption will cause significant 
copyright infringement.
18 
 
 
The Register should more clearly define the factors considered for granting an 
exemption and tie them more closely to the requirements of the statute. 
 
We agree with many commenters w ho suggested a more straightforw ard and clearly 
defined inquiry for granting an exemption.
19  In the Notice of Inquiry commencing the 
rulemaking, the Register should define and spell out the inquiry necessary for granting an 
exemption.  Such a framework could easily be implemented in the context of a rulemaking 
proceeding, where all interested parties are given the opportun ity to comment without 
being categorized as proponents and opponents.   
 
For new exemptions (or aspects thereof) that would not be renew als of previous 
exemptions, the Register should re commend that an exemption iss ue if the following 
conditions are met:  
 
1. Users seek to undertake an activity with regard to a class of copyrighted works 
that is likely to be noninfringing under copyright law. 
As we discuss in our Initial Comment, the standard for “likely to be noninfringing” should 
be whether there is some likelihood that a desired use is noninfringing.20  It is not necessary 
to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the desired use  is in fact noninfringing 
because an unduly restrictive standard runs counter to Congress ’s intent not to disturb the 
natural development of case law with respect to fair and other lawful uses.21 
                                                 
16 AAP, et al. Initial Comment at 10 (describing access controls as controls designed to prevent “enabling a 
person to listen to music, watch a movie, or read a book only after the consumer has properly paid for access 
to such content, and consistent with the terms on which access is granted”). 
17 Large rightsholder groups readily acknowledge in their initial comments that many common TPMs prevent 
both access and use.  AAP, et al . Initial Comment at 10 (“AAP, MPAA and RIAA use access controls for 
purposes that relate to ‘core copyright concerns.’); see also DVD CCA and AACS LA Initial Comment at 2 
(“CSS allowed content owners to protect their copyrighted works  from unauthorized access (and . . . from 
unauthorized copying or other uses.”); id. at 9 (“[S]ection 1201 provides legal protections in connection with 
the use of technological protection measures like CSS and AACS to protect motion picture content from 
unauthorized access and uses.”). 
18 International Documentary Association, et al. Initial Comment at 16–17. 
19 See, e.g., Cyberlaw Clinic at Harvard Law School Initial Comment at 8. 
20 International Documentary Association, et al. Initial Comment at 14. 
21 Id. at 13–15.

[PAGE 9]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Reply Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
April 1, 2016 
Page 8 of 9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Users reasonably fear that a technological protection measure m akes or will 
make the activity in question unlawful under 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(A). 
Here, the inquiry should be whet her it may be necessary to circ umvent a TPM that 
“effectively controls access” to copyrighted material in order to conduct the activity in 
question.  For example, filmmakers frequently seek to criticize  or comment on other 
copyrighted works, which is lawful under the fair use doctrine,  bu t a re  prevented from 
doing so because the copyrighted  works are protected by TPMs th at effectively control 
access to such material. 
 
3. The resulting effect on the activity in question is adverse.  
Consistent with both her statutory authority and the legislative history, the Register should 
define “adverse” as “more than de minimis,” 22 meaning that if real cases exist which are 
emblematic of a broader impact, an adverse effect has been show n.  This is clearer and 
more administrable than “adverse effects” standards applied in previous rulemakings, 
given that it is difficult to quantify how many examples are sufficient to show a nationwide 
adverse effect.  
 
In addition, if the TPM in question restricts both access and u se, and the use in question 
does not involve viewing or consuming copyrighted content, the effect should be presumed 
to be adverse absent concrete evidence of market substitution o r other copyright-related 
harms that would issue from the exemption.   
 
4. The §1201(a)(1)(C) statutory factors favor the exemption.  
We urge the Register to consider the factors set forth in the s tatute23 in light of our 
collective experience over the p ast eighteen years with the DMC A.  In that time, it has 
become quite clear that section 1201 has had little to no effec t on copyright infringement; 
instead, section 1201 has consistently obstructed fair use and other lawful uses.  The section 
1201(a)(1)(C) statutory factors intentionally give the Register ample discretion to consider 
this reality. 
 
For example, the first factor, “the availability for use of cop yrighted works,” allows the 
Copyright Office to consider the ubiquity of TPMs on copyrighted works, and the fact that 
                                                 
22 H.R. REP. NO. 105-551, pt. 2, at 37 (1998) (“Commerce Comm. Report”). 
23 17 U.S.C. § 1201 (a)(1)(C) (“In conducting such rulemaking, th e Librarian shall examine—(i) the 
availability for use of copyrighted works; (ii) the availabilit y for use of works for nonprofit archival, 
preservation, and education purposes; (iii) the impact that the  prohibition on the circumvention of 
technological measures applied to copyrighted works has on crit icism, comment, news reporting, teaching, 
scholarship, or research; (iv) the effect of circumvention of technological measures on the market for or value 
of copyrighted works; and (v) such other factors as the Librarian considers appropriate.”).

[PAGE 10]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Reply Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
April 1, 2016 
Page 9 of 9 
 
 
 
 
 
a massive proportion of the content that dominates current even ts, culture, civic life, and 
our most pressing national debates is protected by TPMs. 24   
 
The fourth factor, “the effect of circumvention of technological measures on the market for 
or value of copyrighted works,” calls for the Register to assess whether the circumvention 
of technological measures presents a real threat of market substitution.  To qualify as a real 
threat of market substitution, th ere should be concrete evidenc e to that effect; mere 
assertions
25 should not be sufficient.  Furthermore, this inquiry should no t include effects 
on the licensing market, because it is well-established that rights holders have no claim to 
the derivative market for criticisms of their works.26 
 
Finally, under the fifth factor, “such other factors as the Lib rarian considers appropriate,” 
the Register must pay special attention whether merged access and use controls are present.  
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
We again thank the Register for inviting comments on section 12 01 and its exemption 
process.  Through this study, the Register has an opportunity to revise and revamp the 1201 
rulemaking proceeding in accordance with Congress’s intentions.  As rightsholders 
ourselves, we utilize many distribution mechanisms that employ digital rights management 
and technological protection measures—and our own TPM-protected works are subject to 
the exemptions we have sought.  Digital rights management syste ms can be useful, but 
their usefulness has little t o do with section 1201.  Instead, the anticircumvention 
provisions have inhibited countle ss lawful uses.  We therefore urge the Register to adopt 
the recommendations in this Reply Comment and our Initial Comment. 
 
 
 
  
                                                 
24 See 2015 Joint Filmmakers Comment, at 2, 4, 18. 
25 See  2015 Advanced Access Content Syst em Licensing Administrator Co mment at 15, 
http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/comments-032715/class%201/AACS_LA_class01_1201_2014.pdf (“[A]ny 
weakening of AACS could do great harm to the use-facilitating business model and damage efforts to bring 
further high definition media formats to market.”); 2015 Entert ainment Software Association Comment at 
15, http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/comments-032715/class%2019/E ntertainment_Software_Association 
_Class19_1201_2014.pdf. 
26 See Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc ., 510 U.S. 569 (1994); U.S. Copyright Office, Section 1201 
Rulemaking: Fifth Triennial Pro ceeding to Determine Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention, 
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 131 (2012), http:/ /www.copyright.gov/1201/2012/Section 
_1201_Rulemaking_2012_Recommendation.pdf (“2012 Recommendation”) (citing Campbell v. Acuff-Rose 
Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569 (1994)) (“[R]equiring a creator who is making fair use of a work to obtain a license 
is in tension with the Supreme Court’s holding in Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc. that rightsholders do 
not have an exclusive right to markets for commentary on or criticism of their copyrighted works.”).

[PAGE 11]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Reply Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
April 1, 2016 
Appendix 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ABOUT THE COMMENTERS 
 
The International Documentary Association (IDA) is a non-profit 501(c)(3) 
organization that promotes nonfiction filmmaking, and is dedica ted to increasing public 
awareness for the documentary genre. At IDA, we believe that do cumentary storytelling 
expands our understanding of shared human experience, fostering  a n  i n f o r m e d ,  
compassionate, and connected world, and we exist to serve the n eeds of those who create 
this art form. Our major program areas are: Advocacy, Filmmaker Services, Education, and 
Public Programs and Events. For over 30 years, IDA has worked t o support documentary 
filmmaking as a vital art form. We continue to seek ways to ensure that the artists, activists 
and journalists who make documentaries receive the resources that they need and deserve. 
Film Independent is a non-profit arts organizati on and our mission is to champio n the 
cause of Independent film and support a community of artists wh o embody diversity, 
innovation and a uniqueness of vision. We help independent film makers tell their stories, 
build an audience for their projects and diversify the voices in the film industry, supporting 
filmmakers at every experience level with a community in which their works can be 
appreciated and sustained. With over 200 annual screenings and events, Film Independent 
provides access to a network of likeminded artists who are driv ing creativity in the film 
industry. Our free Filmmaker Labs f or selected writers, directo rs, producers and 
documentary filmmakers and year-round educational programs serve as a bridge from film 
school to the real world of filmmaking – one with no defined career ladder. Project Involve 
is Film Independent’s signature program dedicated to fostering the careers of talented 
emerging filmmakers from communities traditionally underreprese nted in the film 
industry. We also produce the we ekly Film Independent at LACMA film series, the Los 
Angeles Film Festival in June and the annual awards programs fo r the finest independent 
films of the year—the Film Independent Spirit Awards.   
Kartemquin Educational Films is a not-for-profit collaborative center for documentary 
media makers who seek to foster a more engaged and empowered so ciety. In 2016, 
Kartemquin will celebrate 50 ye ars of sparking democracy throug h documentary. Best 
known for producing Hoop Dreams  and The Interrupters  among over 50 other 
documentaries that examine and critique society through the liv es of ordinary people, 
Kartemquin has won every major almost every available prize for  documentary 
filmmaking, including multiple Emmy, Peabody, duPont-Columbia a nd Robert F. 
Kennedy journalism awards, Inde pendent Spirit, IDA, PGA and DGA  a w a r d s ,  a n d  a n  
Oscar nomination. A revered resource on issues of ethics and st orytelling, Kartemquin is 
internationally recognized for crafting quality documentaries b acked by comprehensive 
audience engagement, and for its innovative programs and advoca cy designed to elevate 
the documentary community.

[PAGE 12]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Reply Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
April 1, 2016 
Appendix 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Founded in 1979, the Independent Filmmaker Project  (IFP) champions the future of 
storytelling by connecting artist s with essential resources at all stages from development 
to distribution. The organization fosters a vibrant and sustainable independent storytelling 
community through its year-round programs, which include IFP Fi lm Week, IFP Labs, 
Filmmaker Magazine, the IFP Gotham Awards and the Made in NY Media Center by IFP, 
a new incubator space developed with the Mayor’s Office of Media and Entertainment and 
EDC. IFP represents an ever-growing network of 10,000+ storytel lers around the world 
and plays a key role in supporting over 350 narrative and documentary features, as well as 
new series, each year. 
 
Indie Caucus is a national, independent group of filmmakers who believe in the public 
mission of public media.  It is dedicated to strengthening our collective voice both within 
and outside of the public media system. As a group we keep tabs on events related to indies 
and public media, and can quickly  activate the national communi ty when a crisis arises.  
We aim to be a voice that repr esents independent filmmakers to our broadcast, 
programming and funding partners in public media. Members of the Indie Caucus Steering 
Committee are independent producers who meet regularly, who can  intervene behind the 
scenes, and who are pledged to a ctivate their networks when a l arge outcry and action is 
needed.   
 
The National Alliance for Media Arts and Culture  (NAMAC) consists of 225 
organizations that serve over 335,000 artists and media professionals nationwide. Members 
include community-based media p roduction centers and facilities , university based 
programs, museums, media presenters and exhibitors, film festiv als, distributors, film 
archives, youth media programs, community access television, an d digital arts and online 
groups. NAMAC’s mission is to foster and fortify the culture an d business of the 
independent media arts. NAMAC believes that all Americans deser ve access to create, 
participate in, and experience a rt. NAMAC co-authored the Docum entary Filmmakers’ 
Statement of Best Practices in Fair Use and has long been an ad vocate for orphan works 
reform. 
 
New Media Rights  (NMR) New Media Rights is a non-profit program that provides 
preventative, one-to-one legal services to creators, entrepreneurs, and internet users whose 
projects require specialized int ernet, intellectual property, p rivacy, media, and 
communications law expertise. These legal services include coun sel regarding section 
1201 of the DMCA.  NMR is an independently funded program of Ca lifornia Western 
School of Law, a 501(c)(3) non-profit. Further information regarding NMR’s mission and 
activities can be obtained at http://www.newmediarights.org.  
 
Women in Film & Video (WIFV) of Washington, DC is dedicated to advancing the career 
development of professionals working in all areas of screen-bas ed media and related 
disciplines. WIFV supports women i n the industry by promoting e qual opportunities, 
encouraging professional development, serving as an information network, and educating 
the public about women’s creative and technical achievements. W IFV, a 501(c)(3) non-

[PAGE 13]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Reply Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
April 1, 2016 
Appendix 
 
 
 
 
 
 
profit community benefit organization founded in 1979, is the p remier professional 
resource for people who want successful media careers in the DC -metro region. Our 
resources, connections, and advocates support a vibrant, creative media community.
