[PAGE 1]
 
 
UNITED STATES COPYRIGHT OFFICE 
 
 
    *  
Section 1201 Study: Request                                     Additional Reply Comments of:  
For Additional Comments                              *       Association of American Publishers,       
  Entertainment Software Association,      
  Motion Picture Association of America, 
                                                *       Recording Industry Association of  
Docket  No. 2015-8                                                      America 
    * 
  
****** 
 
 
I. Introduction 
The Association of American Publishers (“AAP”), the Entertainment Software 
Association (“ESA”), the Motion Picture Association of America, Inc. (“MPAA”) and the 
Recording Industry Association of America, Inc. (“RIAA”) respectfully submit these reply 
comments in connection with the above referenced docket.  As described in their prior comments 
submitted on March 3, 2016, April 1, 2016, and October 27, 2016, and during the public 
roundtables, the protections provided in Chapter 12 of Title 17 are extremely important to the 
motion picture, television, music, entertainment software, and publishing industries.  These 
protections helped encourage early adoption of digital distribution methods and continue to 
enable the exciting new business models that AAP, ESA, MPAA and RIAA members are 
currently using to disseminate their creative works.  See March 3, 2016 Initial Comments of 
AAP, MPAA, and RIAA at 4-9 (describing the numerous digital products currently being offered 
by motion picture distributors, record companies and publishers of literary works); March 3, 
2016 Initial Comments of ESA at 2-6 (describing variety of offerings from video game 
publishers and distributors).  
Nothing in the comments filed in this docket justifies amending Chapter 12.  Its 
protections have played a large role in the development of the thriving digital marketplace for 
expressive works that Congress envisioned nearly two decades ago when it passed the DMCA.  
See S. Rep. No. 105-190, 105th Cong., 2d Sess., at 8 (May 11, 1998) (Section 1201 “creates the 
legal platform for launching the global digital online marketplace for copyrighted works.  It will 
facilitate making available quickly and conveniently via the Internet the movies, music, software 
and literary works that are the fruit of American creative genius.”); see also May 19, 2016 
Transcript at 14 (statement of Mr. Adler, AAP) (“The idea here was all about access.  It is to 
facilitate consumer access to works online because that would be convenient, because it was 
viewed that that would cut expenses.  It would cut against the difficulties people have in finding 
these works.  …  So we think that the legal prot ections were a necessary part of the notion that 
copyright owners could use technological protection measures in order to make their works 
conveniently and ubiquitously available online and that’s been a wild success.”); id. at 18 
(statement of Mr. Pierre-Louis, ESA) (“When [the DMCA] was passed in 1998, the thought was 
we want to expand consumer access to broadband and to new technologies.  And one of the ways

[PAGE 2]
 
 
 2 
 
we encourage that is by getting copyrighted content online and on other devices.  And part of 
those twin goals involved 1201.”).   
These protections are only growing in importance, as online dissemination of works 
becomes the primary business model for a broad range of products.  Over the last several years, 
we have entered an “access economy” wherein consumers demand and prefer business models 
that provide on-demand access on a subscription or rental transaction basis rather than buying 
and owning copies of works.  See Hayley Tsukayama, Wash. Post, Mary Meeker Sees Web 
Trend Toward Consumer Access, Dec. 4, 2012 (“CD wallets, bookshelves, DVD towers and 
even garages may be fading away as a new generation lets technology affect the way it thinks 
about ownership.”); A Hard Sell:  The Industries That Can’t Get Millennials Buying, The 
Guardian, March 18, 2016 (“The sharing economy has taught us that just as you don’t need to 
own the DVD of the film you want to watch, you don’t need your own car to get around.”).  In 
this access economy, technological measures that enforce the terms of access-based transactions 
are the tools by which copyright owners and their distributor licensees meet consumer 
expectations.  These controls are not imposing unnecessary, restrictive limits on consumers.  
They are instead enabling consumers to pay less while getting more.  See U.S. Dept. of 
Commerce Internet Policy Task Force, White Paper on Remixes, First Sale, and Statutory 
Damages, at 42-44, 56-68 (Jan. 2016) (“The Task Force is persuaded that an overly broad 
application of the first sale doctrine could also impede the continued development of the growing 
range of flexible new licensing models and variable pricing.  Considerable evidence was 
presented that such models are becoming more and more prevalent and that they provide real 
value to consumers above and beyond traditional ownership models.”). 
Accordingly, we call on the Copyright Office not to recommend legislative change, but 
instead to focus its efforts on refining the triennial rulemaking process, which, with a few 
relatively minor procedural adjustments, will continue to provide a flexible fail-safe mechanism 
to address any perceived problems associated with the prohibition against circumventing access-
control technologies.     
II. Response to Notice of Inquiry 
Although the Copyright Office published a detailed and focused Request for Additional 
Comments regarding specific issues primarily related to access controls applied to software that 
enables machines and devices to function, rather than access controls applied to expressive 
works or software that renders expressive works for viewing or listening, a number of Section 
1201’s critics responded with more demands for fundamental changes to the statute, such as 
inserting a requirement that violations of Section 1201 must be linked to acts of copyright 
infringement.  See, e.g., Additional Comments of Public Knowledge at 1; Additional Comments 
of Center for Democracy and Technology (“CDT”) at 4; Additional Comments of the Society of 
American Archivists at 2; Additional Comments of Owners Rights Initiative at 1.
1  Without 
reiterating all of the reasons why such fundamental changes to the statute would be misguided 
and harmful, AAP, ESA, MPAA and RIAA remain strongly opposed to any efforts to render 
Section 1201 superfluous, a mere duplication of the protections provided by Section 106.  Many 
of today’s most successful, consumer-friendly business models involve selling access to works 
rather than copies of works.  See May 25, 2016 Transcript at 15 (statement of Ms. Chertkof, 
                                                 
1 All references to “Additional Comments” herein are to the comments submitted on October 27, 2016.

[PAGE 3]
 
 
 3 
 
RIAA) (“It’s been well publicized in the music industry that the industry is shifting from an 
ownership model to an access model and that access is really kind of where all the growth is.”);2 
id. at 14 (statement of Mr. Sheffner, MPAA) (“And as we’ve actually seen the distribution 
models [in the motion picture industry] move from ownership [of] a physical item like Blu-Ray 
disc or a DVD towards access-based models, whether it’s subscription models like Netflix or 
Hulu or iTunes, et cetera, access is really what’s at issue here.”).  Without the protections of 
Section 1201, such offerings could be subject to unrestrained hacking without legal recourse for 
copyright owners because merely viewing or listening to a work may not necessarily constitute 
copyright infringement, depending on the particular technology at issue.  The Copyright Office 
was right to implicitly reject requests for fundamental changes to the statute in the Request for 
Additional Comments.  AAP, ESA, MPAA, and RIAA strongly urge the Office to maintain its 
position on these issues and to clearly articulate in any published study the reasons why Section 
1201 should not be fundamentally altered. 
While Public Knowledge claims that advocates for preserving the protections provided to 
rights holders by Section 1201 “have not actually produced evidence supporting the causal link 
between” those protections and the widespread availability of new digital products and services, 
that is untrue.  In every rulemaking proceeding, the Joint Creators and Copyright Owners submit 
extensive evidence regarding that link, including live testimony from business executives.  See, 
e.g., May 20, 2015 Transcript at 81 (statement of Mr. Swart, Twenty First Century Fox)  
(“[W]ith any distributor we work with, copy protection and encryption is critical.”); May 19, 
2015 Transcript at 129-130 (statement of Mr. Voris, The Walt Disney Company) (“[P]roducts 
and services like Disney Movies Anywhere are making it easy for consumers to access their 
movies across formats and platforms and they represent the very type of innovative digital 
solutions the DMCA’s anti-circumvention protections were intended to encourage.”).  Similar 
testimony was provided at the public roundtables during this proceeding.  See, e.g., May 19, 
2016 Transcript at 22-23 (statement of Mr. Dow, The Walt Disney Company) (“Now, in the last 
15 years that I’ve been involved in this from the business side, I’ve been at the intersection of the 
law and sort of the business considerations.  And I can tell you that the availability of these legal 
tools has been directly relevant to the decisions to get into these markets, whether it was the 
development of AACS as a next-generation standard for the protection of high definition digital 
content, whether it’s the willingness to get into the market for 4K, whether it’s the willingness to 
get into the market for over-the-top television and authenticated television to allow people to do 
streaming, the DMCA has been a factor in the willingness to engage in all of those things.”); 
May 25, 2016 Transcript at 203-04 (statement of Mr. Reed, Fox Entertainment Group) (“I sort of 
wanted to … come back to something that came up in one of the earlier panels this morning 
about the idea of whether it’s the law that is causing these business models to evolve in the way 
they have, or whether it’s the technology itself.  It’s both, and it’s very -- the law is very much a 
major consideration here.  Anti-trafficking is very much a major consideration.  When we make 
decisions about what products to make available in the marketplace, either in the United States or 
in foreign countries, we’re looking at not only the technology that’s available to provide that 
content in a way that consumers want it in that market, but also the efficacy of the legal regime 
                                                 
2 See also Neil Shah, Wall St. J., The Summer that Streaming Took Over, Aug. 25, 2016 (“The move by 
consumers away from owning music to renting it from services like Spotify and Apple Music has caught 
fire.”); Ann Steele, Wall St. J., Warner Music Revenue Grows on Streaming: Streaming is Largest Source 
of Revenue in the Company’s Recorded Music Business, May 6, 2016; Tim Ingham, Music Business 
Worldwide, Streaming is Crushing Downloads at Sony Music, Claiming 42% of Revenues, Nov. 1, 2016.

[PAGE 4]
 
 
 4 
 
in that space as well.”).  After almost two decades of the Copyright Office receiving such 
testimony, the fact that Section 1201 plays an important role in the business decisions underlying 
how the market has developed has been conclusively established.  
With respect to other additional comments filed in response to the specific issues raised 
by the Request for Additional Comments, AAP, ESA, MPAA, and RIAA provide the following 
reply comments.       
1. Proposals for New Permanent Exemptions 
(a) Assistive Technologies for Use by Persons Who Are Blind, Visually 
Impaired, or Print Disabled 
The Request for Additional Comments correctly stated that “[t]he written comments and 
roundtable discussions revealed widespread support for adoption of a permanent exemption to 
facilitate access to works in electronic formats by persons who are blind, visually impaired, or 
print disabled.”  81 Fed. Reg. 66,296, 66,296 (Sept. 27, 2016).  However, while AAP, ESA, 
MPAA and RIAA support in principle that the marketplace must provide accessibility to 
copyrighted materials for the blind, visually impaired and print disabled, they do not support 
amending Section 1201 to add a permanent exemption.  Rather, they have stated, and continue to 
believe, that temporary exemptions issued through the rulemaking process are preferable to 
statutory amendments.  As was discussed at the public roundtables, the digital marketplace for 
literary works is going through changes that could result in an amelioration or disappearance of 
the concerns related to disabled read-aloud functionality.  See, e.g., May 20, 2016 Transcript at 
144-45 (statement of Mr. Williams, MSK) (“[T]here are formats in development that are going to 
roll out that will make this problem much less significant if it doesn’t go away.  There’s EPUB-3 
and HTML-5 which I understand are going to help address these issues.  And so, if that were the 
case and circumvention became unnecessary, then there wouldn’t be a need to have an 
exemption sitting in the statute when we could just renew it through the rulemaking process.”); 
id. at 154 (statement of Mr. Cazares, National Federation of the Blind) (“I agree in part with Mr. 
Williams.  I think that the forthcoming of EPUB-3 and HTML-5 are going to kind of 
revolutionize the way accessibility is approached in the mainstream.”).  Accordingly, addressing 
this issue on a triennial basis to account for such marketplace and technological realities is far 
preferable to “permanent” statutory change.
3 
This is especially true when considering the issue outside the narrow context of literary 
works.  Although there is a substantial record regarding the accessibility issue in that context, 
there is very little in the records from prior rulemaking proceedings regarding other 
entertainment products.4  There is also very little regarding such products in this docket.  By 
                                                 
3 Regardless whether in a regulatory or legislative context, the Copyright Office should not recommend 
that the current exemption requirements for remuneration to the copyright owner and compliance with the 
Chafee Amendment be deleted, as some commenters advocated.  See, e.g., Additional Comments of EFF 
at 3; Additional Comments of Authors Alliance at 3.  It is only fair that right holders be paid for copies of 
commercially available works.   
4 In 2012, the Librarian granted an exemption request addressing accessibility issues with respect to 
motion pictures and other audiovisual works.  Final Rule, 71 Fed. Reg. 65,260, 65,270 (Oct. 26, 2012) 
(allowing circumvention “accomplished solely to access the playhead and/or related time code

[PAGE 5]
 
 
 5 
 
failing to limit the Request for Additional Comments to focus on literary works, as opposed to a 
possible permanent exemption applicable to all “works in electronic formats,” the Copyright 
Office took a turn that is unsupported by any factual record.
5  The Copyright Office simply has 
no current data sufficient to justify any conclusions regarding whether accessibility issues, 
caused by access controls, exist with respect to video games, motion pictures or recorded music.  
Thus, the Copyright Office should refrain from recommending “a permanent exemption to 
facilitate access to works in electronic formats by persons who are blind, visually impaired, or 
print disabled.”  See Additional Comments of Copyright Alliance at 2 (“The legislative process 
should be driven by evidence, not speculation.”).
6   
(b) Device Unlocking 
Although AAP, ESA, MPAA and RIAA have no objection in principle to the notion that 
consumers should be able to connect their devices to the mobile wireless network(s) of their 
choosing, they do not support a permanent statutory exemption for device “unlocking.”  As 
referenced in the Request for Additional Comments (81 Fed. Reg. at 66,297), Congress recently 
considered this issue and instructed the Register and the Librarian to renew the regulatory 
exemption for unlocking rather than amending Section 1201.  See Unlocking Consumer Choice 
and Wireless Competition Act, Pub. L. No. 113-144, §§  2(c)(2), 2(d)(2), 128 Stat. 1751 (2014); 
see also 2015 Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights at 12 (“[T]he language of the 
Unlocking Act makes clear that the Register is to consider any future proposal for a cellphone 
unlocking exemption according to the usual triennial rulemaking process.”).  Nothing in this 
docket indicates that any marketplace changes have occurred that would justify reopening that 
legislative issue at this time.  The rulemaking remains the appropriate venue for presentations of 
issues on this topic.  
(c) Computer Programs 
AAP, ESA, MPAA, and RIAA are concerned that the Request for Additional Comments 
suggested that the Copyright Office would consider recommending that Congress create 
                                                                                                                                                             
information embedded in copies of such works and solely for the purpose of conducting research and 
development for the purpose of creating players capable of rendering visual representations of the audible 
portions of such works and/or audible representations or descriptions of the visual portions of such works 
to enable an individual who is blind, visually impaired, deaf, or hard of hearing, and who has lawfully 
obtained a copy of such a work, to perceive the work; provided however, that the resulting player does not 
require circumvention of technological measures to operate.”).  However, no petition for renewal of the 
exemption was filed during the 2015 proceeding, indicating that the marketplace is addressing whatever 
concerns previously existed. 
5 Library Copyright Alliance, in its Additional Comments (at page 3) also proposed expanding the 
exemption applicable to literary works to encompass musical works without submitting an explanation as 
to why or any evidence of any problems related to the enjoyment of musical works.  The Office should 
reject this proposal.  
6 Some commenters suggested that the Marrakesh Treaty provides justification for amending Section 
1201.  See, e.g., Additional Comments of Authors Alliance at 2.  Given there is no evidence that 
technological protection measures are preventing the visually impaired from accessing works other than 
literary works, the continued existence of the exemption for that class of works already satisfies the 
United States’ obligations under the Marrakesh Treaty.

[PAGE 6]
 
 
 6 
 
statutory exemptions with broad language allowing for circumvention “for engaging in any 
lawful modification of a computer program” including “uses permitted under section 117(a) 
and/or the fair use doctrine.”  This type of broad-brush approach was rejected by Congress when 
the DMCA was drafted because creating such vaguely-defined exemptions without specific 
instructions regarding precisely what types of conduct are allowed by them is a recipe for misuse 
and confusion.  The rulemaking process is preferable to legislation because (among other 
reasons) the Copyright Office can craft those specific instructions to address specific, 
demonstrated circumstances. 
 As the Copyright Office is well aware, one person’s notion of fair use is another person’s 
infringement.  Prior rulemaking proceedings are replete with examples of exemption proponents 
maintaining that conduct considered blatantly infringing by copyright owners is unquestionably 
fair use.  See, e.g., 2015 Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights at 119-23 (Register’s 
rejection of Public Knowledge’s position that space-shifting movies is a fair use).  Similarly, 
exemption proponents have often advocated for an expansive interpretation of Section 117 that is 
unsupported by the majority of the case law.  A statutory provision that authorized 
circumvention to access and modify computer programs for all lawful purposes would generate 
widespread mistakes regarding when circumvention is permissible.
7  Indeed, while “maintenance 
and repair” can be tied to Section 117 activity, going beyond that to cover all “modifications” or 
“customizations” or efforts to “improve the functionality” of computer programs would invite 
the creation of infringing derivative works.     
  The harmful impact of those mistakes (and of outright abuses of any newly created 
statutory exemption) would not be adequately “mitigated by conditioning the exemption on the 
circumventing party not engaging in any unauthorized use of a copyrighted work other than the 
accessed computer program, or by limiting the exemption to computer programs that are ‘not a 
conduit to protectable expression’ – i.e., those that do ‘not in turn create any protected 
expression’ when executed.”  81 Fed. Reg. at 66,297 (citing Lexmark Int’l, Inc. v. Static Control 
Components, Inc., 387 F.3d 522, 548 (6th Cir. 2004)).  Although exemptions containing such 
limiting criteria are preferable to unbounded exemptions that do not prohibit unauthorized use of 
expressive works and that permit unauthorized access to expressive works, these limitations 
would not sufficiently confine the contemplated exemption to circumstances where 
circumvention presents no threat to legitimate copyright interests.  For example, manufacturers 
of video game consoles use access controls to prevent piracy not only by restricting access to 
computer programs that render video games perceptible, but also by restricting access to the 
software that operates the consoles and authenticates games.  Circumvention of such access 
                                                 
7 For this reason, the Copyright Office should decline to follow the advice of commenters who expressed 
support for “an exemption to explicitly permit circumvention undertaken to make non-infringing 
adaptations,” or similar language.  See Additional Comments of EFF at 4; see also Additional Comments 
of Public Knowledge at 3, Additional Comments of CDT at 3.  EFF has it exactly backwards when it 
states that “[t]he benefit with that statutory language is that it links the application of Section 1201 
directly to the well-developed limitations and defenses to copyright infringement, including fair use, 
without attempting to recapitulate or paraphrase those limitations within Section 1201, which would raise 
the possibility of inconsistent application.”  Additional Comments of EFF at 4.  Exemptions that do not 
set forth the precise factual circumstances within which they apply create a much higher risk of  
inconsistent application than exemptions that include detailed criteria for judges to apply.

[PAGE 7]
 
 
 7 
 
controls leads to play of pirated games.8  Moreover, the Nintendo Co. Ltd. v. Playables Ltd., case 
from the United Kingdom, which the Copyright Office cited in the Request for Additional 
Comments (id.), exemplifies how plaintiffs operating in a legal system that does not uniformly 
prohibit circumvention of access controls applicable to computer programs face additional, 
unnecessary hurdles in litigation against pirate enterprises.    
AAP, ESA, MPAA, and RIAA also are skeptical that limiting a statutory exemption “to 
computer programs in particular categories of devices” would mitigate “concerns over enabling 
unauthorized uses.”  Id.  That said, of course an exemption that excluded from its scope 
computer programs resident on all devices used to view or listen to sound recordings, movies, 
television shows, literary works and video games would be preferable to one that does not 
contain such exclusions.  Nevertheless, any such exemption should be considered in the context 
of the rulemaking, not recommended as a legislative amendment.    
(d) Obsolete Technologies 
While it is true, as the Request for Additional Comments states, that “[i]n prior 
rulemakings, the Copyright Office and the Librarian of Congress have considered multiple 
petitions to permit circumvention of an access control mechanism protecting against a given 
class of works that fails to permit access because of malfunction, damage, or obsoleteness,” 81 
Fed. Reg. at 66,297, there has been no consistency with respect to the petitions submitted, the 
exemptions granted, or the perceived problems articulated by proponents that would be 
comparable to other issues, like access to e-books by the visually impaired or device unlocking.  
In fact, at the conclusion of the last two proceedings, no exemption specifically referencing 
malfunction, damage or obsoleteness was adopted.  Although an exemption was granted in 2015, 
for the first time, for accessing video games where authentication servers were no longer 
supported – an exemption which the Joint Creators and Copyright Owners opposed
9 and 
continue to oppose – that exemption addressed a specific market sector and includes several 
limitations on its exercise.10  Given that the issues that have been raised during some cycles 
related to obsolete access controls have varied, and that no petitions have been filed on this topic 
during other cycles, it is more appropriate for the Copyright Office to continue to review issues 
as they arise in the course of the triennial proceedings rather than recommending legislation.  
                                                 
8 For this reason, the Owners Rights Initiative is incorrect (Additional Comments at 2) when it argues that 
“circumvention of access controls on programs embedded in hardware are far removed from the 
protection of creative expression that Section 1201 was intended to address.”   
9 In the 2015 cycle, ESA, MPAA, and RIAA comprised the Joint Creators and Copyright Owners. 
10 Library Copyright Alliance, in its Additional Comments, (at page 3) asserted that this exemption has 
“caused copyright owners no harm,” despite the fact that it only recently went into effect and there has 
been insufficient time for evidence of harm to be collected.  There is a risk of harm posed by the existence 
of the exemption, as the Joint Creators and Copyright Owners explained during the rulemaking 
proceeding.  Nor should the Copyright Office recommend an exemption that would allow for 
circumvention for the purpose of creating or operating “emulators,” (Additional Comments of Software 
Preservation Network at 2) which are often used to set up unauthorized gaming platforms used to engage 
in unlawful uses of games.

[PAGE 8]
 
 
 8 
 
Certainly, nothing submitted in this docket would justify recommendation of a broad exemption 
applicable to all malfunctioning, damaged or obsolete access controls.11        
(e) International Considerations 
While there are trade and treaty obligations that could come into play if the Copyright 
Office decides to recommend any of the legislative changes it discussed in the Request for 
Additional Comment, the focus at this point should not be on whether any of the proposals 
would violate existing agreements.  Rather, in considering whether proposals are sound as a 
policy matter, the Copyright Office should focus on the fact that these obligations reflect a broad 
international consensus about the importance of effective protection of intellectual property to 
our economy (as well as to the economies of our trading partners), which includes effective 
measures against circumvention of technological protection measures and trafficking in 
circumvention devices.  Thus, U.S. trade obligations are governed by the trade negotiating 
objectives established by Congress, which reflect U.S. economic, social and cultural interests.
12  
In short, our trade “obligations” are not imposed on the U.S. by other parties, but are a mutual 
acknowledgement of a set of international norms and baseline protections for creativity and 
innovation that reflect a standard of protection similar to that found in United States law.
13  
A departure from these, whether at the international level or domestically, would 
undermine U.S. interests, and depart from the common views of policymakers around the globe 
about how to expand commercial opportunities for creators and innovators.  Now that we have 
reached a consensus with many of our trading partners regarding these international norms and 
baseline protections, it would be counterproductive to reverse course and seek to weaken 
protections for access controls and copy controls.  The adoption of very similar approaches 
around the world to protecting technological measures demonstrates that the approach taken by 
the United States is robust enough to stand the test of time. 
Although several proponents of legislative amendments appear eager to push the United 
States into reopening negotiations regarding trade agreements (see, e.g., Additional Comments of 
the Library Copyright Alliance at 3; Additional Comments of Owners Rights Initiative at 3), 
there is no justification for doing so.  The triennial rulemaking proceeding is already specifically 
permitted by our treaties and trade agreements and is more than sufficient for addressing any 
perceived problems with the prohibition on circumvention of access controls.  
                                                 
11 There is also insufficient evidence in the docket to support the broader permanent exemption requested 
by the Society of American Archivists, (at page 3 of their Additional Comments) which would cover 
“original works of authorship fixed in a digital medium of expression that are currently in the collection 
of a library or archives of the type described by clause (2) of subsection (a) of 17 USC § 108 when 
circumvention is accomplished for the sole purpose of managing, maintaining and preserving its 
collection pursuant to 17 USC § 107 and 108.”  This proposal for what amounts to an expansive 
exemption for “all fair uses by libraries and archives” would be prone to misinterpretation and confusion, 
especially considering ongoing litigation surrounding what types of copying by libraries qualify as fair 
use.  See, e.g., Cambridge University Press v. Patton, 769 F.3d 1232 (11th Cir. 2014) (now on appeal 
again after remand and decision).   
12 See Bipartisan Congressional Trade Priorities and Accountability Act of 2015, section 102(b)(5), 19 
U.S.C. § 4201(b)(5) (2015). 
13 See id. at 19 U.S.C. § 4201(b)(5)(A)(i)(II).

[PAGE 9]
 
 
 9 
 
2. Proposed Amendments to Existing Permanent Exemptions 
The DMCA – including the provisions codified in 17 U.S.C. Sections 1201 and 512 – 
embodies a compromise negotiated at length among all stakeholders, including creators and 
copyright owners, Internet service and website providers, consumer electronics companies, 
libraries, and organizations representing the interests of consumers.  This compromise included 
securing adequate prohibitions against undermining the integrity of technological protection 
measures and incentives for service provider cooperation in dealing with the proliferation of 
infringing material online in exchange for limitations on liability for service providers and the 
creation of a regulatory process by which consumers, libraries and others could propose new, 
temporary exemptions to the anti-circumvention prohibitions.  As changes to existing statutory 
provisions are considered, we urge the Register – and Congress – to be mindful of this bigger 
picture when considering how any changes to portions of Section 1201 would affect the delicate 
balance that the DMCA represents.  With respect to the permanent exemptions included in 
Section 1201 in particular, these exemptions reflect the outcome of careful, complex, and 
consensus-oriented negotiations among affected parties.  Given the significance and technical 
nature of the issues raised, and the potential impact of changes on the affected industry sectors, 
modifications to these statutory exemptions, if any, should reflect a similar consensus. 
(a) Adoption of Regulatory Security Research Exemption    
At the conclusion of the 2015 rulemaking proceeding, AAP, ESA, MPAA and RIAA 
were surprised and disappointed to see that the exemption granted for security research was 
drafted to apply to “a device or machine primarily designed for use by individual consumers.”  
As noted in the Additional Comments of DVD CCA and AACS LA, at 4-5, the record before the 
Copyright Office at that time had focused on cars, medical devices, and voting machines, not on 
devices used by consumers to view and listen to expressive works.  Thus, the exemption should 
have been tailored accordingly.  The fact that it was not renders it a poor candidate for 
recommendation as a permanent legislative amendment to the statute. 
Moreover, prior exemptions granted by the Librarian related to security research targeted 
specific types of works after actual marketplace occurrences indicated that access controls 
protecting such works might themselves be creating security vulnerabilities.  See, e.g., Final 
Rule, 71 Fed. Reg. 68,472 (Nov. 27, 2006) (announcing exemption related to sound recordings 
and access controls causing security vulnerabilities).  Once those circumstances changed, these 
exemptions were not renewed.  That is exactly how the rulemaking process is supposed to work 
and why it is superior to legislation.   
Another reason that continuing to consider these issues in the context of the rulemaking is 
preferable is that the additional comments filed in this docket indicate that the proponents of a 
new security research exemption do not consider the exemption granted in 2015 to be sufficient.  
See, e.g., Additional Comments of Electronic Frontier Foundation (“EFF”) at 6; Additional 
Comments of CDT at 4; Additional Comments of Rapid7, Bugcrowd, HackerOne, and Luta 
Security at 5.  Indeed, one of them is suing the Librarian and the Copyright Office alleging just 
that.  See Green v. U.S. Dept. of Justice, et al., Case No. 16-civ-01492 (D.D.C. filed July 21,

[PAGE 10]
 
 
 10 
 
2016).14  Despite the fact that the Copyright Office carefully considered the issues and granted a 
(rather broad) exemption that is limited in commonsense ways to prevent abuse, these 
proponents would no doubt return in the next triennial proceeding to request broader exemptions 
– even if the language recently adopted by the Copyright Office were codified by statute.  Thus 
the time and effort involved in pursuing legislation in this area would be wasted.  Cf. Additional 
Comments of Public Knowledge at 2 (insisting on an exemption permitting all circumvention 
unless committed with intent to infringe:  “A too narrow exemption would result in the intended 
beneficiaries having to avail themselves of the triennial exemption process anyway, rendering 
pointless the entire exercise of implementing new permanent exemptions.”).   
 (b) Revisions to 1201(j)(1) 
AAP, ESA, MPAA, and RIAA oppose eliminating the statutory requirement that security 
testing be undertaken “with the authorization of the owner or operator of [the] computer, 
computer system, or computer network.”  17 U.S.C. § 1201(j)(1).  Doing so would appear to 
authorize surreptitious invasions into the computers and networks of consumers, businesses and 
other organizations for the purported purpose of protecting them from security vulnerabilities.  
As the Conference Report on the DMCA noted, no one has the right to inspect the security of the 
locks on someone else’s house.  See H.R. Rep. No. 105-796, 105th Cong. 2d Sess., at 67 (Oct. 8, 
1998).  At a time where harmful data breaches and attacks on internet infrastructure occur daily, 
hackers should not be given an additional broad defense to invoke when their invasive conduct is 
identified.  See Additional Comments of BSA – The Software Alliance at 3; Additional 
Comments of SIIA at 3; see also Major Cyber Attack Disrupts Internet Service Across Europe 
and US, The Guardian, Oct. 21, 2016.  Although core copyright concerns are at the heart of 
Section 1201, the statute should not ignore the very real threats posed by malicious hacking.  
Moreover, while good faith, responsible security research, conducted by trained and careful 
researchers, should be encouraged, the Copyright Office and Congress should not assume that 
every person who fancies him or herself a “security researcher” will be able to avoid creating 
more vulnerabilities than they discover.      
 (c) Revisions to 1201(j)(3) 
17 U.S.C. § 1201(j)(3) merely provides non-exhaustive factors for courts to consider 
when presented with a security testing defense to a Section 1201 claim.  There is no reason to 
delete these commonsense factors.
15 
                                                 
14 Professor Matthew Green, the chief proponent of a security testing exemption in the 2015 rulemaking 
proceeding, is the named Plaintiff in the suit, which is part of a wide-ranging effort by his attorneys at the 
Electronic Frontier Foundation aimed at rendering all digital rights management technologies impotent.  
See Cory Doctorow, EFF is Suing the US Government to Invalidate the DMCA’s DRM Provisions, Boing 
Boing, July 21, 2016 (“With this lawsuit, the EFF has fired a starter pistol in the race to repeal section 
1201 of the DMCA and its cousins all over the world.”).  
15 If the Copyright Office is concerned that good-faith research is being chilled by the existence of these 
factors, perhaps “the Office could pursue administrative clarification by issuing guidance as to the 
Office’s interpretation of the meaning and appropriate application of those factors.”  Additional 
Comments of CDT at 6.  As CDT stated, such guidance is preferable to legislation that, in CDT’s view, 
“would not fully address 1201(j)’s uncertainties.”  Id.

[PAGE 11]
 
 
 11 
 
The first factor states that courts should consider whether “the information derived from 
the security testing was used solely to promote the security of the owner or operator of [a] 
computer, computer system or computer network…”  This language appropriately cautions 
courts that defendants should not be allowed to prevail on a security testing defense when they 
engage in such testing while simultaneously engaging in some other nefarious or unrelated 
activity.  See, e.g., Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Reimerdes, 111 F. Supp. 2d 294, 319-322 
(S.D.N.Y. 2000). 
The second factor is even more benign.  It simply instructs courts to consider “whether 
the information derived from the security testing was used or maintained in a manner that does 
not facilitate copyright infringement under this title or a violation of applicable law other than 
this section, including a violation of privacy or breach of security.”  AAP, ESA, MPAA, and 
RIAA cannot discern any reason to consider deletion of this language, which is obviously 
intended to prevent bad actors from enabling infringement or obtaining unauthorized access to 
computers and systems belonging to others under the guise of security testing.   
 (d) Revisions to 1201(g) 
Like Section 1201(j), 1201(g) includes commonsense limitations on persons planning to 
engage in encryption research, to minimize potential abuse of the exemption.  None of these 
limitations should be deleted. 
First, the statute requires that “the person lawfully obtained the encrypted copy, 
phonorecord, performance, or display of the published work.”  Under no circumstances should 
people be allowed to obtain copies of works unlawfully in order to engage in encryption 
research.   
Second, the statute requires that the “act [of circumvention] is necessary to conduct such 
encryption research.”  Given that the point of the defense created by 1201(g) is to enable 
encryption research, there is no reason to allow encryption researchers to engage in 
circumvention where it is unnecessary for them to do so to conduct their research. 
Third, the statute requires that “the person made a good faith effort to obtain 
authorization before the circumvention.”  It is important to note that this provision does not state 
that where such permission is not obtained the researcher must cease and desist her research.  All 
that is required is a good faith effort to obtain permission.  Given that organizations such as a 
DVD CCA and AACS LA have stated in this docket that they stand ready and willing to 
consider requests from researchers for licenses to engage in circumvention to conduct encryption 
research (Additional Comments at 6), it is difficult to understand why researchers should not at 
least attempt to collaborate with such groups before moving ahead with research. 
Fourth, the statute requires that “such act does not constitute infringement under this title 
or a violation of applicable law other than this section, including section 1030 of title 18 …”  
Again, the legitimacy of this provision should be self-evident.  If a researcher is going to commit 
infringement or otherwise violate the law, such as by gaining unauthorized access to someone 
else’s computer, the law must not countenance that conduct.

[PAGE 12]
 
 
 12 
 
 (e) Revisions to 1201(f) 
The statutory exemption related to reverse engineering requires that circumvention be 
undertaken “for the sole purpose of identifying and analyzing those elements of the program that 
are necessary to achieve interoperability of an independently created computer program with 
other programs, and that have not previously been readily available to the person engaging in the 
circumvention, to the extent such acts of identification and analysis do not constitute 
infringement under this title.”  Congress included this language because the purpose of Section 
1201(f) was to acknowledge the Ninth Circuit’s decisions in this area without expanding the 
scope of fair use.  See Staff of House Comm. On the Judiciary, 105th Cong., Section-by-Section 
Analysis of H.R. 2281 as passed by the United States House of Representatives on August 4, 
1998, at 14 (Comm. Print 1998) (“Manager’s Report”) (“The objective is to ensure that the effect 
of current case law interpreting the Copyright Act is not changed by enactment of this legislation 
for certain acts of identification and analysis done in respect of computer programs.  See Sega 
Enterprises Ltd. v. Accolade, Inc., 977 F.2d 1510, 24 U.S.P.Q.2d 1561 (9th Cir. 1992). … [T]he 
goal of this section is to ensure that current law is not changed, and not to encourage or permit 
infringement.  Thus, each of the acts undertaken must fall within the scope of fair use…”).  The 
case law requires that intermediate copying involved in reverse engineering result in the creation 
of a new product that does not copy from the reverse engineered product.  See Sony Computer 
Entm’t, Inc. v. Connectix Corp., 203 F.3d 596, 606 (9th Cir. 2002).  By limiting the scope of the 
exemption to identification and analysis, Congress conveyed that circumvention to gain access to 
software for the purpose of copying and adapting it and including it in a new product, or merely 
for the purpose of obtaining access to a work beyond that which has been purchased or licensed, 
is not necessarily fair use.  The exemption should not imply otherwise and thus should not be 
altered.  Exemption proponents who want to circumvent for a purpose other than identification 
and analysis should make specific proposals in the context of the rulemaking.   
EFF asserts that “the flaws” with the existing reverse engineering exemption “are so 
serious that EFF is not aware of any case in which a permanent statutory exemption was held to 
protect an act of circumvention or trafficking.”  Additional Comments of EFF at 6.  But that is 
not evidence that the statute is failing.  Instead, it is evidence that EFF’s claims regarding the 
number of threats researchers face are overstated.  Good-faith researchers simply are not being 
sued under Section 1201 for reverse engineering.  That is why there are no reported cases of 
Section 1201(f) being successfully asserted.  Comments such as those submitted by Mozilla, 
which asserts without citation that we live “in a climate of high-volume litigation by copyright 
maximalists” (Additional Comments at 4) are simply not reflective of reality. 
3. Anti-Trafficking Provisions 
Several commenters urged the Copyright Office to embrace interpretations of the 
DMCA’s anti-trafficking provisions that are inconsistent with the language of the statute and its 
legislative history.  For example, The Motor & Equipment Manufacturers Association 
(“MEMA”) argued that “whether TPMs may be lawfully circumvented depends on whether 
circumvention is done at the direction of a lawful possessor of the work.  If the work is possessed 
lawfully, then fair use permits that user or his or her agent to circumvent the TPM.”  Additional 
Comments of MEMA at 7.  But, without exception, that reading of the statute has been expressly 
rejected by the courts, which have held that there is no fair use defense to a violation of Section

[PAGE 13]
 
 
 13 
 
1201.  See, e.g., Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Corley, 273 F.3d 429, 444 (2d Cir. 2001); 321 
Studios v. Metro Goldwyn Mayer Studios Inc., 307 F. Supp. 2d 1085, 1097-98 (N.D. Cal. 2004). 
Similarly, Consumer Technology Association (“CTA”) argued that “[t]he drafters of the 
DMCA did not consider it to be trafficking for a retailer to provide specific, expert assistance or 
necessary materials to a consumer, where the consumer’s right to engage in lawful activity has 
been specifically confirmed by the Librarian.”  Additional Comments of CTA at 2; see also 
Additional Comments of Institute for Scarp Recycling at 3 (“[Section 1201] should be read as 
containing an implied right … fo r third parties to assist [exemption] beneficiaries in unlocking 
devices or to unlock devices for them, as well as for third parties to make and offer tools for 
beneficiaries to use in engaging in permitted circumvention.”).  This position is contradicted by 
the plain language of 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(E), which states that no “determination made in a 
rulemaking conducted under subparagraph (C), may be used as a defense in any action to enforce 
any provision of this title other than this paragraph.”  See also Manager’s Report at 8 (“[I]t 
would not provide a defense to a claim based on the manufacture or sale of devices under 
paragraph (2) or section (b)(1), or to a copyright infringement claim.”).  The Copyright Office 
has reached this conclusion numerous times in the past.  See, e.g., Notice of Inquiry, 79 Fed. 
Reg. 55,687, 55,688 n.2 (Sept. 17, 2014).  
Nothing in CTA’s Additional Comments or anywhere else in the record justifies 
changing the Copyright Office’s position or recommending any revision to Section 1201 that 
would undermine the anti-trafficking prohibitions.
16  As multiple witnesses explained at the 
public roundtables, it is imperative that the rulemaking proceedings not result in circumvention 
devices or software being easily accessible in legitimate retail stores like Wal-Mart, Best Buy, or 
Amazon.com.  See, e.g., May 19, 2016 Transcript at 16 (statement of Mr. Zuck, The App 
Association) (“There’s still going to be people that gain access to technology.  But the 
widespread acceptability of that knowledge, that I just walk into a Best Buy, for example, and 
buy software to break encryption is I think what really has changed by the legal provisions that 
have been put in place.”); id. at 22 (statement of Mr. Dow, The Walt Disney Company) 
(“[W]hen we were in litigation with 321 Studios over CSS hacking technology, that was exactly 
the issue, that you could walk into Fry’s and Best Buy and buy consumer-friendly hacking 
technology to rip DVDs.  And the litigation that was involved there didn’t remove the ability to 
hack DVDs.  But it did take that activity and put it on the fringe while leaving a channel in the 
mainstream that helped promote the availability of new business models.”); May 25, 2016 
Transcript at 166-67 (statement of Mr. Reed, Fox Entertainment Group) (“So you can’t buy these 
                                                 
16 CTA relies on the Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act, which is inapposite.  
Although there Congress instructed the Librarian to expand exemptions related to mobile phone 
unlocking to cover circumvention by certain persons at the direction of device owners, that law (i) was 
strictly limited by Congress to apply to this narrow category of circumvention (which is unrelated to 
accessing expressive works) and (ii) does not alter the anti-trafficking provisions of 17 U.S.C. § 
1201(a)(2) or (b).  S. Rep. No. 113-212, 113th Cong., 2d Sess., at 6 (July 17, 2014) (“Unlocking a cell 
phone or other wireless device enables the device owner to connect his or her device to a wireless 
telephone network of his or her choice, and does not enable the device owner, or a third party on an 
owner’s behalf, to engage in other activities that infringe copyrighted works.”); H.R.  Rep. No. 113-356, 
113th Cong., 2d Sess., at 9 (Feb. 25, 2014) (“Nothing in this Act is intended to serve as a limitation on 
section 1201(a)(2) or section 1201(b), which remain critical to the effectiveness of Chapter 12 of Title 17 
and are in no way altered or modified by the provisions of this legislation.” ).

[PAGE 14]
 
 
 14 
 
tools as a general matter at a place like Best Buy, and so consumers think twice when they 
engage in that sort of conduct that those tools enable.  And that’s exactly, I think, the world that 
Congress envisioned when it passed the anti-trafficking provisions in the DMCA.”).  That 
undesirable scenario is exactly what would result from adopting CTA’s position.
17   
Although it is true that Sections 1201(a)(2) and 1201(b) require a plaintiff to prove that a 
device or service “is primarily designed or produced” for the purpose of circumvention, “has 
only limited commercially significant purpose or use” other than circumvention, or “is 
marketed” for use in circumvention, the “substantial non-infringing use” test used by courts in 
contributory infringement cases is not a defense to a Section 1201 claim.  EFF’s assertions 
(Additional Comments at 8) to the contrary are incorrect.  See Manager’s Report at 9 (“The Sony 
test of ‘capab[ility] of substantial non-infringing uses,’ while still operative in cases claiming 
contributory infringement of copyright, is not part of this legislation, however.”).  Moreover, 
EFF’s suggestion that the test should be whether achieving circumvention is why “[c]ustomers 
are attracted to a service,” would inevitably lead to infringement of, or unauthorized access to, 
works protected by technological protection measures, and should therefore be rejected.  As 
stated in the Additional Comments of AAP, ESA, MPAA and RIAA, very few people engage in 
circumvention for its own sake.  If a customer is attracted to a service not because she is 
interested in circumvention, but because she wants to create copies of Blu-ray Discs or play 
pirated copies of video games on a console, that service is of course prohibited by Section 1201 
(as it should be).
18    
While AAP, ESA, MPAA, and RIAA acknowledge that circumvention in the context of 
automobile repair or other forms of repair might present a unique and distinguishable set of 
circumstances, nothing in the record of this docket supports concluding that there is a need to 
amend the statutory provisions of Sections 1201(a)(2) or 1201(b) to permit additional forms of 
“third-party assistance.”  These anti-trafficking provisions are crucial to the successes the music, 
                                                 
17 CTA claims its position is supported by a floor statement made by Congressman Bliley:  “Given our 
keen interest in the development of new products, in particular digital television monitors, the Committee 
is particularly concerned that the introduction of [technological] measures not frustrate consumer 
expectations and that this legislation not be interpreted to in any way limit the authority of manufacturers 
and retailers to address the legitimate concerns of their consumers.”  Additional Comments of CTA at 3 
(citing 144 Cong. Rec. H7094 (Aug. 4, 1998)).  This statement had nothing to do with whether creating 
exemptions in the rulemaking results in limitations on the applicability of the anti-trafficking provisions.  
It instead related to Mr. Bliley’s concern that the bill should not “make it illegal for a manufacturer of a 
product or device (to which section 1201 would otherwise apply) to design or modify the product or 
device to the extent necessary to mitigate a frequently occurring and noticeable adverse effect on the 
authorized performance or display of a work that is caused in the ordinary course of its design and 
operation.”  144 Cong. Rec at H7095.  See also 17 U.S.C. § 1201(k) (Certain Analog Devices and Certain 
Technological Measures).   
18 The danger of EFF’s approach is also present in the approach proffered by iFixit.  They suggested that 
“most repair services” do not violate the anti-trafficking provisions because their primary purpose is to 
“improve the functionality of products that include software; circumvention is merely a mechanism by 
which this broader purpose must sometimes be achieved.”  Additional Comments of The Repair 
Association and iFixit at 17.  Undoubtedly, a person who wants to play pirated copies of video games on 
his console or play pirated copies of movies on his Blu-ray Disc player would consider hacks that enabled 
him to do so to “improve the functionality” of those devices.

[PAGE 15]
 
 
 15 
 
publishing, entertainment software, movie and television industries have had in the digital 
market.   
III. Conclusion 
Nothing submitted in four rounds of comments in this docket and during multiple days of 
public roundtables establishes a need to recommend legislative changes to Section 1201.  AAP, 
ESA, MPAA, and RIAA oppose any such changes.   
DATE: November 16, 2016 
Respectfully submitted: 
 
_____________________ 
Allan R. Adler 
General Counsel 
Vice President for Government Affairs 
Association of American Publishers 
455 Massachusetts Ave., NW, 7th Floor 
Washington, DC 20001 
(phone) 202-220-4544 
(email) adler@publishers.org 
 
 
_____________________ 
Stanley Pierre-Louis 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Entertainment Software Association 
601 Massachusetts Avenue NW 
Suite 300 
Washington, DC 20001 
(phone) 202-223-2400 
(email) stan@theESA.com 
 
 
_____________________ 
Benjamin S. Sheffner 
Vice President, Legal Affairs 
Motion Picture Association of America, Inc.

[PAGE 16]
 
 
 16 
 
15301 Ventura Blvd., Bldg. E 
Sherman Oaks, CA 91403 
(phone) 818- 935-5784 
(email) Ben_Sheffner@mpaa.org 
 
 
_____________________ 
Susan B. Chertkof 
Senior Vice President, Business and Legal Affairs 
Recording Industry Association of America, Inc. 
1025 F Street NW, 10th Floor 
Washington, DC 20004 
(phone) 202-775-0101 
(email) schertkof@riaa.com
