[PAGE 1]
  
         
 
October 27, 2016   
 
U.S. Copyright Office 
Docket No. 2015-8 
Section 1201 Study:   
Notice of Inquiry and Request for Additional Comments 
Comments of the Consumer Technology Association 
 
The Consumer Technology Association (CTA) applauds the Copyright Office for 
specifically requesting comments on CTA’s view, expressed in its March 3, 2016 Comments  
and an ensuing Roundtable, that supplying expert assistance and components to a user for a 
purpose ruled exempt under Section 1201(a)(1) is not and should not be considered “trafficking” 
under separate provisions of the DMCA.  Thus the Office should not have recommended a Class 
21 exemption narrower than the one advised by the Administration’s expert agency, the 
Department of Commerce.
1  CTA said in its Comments: 
 
CTA believes that the correct recommendation was that of the Department of 
Commerce, which advised the Register to recommend an exemption to make 
repairs or modifications “by or at the request of the owner of the vehicle or 
machinery.”
2    
 
CTA respectfully requests that the Office and Librarian urgently reconsider and revise the 
Class 21 outcome, and accept the Commerce Department’s recommendation.  New aftermarket 
technologies are becoming available that promise to dramatically enhance auto safety.  Sensors, 
lane change detectors and visibility enhancing devices, if installed, promise to save many of the 
30,000 lives lost every year on American highways.  It is imperative – even a moral obligation – 
that we allow these new technologies to find their way into vehicles as quickly as 
possible.  Ensuring that drivers can, if needed, avail themselves of third party assistance to install 
these revolutionary technologies is a profound and necessary social good.   
                                                 
1 Commerce Dept. Letter to the Register at 58 (emphasis added).  The Librarian’s October 28, 
2015 “Final Rule,” the October 8 Recommendations of the Register, and the Sept. 18 Letter of 
the Commerce Department to the Register on behalf of the Administration are all linked at 
http://www.copyright.gov/1201/.    
2  U.S. Copyright Office Docket No. 2015-8, Section 1201 Study: Notice of Inquiry and Request 
for Public Comment, 80 Fed.Reg. No. 249, Dec. 29, 2015, Comments of the Consumer 
Technology Association, March 3, 2016, at 1 (“CTA Comments”).

[PAGE 2]
2 
 
CTA members3 and others who offer services to consumers in the repair, replacement, 
and safety of automotive products should be free of DMCA objections that have nothing to do 
with commercial exploitation of copyrighted works.  The drafters of the DMCA did not consider 
it to be “trafficking” for a retailer to provide specific, expert assistance or necessary materials to 
a consumer, where that consumer’s right to engage in lawful activity has been specifically 
confirmed by the Librarian.  The Office erred in interpreting the Unlocking Act4 as implying by 
negative inference that the offer of expert assistance or necessary components for an exempt 
purpose constitutes “trafficking.”  That law (passed to correct a different determination by the 
Librarian) contained no such language – indeed, its legislative history cautioned against negative 
inference. 
 
The Office’s May Roundtable 
 
In the Office’s May 20, 2016 roundtable CTA’s counsel made these points in elaboration 
of CTA’s March Comments: 
 
Expert Assistance For A Lawful Purpose Is Not Trafficking. 
 
 As the Office’s roundtable moderator pointed out, the Act’s provision’s pertaining to 
trafficking are contained in DMCA sections 1201(a)(2) and 1201(b); they do not appear in 
Section 1201(a)(1).5 
 
 Any exemption to use tools, components, or advice is granted only in the context of the 
specific limitations set forth by the Librarian.  Thus, with or without expert assistance, to use 
a tool or product or receive or install a component in conformity with these limitations 
cannot be “trafficking” because it is not conduct beyond that which the Librarian has  
declared exempt under Section 1201(a)(1).6   
 
 To the extent the furnishing of tools, components, or advice may go beyond the defined 
limits of the granted exemption, it would extend beyond the safe harbor of Section 
                                                 
3 CTA is the preeminent technology trade association, promoting growth in the $285 billion U.S. 
consumer technology industry through market research, education and public policy 
representation.  CTA members lead the consumer technology industry in the development, 
manufacturing and distribution of audio, video, mobile electronics, communications, information 
technology, multimedia, and accessory products, as well as related services sold to consumers.  
A complete list of CTA members is available at https://www.cta.tech/Membership/Membership-
Directory.aspx. 
4 Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act, Pub. L. No. 113-144, 128 Stat. 
1751 (2014). 
5 U.S. Copyright Office Section 1201 Public Roundtable Transcript, May 20, 2016, at 9 (“May 
20 Transcript”). 
6 Id. at 28 – 29, 69 – 71.

[PAGE 3]
3 
 
1201(a)(1), so would not be exempt.  Any such tool, component, or assistance could still be 
successfully challenged in court as “trafficking,” irrespective of the Librarian’s exemption.  
Any court would understand that the exemption as granted by the Librarian is limited and 
conditioned.  Thus the Librarian’s action should not and would not be understood by any 
court as impairing the court’s ability to make a “trafficking” determination as appropriate 
under Sections 1201(a)(2) or 1201(b).  Accordingly, there was no reason for the Office to 
conflate Section 1201(a)(1) with these other provisions. 
 
 The legislative history cited in CTA’s March Comments, which was contemporaneous with 
and a functional part of the passage of the DMCA, clearly supports this interpretation.  In 
presenting this legislation on the House floor, the Chairman of the House Commerce 
Committee referred specifically to the “authority of manufacturers and retailers to address 
the legitimate concerns of their customers.”7 The only sensible interpretation of this and 
similar statements made in presenting the legislation to the full House is that aftermarket 
assistance to consumers for a lawful purpose should not be assumed to be “trafficking.” 
 
 If there were any public policy basis with respect to safety or the environment for such 
assistance to be nevertheless forbidden as “trafficking,” it would have been the responsibility 
of the Administration, through the Department of Commerce, to provide such basis.  Instead, 
the Commerce Department, through NTIA’s analysis and guidance, affirmatively 
recommended that the exemption should include modifications and installations “by or at the 
request” of the user.  The Office could and should have accepted this guidance. 
In the same Roundtable it was also asserted by expert commentators: 
 
 The automotive context in which expert assistance, components, and tools are provided is 
non-expressive.8 
 
 Any software involved is essentially functional.9 
 
 Any vehicle software that is accessed or modified is likely to have been purchased by the 
consumer along with the vehicle.10 
 
 The context in which attachment of third party components has been challenged has been the 
avoidance of competition, rather than the protection of expression or rights in intellectual 
property.
11  Such attempts to suppress competition are not aimed at “trafficking.”  Rather, 
                                                 
7 144 Cong. Rec. H7094 – 7095 at 7094 (Aug. 4, 1998), Remarks of Rep. Bliley (emph. added) 
(“Bliley”).  
8 May 20 Transcript at 17, 26 – 27, 39 - 41, 45. 
9 Id. at 11, 20, 23, 25 - 27, 30, 39 - 41, 45, 55 – 59, 74 – 75. 
10 Id.  at 26. 
11 Id.  at 26, 58 – 59, 175 - 176

[PAGE 4]
4 
 
they constitute conduct labeled by leading members of the House Judiciary Committee in its 
2014 oversight review as abuse.12 
 
The Unlocking Act Neither Says Nor Implies That Lawful Expert Assistance Is 
Trafficking. 
 
 Members of Congress, in reviewing the Librarian’s historical dealing with phone unlocking, 
were well aware that a consumer’s ability to unlock a phone depended on expert assistance.  
The Librarian had not cautioned against such assistance in previously granting unlocking 
exemptions.13   
 
 The Congress, in undertaking to reverse the Librarian’s failure to grant the phone exemption 
in the previous round, was simply reversing one action of the Librarian.  That the Act also 
clarified that lawful unlocking may include expert assistance was no more significant than 
had been the unstated assumption, in previous rounds, that such assistance could and would 
be rendered, because otherwise phone unlocking would not have been possible.14   
 
 There is nothing in the law or the legislative history to suggest that Congress intended any 
negative inference about necessary assistance in any other context or with respect to any 
other determination by the Librarian.15   
 
 The Administration supported the Unlocking Act and the President signed it into law.  Yet 
the Administration, through the Commerce Department, thereafter recommended that the 
Class 21 exemption should include work and installations performed at the request of the 
user.  Thus the negative inference seen by the Office was seen by no other responsible 
agency of government and lacked any foundation.16 
 
The DMCA Drafters Recognized The Importance of Aftermarket Interoperability. 
 
In presenting the DMCA on the floor of the House, Commerce Committee Chairman 
Bliley emphasized that the Act was not meant to restrict interoperability in a post-sale, 
aftermarket environment.  He specifically cautioned that the DMCA should not be interpreted as 
unduly restricting the ability of retailers and servicers to maintain or enhance the performance of 
the devices for which consumers pay: 
 
[T]he Committee is particularly concerned that the introduction of such measures 
not frustrate consumer expectations and that this legislation not be interpreted to 
in any way limit the authority of manufacturers and retailers to address the 
                                                 
12 See Class 11 Comments of Gazelle and eBay, Feb. 6, 2015, and Class 21 Reply Comments of 
Consumer Electronics Association, May 1, 2015. 
13 May 20 Transcript at 31 – 33, 41 
14 Id. 
15 Id. 
16 Id.

[PAGE 5]
5 
 
legitimate concerns of their customers. *** As advances in technology occur, 
consumers will enjoy additional benefits if devices are able to interact and share 
information. Achieving interoperability in the consumer electronics environment 
will be a critical factor in the growth of electronic commerce. In our view, 
manufacturers, consumers, retailers, and servicers should not be prevented from 
correcting an interoperability problem resulting from a protection measure 
causing one or more devices in the home or in a business to fail to interoperate 
with other technologies.17 
The Unlocking Act Drafters Recognized The Importance of Interoperability Generally. 
 
In the legislative history discussion of the Unlocking Act it was noted that servicer 
assistance in aid of interoperability was essential for many consumers.18 Yet when prior phone 
unlocking exemptions were granted there had been no public or congressional concern expressed 
that specific permission for such assistance was necessary and had been withheld.  Hence, there 
was no basis for the Office to assume that Congress, in specifying a right to such assistance, was 
under the impression that prior grants had excluded such a right.  Indeed, in reporting out the 
final version19 of the bill that reversed the Librarian’s denial, the Senate Judiciary Committee 
was emphatic that it intended no positive or negative inference with respect to the Librarian’s 
authority in other exemption proceedings: 
 
While there are larger ongoing debates about the scope and application of Section 
1201 of the DMCA, as well as other aspects of phone unlocking, those issues are 
not addressed by the legislation, which makes no changes to Section 1201 of the 
DMCA. The bill respects the independence of the Library of Congress under 
existing law to conduct the triennial rulemakings set forth in Section 1201(a)(1) 
and does not alter the authority of the Librarian in future rulemakings.
20 
 
Given the explicit intent of the DMCA’s drafters that it should not be read to impair user 
interoperability for lawful purposes, or to impair the Librarian in granting exemptions, the 
Unlocking Act could not and did not pose any barrier to the Librarian’s following the 
Administration’s specific advice to include a right to assistance in its Class 21 exemption, as it 
did for Class 11.  To the extent the Unlocking Act is relevant to autos it should have been 
understood by the Office as furthering the rights of users generally, rather than constraining 
them.  The only caution and constraint cited by the drafters of the Unlocking Act was that the 
assistance must be rendered be for purposes of interoperability:  
 
                                                 
17 144 Cong. Rec. H7094 – 7095 at 7094 (Aug. 4, 1998), Remarks of Rep. Bliley (emph. added) 
(“Bliley”).  
18 See Senate Report No. 113-212 (Comm. On the Judiciary) at 4, 6 (“Senate Unlocking Act 
Report”). 
19 See 160 Cong. Rec. S4510 – 11 (2014) and 160 Cong. Rec. H6835-36. 
20 Senate Unlocking Act Report at 5.

[PAGE 6]
6 
 
[N]othing in the bill permits third parties to unlock devices independently of the 
device owner’s direction, or for a purpose other than allowing the owner or a 
family member to connect to a new wireless network.21 *** Unlike many other 
situations where an exemption from the circumvention prohibition may be sought 
or granted, unlocking a cell phone to connect to a wireless network typically does 
not facilitate copyright infringement.22 
 
These observations apply identically in the case of consumers who own automobiles and 
wish to maintain or update their performance.  The rationale for the Unlocking Act simply 
recapitulates the rationale of the DMCA drafters in assuring that the DMCA would not impair 
device interoperability.  The Unlocking Act should have been viewed by the Librarian as an 
additional reason to specifically approve assistance to users of owned devices who receive 
exemptions, not one for denying the necessary assistance.  
 
The Office Should Revisit Its Recommendation And Should Support Clarifying Legislation 
 
Although CTA believes that the Office and the Librarian should revisit and modify the 
Class 21 outcome now, CTA also renews its legislative recommendations as provided in CTA’s 
March 3, 2016 Comments:   
 
 The scope of Section 1201 should be clarified to protect only access to and copying of 
expressive works. 
 
 Functional access to a work embedded in a product that the user owns should be clearly 
lawful. 
 
 Expert assistance and component enhancements in aid of repair, upgrade, or interoperability 
should not be regarded as “trafficking.” 
 
CTA appreciates this opportunity to provide its views. 
 Respectfully submitted,  
 
 
  
 Michael E. Petricone 
 Senior Vice President 
      G o v e r n m e n t  A f f a i r s  
                                                 
21 Senate Unlocking Act Report at 4.   
22 Id. at 6 (emph. Added)
