[PAGE 1]
IN THE UNITED STATES COPYRIGHT OFFICE
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS
In re:
Section 1201 Study: Notice and Request
for Public Comment
Docket No. 2015-8
80 Fed. Reg. 81369
81 Fed. Reg. 8545 (Extension)
COMMENTS OF CHARLES DUAN
The following comments are respectfully submitted in response to the Notice dated
December29,2015,forwhichanextensionofthecommentperiodwaspublishedFebruary
19, 2016. The commenter is an attorney with the organization Public Knowledge. That
organization is submitting comments in this proceeding as well; the present papers are
filed in the commenter’s personal capacity.
TheNoticeseekscommentsproviding“anyinsightsorobservationsregardingtherole
andeffectivenessoftheprohibitiononcircumventionoftechnologicalmeasuresinsection
1201(a).” The following comment responds through a short, pertinent work of speculative
fiction.
Section1201,atbottom,askshowenforcementofcopyrightwillinfluencethedevelop-
ment and use of technology. While technological developments offer new opportunities
for creativity and free expression, advancements in technology can also lock down that
creative process. Striking a balance between the interests of copyright owners and mem-
bers of the public is the essence of any proper reading of section 1201.
To understand this interplay among technology, creativity, and law, the many factual
and analytical comments submitted in this proceeding provide extensive insights into
that complex, nuanced problem. But there has always been another way to understand
the complexities and nuances of the world: through the device of creative fiction.

[PAGE 2]
Though obviously not based in fact, fiction has been incredibly important in teaching
truths. WorkslikeHarrietBeecherStowe’s Uncle Tom’s Cabin,UptonSinclair’s The Jungle,
and George Orwell’s1984 have all put forth critical perspectives on important questions
of law and policy. Those fictional works made difficult issues of their respective times
tangible in a way that no legal document can.
To that end, the following submission is a short story of speculative fiction that deals
with the exact question that the Copyright Office considers today with section 1201: how
should the protection of copyright interests proceed in the face of new technologies that
might be used to stop infringement? The story was published on the popular website
Boing Boingand was favorably reviewed by well-known writers.
I hope that this story bears interest to those in the Copyright Office who share both
a love for creative works and a desire to make good policy in a changing technological
environment. I am grateful for the opportunity to submit these comments, and am happy
to provide any further information that would be helpful to this proceeding.
Respectfully submitted,
Charles Duan
1818 N Street NW, Suite 410
Washington, DC 20036
2

[PAGE 3]
STOP THE MUSIC
by Charles Duan
Originally published onBoing Boing, July 28, 2015
This is a work of fiction. Any resemblance to actual persons or events is purely coincidental.
I.
In the District Court for the Central District of California
Eugene L. Whitman v. Alfred Vail Enterprises, Inc.
Complaint for Copyright Infringement
February 18, 2044
Comes now plaintiff, Eugene L. Whitman, by and through his attorneys, and bringing
a complaint against Alfred Vail Enterprises, Inc., states:
1. Plaintiff Whitman is a songwriter and composer of the popular song “Taking It
Back.”
2. OnJanuary14, 2044, DefendantVailEnterprisesfirstdistributedthenow-hitsong
“Straight Focus.”
3. “Straight Focus” includes an eight-note sample from “Taking It Back.” Vail Enter-
prises accordingly infringed Whitman’s copyright by making an unauthorized derivative
work.
Wherefore, Whitman prays for judgment against Vail Enterprises as follows:
A. A permanent injunction prohibiting Vail Enterprises from continuing to infringe
Whitman’s copyright;
B. Destruction of all copies of “Straight Focus” in Vail Enterprises’ possession; and
C. An order requiring Vail Enterprises to erase the song “Straight Focus” from the
memories of all persons residing in the United States.
3

[PAGE 4]
II.
In the District Court for the Central District of California
Eugene L. Whitman v. Alfred Vail Enterprises, Inc.
Answer of Alfred Vail Enterprises, Inc.
February 25, 2044
Defendant Alfred Vail Enterprises, Inc., answers the Complaint of Plaintiff Eugene L.
Whitman as follows:
1. Vail Enterprises is a corporation of the State of Delaware, with headquarters in
Los Angeles, California, and is wholly owned by Alfred Vail.
2. After a long and successful career in the neurobioengineering industry, Mr. Vail
decided to enter the field of music. His first composition, “Straight Focus,” was a unique
and innovative work of music, reviewed by critics as “the sound of a new technological
century” and “a breakthrough piece at the intersection of brain science and art.”
3. Besides being a critical success, “Straight Focus” was a multinational hit. It was
viewed on video sharing sites over 350 million times within a month of its release. But
more indicative of its popularity are the appreciation videos, remixes, and cover versions
that its fans have made.
4. Mr.Vailwrote“StraightFocus”inmemoryofhisdaughter, SarahVail, whopassed
away as a teenager due to complications of leukemia last year. The piece is made up of
fifty of Ms. Vail’s favorite musical works, which Mr. Vail arranged using his creativity and
experience in neurological science to produce an unexpectedly emotionaltour de forceof
sound. One of those works was the Plaintiff’s piece “Taking It Back.”
5. The included portion of “Taking It Back” in “Straight Focus” was minimal, and
it has not diminished the value of the former piece. Indeed, the popularity of Mr. Vail’s
compositionhassparkedsignificantinterestandincreasedsalesinallofthesourcepieces.
Accordingly, Mr. Vail’s use of a small portion of “Taking It Back” is not copyright infringe-
ment, or, at a minimum, is fair use under 17 U.S.C. § 107.
4

[PAGE 5]
6. Furthermore, Plaintiff Whitman’s proposed remedy of erasing all memory of
“Straight Focus” from people’s minds is unprecedented and absurd. No court has ever
ordered or authorized a total memory erasure on the public in a copyright case, and it
should not be ordered or authorized here.
III.
In the District Court for the Central District of California
Eugene L. Whitman v. Alfred Vail Enterprises, Inc.
Opinion and Order on Memory Erasure
June 20, 2044
Opinion of Benson, District Judge.
ThetrialjuryfoundthatDefendantVailEnterpriseshadinfringedPlaintiffWhitman’s
copyright. Plaintiff now seeks from this Court an order to compel Vail Enterprises to
eraseallmemoriesoftheinfringingsong“StraightFocus”fromthemindsofeveryperson
residing in the United States, using the National MemSweep system.
This is a highly unusual and unprecedented form of relief that Whitman seeks, and so
some background on the system is in order.
The National MemSweep system developed out of the MemSweep technology in-
vented by Alfred Vail in 2028. Prior advances in neuroscience had revealed that human
memories could be altered or erased by agitation of brain cells, but those procedures were
invasive and risky, accordingly only being used in particularly unusual situations of men-
tal illness such as post-traumatic stress disorder.
Vail discovered that certain rapidly fluctuating low-frequency sound waves could be
used to perform the same brain cell agitation, thereby allowing for erasure of memories
safely, and noninvasively, and with a great deal of precision as to time and subject matter
of the memories. The resulting technology, which he called MemSweep, was offered as
a consumer-level service, often to erase memories of embarrassing events, ex-lovers, and
traumatic situations.
5

[PAGE 6]
The consumer service unexpectedly became a national security defense, at the time of
the August 2039 terrorist attacks on the United States. The Central Intelligence Agency
had intercepted an encrypted communication detailing a plot for multiple simultaneous
bombings on several major cities. The CIA knew the attack would happen within a week,
but otherwise could not decrypt the messages to identify the details of the plan. With
time running out, the CIA in a last-ditch effort procured thousands of large, high-fidelity
speakersystems,distributedthemaroundcities,andloudlyplayedMemSweeprecordings
designed to erase memories of all conversations held during the time of the intercepted
messages.
The results were striking: San Francisco and Washington, D.C., where MemSweep
was deployed, saw not a single bombing, while New York City, where MemSweep was
not deployed in time, was devastated.
Following those attacks, the country moved quickly to deploy MemSweep on a na-
tional scale. The resulting array, known as the National MemSweep system, covers every
square inch and every person of the United States, and can ensure total erasure of an idea
from the populace. The system has been used infrequently but occasionally, and under
strict judicial supervision, to foil terrorist plots and avert crimes, to great success, and the
CIA and military have investigated applications as well.
But the National MemSweep system has never been used to vindicate a private party.
Itsofarhasonlybeenactivatedtoremoveideasofcrimesorpublicdangers. SoWhitman’s
request to use the system to remove memory of a song is truly unexpected. This Court
has not a single prior decision or precedent to stand upon.
As an initial matter, an order for a party to use the National MemSweep system would
almost never be appropriate, since this Court can only order a party to do something that
the partycan do, and operating National MemSweep is not something that most people
can do. But Defendant here is an unusual exception, because Vail Enterprises owns the
system. The Alfred Vail who invented MemSweep went on to found Vail Enterprises,
6

[PAGE 7]
which financed and built National MemSweep, and continues to own it. Thus, an order to
use the system could actually be issued against him.
Whitman contends that 17 U.S.C. § 503(b) permits this Court to order Vail Enterprises
to perform a memory erasure of the song. That law says that this Court “may order the
destruction. . . ofall copies or phonorecordsfound to havebeenmade or used in violation
of the copyright owner’s exclusive rights.” Because the neurons storing memories of the
song constitute “copies or phonorecords,” Whitman argues, this Court has the power to
order Vail Enterprises to conduct the “destruction” of such copies by erasing memories.
I am sympathetic to Whitman’s position. Whitman is clearly very protective of his
musical works, refusing to allow anyone else to make derivative works or alterations
of them, out of his personal desire to ensure that his music remain “untainted.” He is
allowed to do that, as copyright owner. I have already ordered Vail Enterprises to destroy
all physical copies of the infringing song.
But it is unclear, in my view, whether ordering the destruction of memories is a bridge
too far. Perhaps it is; perhaps it is not—no other court authority provides any guidance
on this question. If a Court of Appeals or the Supreme Court were to find such an order
permissible, then I would grant the order. But until I have support from a court above, I
find it necessary to err on the side of caution and not to order Vail Enterprises to erase
memories of the infringing song.
Motion denied.
IV.
The Washington Post
Supreme Court to Hear Case on Memory Erasure
February 12, 2046
This morning, the Supreme Court will hear arguments in a closely watched case over
the ability of a songwriter to use his copyright power to erase from the minds of all Amer-
icans a song deemed to infringe that copyright.
7

[PAGE 8]
The case,Whitman v. Vail Enterprises, pits songwriter Gene Whitman against neuro-
scientist-turned-remix-artistAlfredVail, overtheformerhitsong“StraightFocus.” Ajury
in 2044 decided that Vail’s song infringed Whitman’s copyright. Immediately afterwards,
the Recording Industry Association of America issued commands to the Federal Digital
RightsManagementsystem,automaticallydeletingallversionsofthesongfromallonline
sites and personal computing devices. “Straight Focus” has not been heard in the United
States for over a year now.
But Whitman found the deletion of “Straight Focus” from all devices to be not enough.
Intensely protective of his works, Whitman sought a further order from the court for
deletionof“StraightFocus”fromallpeople’sminds,usingtheNationalMemSweepsystem
owned by Vail.
The trial court refused Whitman’s request, stating that it would not order the use of
National MemSweep without guidance from the Supreme Court.
Whitman declined to comment on the case. Vail, in an interview, expressed “exasper-
ation” that the case had even reached the Supreme Court.
“Mysong‘StraightFocus’holdsalotofmeaningtolotsofpeople,”hesaid. “Forme,it’s
a memory of my daughter, who I lost three years ago. And fans of the song have created
their own meanings and memories from it. It boggles the mind why Gene Whitman can
selfishly wipe out all those thoughts with some sort of claim of copyright ownership.”
ThisisthesecondrecentcaseontheNationalMemSweepsystemtoreachtheSupreme
Court. The last case,United States v. Neilson, tested the constitutionality of the system as
used to suppress criminal activity in the wake of the August 7, 2039 terrorist attacks. A
sharply divided 5–4 decision affirmed the system.
Writing for the majority, Chief Justice Diehr rejected challenges under the First, Fifth,
and Fourteenth Amendments, finding National MemSweep to be “a necessary tool of a
technological society to prevent wrongdoing and malfeasance against the public.” An air
force veteran and former Department of Justice prosecutor, the chief justice likely drew
8

[PAGE 9]
from her years of experience serving in the United States military when she concluded
that “the ever-increasing threats to this nation can only be met with ever-increasingly
effectivedefenses.” Furthermore,shewrote,“thedutiesofcitizenshipmustatleastinclude
the surrender of personal thoughts if to do so would protect the greater good, just as one
may be called to surrender liberty or property in times of war for the good of the nation.”
A strongly worded dissent by Justice Diamond dismissed the idea that “the human
mind is the plaything of the federal government.” Reflecting his background as a former
civil rights lawyer, the justice interpreted the Constitution and Bill of Rights to include
“penumbras” of guarantees of privacy and freedom of thought. These were strongly in
conflict with non-consensual memory erasure, in his view. He cited to the caseAmericans
for Digital Rights v. Gottschalk, which held that collection of online data was an illegal
search under the Fourth Amendment. Twenty-five years ago, Justice Diamond was the
attorney for ADR in that case, which finally struck down pre-Internet caselaw that had
been seriously questioned by Justice Sotomayor back in 2012.
Justice Flook, who wrote a separate concurrence, indicated that he was “on the fence”
duetothe“troublingimplications”ofwidespreadmemoryerasure,butonthewholefound
that the benefits outweighed those issues. He will likely cast the swing vote in the case,
and all eyes will be on him during the argument.
Thejusticeisaformerlawprofessor, whoseinterestsandwritingsfocusedonenviron-
mental and natural resources law. Reflecting his academic prowess and his environmen-
talist passion, the justice’s opinion inNeilson, like many of his others, is both analytically
brilliant and emotionally torn. “I sincerely fear,” he wrote, “a world where my memories
and the memories of countless others can be erased at the flip of a switch. But I fear at-
tacks of terrorists no less. So long as I can be satisfied that memory erasure is limited to
the most necessary of situations, my first fear will remain sufficiently contained.”
Theargumentwillbeginat10:00AM,andthecaseis Whitman v. Alfred Vail Enterprises,
No. 45-405.
9

[PAGE 10]
V.
In the Supreme Court of the United States
Eugene L. Whitman v. Alfred Vail Enterprises, Inc.
Oral Argument of Attorney Richard A. Tilghman
on Behalf of Petitioner Eugene L. Whitman
February 12, 2046
Chief Justice Diehr: We’ll hear argument this morning in Case 45-405, Whitman
versus Alfred Vail Enterprises.
Mr. Tilghman?
Mr. Tilghman: Madam Chief Justice, and may it please the Court.
Today, we ask this Court to protect one of the oldest and most important property
rights established within this nation: the copyright that protects the creative works of
authors, artists, and—most relevant to this case—musicians.
Section 106 of the Copyright Act guarantees to copyright owners the exclusive right
to make copies of their works, to make derivative works based on the originals, and to
distribute and publicly perform those works, among other things. These rights are—
Justice Diamond: Before we get too far into the copyright weeds, Mr. Tilghman,
can you explain to me why we should even be considering this case? This is a case about
erasing people’s memories, so I want to start out with why you think the National Mem-
Sweep system is at all relevant outside the very narrow confines of terrorist activity that
we permitted inNeilson. I mean, we’re talking about suspending civil rights, about free-
dom of thought. Why should we even be thinking about erasing people’s memories any-
where outside the context of terrorism?
Mr. Tilghman: Justice Diamond, though Neilson was itself a case involving a ter-
rorist act, its reasoning was not limited to such situations. This Court’s decision relied
on general principles of the Constitution, and it decided that erasure of memories on a
national scale was permissible when “an unquestionable interest of the American people
is placed at imminent risk.” The unquestionable interest inNeilson was the right to safety
from terrorism, but other important interests could fit the bill as well.
10

[PAGE 11]
Chief Justice Diehr: And, of course, there’s the fact that an illegal idea is contra-
band. Youknow, no one questions why it’s illegal to ownillicit drugs, or weapons of mass
destruction. An idea can be just as destructive as either of those things. Doesn’t it seem
like the government should have the power to confiscate dangerous ideas to protect the
people?
Mr. Tilghman: Indeed that’s right, your Honor. Possession of an illegal thought
ought to be dealt with just like possession of an illegal object. And an infringing copy of
a copyrighted work is contraband, as the Chief—
Justice Flook: Well—well—hmm. I can understand the contraband argument as a
general matter, but I’m worried about the slippery slope. I concurred inNeilson but was
concerned about what overuse of National MemSweep could ultimately cause. Taken too
far, it could lead to censorship, government mind control,Nineteen Eighty-Fourtotalitari-
anism. How can I be sure, Mr. Tilghman, that what you are asking for in this case won’t
take us down that path?
Mr. Tilghman: It’s an excellent question, Justice Flook, but luckily it has a straight-
forward answer. As I said previously,Neilson held that an “unquestionable interest of the
American people” could justify use of National MemSweep without triggering those slip-
pery slope concerns. And protection of copyright is that kind of unquestionable interest,
because copyright is a strong, absolute right.
Chief Justice Diehr: Right, this is the argument from your brief about Digital
Rights Management.
Mr. Tilghman: That’s correct.
DRM, of course, is the technology that ensures that copyrighted works cannot be mis-
used in ways that the copyright owners do not want. That technology was once crude
and rare, in the early days of computer technology. In that world, perhaps I would have
agreed with you, Justice Flook: copyright was rarely enforced, and piracy was rampant.
11

[PAGE 12]
But the world shifted toward mobile devices around the turn of the century, and those
devices could be tracked, controlled, or even disabled remotely. That opened the door to
strong, effective DRM, which was ultimately developed by an industry consortium and is
now included on every computer device sold today. That industry standard DRM gives
copyright owners total control over their works: power to stop copying, power to control
who views the work, power even to delete data off of a device to protect against misuse.
That is absolute control.
Looking atitthatway, what myclientisasking forinthiscase isnotaparticularly big
step. He already has control over every copy of his work stored in any electronic device.
All he wants now is control over copies of his work stored in people’s minds.
Justice Diamond: Wait—wait a second. You’re completely forgetting the rights on
the other side. Don’t consumers have rights to make personal copies, or to play music
among friends? There are all sorts of things that are “fair use” or otherwise allowed under
copyright law, as I recall. Making parodies, quoting for news reporting, recording broad-
casts to watch them later—these are all considered fair use rights, and people are allowed
to do them despite copyright.
Mr. Tilghman: While it is true that those exceptions to copyright still remain on
the books, they have all been superseded by the law surrounding DRM.
Justice Flook: So to be perfectly honest, Mr. Tilghman, I didn’t quite understand
this argument in your brief. Section 1201 of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, which
I’massumingyou’retalkingabout,thatsectionsaysnothingaboutoverridingfairuseand
other exceptions that Justice Diamond mentioned. So how do you reach the conclusion
that Section 1201 supersedes such things?
Mr. Tilghman: It’s admittedly a tricky concept, your Honor, and I apologize if I
didn’t explain it well in the briefs.
Itistruethatthoseexceptionstocopyright, likefairuse,stillremainonthebooks. But
the applicability of those exceptions is sharply limited by DRM and Section 1201. Modern
12

[PAGE 13]
DRM ensures that protected works cannot be used in ways the author does not desire,
even if those uses might fall within one of those exceptions. And Section 1201 made it
illegal to get around the DRM. So by operation of law and technology, it is illegal to use
a DRM-protected work outside of how the copyright holder permits, regardless of any
purported “statutory exceptions” to copyright.
Chief Justice Diehr: So, in other words, Congress made it illegal to do whatever
the DRM doesn’t allow, even if the DRM is blocking one of those copyright exceptions.
And that means that respecting the DRM is actually more important than those fair use
exceptions and such. Is that right?
Mr. Tilghman: Yes, that’s exactly right. With Section 1201, Congress decided that
copyright owners’ interests must come first, when it comes to data on devices. No reason
why data in minds should be different.
Justice Diamond: Thatjustseemsabsurdtome. Thislawmakesitillegalforpeople
to exercise their rights like fair use?
Mr. Tilghman: Perhaps it seems absurd to you that DRM legally overrides fair use,
but that has been long established as the law. A case from 2001,Universal City Studios
v. Corley, specifically said that circumventing DRM was illegal under Section 1201, even
if it was done for fair use purposes.MDY Industries v. Blizzard Entertainmentfrom 2010
reached the same conclusion.
If these cases were wrong, then Congress has had four decades to change the law. But
there has been no such change. Section 1201 remains on the books just as it was enacted.
This just goes to show that copyright is a power of total control today. It is a very strong
right.
Justice Flook: So this is fascinating. I think I now understand your argument for
why copyright is a strong right. But let’s step back a minute.
This case is about erasing memories from citizens’ minds. From all the citizens’ minds.
NowIappreciateyourargumentthatcopyrightisastrongright,backedbyDRMandlaws
13

[PAGE 14]
like Section 1201. But I’m not sure why I should make the jump from very strong right to
this remedy of memory erasure.
ObviouslyallthisMemSweeplawisverynew,andwe’restillfiguringouthowitworks
in all different areas of the law. But I want to make sure this isn’t like the power grabs I
remember from the ’20s and ’30s, when the big nuclear power companies tried to claim
all sorts of rights based on some pretty outlandish interpretations of environmental laws.
What legitimate need do copyright owners have for erasing people’s memories?
Mr. Tilghman: The legitimate need is the interest in total control over one’s copy-
righted work. That interest in total control is legitimized by the DRM and Section 1201
protections that enable such control. Copyright law today gives owners total and com-
plete power over their protected property.
The power to control is the power to erase. Already modern DRM systems allow copy-
rightownerstodeleteinfringementsofthosecopyrightsfromafaratthetouchofabutton.
Physical copies of infringements can be destroyed under Section 503(b) of the Copyright
Act. And ever since the U.S. International Trade Commission started treating data trans-
missions the same as importation of goods in 2014, it has been impounding and blocking
Internet information on a regular basis. There is no doubt that removal of information
from the public thought is a well-accepted remedy for copyright infringement.
So why should it matter whether that information is removed from a silicon drive
or a human neuron? As Chief Justice Diehr explained earlier, information that infringes
copyright, like Mr. Vail’s song “Straight Focus,” is contraband wherever it might be stored.
And ultimately, all we ask for in this case is the modest proposal to apply the same power
over computer devices that DRM gives copyright owners, to apply that power to human
minds. If we can prevent tablets from thinking infringing thoughts, why shouldn’t we
stop people from using their heads to violate aptly-named intellectual property rights?
The only reason that copyright infringements were allowed to remain stored in peo-
ple’s minds is that we didn’t have the technology to remove illegal copies of memories.
14

[PAGE 15]
Today we have that technology. So I urge the Court to take what is the next natural
and reasonable step in protecting copyright owners, to allow them to fully protect what
belongs to them.
Chief Justice Diehr: Thank you, Mr. Tilghman.
Ms. Proctor?
VI.
In the Supreme Court of the United States
Eugene L. Whitman v. Alfred Vail Enterprises, Inc.
Oral Argument of Attorney Willa M. Proctor
on Behalf of Respondent Alfred Vail Enterprises, Inc.
February 12, 2046
Ms. Proctor: Madam Chief Justice, and may it please the Court.
For the almost three centuries that the United States of America has been a nation, the
inviolability of the mind has been a central tenet. The pursuit of happiness—the pursuit
of personal thought—stands up there with life and liberty as an inalienable right.
But that pursuit of happiness is fundamentally what is being questioned in this Court
today. For Petitioner seeks to violate the fundamental right to freedom of thoughts, to
maintenance of ideas, to pursuit of happiness—he seeks to violate these in order to vindi-
cate his desire for protection of intellectual property.
Certainly freedom of thought is not absolute, as this Court recognized inNeilson. But
likefreedomofspeech,ortherightstodueprocessorequalprotection,itisafundamental
right that may be breached only when there is a compelling interest on the other side—an
interest like terrorism or national security.
Copyright is no such compelling interest. It does not put the security or protection of
the whole nation at stake; it is merely a financial interest of a single person.
Chief Justice Diehr: Well, the interest of a single person can certainly be com-
pelling if that interest is strong enough, can it not? The interest in protecting a person
from violent crime, or a person’s fundamental right to equal protection under the law,
15

[PAGE 16]
those are certainly compelling interests. And if, as Mr. Tilghman suggested, copyright is
suchastrong,absoluteright,whyshouldn’titfallwithinthatsamecategoryofcompelling
interests deserving of the utmost protection?
Ms. Proctor: Well that’s just it, your Honor. Copyright is not nearly as absolute as
Mr. Tilghman would have us believe. The most well-known exception to the absoluteness
of copyright is the doctrine of fair use, by which one may perform an act that looks just
like infringement of copyright, but bear no liability or responsibility for infringement,
because the performed act is deemed a fair and acceptable use.
Chief Justice Diehr: Mr. Tilghman just argued that fair use has basically been
trumped by DRM and Section 1201. What’s your response to that?
Ms. Proctor: Maybe he’s right as a practical matter, but the annihilation of fair use
is not something that this Court should propagate or endorse. Doctrines like fair use are
critical to the continued ability of artists and creators to do their work. All art builds
upon the successes and inspirations of the past. Just as this Court cites prior cases in
writing new opinions, a novel will quote or allude to older works; a painting will use the
techniques of the great masters; a musician will borrow ideas from various genres and
songs.
So even if DRM and Section 1201 have diminished the doctrine of fair use on elec-
tronic devices, this Court should not further diminish it by declaring copyright a totally
absolute right. And that is why use of National MemSweep simply cannot be appropriate.
That system is reserved for situations of absolutes: absolute rights for which there is no
redeeming value on the other side.
Justice Diamond: ThenumerousstatelawsregulatingtheoveralluseofMemSweep
technology, those laws would confirm your view that National MemSweep must be re-
served for uses of absolute importance, right?
Ms. Proctor: They certainly would, your Honor. When MemSweep was first made
popular years ago, states immediately acted to regulate the industry out of concern that
16

[PAGE 17]
the technology could be abused. Today, every one of the fifty-two states has laws that
license MemSweep operators, restrict use of memory erasure operations to a small set of
appropriatesituations, imposewaitingperiodsonthosewishingtouseit, requiresubstan-
tial verification of informed consent—
Chief Justice Diehr: And all of those laws are inapplicable here. As I’m sure you
know, the National Security Act of 2040 preempted those state laws and allowed for Na-
tional MemSweep to be used “to protect any national interest or right,” to quote the lan-
guage of the law. So enforcement of a right created by the U.S. government—oh, say,
copyright—is explicitly permitted even in the face of those individual state laws you bring
up, right?
Ms. Proctor: Your Honor, the National Security Act was enacted only five months
after the August 2039 terrorist attacks, and it seems obvious that the act was intended
specifically to deal with terrorism and national security. So maybe the text of the act
suggests that the act overrides all those protective state laws when it comes to enforcing
copyrights. But in the context of the passage of the National Security Act, that’s a real
stretch of interpretation.
Justice Flook: It seems to me, counsel, that what you’re pointing to is that larger
problem of a slippery slope, which we discussed with Mr. Tilghman. If copyright is not as
strong an interest as national security, then allowing the National MemSweep system to
be used for copyright enforcement might open the door to all sorts of other unintended
uses of the system.
Ms. Proctor: That’s exactly my concern, your Honor. Abuses of memory erasure—
abuses of wholesale national memory erasure—are easy to imagine. A political party in
power could use it to weaken the beliefs of the opposing party. Big companies could
use it for corporate sabotage. Erasing memories could become the tool of oppression, of
ostracism, of—
17

[PAGE 18]
Chief Justice Diehr: Well it seems to me that there are plenty of other situations
where it would be appropriate to use the system. What about leaks of classified infor-
mation? Shouldn’t the government be able to use National MemSweep for preventing
leaks?
Ms. Proctor: Leaks of classified information are still issues of national security, so
they are essentially no different from prevention of terrorism. So even if using National
MemSweep to prevent those leaks is appropriate, that says nothing about using National
MemSweep for copyright infringement.
Chief Justice Diehr: OK, in that case let’s consider a copyright example. Say that
you have a situation like the old copyright caseHarper & Row v. Nation Enterprises, where
a magazine gets its hands on a book before publication, and “scoops” the book by printing
the best parts in advance. That kills the market for the book and is totally contrary to the
exclusive right to control distribution of one’s work that copyright entails. The only true
remedy for the copyright owner is to erase memory of the scoop, so that the book can be
sold and read anew. Isn’t that an appropriate use as well?
Ms. Proctor: No, your Honor—
Justice Flook: Huh.
Ms. Proctor: I’m sorry?
Justice Flook: Well—hmm. It’s interesting, that point that Chief Justice Diehr
raises. I knew of theHarper & Rowcase but hadn’t thought of it that way.
It reminds me of something that happened to me years ago, when I was still a student
in law school. I had been working on a research project on local plastic shopping bag
laws, back in 2012. I spent months digging through municipal law records, calling up city
councils—even had to visit one town that still only kept the laws in paper books.
Finally, I’d gotten all the data I needed, and was starting to write my paper on it. And
I knew that this was going to be a big one, at least for a third-year law student with barely
a law review note to his name. But I mentioned the results to a professor of mine at the
18

[PAGE 19]
time, andherepeatedthemainconclusionduringapressinterview. Thatofcoursespread
across all the news sites within days.
I suppose I should have been happy that the facts were out there. But when it came
time to send out my paper for publication two months later, of course no one was inter-
ested. The paper was ultimately thrown out, along with the half a year I’d dedicated to
it.
Obviously I managed to produce other successful work—
Justice Diamond: I think you did pretty well for yourself, Justice Flook.
(Laughter.)
Justice Flook: Well, being on the bench with you, it can’t be all bad.
(Laughter.)
But I suppose what I take from that incident is—well, having control over your own
work is pretty important. I lost control over my research. But now technology can help
with that. We have DRM that gives copyright holders control over their work on devices.
Maybe that was controversial once, but everyone accepts that today, considering that the
Section 1201 law remains unchanged. Why shouldn’t we have control over our works in
the minds of others? That’s all that Mr. Whitman is asking for, right? A sort of do-over,
to pluck out the mistaken, infringing information that never should have been let loose
in the first place.
Chief Justice Diehr: Something like, maybe, cleaning the environment of a pollu-
tant? That would be analogous.
Justice Flook: Hmm—yes—maybe that’s it. Maybe that’s what I was looking for
when I was asking whether memory erasure is the right remedy here. Like scrubbing the
air of chemicals, perhaps we’re scrubbing minds of information that doesn’t belong there.
Ms. Proctor: I—I see that my time has expired, would—
Chief Justice Diehr: The Court will indulge you a minute or two for a response.
19

[PAGE 20]
Ms. Proctor: Thankyou,yourHonor. Toansweryourquestion,JusticeFlook,we’re
not just scrubbing minds of a small piece of information. We’re scrubbing a whole lot
more.
When I talked to my client, Mr. Vail, about the importance of his song, he explained
that it was intimately tied to the memory of his daughter, Sarah Vail. “Straight Focus” is
made up of her favorite songs, he said, and so his memory of that song is his memory of
her. The song also uses the neurological techniques he invented, working as a carefully
orchestratedwholetotriggermemoriesofSarahinhismind. Inaveryrealsense, itisthis
song that keeps Mr. Vail’s daughter alive. To take away his memory of that song would
be to take a piece of her away from him.
Thisdeplorableresultisonlywritlargerforallthefansofthesong. Fanshaveenjoyed
the piece and built their own memories around it. Artists have built upon and improved
the song with their personal tastes and creativity through remixes and cover versions.
Shall we give up all of this creation, all of this progress, all of this thought and happi-
ness, on the unilateral request of one songwriter? The Constitution of the United States
says that copyright law must “promote the progress of science and the useful arts.” But
the memory erasure that Mr. Whitman seeks would eliminate not only the infringing
song—which was a work of progress in itself—but also all the progress made based upon
it. Erasure is regress, not progress, and this Court should not authorize it.
Chief Justice Diehr: Thank you, Ms. Proctor. The case is submitted.
VII.
The Washington Post
High Court Authorizes Erasure of Song from National Memory
June 25, 2046
In an acrimoniously split 5–4 decision, the Supreme Court approved an order against
technology and music giant Vail Enterprises, requiring it to use the National MemSweep
20

[PAGE 21]
system to erase all memory of the hit song “Straight Focus” from the minds of all people
in the United States.
Writing for the majority, Justice Flook reiterated his concerns about cabining uses
of National MemSweep to “serious infractions of the law,” but was persuaded that “the
strong copyright policies that have developed over the last few decades indicate that the
nation now views copyright infringement as such a serious infraction.” He went on to
find that “removal of memories is an appropriate remedy, given the longstanding ability
of copyright owners to remove ideas from just about every other place, based on Section
1201 and other parts of the copyright law.”
In dissent, Justice Diamond found the decision “diametrically opposed to the consti-
tutional requirement that copyrights promote progress of the arts and sciences,” and pre-
dictedthatthedecisionwouldleadto“aneradevoidofnewmusic, newwritings, andnew
creations that depend on building upon the work of the past.”
Musicindustryexecutivesapplaudedthehighcourtforapprovingofmemorydeletion.
“Copyrightshouldgivecreatorstotalcontrolovertheirworksandhowaudiencesperceive
them,” said Clifford King, president of the Recording Industry Association of America.
“Eliminating bootleg content from people’s minds ought to be a part of that.”
But civil liberties advocates disagreed. “A person’s right to freedom of thought ought
to trump a commercial copyright interest,” read a letter signed by twenty nonprofit orga-
nizations this morning, asking Congress to overturn the decision.
The ruling will most directly affect the creator of “Straight Focus” itself, Alfred Vail,
who will be compelled to conduct the erasure of memories of his own song. Vail could
not be reached for comment. His neighbors reported that they had not seen him leave his
home since the ruling was announced.
This particular act of memory erasure for copyright infringement will remain unique
for some time, given that it could only occur in the unusual circumstance of the copyright
21

[PAGE 22]
infringer being the same as the owner of the National MemSweep system. But that may
not be the case for long. The patents on MemSweep are due to expire two years from now.
“We are in the early stages of planning our own system, tentatively called the ‘Mental
Rights Management’ or MRM system,” said Mr. King. “This will allow every author, artist,
and songwriter to reap the benefits of memory erasure that the Supreme Court’s decision
authorizes.”
The activation of National MemSweep in view of this case will not occur for several
weeks, most likely not until late July. System engineers will code in the parameters of the
informationtobeerased, sothatnotraceofmemory—notevenknowledgethatamemory
had been erased—will remain.
Aswithotheractivationsofthesystem, itwilllikelyoccurinthelatemorningorearly
afternoon, to minimize disturbance. The procedure will consist of about fifteen seconds
of low-pitched, rhythmic sounds—some have described them as lyrical or soothing—loud
enough to penetrate walls or buildings, and calibrated to remove all memories of the song
in question. After that time, the music will go silent.
VIII.
Message from Rand A. Warsaw to Alice Stevens Vail
April 4, 2084
Hi Mom,
(I’m trying out this new direct-mind transcription thing—sorry if this is a little ram-
bling, haven’t quite gotten the mental focus down yet.)
I was going through Grandpa Al’s things to get ready for the estate sale next week (I
can’t believe how fast they do these things, the funeral was just a week ago!) and of all
things, there was this box stuck behind a desk stored in the attic. At first it looked like
it might have fallen back there by accident—it must have been there for years, it was so
dusty—but I think Grandpa may have meant to hide it.
22

[PAGE 23]
Inside there were a couple of legal documents and newspaper clippings. Something
about a lawsuit over a song that he wrote. I had no idea that he was a musician once.
But I guess that’s not surprising, considering that the documents say that they erased
everyone’s memory of his song.
On top of the papers, there was this note:
June 26, 2046. Last Monday, the Supreme Court approved obliterating
my song “Straight Focus” from everyone’s memory. My song! That I spent
months thinking about and planning, all because of a couple of dumb notes
borrowed from someone else.
I thought about leaving the country so at least I could escape the Mem-
Sweep order, but the judge said that I had to be present to carry out the order
to activate the system next month. Besides, the RIAA guy said that it was
only a matter of time before their Memory Rights Management system went
global anyway, so it’s not like I could really get away.
I really hoped that “Straight Focus” would be my lasting legacy. I remem-
berexplainingMemSweeptoSarahwhenshewassevenoreight, andshesaid
to me, “Dad, maybe you should make something for remembering, instead of
something for forgetting.” And after she lost her battle with cancer, I realized
Ididwanttomakesomethingforpeopletoremember—andsomethingforme
to remember her by.
“Straight Focus” did that. Everyone loved the song, and there were all
those great fan versions of it, and videos and everything. I was sharing my
new music ideas with the whole world—creating something to be remem-
bered.
Copyright is supposed to protect artists like me, isn’t it? And instead,
copyright law is what’s destroying my creation. How could they not see
something like this coming? How could they have left that ridiculous 1201
law untouched for almost fifty years?
Well, life is full of ironies. The last thing I expected was for my own mem-
ory erasing technology to be used against my own ideas.
It’s been losses all the way down ever since Sarah died. She loved music,
and there was nothing more important to her than her favorite playlist. After
I lost her, I barely managed to hold onto that playlist before they deleted it
underthedigitalgoodsestateplanninglaw(bizarrethatyournextofkincan’t
inherityourmusiclibrary!). Imade“StraightFocus”tokeephermemoryalive,
but then they deleted that song, even on my own computers.
And now they’re deleting the very memory of that song about her. It’s
like they’re deleting her from my mind.
So before my memories are taken from me next month, I’m packing up
what I have left of this song—practically all my memories of Sarah, I guess. I
was going to leave the box on my desk so I’d see it after they run MemSweep.
23

[PAGE 24]
But the thoughts I’m having now are too sad, too painful, and I don’t know
if I want to reopen those wounds right after I’ve lost my memories. So I’m
going to tuck this box back here in the attic. Perhaps I will find it again one
day, hopefully in happier circumstances.
Also, there’s this plastic cartridge, about the size of my hand, with some sort of shiny
brownish spool of tape running inside. The plastic cartridge has “Straight Focus” written
on it. There’s also a black machine with some buttons, and it looks like the cartridge fits
inside the machine. I can’t get them to turn on, though. I think they need some power,
and I tried every wireless induction charger I’ve got at home, and none of them worked.
Must be too old for them, I guess.
I’ll bring all the stuff I found when I come by tomorrow. Let’s ask Uncle James if he
can figure it out, since he likes all that old 21st-century machinery. Who knows, maybe
we’ll discover a whole new side of Alfred Vail that we’d never heard before.
□
24
