[PAGE 1]
 
 
 
October 27, 2016 
 
The Honorable Karyn Temple Claggett 
Acting Register of Copyrights  
United States Copyright Office  
101 Independence Ave., S.E.  
Washington, D.C. 20559  
 
Re:      Section 1201 Study ; Notice and Request for Additional Comments  
[Docket No. 2015- 8] 
 
Dear Ms. Claggett:  
 
BSA | The Software Alliance (“BSA”)1  is pleased to continue participating in the 
conversation regarding Section 1201 by responding to the Copyright Office’ s Request for 
Additional Comments .2  As the leading advocate for the global software industry in the 
United States and around the world, BSA is uniquely positioned to offer perspectives on 
Section 1201.  
 
In BSA’s March 2016 letter responding to the original Request for  Public Comment, we 
emphasized that the framework set forth in Section 1201 continues to accomplish the 
important goals, and maintain the balance, envisioned by Congress.  That balance—
between supporting innovative means of disseminating copyrighted material, on the one 
hand, and preventing unauthorized uses of copyrighted material, on the other — has largely 
been maintained.  Thus, w e reiterate here that we do not believe there is a factual basis or 
justification to warrant changing the fundamental structure of Section 1201.    
 
In light of the pace of technological innovation, however, it is wise and appropriate to 
periodically review the effects and implications of Section 1201’ s various provisions.   To 
that end, Congress included within Section 1201 a triennial review process aimed at 
                                                      
1 BSA’s members include: Adobe, ANSYS, Apple, Autodesk, Bentley Systems, CA Technologies, 
CNC/Mastercam, DataStax, Dell, IBM, Intuit, Microsoft, Minitab, Oracle, Salesforce, SAS Institute, 
Siemens PLM Software, Symantec, Tekla, The MathWorks, Trend Micro and Workday. 
2 U.S. Copyright Office, Library of Congress, Section 1201 Study: Notice and Request for Additional 
Comments, 81 Fed. Reg. 66296 (Sept. 27, 2016).

[PAGE 2]
The Honorable Karyn Temple Claggett 
October 27, 2016 
Page 2 
 
improving accessibility to and facilitating non- infringing uses of copyrighted work s, while 
also protecting incentives for innovation. The Copyright Office has skillfully administered six 
rulemaking cycles and done a remarkable job of ensuring that Section 1201 continues to 
deliver on its promise.  
 
To avoid unintended consequences that could undermine the existing balance of Section 
1201, BSA encourages the Copyright Office to proceed cautiously  as it considers  proposing 
to Congress any revisions to the statute.  This concern is especially important when 
considering recommendations for  Congress to add new permanent exemptions to Section 
1201.  For exa mple, commenters have argued for a statutory exemption permitting 
circumvention of technological protection measures (“TPM ”s) for purposes of diagnosis, 
maintenance, or repair  of machines or devices with embedded software. Caution is 
warranted because any such exemption has implications beyond a particular consumer and 
a particular class of works — such as the consumer who wishes to diagnose a failed oxygen 
sensor in his  or her car.  With self -driving cars on the horizon, it is not difficult  to imagine 
how mere “diagnoses” or “repairs” that might seem appropriate could create software 
modifications resulting in safety hazards and unknown consequences  to third parties .  
 
During the 2015 r ulemaking, the Copyright Office recommended an exemption for 
diagnosis, repair or lawful modification of computer p rograms that are contained in and 
control the functioning of a motorized land vehicle. Notably, the Copyright Office narrowed 
the proposed class to exclude computer programs primarily designed for  the control of 
telematics systems.  Such a limitation will prove more important in the years ahead 
because alteration of telematics software in self-driving cars could give rise to significant 
safety concerns . The Copyright Office’s recommendation illustrates the nuances that must 
be taken into account when considering exemptions to Section 1201, particularly those 
bearing on rapidly evolving technologies. In this regard, the triennial rulemaking offers 
significant advantages over statutory revisions, allowing flexibility to refine exemptions as 
technologies evolve.   
 
Similar safety concerns apply across the board to other interdependent  software systems 
that interact in complex ways.  And, parallel concerns exist with respect to how “ diagnoses” 
or “repairs” to works protected by copyright can easily (even if unintentionally) result in 
compromises to other protections, such as for privacy or security.  Legal and technological 
limitations on circumvention exist to protect not only copyright owners, but also consumers 
of copyrighted works and the consumer products in which those works are embodied.  
 
A measured approach is also critical with respect to existing security research exemptions .  
As a general matter, BSA supports good-faith security testing because such research, 
when it is coordinated with the vendor,  is essential to maintaining the inte grity and security 
of software. The security research language the Copyright Office recommended (and that

[PAGE 3]
The Honorable Karyn Temple Claggett 
October 27, 2016 
Page 3 
 
was subsequently adopted by the Librarian)  in the 2015 rulemaking reflects the careful 
consideration that is necessary in evaluating potential changes to Section 1201(j) .3  That 
language took account of the benefits of good- faith security research, while at the same 
time respecting the important safeguards Section 1201 provides .  BSA urges the Copyright 
Office not to abandon the requirement of owner/oper ator authorization and/or notification 
without considering the practical effects of doing so.  While it may be helpful to provide 
greater clarity in situations with multiple owners, the Office should move slowly , particularly  
with respect to the existing notification requirement that serves to protect not only  copyright 
holders, but other stakeholders as well.   Unsanctioned, unauthorized system access under 
the guise of “security research ” can not only result in compromised systems, but also r isks 
revealing to malefactors sensitive trade secrets, private consumer data, and other 
proprietary material.  While legitimate security research certainly can serve to enhance 
everyone’s security, the existing statutory structure continues to safeguard the security and 
copyright interests of researchers and consumers, as those stakeholders are vulnerable to 
bad actors as well.   
 
Given these competing interests and concerns, BSA encourages the Copyright Office to 
recommend small steps to address any  perceived challenges in the operation of Section 
1201.  To a considerable extent, the Copyright Office can address outstanding issues that 
are important to different stakeholders by c ontinuing to add agility and responsiveness to 
the triennial rulemaking process.   The Office also should continue to c onsult with agencies 
with primary jurisdiction in other affected areas (such as transportation safety, security, and 
privacy) in order to further protect innovators and consumers from illegitimate uses  of 
material protected by copyright , while providing access for legitimate uses.   
 
We stress that the concerns of BSA ’s members reach beyond copyright protection and 
encouraging innovation to include individual privacy, consumer safety, system 
interoperability, and data security.  These issues , among others, are all  implicated when the 
Copyright Office considers modifying or creating a new permanent exemption to the 
prohibition on circumvention.  
 
As has been true since 1998, balance is critical for Section 1201 to simultaneously address 
the needs of the owners, innovators, and consumers impacted by copyright .  BSA members 
are committed to ensuring that Section 1201 remains appropriately balanced for all 
impacted parties.   To that end, we urge the Copyright Office to ensure that any modification 
of Section 1201 it proposes to Congress is incremental and reflects appropriate 
consideration of the multitude of effects on different stakeholders .  As Congress recognized 
                                                      
3 U.S. Copyright Office, Library of Congress, Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright 
Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 80 Fed. Reg. 65956 (Oct. 28, 2015).

[PAGE 4]
The Honorable Karyn Temple Claggett 
October 27, 2016 
Page 4 
 
in 1998, appropriate exceptions to the protections of Section 1201 are essential, but any 
changes must take care not to usher in new problems as old ones are addressed.  
 
We appreciate the opportunity to share our members ’ perspectives on these important 
issues.   
 
 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Christian Troncoso  
Director, Policy
