[PAGE 1]
 
 
Submitted by Emily Feltren, Director of Government Relations 
 
February 26, 2016 
 
Ms. Maria Pallante 
Register of Copyrights 
United States Copyright Office 
101 Independence Avenue S.E. 
Washington, D.C. 20559 
 
RE: Section 1201 Study: Notice and Request for Comment (80 F.R. 81369, Docket No. 2015-8) 
 
Dear Ms. Pallante: 
 
The American Association of Law Libraries (AALL) is pleased to submit these comments in 
response to the Copyright Office’s December 29, 2015 Section 1201 Study: Notice and Request 
for Public Comment. We appreciate the Copyright Office’s inquiry into section 1201 of Title 17, 
including the triennial rulemaking process. 
 
Section 1201 has been plagued with issues since its enactment in 1998. Throughout our 
participation in the legislative process that led to the enactment of the Digital Millennium 
Copyright Act (DMCA), AALL expressed concern that the Act’s complicated rules would 
prevent circumvention for noninfringing, legitimate uses; today, nearly twenty years later, we 
still hold that view. Section 1201’s restrictions and rulemaking process are cumbersome and do 
not adequately address issues with circumvention of technological protection measures.  
 
While AALL would like to see a complete revision of section 1201, we focus these comments on 
advocating for clarification of the role of existing copyright exemptions and changes to the 
rulemaking process, particularly de novo review of previously granted exemptions and 
permanent exemptions. 
 
I.
                DMCA’s Relationship with Copyright Law Requires Clarity 
 
A primary problem with the DMCA is its uncertain relationship with the remainder of copyright 
law. While section 1201(c) explicitly states that “[n]othing in this section shall affect rights, 
remedies, limitations, or defenses to copyright infringement, including fair use,” courts have 
reached opposite conclusions as to whether the bans on circumvention and trafficking are 
applicable where a limitation or defense to copyright infringement applies, such as fair use.
1  
1 Compare Chamberlain Group, Inc. v. Skylink Technologies, Inc., 381 F.3d 1178, 1203 (Fed. Cir. 2004) (finding 
that circumvention is only prohibited when it “infringes or facilitates infringing a right protected by the Copyright 
Act”) with MDY Industries, LLC v. Blizzard Entertainment, Inc., 629 F.3d 928 (9 th Cir. 2010) (declining to follow 
Chamberlain and stating that “Congress created a distinct anti-circumvention right under § 1201(a) without an 
infringement nexus requirement.”) and United States v. Elcom, Ltd., 203 F. Supp. 2d 1111 (N.D. Cal. 2002) (“The 
statute does not distinguish between devices based on the uses to which the device will be put. Instead, all tools that 
enable circumvention of use restrictions are banned, not merely those use restrictions that prohibit infringement.

[PAGE 2]
 
Commenters and members of Congress have long recognized this as a significant flaw in the 
DMCA, as evidenced by repeated proposed legislation that would bring the scope of the DMCA 
back to the contours of copyright law.
2 AALL agrees with the Library Copyright Alliance and 
other commenters who have suggested that liability should only attach to circumvention that 
enables infringement.
3  
 
II.             The DMCA Rulemaking Process Needs Revision 
 
AALL agrees that the rulemaking process requires revision. Commenters and scholars have 
repeatedly bemoaned the burdensome nature of the de novo review process.
4 AALL agrees with 
these commenters, and agrees with the framework set forth by the Library Copyright Alliance in 
its written testimony before Congress. 5 The burden of proof should be placed on those opposing 
renewal of exemptions, and exemptions should become permanent upon granting of a second 
renewal. 
 
In many instances, technology is unpredictable and an exemption sought today can be 
unnecessary in three years. Alternatively, sometimes technology persists and an exemption may 
be necessary for an undeterminable amount of time. A change in the rulemaking, such as the one 
above, permits flexibility and predictability. Groups and individuals should be able to rely upon 
some exemptions as they seek access to information and push technological innovation. 
III.
           Exemptions Should Extend to the Anti-trafficking Provisions 
 
As currently written, the anti-trafficking provisions of section 1201(a)(2) and 1201(b) effectively 
prevent the legal usage of exemptions to the anti-circumvention provisions. Section 
1201(a)(1)(C) allows for lawful circumvention of access controls pursuant to exemptions granted 
by the Librarian of Congress; however, there is no allowance for exemptions to the anti-
trafficking provisions, which prohibit not only the importation, offering to the public, or 
provision of products and services primarily designed to facilitate circumvention, but also the 
“manufacture” of such products and services.
6 Circumvention of copy controls is not prohibited 
Thus… Section 1201(b) imposes a blanke t ban on trafficking in or marketing of any device that circumvents use 
restrictions.”). 
2 See, e.g., Unlocking Technology Act of 2013, H.R. 1892, 113th Cong. (2013), 
https://www.congress.gov/113/bills/hr1892/BILLS-113hr1892ih.pdf; Digital Media Consumers’ Rights Act of 2005, 
H.R. 1201, 109th Cong. (2005), https://www.congress.gov/109/bills/hr1201/BILLS-109hr1201ih.pdf. 
3 Chapter 12 of Title 17: Hearing Before the Subcomm. on Courts, Intellectual Property, and the Internet of the H. 
Comm. on the Judiciary¸ 113th Cong. 115 (2014) (statement of the Library Copyright Alliance) ; Chapter 12 of Title 
17: Hearing Before the Subcomm. on Courts, Intellectual Property, and the Internet of the H. Comm. on the 
Judiciary¸ 113th Cong. 60 (2014) (testimony of Corynne McSherry, Intellectual Property Director, Electronic 
Frontier Foundation). 
4 See, e.g., Christopher Moseng, The Failures and Possible Redemption of the DMCA Anticircumvention 
Rulemaking Provision, 12 J. TECH. L. & POL’Y 333, 352-354 (2007); Krista L. Cox, Flaws of the 1201 Rulemaking 
Process, ARL POLICY NOTES (Jan. 21, 2015), http://policynotes.arl.org/?p=852. 
5 Chapter 12 of Title 17: Hearing Before the Subcomm. on Courts, Intellectual Property, and the Internet of the H. 
Comm. on the Judiciary¸ 113th Cong. 115 (2014) (statement of the Library Copyright Alliance). 
6 See Pamela Samuelson, Intellectual Property and the Digital Economy: Why the Anti -Circumvention Regulations 
Need to be Revised, 14 BERKELEY TECH. L.J. 519, 551 (1999) (“It is unclear whether Congress intended for the 
technologically savvy who could ‘do it themselves’ to be the only ones who could engage in privileged acts of

[PAGE 3]
by the DMCA; however, manufacturing or trafficking in the means by which copy controls can 
be circumvented, even if for a noninfringing use, is prohibited.7 
 
AALL supports proposals to extend exemptions to the anti-trafficking prohibitions. Requiring 
that the Librarian adopt separate exemptions to anti-trafficking provisions in addition to the anti-
circumvention provisions, however, unnecessarily complicates and increases the administrative 
burden of the triennial rulemaking. Rather, exemptions granted during a triennial rulemaking 
should automatically include relevant exemptions to 1201(a)(2) and 1201(b).  
 
IV.  Permanent Exemptions Should Be Expanded 
 
Congress should revise the current permanent exemption for nonprofit libraries, archives, and 
educational institutions to establish exemptions addressing persistent needs.  
 
The current exemption in 1201(d) is inadequate for the needs of libraries and archives. The 
exemption, which only allows for circumvention of access controls for the purpose of making a 
purchasing decision, allows circumvention in a comparatively rare situation. What is more 
troubling is that the exemption, as currently framed, only recognizes the needs of libraries and 
archives as acquirers of information; the DMCA entirely ignores the important roles that 
libraries and archives play as preservers and providers of information. A reframed exemption 
should address all of these roles. 
 
Libraries and archives need an exemption that takes into account their need to preserve for public 
access information locked behind technological protection measures. The current exemption in 
section 1201(d) does not account for the changing nature of technology and the ways in which 
libraries collect and provide access to electronic materials. For example, as more scholarly works 
are only available online, libraries face increasing challenges in archiving materials to allow for 
permanent access. As technology related to older born-digital materials becomes obsolete, so too 
do any technological protection measures (TPMs) attached to those works. By not permitting 
libraries to circumvent or permanently remove obsolete TPMs, the DMCA frustrates 
preservation of and access to materials.  
 
The development of video technology is an appropriate example. Over the past century, video 
formats have shifted dramatically, from reels to VHS tapes to laserdiscs to DVDs and digital 
media files. Ebooks have been released in a variety of formats, including proprietary formats 
such as AZW and iBooks. Only a fraction of the works released in an obsolete format are 
rereleased in a newer format; as they are unable to acquire materials in current formats, libraries 
and archives rely upon section 108(c) to fulfill their important role as preservers of the cultural 
record. Just as formats become obsolete, so will TPMs, necessitating their circumvention for 
preservation of the underlying work. However, the DMCA currently does not allow for 
circumvention. Yet… even the technically sophisticated will often need to devel op a tool to accomplish a privileged 
circumvention; this would seem to put them at risk under a strict reading of section 1201(b)(1).”). 
7 Bill D. Herman & Oscar H. Gandy, Jr., Catch 1201: A Legislative History and Content Analysis of the DMCA 
Exemption Proceedings, 24 CARDOZO ARTS & ENT. L.J. 121, 132 (2006) (noting that “not even librarians can 
develop” technology needed to circumvent copy controls).

[PAGE 4]
circumvention of access controls for preservation.8 As such, AALL recommends a permanent 
exemption for libraries and archives for the purpose of activities permitted under section 108.  
 
In addition to an expanded exemption for libraries and archives, AALL also supports permanent 
exemptions to facilitate access by print-disabled persons and to allow for circumvention of TPMs 
on motion pictures for educational uses. These exemptions have proven their necessity in 
repeated rulemakings. Print-disabled persons are a defined and protected class of individuals that 
will always need technology to assist with accessing information. Similarly, the use of films is 
often necessary in classrooms, whether as an accommodation for different learning styles or 
because the information needed is only available in a film.  
 
V.  Treaty Obligations 
 
Amending the DMCA and the rulemaking process as outlined above does not, to our knowledge, 
interfere with the obligations of the United States under the WIPO Copyright Treaty or the 
WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty. While Section 1201 was enacted to comply with 
the requirements of these treaties, it is important to note that Section 1201 as written imposes a 
far broader ban on circumvention than required under the WIPO treaties.
9 Article 11 of the 
WIPO Copyright Treaty and Article 18 of the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty 
contain matching mandates that signatory states provide “adequate legal protection and effective 
legal remedies” against circumvention of TPMs used to protect rights they are accorded by 
law.10 None of the changes suggested here would fall below this standard.  
 
Amendments to the DMCA and the rulemaking process may, however, implicate provisions of 
most free trade agreements entered into by the United States, including the pending Trans-Pacific 
Partnership. The language of the anti-circumvention provisions of these agreements varies; for 
example, the United States-Jordan free trade agreement only contains one brief paragraph 
covering circumvention of effective technological protection measures,
11 while the United 
States-Korea free trade agreement contains much longer, more detailed anti-circumvention 
provisions.12 Anti-circumvention provisions are also included in the Trans-Pacific Partnership.13  
8 Bill D. Herman & Oscar H. Gandy, Jr., Catch 1201: A Legislative History and Content Analysis of the DMCA 
Exemption Proceedings, 24 CARDOZO ARTS & ENT. L.J. 121, 131 (2006) (“Even a librarian who wants only to 
preserve a decaying digital artifact is prohibited from circumventing an access-controlling TPM to do so.”). 
9 WIPO Copyright Treaties Implementation Act; and Online Copyright Liability Limitation Act: Hearing on H.R. 
2281 and H.R. 2280 Before the Subcomm. on the Courts and Intellectual Property of the H. Comm. on the Judiciary  
105th Cong. 62 (1997) (testimony of Bruce A. Lehman); Stephen E. Blythe, The U.S. Digital Millennium Copyright 
Act and the E.U. Copyright Directive: Comparative Impact on Fair Use Rights , 8 TUL. J. TECH. & INTELL. PROP. 
111 (2006). 
10 World Intellectual Property Organization Copyright Treaty, art. 11, Dec. 20, 1996, S. Treaty Doc. 105-17 (1997); 
World Intellectual Property Organization Performances and Phonograms Treaty, art. 18, Dec. 20, 1996, S. Treaty 
Doc. 105-17 (1997). 
11 Agreement between the United States of America and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan on the Establishment  of 
a Free Trade Area, art. 4, para. 13, U.S.-Jordan, Oct. 24, 2000, 
https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/Jordan%20FTA.pdf.  
12 Free Trade Agreement between the United States of America and the Republic of Korea, art. 18.1, para. 7, U.S. -
Korea, Apr. 1, 2007, 
https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/uploads/agreements/fta/korus/asset_upload_file273_12717.pdf.  
13 Trans-Pacific Partnership, art. 18.68, https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/TPP -Final-Text-Intellectual-Property.pdf 
(last visited Feb. 25, 2016).

[PAGE 5]
VI.  Conclusion 
 
Copyright law has often been referred to as a “delicate balance” between the rights of creators 
and the rights of users. Unfortunately, section 1201 has too often shifted this balance toward 
rightsholders over the public good. By bringing section 1201 in harmony with the rest of 
copyright law, providing for less onerous renewal of exemptions, and creating meaningful 
permanent exemptions, the Copyright Office and Congress can help restore the balance.  
 
AALL reiterates its appreciation to the Copyright Office for undertaking this inquiry into section 
1201 and for the opportunity to comment.
