[PAGE 1]
	
Comments	on	U.S.	Copyright	Office	(COLC)	Notice:	Section	1201	Study:	Request	for	Additional	Comments	FR	2016-23167	Docket	ID:	COLC-2015-0012-0088	Art	Manion	CERT	Coordination	Center	amanion@cert.org	2016-10-27	
About	CERT	The	CERT	Coordination	Center	(CERT/CC)	is	part	of	the	Software	Engineering	Institute	(SEI),	a	Federally	Funded	Research	and	Development	Center	(FFRDC)	at	Carnegie	Mellon	University.	The	CERT/CC	has	been	studying	software	security,	specifically	software	security	defects,	or	vulnerabilities,	since	its	inception	in	1988.	The	CERT/CC	has	significant	experience	in	both	the	technological	and	institutional	aspects	of	testing	software	for	vulnerabilities	and	coordinating	the	results.	The	CERT/CC	provided	testimony	regarding	insufficient	or	unclear	exemptions	for	security	testing	and	the	chilling	effects	of	the	DMCA	on	good-faith	security	research	at	a	May	2003	hearing.	
Comments	2.	Proposed	Amendments	to	Existing	Permanent	Exemptions	a.	The	Office	is	interested	in	commenters'	views	on	whether	this	language	[37	CFR	201.40	(b)(7)(i)]	would	be	appropriate	for	adoption	as	a	permanent	exemption,	or	whether	there	are	specific	changes	or	additional	provisions	that	Congress	may	wish	to	consider.	We	offer	two	comments,	intended	as	modifications	to	the	current	language	before	adopting	it	as	a	permanent	exemption.	First,	it’s	not	clear	why	the	violation	of	any	applicable	law	and	Computer	Fraud	and	Abuse	Act	(CFAA)	are	called	out.	Do	the	CFAA	and	other	laws	not	apply	independently	of	this	or	any	other	DMCA	exemption?	The	CFAA	in	particular	is	subject	to	active	debate	about	its	chilling	effects	on	good-faith	security	research.1	We	suggest	removing	the	text	“…and	does	not	violate	any	applicable	law,	including	without	limitation	the	Computer	Fraud	and	Abuse	Act	of	1986,	as	amended	and	codified	in	title	18,	United	States	Code”	from	37	CFR	201.40	(b)(7)(i).	
																																																								1	https://www.ischool.berkeley.edu/sites/default/files/cybersec-research-nsf-workshop.pdf

[PAGE 2]
	
The	second	comment	is	about	constraining	research	to	three	types	of	device	or	machine:	(A)	A	device	or	machine	primarily	designed	for	use	by	individual	consumers	(including	voting	machines);	(B)	A	motorized	land	vehicle;	or	(C)	A	medical	device	designed	for	whole	or	partial	implantation	in	patients	or	a	corresponding	personal	monitoring	system,	that	is	not	and	will	not	be	used	by	patients	or	for	patient	care.	How	were	these	constraints	chosen?	What	about	airplanes,	industrial	control	systems,	enterprise	information	technology	designed	for	professional	use,	or	any	other	imaginable	device	or	machine?	We	know	of	no	device	or	machine	(or,	more	specifically,	the	software	that	runs	on	them)	that	is	immune	from	vulnerabilities	and	should	not	be	open	to	good-faith	security	research.	Furthermore,	modern	systems	share	software	and	hardware	components.	The	same	component	used	in	a	consumer	device	may	also	be	used	in	a	medical	device,	ground	vehicle,	or	industrial	control	system.	We	suggest	that	the	critical	distinction	is	that	research	is	conducted	safely	–	as	implied	in	(C):	“…that	[the	device]	is	not	and	will	not	be	used	by	patients	or	for	patient	care.”	We	recommend	removing	the	“device	or	machine”	constraints.	It	may	be	useful	to	add	language	requiring	exempted,	good-faith	security	research	to	be	conducted	safely,	in	test	environments,	and	that	test	targets	not	be	used	in	production	if	there	is	any	concern	about	future	performance	and	safety,	as	noted	in	(C).	Such	language,	however,	is	already	present	in	37	CFR	201.40	(b)(7)(iI):	“…where	such	activity	is	carried	out	in	a	controlled	environment	designed	to	avoid	any	harm	to	individuals	or	the	public.”
