[PAGE 1]
 
Comments on Section 1201 Study Page 1 of 6 Society of American Archivists 
Before the 
Copyright Office 
Library of Congress 
Washington, D.C. 20024 
 
 
 
 
 
In the Matter of   
  
Section 1201 Study: Notice and  Docket No. 2015-8 
Request for Public Comment  
  
 
 
 
 
 
COMMENTS 
OF 
THE SOCIETY OF AMERICAN ARCHIVISTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dennis E. Meissner, President  
Society of American Archivists 
17 North State Street, Suite 1425 
Chicago, IL 60602-4061

[PAGE 2]
 
Comments on Section 1201 Study Page 2 of 6 Society of American Archivists 
 
The Society of American Archivists (SAA) congratulates the Copyright Office on its desire to assess and 
improve the operation of section 1201 of Title 17, including the triennial rulemaking process.  
SAA is the oldest and largest organization of archivists in North America. It serves the education and 
information needs of its members, including more than 6,200 individual archivists and institutions, and 
provides leadership to help ensure the identification, preservation, and use of the nation's historical 
record. To fulfill this mission, SAA exerts active leadership on significant archival issues by shaping 
policies and standards, and serves as an advocate on behalf of both professionals who manage archival 
records and the citizens who use those records.  
SAA is convinced that section 1201 has the potential to harm archivists’ ability to identify, acquire, and 
preserve records that ensure the rights of individuals and document American culture. Section 1201’s 
impediments are particularly troublesome given the absence of any empirical evidence that section 
1201 has lessened the incidence of piracy or “been useful in expanding consumer choice and the 
avenues for dissemination of creative works,” as the notice suggests. 
SAA’s responses to the specific subjects posed by the Copyright Office follow. 
General 
1. Please provide any insights or observations regarding the role and effectiveness of the prohibition on 
circumvention of technological measures in section 1201(a). 
 
It is SAA’s understanding that the measures intended to outlaw the circumvention of access control 
tools had two major goals: the elimination of “piracy” of copyrighted content and the 
encouragement of new business models for the distribution of digital content. SAA cannot speak to 
either of these issues; it does not have the data that the Copyright Office needs. SAA does, however, 
encourage the Copyright Office to undertake a careful empirical study to determine if the anti-
circumvention measures in section 1201 have led to a decrease in “piracy” and the development of 
consumer-desired new digital distribution channels. Until one has a clear sense of any benefits from 
the implementation of section 1201, it is difficult to know how to evaluate the section in light of its 
real costs (detailed below).  
2. How should section 1201 accommodate interests that are outside of core copyright concerns, for 
example, in cases where circumvention of access controls protecting computer programs implicates 
issues of product interoperability or public safety? 
 
SAA fears that the more the copyright statute moves away from core copyright concerns, the harder 
it becomes to understand and enforce basic copyright principles. Just as copyright should not be 
used as a mechanism to enforce the privacy interests of individuals, so too should it not be used to 
endorse and enforce particular business practices. The Copyright Office should focus on the core 
copyright concerns of reproduction, distribution, public performance, public display, and, for sound 
recordings, public performance by means of digital audio transmission utilized in support of the 
public good. Issues of product interoperability and public safety should be left to agencies (and laws) 
that are better able to evaluate the competing interests involved.

[PAGE 3]
 
Comments on Section 1201 Study Page 3 of 6 Society of American Archivists 
Rulemaking Process 
3. Should section 1201 be adjusted to provide for presumptive renewal of previously granted 
exemptions—for example, when there is no meaningful opposition to renewal—or otherwise be 
modified to streamline the process of continuing an existing exemption? If so, how?  
 
Streamlining the renewal of existing exemptions is an excellent idea. In material submitted to the 
House Judiciary Committee’s Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property, and the Internet as 
part of its comprehensive review of the nation’s copyright law, the Library Copyright Alliance 
proposed that after an exemption is granted, the burden in subsequent rulemakings “should be on 
those opposed to renewal to demonstrate why the exemption should not be renewed or should be 
modified in some manner. Moreover, if a second renewal is granted, the exemption should become 
permanent.”1 These are excellent suggestions that should be implemented. 
 
4. Please assess the current legal requirements that proponents of an exemption must satisfy to 
demonstrate entitlement to an exemption. Should they be altered? If so, how? In responding, please 
comment on the relationship to traditional principles of administrative law.  
 
Archivists preserve a wide variety of primary sources for the benefit of future generations. 
Preserving materials is a means to this end, not an end in itself. Archival materials provide 
surrogates for human memory, both individually and collectively, and when properly maintained, 
they serve as evidence against which individual and social memory can be tested. Archivists know 
that materials that are password-protected, encrypted, or otherwise encumbered with access 
control mechanisms are going to come into their collections. We have heard from some who have 
received this material and have been able to secure “keys” or other mechanisms that can, with the 
permission of the content owner, unlock the content. Other archivists may have received such 
material and used anti-circumvention tools to bypass the technical protection measures on the files 
in order to make non-infringing uses of the material. These archivists are understandably unwilling 
to go on record as to their potentially infringing actions.  
 
The requirement that future adverse impact during any three-year period must be proven through 
“concrete evidence, examples and data supporting their responses” has therefore impeded SAA’s 
participation in the rule-making process.2 Furthermore, in many cases the three-year window is too 
long. A grant-funded preservation project that encounters protected digital files may not have 
enough funding to allow the archivists to wait for the next triennial rulemaking process and seek 
permission to bypass the measures that are preventing them from making lawful use of the files. By 
the time SAA will have assembled a portfolio of “concrete evidence, examples and data,” it may be 
too late for many critical preservation actions. Given the rapid pace of technical change, it may no 
longer be possible to bypass an anti-circumvention mechanism.  
                                                           
1 Chapter 12 of Title 17: Hearing Before the Subcomm. on Courts, Intellectual Prop., and the Internet of the H. 
Comm. on the Judiciary, 113th Cong. (2014) (‘‘Chapter 12 of Title 17 Hearing’’) at 24. 
2 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Cont rol Technologies, 
Notice of Inquiry, 64 FR 66139 (Nov. 24, 1999), at 66142.

[PAGE 4]
 
Comments on Section 1201 Study Page 4 of 6 Society of American Archivists 
The second major barrier has been the narrow definition of what constitutes a “particular class of 
copyrighted works.” Often digital archival material is donated by heirs or successor business 
executives who may not be aware that the collection contains encrypted content and often are not 
in possession of the encryption keys or passwords. Protected or encrypted material could be in any 
of the section 1201 categories. What defines them is not their content but rather where they are 
being stored and the kinds of uses that are being made of them. The recent recommendation from 
the Copyright Office that a “class of works” may be defined by reference to the particular type of 
use and/or user to which the exemption should apply is an important and welcome first step in 
addressing this problem. 3 The proper approach would be to provide a blanket exemption for 
archives engaging in non-infringing activities. At a minimum, the blanket exemption would 
encompass all acts authorized in section 108 of the Copyright Act. Even better would be a blanket 
exemption for any lawful use. It makes no sense to have the Copyright Act restrict in any way acts 
that are non-infringing. 
5. Please provide additional suggestions to improve the rulemaking process.  
 
There is inherent in the entire 1201 rulemaking process a fundamental flaw: The rulemaking should 
not apply to anti-circumvention actions undertaken to accomplish a non-infringing use. At a 
minimum, more reasonable permanent exemptions should be adopted (as discussed below in the 
response to question 8) to minimize the effort we all must expend on this procedure. 
 
Anti-Trafficking Prohibitions 
6. Please assess the role of the anti-trafficking provisions of sections 1201(a)(2) and 1201(b) in 
deterring copyright infringement, and address whether any amendments may be advisable.  
 
SAA is not aware that the anti-trafficking provisions of section 1201(a)(2) and 1201(b) have had any 
impact in deterring copyright infringement. We do know, however, that the provisions have created 
an absurd, Catch-22 situation for any archives that sought to adhere to the letter of the law. Imagine 
that an archives petitioned successfully for an exemption to allow it to bypass an anti-circumvention 
measure on a file in its collection. It would then have to develop the technology that would allow for 
the anti-circumvention. But digital preservation is a community-based activity. No one institution 
can afford to develop all of the software tools needed to ensure the accessibility of digital materials 
over the long term. Instead, our work is conducted using software that is shared among institutions. 
For many years, the Library of Congress itself maintained a repository of shared digital preservation 
tools.4 That role has now been assumed by the Community Owned Digital Preservation Tool Registry 
(COPTR).5 It lists 410 shared tools that can be used in digital preservation. Yet because of the 
prohibition on trafficking in anti-circumvention tools, few of the available tools can assist archives in 
                                                           
3 U.S. Copyright Office, Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights in RM 2005 -11, Rulemaking on Exemptions 
from Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies 9-10 (Nov. 17, 
2006), http://www.copyright.gov/1201/docs/1201_recommendation.pdf . 
4 http://www.digitalpreservation.gov/tools/. 
5 http://coptr.digipres.org/Main_Page.

[PAGE 5]
 
Comments on Section 1201 Study Page 5 of 6 Society of American Archivists 
circumventing technical protection measures even when the purpose for circumventing the 
measure is non-infringing. Without the ability to acquire and use anti-circumvention tools from third 
parties, the 1201 rulemaking process is pointless. 
 
7. Should section 1201 be amended to allow the adoption of exemptions to the prohibition on 
circumvention that can extend to exemptions to the anti-trafficking prohibitions, and if so, in what 
way? For example, should the Register be able to recommend, and the Librarian able to adopt, 
exemptions that permit third-party assistance when justified by the record?  
 
As the Copyright Office’s notice notes, it is often impossible for an individual or an agency to carry 
out anti-circumvention activities even if authorized through the rulemaking. SAA suggests that the 
normal principles of agency should apply to anti-circumvention. If it is legal for an archives to 
undertake an activity, it should also be legal for the agents of that archives to conduct that activity 
for the repository. 
 
Permanent Exemptions 
8. Please assess whether the existing categories of permanent exemptions are necessary, relevant, 
and/or sufficient. How do the permanent exemptions affect the current state of reverse engineering, 
encryption research, and security testing? How do the permanent exemptions affect the activities of 
libraries, archives, and educational institutions? How might the existing permanent exemptions be 
amended to better facilitate such activities? 
 
There are a number of elements in the 1201 rulemaking process that seem to have been designed 
merely to encourage contempt of copyright law. None, however, is as ridiculous as the permanent 
exemption found in section 1201(d). No library or archives asked for this exemption and none would 
ever use it. If an institution wished to gain access to a commercially exploited, copyrighted work in 
order to make a good-faith determination of whether to acquire such a work, it would simply ask 
the vendor for test access. The idea that a repository would instead develop tools to allow it hack 
into a commercial system is simply absurd. 
 
A reasonable permanent exemption is possible. Section 1201(d) should be amended to allow 
archives and libraries to circumvent technical protection measures restricting access when the 
purpose is non-infringing, such as when it is authorized by sections 107, 108, 109, 110, or 117 of the 
Copyright Act. Further, the prohibition against trafficking in tools that enable the circumvention 
should be lifted for such purposes.  
9. Please assess whether there are other permanent exemption categories that Congress should 
consider establishing—for example, to facilitate access to literary works by print-disabled persons? 
 
All archives face the difficult challenge of providing equal access to people with disabilities, including 
those individuals with visual or hearing impairments as well as those whose physical disabilities may 
make it difficult for them to travel to a repository. Anything that can be done to make archival 
resources more available to all citizens is welcomed and encouraged.

[PAGE 6]
 
Comments on Section 1201 Study Page 6 of 6 Society of American Archivists 
Other  
10. To what extent and how might any proposed amendments to section 1201 implicate the United 
States’ trade and treaty obligations? 
 
11. Please identify any pertinent issues not referenced above that the Copyright Office should consider in 
conducting its study.
