[PAGE 1]
 
Commenting Party:  Competitive Carriers Association (“CCA”) 
 
Contact:   Rebecca Murphy Thompson, EVP & General Counsel 
    Email: rthompson@ccamobile.org  
    Telephone: (800) 722-1872 
 
Comment Submission: Section 1201 Study: Notice and Request for Public Comment 
    Notice of Inquiry  
Docket No. 2015-8 
ID: COLC-2015-0012  
 
Date:    October 27, 2016 
 
 
COMMENTS OF COMPETITIVE CARRIERS ASSOCIATION 
     
Competitive Carriers Association (“CCA”)1 submits the following comments in response 
to a Notice of Inquiry (“Notice”), in which the United States Copyright Office (the “Office”) 
seeks additional comment on the operation of the Section 1201 rulemaking process under the 
Digital Millennium Copyright Act (“DMCA”).  These comments focus on the Notice’s proposal 
to adopt “a permanent exemption to permit circumvention of access controls on wireless devices 
for purposes of ‘unlocking’ such devices – i.e., enabling them to connect to the network of a 
different mobile wireless carrier.”2  CCA has been the principal advocate for this exemption and 
supports adoption of the Notice’s proposal, consistent with the 2015 unlocking exemption.   
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1  CCA is the leading association for competitive wireless providers and stakeholders across 
 the United States.  CCA’s membership includes nearly 100 competitive wireless  providers 
 ranging from small, rural carriers serving fewer than 5,000 subscribers, to regional and national 
 providers serving millions of customers.  CCA also represents approximately 200 associate 
 members consisting of small businesses, vendors, and suppliers that provide products and 
 services throughout the mobile communications supply chain. 
 
2   U.S. Copyright Office, Library of Congress, Section 1201 Study: Request for Additional 
Comments, Notice of Inquiry, Docket No. 2015-8 at 4 (rel. Sept. 27, 2016) (the “Notice”).

[PAGE 2]
2 
 
BACKGROUND 
Over the past decade, CCA has participated in several rounds of the Section 1201 
triennial rulemaking proceedings seeking exemptions that would allow circumvention of access 
controls on wireless devices, such as mobile phones and tablets, so users may easily connect to 
wireless networks through their preferred carrier.  It was a win for consumers and competitive 
carriers alike when the Librarian of Congress adopted exemptions permitting unlocking of 
wireless handsets in 2006, 2010, 2012, and 2015.3   
As CCA’s initial comments in these proceedings indicate, CCA was pleased that the 
Register of Copyrights (the “Register”) recognized the need to reexamine the burdensome 
triennial rulemaking process and recommended that Congress revise Section 1201 to better 
account for exemptions that lack meaningful opposition or otherwise demonstrate a need for a 
permanent exemption.4   
 
 
 
                                                 
3  See U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, SECTION 1201 RULEMAKING:  SIXTH TRIENNIAL PROCEEDING TO 
DETERMINE EXEMPTIONS TO THE PROHIBITION ON CIRCUMVENTION, RECOMMENDATION OF THE 
REGISTER OF COPYRIGHTS 138 (2015), available at http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/registers-
recommendation.pdf  (“2015 Recommendation”).  In 2012, the adopted exemption was more  
restrictive and limited to wireless handsets obtained by January 26, 2013.  In response to vocal 
public disapproval and advocacy from stakeholders, Congress passed the Unlocking Consumer 
Choice and Wireless Competition Act, which, among other things, reinstated the broader 2010 
unlocking exemption for wireless handsets.  Congress also directed the Copyright Office to 
examine and consider in the 2015 rulemaking proceeding whether additional types of devices 
should be included under this exemption.  See Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless 
Competition Act, Pub. L. No. 113-144, 128 Stat. 1751 (2014) (the “Unlocking Act”).  
4  See generally Comments of CCA at 2 (filed Mar. 3, 2016) (“CCA Policy Study Comments”) 
(CCA, among other things, agreed that “exemptions to the prohibition on circumvention for 
wireless devices are ripe for permanent consideration” and requested that the Register 
recommend that Congress adopt a permanent wireless device unlocking exemption).

[PAGE 3]
3 
 
DISCUSSION 
CCA urges the Copyright Office to make permanent the device unlocking exemption as 
adopted in the 2015 triennial rulemaking (“2015 device exemption”).5  A device unlocking 
exemption is good public policy, providing consumers with greater choice of both wireless 
carrier and mobile device, as well as fostering competition in the mobile broadband marketplace.  
A permanent unlocking exemption will provide needed stability and certainty to carriers and 
consumers currently operating in a more competitive environment.  The 2015 device exemption 
provides appropriate language for a permanent exemption.  The 2015 exemption is more broadly 
written than its predecessors, encompassing technologies like wearables and other portable 
devices which will become increasingly ubiquitous as the Internet of Things (“IoT”) develops.  
Moreover, a permanent unlocking exemption will ease the substantial burden on those 
participating in the resource-intensive triennial rulemaking proceedings.  In addition, the current 
exemption has received little objection.6  Congress and the record in these proceedings supports 
the contemplated 2015 device exemption.  Accordingly, CCA supports making permanent the 
unlocking exemption for wireless devices as articulated by the 2015 exemption.     
 
 
                                                 
5  Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
 Technologies, 80 FR 65944, 65950 (Oct. 28, 2015) (“2015 Final Rule”). 
6  See Testimony of Steven Berry before the United States Copyright Office, at pps. 33 – 34 (May 
31, 2012), available at http://copyright.gov/1201/2012/hearings/transcripts/hearing-05-31-
2012.pdf; see also Testimony of Steven Berry before the United States House of Representatives 
Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property and the Internet, H.R. 
1123, the “Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act” (June 6, 2013), available 
at http://judiciary.house.gov/index.cfm/hearings?ID=379A2DB0-9D53-
E1934DBB9687D1DFA54C.

[PAGE 4]
4 
 
 
I. A PERMANENT UNLOCKING EXEMPTION WILL BENEFIT THE PUBLIC 
 
Establishing a permanent unlocking exemption for wireless devices will result in 
significant and sustained public benefits by promoting competition, innovation and consumer 
choice.  The unlocking exemption allows customers more freedom and flexibility to select the 
wireless provider of their choice.  Absent an exemption for wireless device unlocking, wireless 
device owners may be forced to purchase a new, and oftentimes expensive, wireless handset to 
change service providers and connect to their preferred wireless network.  This may result in 
substantial consumer costs in the form of the price paid for a new wireless device (while their 
current device becomes obsolete), lost personal information and other assets stored on the device 
such as contacts, music, apps, and wireless accessories, to name a few.  These costs likely will 
hinder a consumer’s ability to switch service providers, or otherwise prevent consumers from 
choosing to switch, thus diminishing competition.  Consumers should not be forced to choose 
between being locked to an undesirable network or losing their device and the data that comes 
with it.  Moreover, without a permanent exemption, every three years consumers and carriers 
will continue to experience uncertainty about the ability to unlock a device.7  Consumers should 
not have to worry about losing the right to use their devices on a network of their choosing.   
Further, unlocking is particularly important to correct a market imbalance that, in the 
past, led to exclusive contracts between dominant carriers and original equipment manufacturers 
(“OEMs”) for the most sought-after devices.  This dynamic has, and would, prevent millions of 
consumers from accessing the latest devices, stifling competition and innovation.   
                                                 
7  A consistent exemption would provide a level of stability and certainty not only for consumers 
and providers, but also investors and innovators.  See Policy Study Comments of New America’s 
Open Technology Institute (filed Mar. 3, 2016).

[PAGE 5]
5 
 
II. THE 2015 DEVICE EXEMPTION PROVIDES APPROPRIATE LANGUAGE 
FOR A PERMANENT DEVICE UNLOCKING EXEMPTION  
The 2015 exemption is appropriately written for permanent adoption of a device 
unlocking exemption.  The 2015 exemption includes more expansive language than previous 
exemptions, while focusing on use of wireless devices as opposed to altering rights of content 
owners.  Particularly, the 2015 exemption covers mobile phones and tablets, as well as mobile 
hotspots and other “portable mobile connectivity devices,” including wearable devices like 
smartwatches.8  This language will ensure the exemption continues to be meaningful to 
consumers and industry stakeholders as technology evolves over time. 
III. THE RECORD REFLECTS A CLEAR NEED FOR THIS EXEMPTION 
 Providers and other stakeholders should not have to engage in a tedious and burdensome 
rulemaking proceeding every three years to protect the rights of their customers for an exemption 
like device unlocking, which faces little opposition.  As CCA has explained – and the record 
strongly supports9 – the triennial rulemaking proceeding is resource-intensive, costly and 
inefficient with regard to certain, specific exemptions.  Indeed, every three years device-
unlocking proponents are required to prepare several rounds of written submissions, review a 
substantial written record,10 and potentially participate in a hearing before representatives of the 
                                                 
8  See 2015 Final Rule at 65950. 
9   See, e.g., Policy Study Reply Comments of Electronic Frontier Foundation (filed Apr. 1, 2016); 
Policy Study Reply Comments of International Doc Association et al. (filed Apr. 1, 2016); Policy 
Study Reply Comments of U.S. Intellectual Property and Technology Law Clinic (filed Apr. 1, 
2016); Policy Study Comments of ACM U.S. Public Policy Council (filed Mar. 3, 2016); Policy 
Study Comments of Consumers Union (filed Mar. 3, 2016); Policy Study Comments of 
DIYAbility (filed Mar. 3, 2016); Policy Study Comments of Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology Libraries (filed Mar. 3, 2016); Policy Study Comments of New Media Rights (filed 
Mar. 3, 2016); Comments of Owners Rights’ Initiative (filed Mar. 3, 2016); Policy Study 
Comments of Public Knowledge (filed Mar. 3, 2016). 
10  Nearly 40,000 comments were submitted in the sixth triennial rulemaking.  See U.S. Copyright 
Office, Library of Congress, Section 1201 Study: Notice and Request for Public Comment,

[PAGE 6]
6 
 
Office, even where there is no real objection.11  If the proposed permanent exemption is not 
adopted, then CCA and other proponents will need to decide in 2018, and then 2021 and so on, 
whether they can expend substantial resources toward a rulemaking that may be otherwise 
directed in a more efficient manner.12  Adopting a permanent exemption will change this pattern, 
and will “minimize the effort [participants] must expend” on the rulemaking process, benefiting 
and creating additional certainty for participants, consumers and the Office.13     
IV. THERE IS CONGRESSIONAL SUPPORT FOR A PERMANENT DEVICE 
UNLOCKING EXEMPTION  
Congress plainly supports a device unlocking exemption, and therefore the Office should 
move forward confidently in adopting a permanent unlocking exemption.  A form of unlocking 
exemption has been recommended by the Register since 2006, with Congress continuously 
providing a stamp of approval for a wireless device unlocking exemption.14  The most apparent 
example of Congress’s support is its adoption of the Unlocking Act, which it enacted in response 
to the Office’s failure to recommend a suitable unlocking exemption for wireless devices.15  In 
                                                 
Notice of Inquiry, Docket No. 2015-8 at 5 (rel. Dec. 22, 2015) (the “2015 Section 1201 Study 
Notice”).   
11  See CCA Policy Study Comments at 5-11.  For instance, although many of the different 
unlocking classes proposed by CCA in the 2015 rulemaking proceeding possessed similar and 
overlapping attributes, CCA still was required to prepare and file five separate petitions and 
rounds of comments for each class, even if an exemption was already in place.   
12  Policy Study Comments of Organization for Transformative Works at 8 (filed Mar. 3, 2016) 
(noting that with the adoption of more permanent exemptions, the “Copyright Office, copyright 
owners, and public interest organizations could focus elsewhere, where numerous other copyright 
issues remain in need of attention . . . [it] would also at least reduce the burden on the Copyright 
Office on a long-term basis.”); see also Policy Study Comments of DIYAbility (filed Mar. 3, 
2016) (explaining that permanent exemptions would “streamline the comment process.”).   
13  Policy Study Comments of Society of American Archivists at 4 (filed Mar. 3, 2016).  
14  See supra note 2 and accompanying text.  
15  See supra note 2.

[PAGE 7]
7 
 
passing the Unlocking Act, Congress “permanently established” that circumvention under any 
exemption to permit a wireless telephone handset or other wireless device to connect to a 
different telecommunications network may be initiated by the owner of the handset or device, or 
other specific individuals.16  Accordingly, the Copyright Office should not feel constrained by 
lack of Congressional support when adopting a permanent exemption for device unlocking. 
V. THE RECORD SUPPORTS A PERMANENT DEVICE UNLOCKING 
EXEMPTION  
The record in the 1201 Study supports expanding the categories of permanent exemptions 
as well.  While there was limited opposition to expanding the categories of permanent 
exemptions generally, there was no significant opposition on the record to the adoption of a 
permanent exemption for wireless device unlocking.  Public Knowledge explained that “the 
number of repeat exemption requests . . . speaks to the value of expanding the set of permanent 
exemption categories.”17  The Massachusetts Institute of Technology and University of Virginia 
Library agree that a “useful” permanent exemption would be one that permits circumvention for 
all lawful uses permitted by the Copyright Act, as contemplated by the Unlocking Act.18  An 
effective permanent exemption, especially one concerning technology, must also be forward-
thinking.  The language of the 2015 unlocking exemption is broad and covers a wide array of 
                                                 
16  2015 Section 1201 Study Notice at 9; Unlocking Act, § 2(a), (c), 128 Stat. at 1751-52; see also 37 
C.F.R. 201.40(b)(3) (2012).  
17  Policy Study Comments of Public Knowledge at 9 (filed Mar 3, 2016); see also Policy Study 
Comments of Society of American Archivists at 3 (filed Mar. 3, 2016) (arguing that if a second 
renewal is granted, the exemption should become permanent.).   
18  See Policy Study Comments of Massachusetts Institute of Technology at 5 (filed Mar. 3, 2016); 
Policy Study Comments of University of Virginia Library at 3 (field Mar. 3, 2016); see also 
Policy Study Comments of Authors Alliance at 4 (filed Mar. 2, 2016); Policy Study Comments of 
Organization for Transformative Works at 8 (filed Mar. 3, 2016) (recognizing that the “best result 
would be a permanent exemption for noninfringing uses, avoiding the extended, wasteful 
wrangling involved” in the rulemaking proceedings).

[PAGE 8]
8 
 
wireless devices, including mobile phones, mobile tablets, portable mobile connectivity devices 
and wearable devices.  As such, this exemption will evolve with new devices technology using 
the underlying software.  The Office should adopt a permanent wireless device unlocking 
exemption consistent with the 2015 exemption.19   
VI. CONCLUSION 
The time is ripe for the Office to adopt a permanent exemption for unlocking wireless 
devices, as articulated by the 2015 device exemption.  A permanent exemption for unlocking 
wireless devices will help ensure a consumer-friendly mobile broadband market wherein 
consumers can purchase a device and easily switch between compatible providers without taking 
a loss on their often substantial investment.  It will also facilitate competition between providers, 
by limiting the impact of any exclusive arrangements between OEMs and dominant wireless 
carriers.  Next, making permanent the wireless device unlocking exemption will reduce 
uncertainty and relieve consumer and industry groups from the formidable burden of 
participating in Triennial Rulemakings.  Certainly, the public benefit of this exemption is 
uncontroversial and the record supports a permanent exemption.  Further, adopting a permanent 
exemption for wireless devices enjoys Congressional support.  For the foregoing reasons, CCA 
supports the adoption of a permanent exemption for wireless device unlocking, consistent with 
the 2015 unlocking exemption.   
 
 
                                                 
19  CCA would not be opposed to also including “Consumer Machines” and therefore allowing the 
Internet of Things (“IoT”) within the scope of the permanent exemption.  This would include 
“smart” devices that utilize data connections to connect to the Internet or interact with other smart 
devices.

[PAGE 9]
9 
 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
/s/ Rebecca Murphy Thompson          
Steven K. Berry 
Rebecca Murphy Thompson 
Elizabeth Barket 
COMPETITIVE CARRIERS ASSOCIATION  
805 15th Street NW, Suite 401 
       Washington, DC 20005 
 
October 27, 2016
