[PAGE 1]
 
 
Before the 
U.S. Copyright Office 
Library of Congress 
 
 
In the Matter of: 
 
Section 1201 Study: Notice and 
Request for Public Comment 
 
 
 
Docket No. 2015-8 
 
COMMENTS OF THE ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE ASSOCIATION 
 
The Entertainment Software Association (“ESA”) welcomes the opportunity to provide 
these Comments in response to the Copyright Office’s Notice of Inquiry (“NOI”) concerning the 
operation of Section 1201 of the Copyright Act.1  ESA is the U.S. trade association serving 
companies that publish computer and video games for video game consoles, handheld gaming 
devices, personal computers, and the Internet.  It represents nearly all of the major video game 
publishers and major gaming platform providers in the U.S.2   
Section 1201 serves the public interest well.  American life and culture has been 
tremendously enriched by new copyrighted works, and new ways to enjoy those works, that have 
been made possible by the protections provided by Section 1201.  This is particularly true in the 
video game industry, where platform and content creators have brought to consumers a vast 
array of new game experiences, new ways to access and enjoy game content, and new ways to 
experience non-game content such as music, films, television shows and live sports 
programming.  All of these innovations have been made possible by technological measures used 
to secure creative content and the software that permits consumers to buy and render it.  And 
                                                 
1 Section 1201 Study: Notice and Request for Public Comment, 80 Fed. Reg. 81,369 (Dec. 29, 2015). 
 
2 See http://www.theesa.com/about-esa/members/ (listing ESA’s members).

[PAGE 2]
 
2 
while triennial rulemaking proceedings require substantial resources from the Office and all 
other significant participants, the breadth and importance of this process makes that result 
unavoidable.  It is possible that some adjustments to the Copyright Office’s procedures for 
triennial rulemakings may be warranted, but overall, Section 1201 is doing a very good job of 
serving the purposes of copyright, including supporting innovation and promoting access to 
creative works.   
I. Introduction 
As the Office recognized at the conclusion of the sixth triennial rulemaking under Section 
1201, the Copyright Act’s prohibitions on circumvention of technological protection measures 
have “played a critical role in the development of the digital marketplace that is a defining 
feature of modern life.”3  Specifically, when Congress enacted Section 1201, it anticipated that 
technological protection measures would be used to “support new ways of disseminating 
copyrighted materials to users.”4  That is precisely what has happened in the nearly twenty years 
since the DMCA.  As a result, the anticircumvention provisions have “fostered widespread 
dissemination and enjoyment of creative works by establishing legal protections for copyrighted 
content . . . .”5   
The NOI notes that “the use of technological measures has been useful in expanding 
consumer choice and the avenues for dissemination of creative works, for example movies and 
                                                 
3 Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights in the Sixth Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the 
Prohibition on Circumvention, at 1 (Oct. 2015) [hereinafter “2015 Register’s Recommendation”]; see also 80 Fed. 
Reg. at 81,369 (referring to the “pivotal” role of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (“DMCA”)).  
 
4 Staff of H. Comm. on the Judiciary, 105th Cong., Section-by-Section Analysis of H.R. 2281 as Passed by the 
United States House of Representatives on August 4th, 1998, at 6 (Comm. Print 1998) [hereinafter “House 
Manager’s Report”].  
 
5 2015 Register’s Recommendation, at 1.

[PAGE 3]
 
3 
video games.”6  The Office’s reference to video games is appropriate, because the video game 
industry has been tremendously successful at providing Americans access to new works and new 
means of accessing works.  About 80% of U.S. households own a device used to play video 
games, and 51% of U.S. households own a dedicated game console.7  Over 150 million 
Americans play video games, and 42% of Americans play video games regularly, or at least 
three hours per week.8  In addition to playing games, 54% of gamers who own consoles use them 
to watch movies, 33% use them to watch television shows, 27% use them to listen to music, and 
20% use them to watch live and other content.9  In 2015, the industry generated U.S. revenues of 
$23.5 billion from sales of hardware, game software, other content, accessories and services.10  
Indeed, video games are “the fastest growing sector of the entertainment industry and an 
important driver of economic growth, creating millions of jobs, generating much-needed tax 
revenues and offering exciting opportunities for talented creators and engineers from all corners 
of the globe.”11 
This success depends significantly on the protections provided by Section 1201.  Of 
course, video game publishers rely on access and copy controls to reduce infringement of the 
thousands of original video games they create each year.  However, technological protection 
measures are used in the game industry to enable a much broader range of exciting new 
                                                 
6 80 Fed. Reg. at 81,372. 
 
7 ESA Essential Facts about the Computer and Video Game Industry, at 2 (Apr. 2015), available at 
http://www.theesa.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/ESA-Essential-Facts-2015.pdf. 
 
8 Id.  
 
9 Id. at 6. 
 
10 ESA, U.S. Video Game Industry Generates $23.5 Billion in Revenue for 2015 , available at 
http://www.theesa.com/article/u-s-video-game-industry-generates-23-5-billion-in-revenue-for-2015/ 
 
11 David Greenspan, S. Gregory Boyd and Jas Purewal, Video Games and IP: A Global Perspective, WIPO 
Magazine (Apr. 2014), available at http://www.wipo.int/wipo_magazine/en/2014/02/article_0002.html.

[PAGE 4]
 
4 
consumer offerings.  Video game consoles are the center of an intellectual property ecosystem 
that makes a wide variety of copyrighted content easily and legally accessible.  Each of the three 
major home consoles works in tandem with an integrated, console-specific online network.12  
These networks provide an array of functions in support of game play, including announcements 
for new games, downloading of games, enabling multiplayer game play, expansion packs and 
updates, tournaments, tracking of trophies and achievement badges, social and community 
features, and customization of avatars.  These networks also provide access to non-game 
entertainment services, including movies, television shows, music and live sports programming.  
The creative content available through these networks comes from partners ranging from the 
largest media companies to the smallest independent producers and developers.   
In addition to physical game consoles and their associated networks, consumers also may 
access, obtain and play video games through online game platforms, such as Electronic Arts’ 
Origin13 and Blizzard’s Battle.net.14  Separately, game publishers develop video game software 
for other multipurpose platforms, such as the Windows Store and Apple’s App Store, which 
serve as digital hubs for games playable on mobile phones, tablets and PCs.  Game publishers 
also offer games directly to consumers that are played exclusively online through a PC platform, 
in some cases through a game client that connects to the publishers’ servers and often through a 
web browser interface.   
To secure this content, the industry has designed technological protection measures to 
support the creation and distribution of copyrighted works.  These controls enable the 
                                                 
12 See, e.g., Xbox Entertainment, http://www.xbox.com/en-US/entertainment?xr=shellnav; Nintendo Wii U eShop, 
http://www.nintendo.com/wiiu/eshop; PlayStation Entertainment, http://www.playstation.com/en-
us/explore/playstationnetwork/apps-and-entertainment/. 
 
13 https://www.origin.com/en-us/store/origin-access. 
 
14 http://us.battle.net/en/.

[PAGE 5]
 
5 
distribution of copyrighted works through physical media (e.g., video game discs, DVDs, and 
Blu-ray discs), downloadable files (e.g., video games, expansion packs, video game add-ins and 
television and movie programming), and live streaming (e.g., online games, music, movies, and 
television programming), while preventing individuals from making unauthorized copies of this 
content, distributing it to others, or using a console to play infringing copies of such works.  
These measures including access controls on video game consoles and other devices that ensure 
that content played on such devices is legitimate, and not infringing.  The companies that create 
and make available games and other content for use on gaming devices depend on these access 
controls to prevent unauthorized copying of their content.  
The game industry devotes significant resources on an ongoing basis to maintaining 
security for their games, platforms and non-game content distributed through their platforms.  
These efforts have helped reduce infringement.  For example, a recent TorrentFreak article 
lamented that “increasingly pirates are being made to wait for big titles to have their protection 
defeated,” and that the security on one product was so good that a particular hacker “nearly gave 
up.”15  Still, games and the devices that play them are under constant assault by hackers, and 
numerous providers make available tools to assist others in hacking the security measures built 
into video game consoles.16   
In the face of constant efforts to hack technological protection measures, the video game 
industry and its partners depend upon the legal protections provided by Section 1201 to provide 
consumers with exciting new content and new ways to obtain and interact with content.  The 
                                                 
15 No More Pirated Games in Two Years, Cracking Group Warns, TorrentFreak (Jan. 6, 2016), available at 
https://torrentfreak.com/no-more-pirate-games-in-two-years-group-warns-160106/; see also Patrick Klepek, The 
Anti-Piracy Tech That’s Giving Hackers Fits, Kotaku (Feb. 17, 2016), available at http://kotaku.com/the-anti-
piracy-tech-thats-tearing-video-game-hackers-a-1759518600. 
 
16 E.g., http://jailbreaksoftwaredownload.com/xbox360-jailbreak/; https://hackmii.com/; 
http://sonyps3jailbreak.com/; http://www.modchipcentral.com/store/.

[PAGE 6]
 
6 
video game industry has invoked the Copyright Act’s protections against circumvention on a 
number of occasions17 and, indeed, has probably done so more than any other industry.  Criminal 
prosecutions also have been brought to help reduce circumvention of protection measures used in 
game environments.18   
If the technological protection measures that are applied to game consoles and works 
distributed through consoles legally could be circumvented, copyright owners would be less 
likely to make their highly valuable works available on consoles, and the American public would 
have less access to new works and new means of accessing works.  While it is possible that the 
Office’s study of Section 1201 will identify some adjustments to its procedures that would make 
the Section 1201 system operate even more effectively, the Office should exercise caution in 
evaluating any possible changes, because Section 1201 is working very well.   
II. The Office’s Specific Areas of Inquiry  
General 
1. Please provide any insights or observations regarding the role and effectiveness 
of the prohibition on circumvention of technological measures in section 1201(a). 
 As described more fully above, the protections provided by Section 1201(a) have been 
extremely important to the video game industry and its partners that distribute their non-game 
content through game consoles.  While Section 1201(b) is important too, Section 1201(a) is 
                                                 
17 E.g., MDY Industries, LLC v. Blizzard Entertainment, Inc., 629 F.3d 928 (9th Cir. 2010); Nexon American Inc. v. 
Kumar, No. 2:11–cv–06991–ODW(PJWx), 2012 WL 1116328 (C.D. Cal. Apr. 3, 2012); Sony Computer 
Entertainment America v. Zoomba LDC, No. C 10–3909 VRW, 2010 WL 4512835 (N.D. Cal. Oct. 5, 2010); 
Blizzard Entertainment, Inc. v. Reeves, No. CV 09-7621 SVW (AJWx), 2010 WL 4054095 (C.D. Cal. Aug. 10, 
2010); Nintendo of America Inc. v. Chan, No. CV 09-4203 JFW, 2009 WL 2190186 (C.D. Cal. July 21, 2009); Epic 
Games, Inc. v. Altmeyer, No. 08-CV-0764-MJR, 2008 WL 4853634 (S.D. Ill. Nov. 5, 2008); Sony Computer 
Entertainment America, Inc. v. Divineo, 457 F. Supp. 2d 957 (N.D. Cal. 2006); Sony Computer Entertainment 
America, Inc. v. Filipiak, 406 F. Supp. 2d 1068 (N.D. Cal. 2005); Davidson & Associates, Inc. v. Internet Gateway, 
Inc., 334 F.Supp.2d 1164 (E.D. Mo. 2004); Nintendo of America Inc. v. Bung Enterprises, Ltd., No. 97–8511–GAF 
(VAPx), 1999 WL 34975007 C.D. Cal. Dec. 14, 1999); Sony Computer Entertainment America v. Gamemasters, 87 
F. Supp. 2d 976, 981 (N.D. Cal. 1999). 
 
18 E.g., U.S. v. Reichert, 747 F.3d 445 (6th Cir. 2014); U.S. v. Silvius, 559 Fed. Appx. 490 (6th Cir. 2014).

[PAGE 7]
 
7 
crucial, because the best way to secure a copyrighted work from unauthorized copying or other 
infringement is often to limit access to the work or to the software used to render the work (such 
as in the case of a video game platform).  Through the use of innovative technological protection 
measures – backed up by the legal protections provided by Section 1201 – the video game 
industry has been able to make meaningful progress at combating infringement of the copyrights 
in video games, such that some hackers are now complaining that breaking the security measures 
applied to video games has become too hard.  As a result, the industry has been able to provide 
secure distribution networks that are attractive to content partners.  This has led to an outpouring 
of exciting new games, as well as new methods and business models for consumers to access 
games, game-related services, and non-game content.  Section 1201 is, in the video game 
industry at least, a resounding policy success story. 
2. How should section 1201 accommodate interests that are outside of core 
copyright concerns, for example, in cases where circumvention of access controls 
protecting computer programs implicates issues of product interoperability or 
public safety? 
Section 1201 plays a vital role in enabling and protecting creative expression that lies 
“within the core of the copyright’s protective purposes,”19 such as video games.20  Outside of 
core copyright concerns, Section 1201 already accommodates other interests in several ways.  
First, various “permanent” exemptions address government activities (Section 1201(e)), reverse 
engineering to achieve interoperability (Section 1201(f)), encryption research (Section 1201(g)) 
and security testing (Section 1201(j)).  Second, the triennial rulemaking process provides a 
flexible means of accommodating interests outside of core copyright concerns in a way that a 
                                                 
19 Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569, 586 (1994). 
 
20 See generally Catherine Jewell, Video Games: 21st Century Art, WIPO Magazine (Aug. 2012), available at 
http://www.wipo.int/wipo_magazine/en/2012/04/article_0003.html.

[PAGE 8]
 
8 
permanent statutory provision never could.21  Finally, the courts have found sufficient flexibility 
in Section 1201 to address competitive concerns expressed as to cases arising from factual 
scenarios outside the usual core of copyright protection.22  
The last 20 years have seen an explosion of new works and new means to access works 
made possible by Section 1201, yet through these existing mechanisms, a wide array of interests 
that are outside of core copyright concerns have been accommodated.  Any proposals to modify 
Section 1201 to address non-copyright concern should be evaluated with caution, to avoid 
creating loopholes that every hacker group in the world could rely upon to attack every 
technological protection measure with impunity, under the guise of a permitted use.   
Rulemaking Process 
3. Should section 1201 be adjusted to provide for presumptive renewal of 
previously granted exemptions—for example, when there is no meaningful 
opposition to renewal—or otherwise be modified to streamline the process of 
continuing an existing exemption?  If so, how? 
 ESA does not believe that Section 1201 needs to be amended to provide for presumptive 
renewal of previously granted exemptions.  Indeed, ESA believes that the triennial rulemaking 
process generally has worked satisfactorily to provide a safety valve so that Section 1201’s 
important protections do not inadvertently create undue restraints on noninfringing and socially 
beneficial uses.   
However, most people who have been involved significantly in a triennial rulemaking 
proceeding would likely agree that those proceedings are resource-intensive.  Having 
                                                 
21 See 2015 Register’s Recommendation, at 3, 241-44, 248. 
 
22 See Lexmark Intern., Inc. v. Static Control Components, Inc., 387 F. 3d 522 (6th Cir. 2004) (authentication of 
laser printer toner cartridges); Chamberlain Group, Inc. v. Skylink Technologies, Inc., 381 F.3d 1178 (Fed. Cir. 
2004) (interoperability of garage door openers).

[PAGE 9]
 
9 
participated in all six such proceedings,23 ESA certainly holds that view.  Thus, ESA agrees with 
the Office that it is attractive to look for ways to “streamline” such proceedings to “reduce 
administrative burdens on both the participants and the Copyright Office.”24  Accordingly, ESA 
is open to the possibility of adjustments in the Copyright Office’s procedures to streamline the 
triennial proceedings within the current statutory framework, if the Office believes that such 
changes are warranted. 
 While statutory change is unnecessary, ESA would not oppose adjustments in the 
Copyright Office’s procedures to provide a presumption of renewal of a previously granted 
exemption by shifting the burden of persuasion for such renewal.  This would not change the de 
novo nature of the review in each proceeding, but simply mean that where renewal was proposed 
with a claim that the circumstances that had justified the adoption of the exemption persist and 
support a renewal, and there was no opposition to such renewal (e.g., suggesting that 
circumstances had changed), the exemption could be re-adopted in the same form previously 
adopted without further proof.25  To the extent the Office may wish to modify its procedures to 
                                                 
23 ESA sometimes has participated through joint comments filed with other copyright owner groups, and at the time 
of the first two triennial rulemakings was known as the Interactive Digital Software Association.  
 
24 80 Fed. Reg. at 81,371. 
 
25 Historically, when exemptions covering similar subject matter have been adopted in sequential proceedings, they 
sometimes have remained the same and sometimes have been modified to address current products and use cases.  
For example, there have been exemptions to permit the blind, visually impaired and print-disabled to access e-books 
and similar products since the second triennial rulemaking.  See 68 Fed. Reg. 62,011, 62,014 (Oct. 31, 2003).  A 
modified version of the exemption was adopted in the third triennial proceeding.  Recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights in RM 2005-11, at 40-42 (Nov. 2006).  The same exemption was readopted in the fourth proceeding.  75 
Fed. Reg. 43,825, 43,838-39 (July 27, 2010).  By the fifth proceeding, “the marketplace was very different,” so the 
exemption was revised again.  See 77 Fed. Reg. 65,260, 65,262-63 (Oct. 26, 2012).  The exemption was readopted 
without material change in the sixth proceeding.  80 Fed. Reg. 65,944, 65,950 (Oct. 28, 2015).  Similarly, in the first 
triennial proceeding, the Librarian adopted an exemption for literary works protected by access controls that 
malfunctioned or had become obsolete.  65 Fed. Reg. 64,556, 64,574 (Oct. 27, 2000).  In the second triennial 
proceeding, the Office adopted a pair of exemptions addressing similar issues, but limited only to computer 
programs (including in one case video games) and in more specific circumstances.  68 Fed. Reg. at 62,018.  The 
Librarian adopted similar exemptions in the third triennial proceeding, but with further changes in scope and 
clarifications.  71 Fed. Reg. 68,472, 68,480 (Nov. 27, 2006).  One of those exemptions was proposed for

[PAGE 10]
 
10 
provide a presumption of renewal of unopposed exemptions, ESA encourages the Office to 
incorporate a mechanism to ensure that the regulations implementing Section 1201 do not 
become a repository for outmoded and unnecessary exemptions that continue only because 
nobody cares enough to address them one way or the other.  In the past, when exemptions have 
become irrelevant, gone unused, or been viewed as not important enough to pursue, they have 
been retired without significant controversy or obvious adverse consequences.26  It would be 
desirable to retain some form of periodic review to ensure that only exemptions that are current 
and important remain on the books.   
ESA also notes that the Office has already eased the burden of proof on those who favor 
continuation of an exemption, by specifying that a prima facie case for readoption of an existing 
exemption need only “demonstrat[e] that the conditions that led to the adoption of the prior 
exemption continue to exist today.”27  That existing provision comes close to a presumption of 
renewal.  Accordingly, it may well be that the perceived benefits of a presumption of a renewal 
could be substantially realized, while ensuring that the list of exemptions remains relevant, 
simply by allowing proponents of continuing existing exemptions to make their prima facie 
cases during the petition phase, and requiring any opponents to indicate their intent to oppose at 
an early stage.  Doing so would help all interested parties determine whether meaningful 
                                                                                                                                                             
continuation in the fourth triennial proceeding with additional modifications, but the Librarian decided to readop t 
the exemption without the proposed modifications.  75 Fed. Reg. at 43,833-34.   
 
26 For example, in the fifth triennial proceeding, no one re-proposed the exemption for malfunctioning and obsolete 
access controls discussed above in note 25.  A similar exemption targeted to a particular product was proposed in the 
sixth triennial proceeding and rejected for lack of evidence.  80 Fed. Reg. at 65,961.  As a further example, an 
exemption for compilations consisting of lists of websites blocked by filtering software was adopted in the first 
triennial proceeding.  65 Fed. Reg. at 64,574.  A similar exemption was adopted in the second triennial proceeding.  
68 Fed. Reg. at 62,018.  It was proposed for readoption in the third proceeding, but the Lib rarian discontinued it, due 
to a lack of evidence that it remained relevant.  71 Fed. Reg. at 68,477-78. 
 
27 80 Fed. Reg. at 65,945; see also 79 Fed. Reg. 55,690 (Sept. 17, 2014) (“Assuming the proponent succeeds in 
making such a demonstration, it is incumbent upon any opponent of that exemption to rebut such evidence by 
showing that the exemption is no longer justified.”).

[PAGE 11]
 
11 
controversy exists, allow proponents to avoid unnecessary expenditures of resources to build a 
case that no one planned to oppose, and in the absence of opposition, permit the Office to focus 
its efforts on determining whether the conditions that led to the adoption of the exemption 
continue to exist. 
4. Please assess the current legal requirements that proponents of an exemption 
must satisfy to demonstrate entitlement to an exemption.  Should they be 
altered?  If so, how?  In responding, please comment on the relationship to 
traditional principles of administrative law. 
Triennial rulemakings are burdensome and expensive for copyright owners because 
proponents have placed at issue almost every meaningful use of technological protection 
measures, including ones that are important to protecting valuable expressive works from large-
scale infringement, even though the Office has historically rejected the majority of proposed 
exemptions.  Moreover, even if an exemption has been soundly rejected once, some proponent 
will often try again.  Under those circumstances, it seems to ESA that a way to keep triennial 
proceedings manageable in scope is to rigorously enforce the current standards of proof for new 
exemptions (and changes to existing exemptions).  The triennial rulemaking was intended as a 
“‘fail-safe’ mechanism” to provide an exemption if “someday” it should prove “necessary” to 
ensure access “important to education, scholarship, and other socially vital endeavors.”28  
Consistent with that intention, the “main focus” of the proceeding should be on whether “a 
substantial diminution of [the availability of works] is actually occurring.”29  If rulemaking 
participants understand that proposed exemptions will be granted only when they are genuinely 
necessary to enable significant lawful activities, and do not threaten legitimate markets for 
copyrighted works, proponents will be motivated to seek exemptions only when there is a good 
                                                 
28 H.R. Rep. No. 105–551, pt. 2, at 36 (1998). 
 
29 House Manager’s Report, at 6 (emphasis in original).

[PAGE 12]
 
12 
case for them.  Any weakening of the high standards that should apply invites proposals to create 
exemptions based on hypothetical fears, de minimis experience or mere inconvenience.   
Moreover, just as the Office has already lowered the standard of proof where an 
exemption has previously been granted, ESA believes the Office should consider modification of 
the standard of proof where a similar proposed exemption has previously been rejected.  For 
example, in the fifth triennial proceeding, the Office received a proposal to create an exemption 
for circumvention of access controls on video game consoles.30  The Librarian rejected this 
proposal, agreeing with the Register that “[c]onsole access controls . . . provide important 
incentives to create video games and other content for consoles, and thus play a critical role in 
the development and dissemination of highly innovative copyrighted works.”31  When a similar 
exemption was proposed in the sixth triennial proceeding, it was again rejected.32  To avoid 
wasting the resources of the Office and copyright owners revisiting issues that have previously 
been decided, proponents of an exemption that has previously been rejected should be required 
to show what conditions have changed that would compel a contrary decision in a subsequent 
rulemaking. 
5. Please provide additional suggestions to improve the rulemaking process. 
 As indicated in the NOI and in ESA’s responses above, the triennial rulemaking process 
has become quite involved.  In large part that may simply be the necessary result of a process 
that potentially implicates a wide range of technologies and use cases, and has motivated 
proponents to seek exemptions even when the case for them seems thin.  Thus, while ESA would 
                                                 
30 77 Fed. Reg. at 65,272. 
 
31 Id. at 65,274.   
 
32 80 Fed. Reg. at 65,961.

[PAGE 13]
 
13 
in principle be receptive to ways to streamline the rulemaking process, ESA has no other specific 
suggestions to make at this time.   
Anti-Trafficking Prohibitions 
6. Please assess the role of the antitrafficking provisions of sections 1201(a)(2) and 
1201(b) in deterring copyright infringement, and address whether any 
amendments may be advisable. 
 The antitrafficking provisions of Section 1201 are extremely important to deterring 
copyright infringement, as Congress has recently affirmed.33  Accordingly, ESA does not support 
any amendments to those provisions.  As described above, copyright owners depend upon 
technological protection measures when making decisions about creating and releasing new 
product and service offerings.  Once made available to the public, those offerings are under 
constant assault by hackers.  The antitrafficking provisions are a critical component of the legal 
regime to protect copyrighted works from that onslaught. 
 In the case of video games and other entertainment content available through gaming 
devices, circumvention of access controls on gaming devices is closely connected with 
infringement.  The video game industry has demonstrated that technology itself can sometimes 
make strides against the constant onslaught of hackers.  However, with hackers working hard to 
break every new security measure, video game companies still face a constant battle against 
large-scale infringement.  A common business model for commercial operators to profit from 
video game infringement is to sell circumvention technology or services for a fee to enable 
customers to play infringing games on their consoles, and set up websites to monetize the 
distribution of infringing game files (typically through the sale of advertisements on the site).  
                                                 
33 In the Trade Facilitation and Trade Enforcement Act, Congress recently authorized customs seizure of 
circumvention devices, demonstrating its desire to strengthen rather than weaken the antitrafficking protections o f 
Section 1201.  See Pub. L. No. 114-125 § 303 (enacted Feb. 24, 2016).

[PAGE 14]
 
14 
ESA also sees commercial operators selling circumvention technology packaged with infringing 
copies of games (e.g., circumvention devices preloaded with games, circumvention software 
accompanied by a hard drive of infringing games).    
Under these circumstances, it is important to be able to back up technological measures 
with legal protection, just as Congress perceived in enacting the DMCA.  Specifically, where 
both circumvention technology and infringing content are independently available from many 
sources, it is important that copyright owners be able to target not only the infringement, but also 
the trafficking in circumvention technology to reduce the attractiveness of the business models 
described above.  Being able to target trafficking is also important because the actions of 
distributors of circumvention technology are comparatively easy to detect, and targeting them is 
the most effective and efficient way to protect the rights provided by Section 1201.34   
If it were not possible to target distributors of such technology, and if the only means of 
enforcing Section 1201 were to sue individual users for particular instances of circumvention, the 
legal protections provided by Section 1201 would effectively be a nullity.  This conclusion has 
been confirmed by the experience of video game companies in countries without robust 
antitrafficking provisions.  In such countries, the people really profiting from circumvention are 
effectively untouchable, and prohibitions on circumvention per se are of little practical utility in 
preventing large-scale infringement.  Curtailing the U.S. antitrafficking provisions would 
certainly lead to an increase in infringement. 
                                                 
34 See S. Rep. 105-190, at 28 (1998) (antitrafficking provisions included “to provide meaningful protection and 
enforcement”).

[PAGE 15]
 
15 
7. Should section 1201 be amended to allow the adoption of exemptions to the 
prohibition on circumvention that can extend to exemptions to the 
antitrafficking prohibitions, and if so, in what way?  For example, should the 
Register be able to recommend, and the Librarian able to adopt, exemptions that 
permit third-party assistance when justified by the record? 
 Because the antitrafficking prohibitions are so critical to the operation of Section 1201 – 
and to effective copyright protection for video games and other content distributed through 
gaming platforms – ESA is skeptical of any suggestions to relax those provisions and does not 
support any amendments to Section 1201 at this time.  ESA has seen no evidence that persons 
with a genuine need and desire to engage in permitted circumvention for noninfringing purposes, 
and who lack the ability to do so themselves, have been unable to acquire tools and assistance.  
Instead, there is a very real risk that if exemptions to the antitrafficking provisions were provided 
for limited purposes, it would effectively become impossible to enforce those provisions for any 
purpose, because distributors of circumvention technologies that could be used for both legal and 
illegal purposes would purport to serve the legal market while profiting from the widespread use 
of their product for illegal purposes.   
III. Conclusion 
ESA welcomes the Office’s examination of the operation of Section 1201 of the 
Copyright Act and agrees that it may be possible to make the Section 1201 system operate even 
better with some minor adjustments.  However, ESA urges the Office to keep a clear eye on 
Section 1201’s tremendous record of success at reducing infringement and promoting the 
creation and dissemination of new creative works.  The Office should proceed cautiously to 
ensure that Section 1201 continues to perform its vital role in opening new markets for creative 
expression.

[PAGE 16]
March 3, 2016 
Respectfully submitted, 
Stanley Pierre-Louis, 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Ben Golant, 
Chief Counsel for Intellectual Property Policy 
Entertainment Software Association 
575 7th Street, N.W., Suite 300 
Washington, D.C. 20004 
(v) 202-223-2400 
stan@theESA.com 
bgolant@theESA.com 
Of Counsel 
Steven K-. Englund 
Kenneth L. Doroshow 
JENNER & BLOCK LLP 
1099 New York Ave., N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20001 
(v) 202-639-6000 
senglund@j enner. com 
kdoroshow@jenner.com 
Counsel for the Entertainment Software 
Association 
16
