[PAGE 1]
UNITED STATES COPYRIGHT OFFICE 
 
 
 
Section 1201 Study: Notice and 
Request for Public Comment 
 
Docket  No.: COLC-2015-
0012                        
                             
* 
 
* 
 
* 
 
* 
 
Comments of: 
Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers 
 
Submitted on behalf of 
Jessica L. Simmons, Senior Attorney 
Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers 
Washington, DC 
By 
Steven J. Metalitz 
Mitchell Silberberg & Knupp LLP 
Washington, DC 
Of Counsel 
March 2, 2016 
 
****** 
 
The Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers (Auto Alliance) welcomes this opportunity to 
provide input to the Copyright Office (Office) study on the operation of section 1201 of Title 17. 
See Section 1201 Study:  Notice and Request for Public Comment, 80 Fed. Reg. 81,369 (Dec. 
29, 2015) (“Study Notice”).  Our comment takes the form of responses to the questions posed in 
the Study Notice, which appear in italics below.
1  
The Auto Alliance is the leading advocacy group for the auto industry.  Its members 
represent 77% of all car and light truck sales in the United States, including the BMW Group, 
FCA US LLC, Ford Motor Company, General Motors Company, Jaguar Land Rover, Mazda, 
Mercedes-Benz USA, Mitsubishi Motors, Porsche, Toyota, Volkswagen Group of America and 
Volvo Cars North America.  For further details, see http://www.autoalliance.org/.  
The Auto Alliance participated actively in the Sixth Triennial rulemaking cycle under 17 
U.S.C. section 1201(a)(1)(C), with regard to the proposed exemptions applicable to the auto 
industry.  As Auto Alliance did not participate in previous rulemaking cycles, our comments are 
focused on our experience in the most recent cycle.  
General   
1.  Please provide any insights or observations regarding the role and effectiveness of the 
prohibition on circumvention of technological measures in section 1201(a).   
                                                 
1 See 80 Fed. Reg. at 81,373.

[PAGE 2]
Comments of the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers 
 2 
7464950.3/46565-00003 
Section 1201 (a) of Title 17 plays a key role in safeguarding the integrity of the complex 
software-driven systems on which modern motor vehicles increasingly rely.  The statute is of 
great importance to the U.S. auto industry because it provides a clear legal prohibition against 
the circumvention of the access controls that protect these systems.  Further, as the role of 
software in motor vehicle design and operation continues to grow, the importance of Section 
1201 is almost sure to increase.     
The role of computer programs in the operation of today’s motor vehicles is already 
pervasive, and is growing rapidly.  This software is critical to safe and efficient performance of 
virtually every aspect of motor vehicle use, from basic functions of propulsion, braking and 
steering, to complex systems for driver assistance, crash avoidance, entertainment and 
emergency communications, telematics, and forthcoming autonomous driving capabilities.  
These operations are controlled by millions of lines of software code, developed by thousands of 
programmers employed by auto manufacturers, or licensed by them from third party sources.  
The prevalence of innovative computer programs in today’s cars helps explain why a recent 
study found that almost half of the world’s top 20 “Most Innovative Companies” are 
automakers,
2 and why, for many Americans, the most sophisticated technological device they 
own is their car.  
This software is also critical to meeting the extensive regulatory standards which 
automakers must satisfy in order to protect the safety of drivers and passengers, conserve energy 
resources, protect the environment, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and meet other national 
goals.  As with any other commercially significant computer program, the protection of 
copyright law is essential for encouraging further investment in the creation and proliferation of 
increasingly innovative, flexible and powerful software for motor vehicle operations.   
Automakers employ technological controls on access to many of these computer 
programs in order to protect their integrity and ensure their efficient operation.  Preventing 
tampering with these systems is essential to achieving customer satisfaction and regulatory 
compliance goals, and was in fact mandated by applicable law and regulations in some 
instances.
3  Authorized access to this software is essential for purposes such as diagnosis and 
repair of motor vehicle systems, and, increasingly, for the delivery of tested and approved after-
sale updates and improvements that enhance the performance of these systems and make them 
more reliable.4  But unauthorized access to the software poses potential threats to efficient and 
predictable operations of these systems.  Thus, it risks frustrating the achievement of 
fundamental regulatory goals and, in some cases, even threatens the safety and security of 
drivers, passengers, and pedestrians.  
                                                 
2 The Most Innovative Companies 2013, bcg.perspectives, 
https://www.bcgperspectives.com/content/articles/innovation_growth_most_innovative_companies_2013_lessons_f
rom_leaders/?chapter=2.   
3 See Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies; Public Hearings Transcripts (May 19, 2015) (“2015 Hearings”), at 57-58, 208-209 (California Air 
Resources Board mandate for encryption eventually dropped after manufacturers committed to use of TPMs for anti-
tampering purposes).  
4 See Jonathan M. Gitlin, Finally, Over-the-air Software Updates For Your Car Are Becoming a Reality, ARS 
TECHNICA, January, 11, 2016, http://arstechnica.com/cars/2016/01/finally-over-the-air-software-updates-for-your-
car-are-becoming-a-reality/.

[PAGE 3]
Comments of the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers 
 3 
7464950.3/46565-00003 
2.  How should section 1201 accommodate interests that are outside of core copyright 
concerns, for example, in cases where circumvention of access controls protecting 
computer programs implicates issues of product interoperability or public safety?  
We appreciate the frustration frequently expressed by the Office that the rulemaking 
proceeding increasingly obligates it to address unaccustomed topics that it believes “have little to 
do with the consumption of creative content or the core concerns of copyright.”  Study Notice at 
12.  However, the formulation of this question in the Study Notice requires some unpacking, 
because the way it is presented may obscure the issues involved, and could lead the Office to 
overlook some possible solutions. 
First, the record should be clear that it is not copyright owners, who are employing 
technological protection measures to control access to their works, who are bringing these “non-
core-copyright concerns” into the rulemaking proceeding and requiring the Office to address 
them.  To the contrary, in every case, the parties injecting these issues into the proceeding are 
interest groups whose main concerns are far removed from copyright, but who assert a need to 
circumvent the access controls in order to engage in activities unrelated to the “consumption of 
creative content.”  This was certainly the case with respect to the some of the individuals and 
organizations most vocally advocating for the exemptions relating to automobiles in the most 
recent rulemaking cycle.  
Second, the crux of the issue is less whether the interests involved in defending access 
controls are “outside of core copyright concerns” (itself a label whose boundaries would be 
difficult to define), and more whether the behavior sought to be shielded from section 1201 
liability directly undermines other, non-copyright regulatory regimes that have been adopted to 
further broad national goals.  The auto-related exemptions sought in the most recent rulemaking 
cycle are an excellent example, since the main issues in contention concerned the impact of 
granting the requested exemptions on long-standing regulatory regimes aimed at conserving 
fossil fuels, providing Americans with clean air to breathe, and making cars safer for drivers, 
passengers, pedestrians, and the society as a whole.  Quite understandably, being required to 
make recommendations that could have significant impacts in these areas far outside its expertise 
was a source of frustration to the Office throughout last year’s proceeding.
5 
These observations suggest two steps that the Office might take to ameliorate these 
problems in future rulemaking cycles.  First, it could seek to apply more consistently and 
rigorously the burdens of persuasion that the statute and legislative history impose upon 
proponents of exemptions, and that the Office has repeatedly recited among the proceeding’s 
ground rules.  Second, the Office could seek to identify early in the triennial process those 
proposed exemptions that implicate other non-copyright regulatory regimes, and bring the 
needed expertise to bear on them by giving proponents strong incentives to bring those regulators 
                                                 
5 See, e.g., 2015 Hearings at 51-52 (Remarks of Ms. Charlesworth with respect to proposed exemption 22 (security 
research on automobiles):  “[T]he concern is someone finds a vulnerability and publishes it before there is any 
opportunity to fix it and then bad actors learn of this, someone who may not have known of it before, and then start 
doing bad things to cars. I mean that is – how do you address – we're merely the Copyright Office. If someone 
had told me even three years ago that I would be having this discussion with you today, I would say you are 
crazy, but here we are thanks to 1201. But the thing is, how do you deal with that? How do you deal with that 
concern, which is a legitimate concern.” (emphasis added)).

[PAGE 4]
Comments of the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers 
 4 
7464950.3/46565-00003 
into the process of evaluating those proposed exemptions even before they are presented to the 
Office for consideration.   
A.  Consistent application of burdens of persuasion:  At the outset of each triennial 
rulemaking cycle, and again in its recommendations at the conclusion of each cycle, the Office 
has consistently spelled out that the burden is on proponents of exemptions to demonstrate that it 
is the legal prohibition on circumvention of access controls that is inflicting “distinct, verifiable 
and measurable impacts” on their ability to make non-infringing uses of the copyrighted works to 
which the access controls apply.
6  Unfortunately, in practice, the Office has not always 
rigorously applied this test, including in the case of the types of proposed exemptions that most 
strongly implicate what it calls “non-core copyright concerns.”   
For instance, Auto Alliance respectfully submits that in the recently concluded rule-
making cycle, proponents of an exemption to allow circumvention for the purpose of security 
research involving automobiles presented virtually no concrete evidence that section 
1201(a)(1)(A) was causing any “substantial diminution” of the availability of ECU software to 
researchers.7  This contrasted markedly with the record on security-related proposed exemptions 
in previous cycles, in which threats of litigation or retaliation were allegedly widespread.8  In the 
end, the sole evidence which the Register cited of any asserted “chilling effect” on independent 
research in the automotive sector was a single statement by a researcher of subjective and 
unspecified “fears of the DMCA” which discouraged him from undertaking research, but which 
were overcome – and the research actually undertaken – after he received a government grant to 
do so.
9   
Certainly when proponents of an exemption present credible evidence that the section 
1201(a)(1)(A) prohibition is causing “distinct, verifiable and measurable” adverse impacts on 
activity with respect to copyrighted works that the record shows “is or is likely to be” non-
infringing
10, then the Office is obligated to delve into the merits of the proposed exemption.  
Where the record shows that copyright owners are using section 1201 aggressively to suppress 
such activity, those burdens might be met.  But surely when there is no evidence of this, and 
when proponents are not held strictly to their burdens, the frustrations and inconveniences that 
the Office experiences in grappling with technical issues beyond its expertise are, to that extent 
at least, self-inflicted wounds.   
B.  Early identification of collateral regulatory impacts, and incentives to pre-clear.  The 
Office should consider modifying its rulemaking procedures by asking proponents of exemptions 
                                                 
6 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies; 
Notice of Inquiry and Request for Petitions, 79 Fed. Reg. 55,687 (Sept. 17, 2014) (“2014 NOI”); Recommendation 
of the Register of Copyrights, Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding (Oct. 8, 2015) (“2015 Rec.”), at 
12-13.  
7 See Auto Alliance Class 22 Opposition Comment at 9-12 (refuting allegations of adverse impact made in first two 
rounds of comments by proponents) (March 27, 2015); 2015 Hearings at 36:20 – 39:2 (refuting allegations made in 
reply comments by proponents).    
8 See, e.g., Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights in RM 2008-8; rulemaking on Exemptions from 
Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Sy stems of Access Control Technologies (“2010 Rec.”), at 
195, 201 (referencing threats of lawsuits and a “regime of panic, protests and litigation”).  
9 2015 Rec. at 306, n. 2100, citing 2015 Hearings at 45:08-13.    
10 The non-infringing character of the activity is also an issue on which the proponent bears the burden of proof.  
2014 NOI, 79 Fed. Reg. at 55690; 2015 Rec. at 13.

[PAGE 5]
Comments of the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers 
 5 
7464950.3/46565-00003 
to identify potential collateral regulatory impacts of their proposals (or to demonstrate that such 
impacts would be minimal), including specification of the main federal or state regulatory 
agencies potentially impacted.  When such impacts are identified, whether (optimally) by 
proponents in their initial submissions, or by opponents in their responses, the Office should be 
in a position to trigger a formal process of seeking input from applicable regulatory agencies.  
These agencies should not only be asked their views on how granting the proposed exemption 
would impact their regulatory efforts, but also to provide suggestions on how any such 
exemption might be crafted or modified to minimize adverse impacts.  
An example may show how such a modification to the rulemaking procedure could lead 
to a smoother process and a better-informed outcome.  In the recently concluded rulemaking 
cycle, a number of proponents sought, in the initial round of submissions in early November 
2014, proposed exemptions to allow circumvention of access controls on vehicle ECUs to 
diagnose, repair or modify automobiles.11  However, the issue of the potential impact of such 
exemptions on the regulatory regimes administered by the Environmental Protection Agency, the 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, and other agencies did not enter the record 
until the third submission round, in comments filed in March 2015 in opposition to these 
proposals.12  It was not until almost two months later, in May 2015, that the Office reached out to 
these agencies, and their input was not received until July (and in one case, until September) 
2015.13  Under this timetable there was no opportunity for any input to the Office from either 
proponents or opponents on the positions taken by the agencies, nor (as far as the record shows) 
for any dialogue between these agencies and the Office, before the Register’s Recommendations 
were completed.  Surely this process was far from optimal.   
Without making any criticism of how the Office handled this issue on an ad hoc basis 
during the past rulemaking cycle, it would certainly be better to plan for it for next time. If 
proponents had been asked to identify potential collateral regulatory impacts in their initial 
petitions, then the views of the relevant agencies could have been sought, and likely obtained, 
early enough in the process to have made a more meaningful contribution to the outcome.
14  
Even if, as in the past cycle, the issues were not brought into the record until the opponents had a 
chance to make submissions, a better-planned process for seeking agency input likely would 
have produced statements on the record which could then have been examined in public 
hearings.  The final decision could then have reflected the perspective of the regulatory agencies, 
                                                 
11 University of Southern California (“USC”), Intellectual Property and Technology Law Clinic Initial Submission 
(Vehicle Software – Modification) (Nov. 3, 2014); USC,  Intellectual Property and Technology Law Clinic Initial 
Submission (Vehicle Software – Repair) (Nov. 3, 2014); EFF Initial Submission (Vehicle Software – Security 
Research) (Nov. 3, 2014); EFF Initial Submission (Vehicle Software – Modification and Repair) (Nov. 3, 2014). 
12 Auto Alliance Class 21 Opposition Comment at 16, 19 (March 27, 2015); Association of Equipment 
Manufacturers Class 21 Opposition Comment at 1 (March 27, 2015); Association of Global Automakers Class 21 
Opposition Comment at 2 , 7 (March 27, 2015); General Motors Class 21 Opposition Comment at 6, 8, 23 (March 
27, 2015).  
13 Letter from Geoff Cooper, Assistant General Counsel, Environmental Protection Agency to Jacqueline 
Charlesworth, General Counsel and Associate Register of Copyrights, Copyright Office, (July 17, 2015); Letter 
from Mary D. Nichols, Chairman, California Air Resources Board to Jacqueline Charlesworth, General Counsel and 
Associate Register of Copyrights, Copyright Office, (July 21, 2015); Letter from Kathryn B. Thomson, General 
Counsel, Department of Transportation to Jacqueline Charlesworth, General Counsel and Associate Register of 
Copyrights, Copyright Office, (Sept. 9, 2015).   
14 Surely proponents must have been aware that many of the vehicle modifications they sought to facilitate through 
their proposed exemptions would have an impact on vehicle compliance with emissions, safety, and fuel economy 
standards.  But under the prevailing ground rules they were under no obligation to flag these issues for the Office.

[PAGE 6]
Comments of the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers 
 6 
7464950.3/46565-00003 
which clearly was not the case this time, except through the use of the blunt instrument of 
delaying the effective date of the exemption to allow for agency reaction.15  
Indeed, the rulemaking process could be modified to give proponents strong incentives to 
approach the relevant regulatory agencies first, before they seek any DMCA exemption, to try to 
fashion an outcome that minimized adverse impacts on national regulatory objectives.  The best 
case scenario from the Office’s perspective could be a prior determination by the regulatory 
agency of the scope of a possible exemption that would not undermine (or conceivably could 
even advance) those objectives.  A resulting proposed exemption that had been “pre-cleared” of 
collateral regulatory impacts could be given some level of preference in the rulemaking process.  
At least, when presented with such a record, the Office could better justify minimizing such 
collateral regulatory impacts from its analysis under the fifth “catch-all” statutory factor.
16   
Rulemaking Process  
3.  Should section 1201 be adjusted to provide for presumptive renewal of previously 
granted exemptions—for example, when th ere is no meaningful opposition to renewal—
or otherwise be modified to streamline the process of continuing an existing exemption?  
If so, how?  
Since the inception of the rulemaking process, the concept that the case for exemptions 
must be demonstrated de novo in each cycle has been a core feature.17  Not only would the 
Office lack authority to undermine this feature by recognizing presumptive renewal of 
previously-granted exemptions; such a change would be inconsistent with the fundamental 
character of the proceeding as a fact-based inquiry that depends on specific evidence of the 
concrete, real-world impact of the anti-circumvention prohibition on actual non-infringing uses 
of works.
18  Most of the markets relevant to proposed exemptions are dynamic and fast-changing 
(most assuredly this is the case for the automotive marketplace).  Issues such as whether 
technological changes or market developments have created new alternatives to circumvention 
that did not exist three years previously, or have made circumvention less (or more) necessary to 
carry out specified non-infringing uses, inevitably require determinations on the proposed 
renewal of existing exemptions to be made de novo.  Thus, on policy grounds reflecting the 
nature of the rulemaking inquiry itself, as well as in order to remain faithful to Congress’s 
instructions concerning the process, proponents should not be relieved of the obligation to prove 
their cases anew in each cycle.   
At the same time, Auto Alliance would not oppose reasonable procedural changes that 
could expedite consideration of uncontested requests for the “renewal” of specific exemptions.  
These could include allowing proponents to ask the Office to take administrative notice of 
relevant portions of the record compiled in the preceding cycle, so long as opponents have a 
                                                 
15 37 CFR 201.40 (b)(6) and (b)(7)(i), as revised in Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright 
Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies; Final Rule, 80 Fed. Reg. 65,944, 65,954 (Oct. 28, 2015) 
(“2015 Final Rule”).  
16 17 U.S.C. § 1201 (a)(1)(C)(v).  Of course proponents would still have to meet the burdens allocated to them, such 
as to show that the activity in which they wish to engage is non-infringing.  See fn. 10, supra.   
17 See 2014 NOI at 55,689-90 (citing legislative history). 
18 See Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights, Section 1201: Fifth Triennial Proceeding (Oct. 12, 2012) 
(“2012 Recommendation”), at 44 (proponents must “address the real-world impact of their proposed exemption”).

[PAGE 7]
Comments of the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers 
 7 
7464950.3/46565-00003 
reasonable opportunity to object.  The process could also be streamlined in those instances in 
which a fully documented proposal for verbatim renewal of a previously granted exemption is 
received, and no objection to it is brought forward in the opposition round of comments.  
However, any “fast-track” procedures should not apply whenever material changes to an existing 
exemption are proposed; and any presumptions adopted by the Office in this area should be fully 
rebuttable.   
4.  Please assess the current legal requirements that proponents of an exemption must 
satisfy to demonstrate entitlement to an exemption.  Should they be altered?  If so, how?  
In responding, please comment on the relationship to traditional principles of 
administrative law.  
These requirements seem basically sound in principle.  However, they could be refined, 
and their execution could be improved, as we note in response to questions 2 (with regard to 
identification and pre-clearance of collateral regulatory impacts) and 8 (with regard to 
relationship with existing statutory exemptions).  
5.  Please provide additional suggestions to improve the rulemaking process.  
(A)  As mentioned in the Study Notice at 10-11, significant adjustments to the 
rulemaking procedure were introduced in the most recent cycle.  One result was that proponents 
of exemptions were give three opportunities to advocate for their positions, while opponents 
were strictly limited to one round of comments.  The Office should consider rebalancing this 
ratio in future rulemaking cycles, in order to develop a more complete and balanced record for its 
recommendations.  
(B)  In another feature of the adjusted rulemaking procedures in the most recent cycle, the 
Office edited and consolidated the exemptions that were proposed in the initial round, thus 
providing a clearer and more specific set of proposals for debate in the ensuing rounds.  This 
brought greater focus to the proceeding.  However, between the unveiling of the proposed 
exemptions in the December 2014 Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, and the publication 10 1/2 
months later of the Register’s Recommendations and Final Rule, no further refinements of the 
proposals were presented for comment and discussion.  As a result, it was not until the Final 
Rule was published and the entire proceeding concluded that rulemaking participants became 
aware of unexplained discrepancies between the phrasing of the exemptions as recommended by 
the Register and the final exemptions promulgated by the Librarian.   
For example, the Register recommended that the security research exemption “should 
require explicitly that the covered security research be lawful.”
19  However, as promulgated, the 
exemption itself seems to require only that the circumvention made to carry out the research — 
not the research project itself — “not violate any applicable law.” 20  Since the Register 
recommended that the exemption be “consistent with  the congressionally enacted exemption in 
[17 U.S.C.] section 1201(j),”21, it is worth noting that in order to qualify for the statutory 
exemption, the “act of security testing,” not just the act of circumvention, must “not constitute 
infringement under this title or a violation of applicable law other than this section.” 17 USC § 
                                                 
19 2015 Rec. at 318. 
20 37 CFR 201.40(b)(7)(i), as revised in 2015 Final Rule at 65, 956. 
21 2015 Rec. at 318.

[PAGE 8]
Comments of the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers 
 8 
7464950.3/46565-00003 
1201(j)(2).  The Register further recommended that, “in the interest of adhering to Congress’ 
basic purpose in section 1201(j),” the exemption recognized should track the legislative language 
as much as possible.22  However, the exemption promulgated by the Librarian deviates without 
explanation from the statutory phrasing.  For instance, it only requires that the information 
derived from the security testing “not [be] used or maintained in a manner that facilitates 
copyright infringement,”
23 while a statutory factor for consideration is whether such information 
is used or maintained in a manner that facilitates copyright infringement “or a violation of 
applicable law other than this section, including a violation of privacy or breach of security.”  17 
U.S.C. § 1201(j)(3)(B) (emphasis added).  Thus the promulgated exception, without explanation, 
was broadened beyond the scope of the Register’s Recommendation, and beyond the statutory 
framework that the Office recommended be followed.   
The current rulemaking procedure provides no clear avenue for bringing to the attention 
of either the Office or the Librarian the existence of such unexplained discrepancies, which may 
well have been inadvertent.
24  We urge the Office to consider ways to modify the process to 
reduce the risk of such discrepancies, or else to allow them to be promptly identified and 
resolved.  For instance, if the exemptions which the Librarian proposes to promulgate were 
published (or made available to the parties), along with the Register’s Recommendations, a short 
time prior to the statutory deadline when the exemptions would come into force, the parties could 
be invited to identify any discrepancies or similar uncertainties so that the Librarian could, if s/he 
chose, rectify them before the Final Rule was promulgated.  
(C)  The Register is apparently fully committed to the proposition that the definition of a 
“particular class of works” for which access controls may be circumvented pursuant to an 
administrative exemption may be “refined not only by reference to the medium on which the 
works are distributed, or the particular access controls at issue, but also by reference to the 
particular type of use and/or user to which the exemption will apply.”
25  This being so, we urge 
her to do more to craft the “scope or boundaries of a ‘particular class’” to “limit the adverse 
consequences of an exemption.” 26  For example, in the most recent rulemaking cycle, the issue 
arose whether a nationwide MOU entered into by virtually the entire U.S. automobile industry on 
access to information and tools needed to diagnose and repair cars provided an alternative to 
circumvention of access controls on motor vehicle software in order to carry out diagnosis and 
repair activities.  The Register concluded that it did not, principally because “the MOU does not 
apply to a significant portion of the vehicles that should be covered by the proposed exemption, 
including pre-2002 and models and mechanized agricultural vehicles.”
27  It does not appear that 
                                                 
22 Id. at 319. 
23 37 CFR 201.40(b)(7)(ii), as revised in 2015 Final Rule at 65,956. 
24 We recognize that the example we have provided concerns  an exemption which, by its terms, does not come into 
force until twelve months after its promulgation, so in this case there is time to rectify the discrepancy before the 
exemption becomes binding.  However, it is not clear what path the Librarian might follow in order to do so; and in 
any event, the same problem could well arise in the future wi th regard to other exemptions that are intended to take 
effect immediately.   
25 2015 Rec. at 18.   
26 Id., quoting Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights in RM 2005-11; Rulemaking on Exemptions from 
Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Sy stems for Access Control Technologies (Nov. 17, 2006) 
(“2006 Rec.”), at 10 and Staff of the House Committee on the Judiciary, 105th Cong., Section-By-Section Analysis 
of H.R. 2281 as Passed by the United States House of Representatives on August 4, 1998 (Comm. Print 1998), 
reprinted in 46 J. COPYRIGHT SOC’Y U.S.A. 635 (1999) (“Manager’s Rep.”).   
27 2015 Rec. at 240.

[PAGE 9]
Comments of the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers 
 9 
7464950.3/46565-00003 
the Register considered “refining” the proposed class of works to exclude vehicles covered by 
the MOU from its “scope and boundaries,” thereby “limiting the adverse consequences” of an 
overbroad exemption that covers many situations in which circumvention is not required.  We 
urge the Office to make greater efforts in future rulemaking cycles to tailor the scope of its 
recommended exemptions to fit the record more closely.
 28  
Anti-Trafficking Prohibitions  
6.  Please assess the role of the anti-trafficking provisions of sections 1201(a)(2) and 
1201(b) in deterring copyright infringement, and address whether any amendments may 
be advisable.   
These provisions are very important in preventing the emergence of black markets in 
circumvention devices and services.  Even a limited authorization for purveying such products 
and services to those entitled to circumvent pursuant to a lawful section 1201(a)(1)(A) 
exemption will inevitably spill over to unauthorized users and uses.  These provisions should 
remain in place. In any case, any changes or exceptions to them should be made by Congress, not 
in the rulemaking process.  
7.  Should section 1201 be amended to allow the adoption of exemptions to the 
prohibition on circumvention that can extend to exemptions to the anti-trafficking 
prohibitions, and if so, in what way?  For example, should the Register be able to 
recommend, and the Librarian able to adopt, exemptions that permit third-party 
assistance when justified by the record?  
No.  Any such exemptions should be decided by Congress, not the Copyright Office.   
Permanent Exemptions   
8.  Please assess whether the existing categories of permanent exemptions are necessary, 
relevant, and/or sufficient.  How do the permanent exemptions affect the current state of 
reverse engineering, encryption research, and security testing?  How do the permanent 
exemptions affect the activities of libraries, archives, and educational institutions?  How 
might the existing permanent exemptions be amended to better facilitate such activities?  
The impact of the existing statutory exemptions on the rulemaking process remains an 
area of confusion.  It is unfortunate that so little case law has developed that could provide 
guidance to the Copyright Office in evaluating whether proposed rulemaking exemptions are 
necessary on topics already addressed by the statute, and on how to craft any such exemptions to 
conform with congressional intent in enacting the statutory exemptions where they overlap or 
occupy adjacent territory.   
                                                 
28 This recommendation is also relevant to the security research exemption recognized for automobiles, as discussed 
in response to question 2 above. The Office chose to aggregate this proposed exemption, for purposes of analysis, 
with others related to security research on medical devices and on commercially distributed software.  2015 Rec. at 
253.  However, this decision may have left it less prepared to appreciate that the record developed was quite 
different with respect to the “real-world” adverse impact of section 1201 on security research in the automotive 
sector, as contrasted with what may have been the case in other sectors.

[PAGE 10]
Comments of the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers 
 10 
7464950.3/46565-00003 
The Office could provide a measure of greater clarity by clearly establishing that it is part 
of the burden assigned to proponents of exemptions to demonstrate that existing statutory 
exemptions do not cover the activities in which they wish to engage.  Without such a 
demonstration, proponents cannot establish that these activities are impeded or constrained by 
the section 1201 prohibition, which of course is inapplicable in the circumstances described in 
the statutory exemptions.  Since commonly the most that proponents can show is that the 
statutory exemptions might not apply, the Office needs to exercise caution to avoid shifting to 
opponents the burden of showing that the statutory exemptions are in fact applicable, a stance 
that would clearly be inconsistent with congressional intent.  The Office’s current practice of 
granting exemptions when “there is some uncertainty” about whether a statutory exemption 
applies, or when “the permanent exemptions embodied in [the statute] do not appear 
unambiguously to permit the full range of [activities] that could be encompassed by the proposed 
[administrative] exemption,” seems to skate uncomfortably close to such a de facto shifting of 
the burden of persuasion.
29   
Of course, any amendments or additions to the statutory exemptions themselves must be 
left to Congress.  Auto Alliance expresses no position at this time on whether any such changes 
should be made.  We look forward to reviewing the positions of other commenters on this 
question.   
9.  Please assess whether there are other permanent exemption categories that Congress 
should consider establishing—for example, to facilitate access to literary works by print-
disabled persons? 
Auto Alliance expresses no views on this question at this time.    
Other   
10.  To what extent and how might any proposed amendments to section 1201 implicate 
the United States’ trade and treaty obligations?   
Auto Alliance expresses no views on this question at this time.   
11.  Please identify any pertinent issues not referenced above that the Copyright Office 
should consider in conducting its study.   
It would be useful to clarify the applicability (or not) of the Administrative Procedure Act 
to the rulemaking proceeding, as well as related issues such as the appropriate venue and 
timetable for seeking judicial review of a rulemaking decision, the applicable standard of review, 
etc.  None of this is clear under the statute as it now stands.  If Congress undertakes to review 
section 1201, these could be appropriate topics for clarifying amendments.   
*  *  *  * 
Thank you for considering the views of the Auto Alliance.   
                                                 
29 2015 Rec. at 308, 309 (with regard to proposed security research exemption).
