[PAGE 1]
 
 
March 3, 2014 
Comments of 
George P. Slover, Senior Policy Counsel  
Consumers Union 
To the U.S. Copyright Office 
Section 1201 Study  
[Docket No. 2015–8] 
 
 
 Consumers Union, the policy and advocacy arm of Consumer Reports,1 respectfully 
submits these comments in the above-referenced matter, to assist the Copyright Office in its 
reassessment of the operation of the Triennial Review procedure under section 1201 of the 
Digital Millennium Copyright Act, for fashioning appropriate exceptions to the prohibition 
against circumvention of technological protection measures that control access to copyrighted 
works.  
 
When Congress was considering the legislation that became the Digital Millennium 
Copyright Act of 1998, there were concerns that the effort to construct a legal shield around 
access to digitized copyrighted works had not been subjected to sufficient care and scrutiny, and 
that that effort, embodied in section 1201 of the Act, would prove to be overbroad and have 
unintended consequences. 
 
Unfortunately, those concerns have been borne out.  The prohibition against 
circumvention of technological protection measures has gone far beyond the purpose of 
protecting copyrighted creative works against infringement.  As everyday consumer products 
increasingly contain computer software and firmware that enables and governs their functioning, 
and that restricts their functioning and their interoperability with other products, the section 1201 
prohibition has had far-reaching effects, undermining fundamental consumer expectations of 
what ownership means.  These anti-consumer effects will take on a new, breathtaking order of 
magnitude as more and more consumer products become part of the Internet of Things.  
 
The process of reviewing, every three years, whether section 1201 is inappropriately 
interfering with commerce and with consumer rights, and in which specific respects, and whether 
and how to craft temporary exemptions to the prohibition, in order to temporarily mitigate that 
                                                           
1 Consumers Union is the public policy and advocacy division of Consumer Reports , an expert, independent, 
nonprofit organization whose mission is to work for a safe, fair, and just marketplace for all consumers and to 
empower consumers to protect themselves.  Consumers Union conducts its policy and advocacy work in the areas of 
telecommunications reform, health reform, food and product safety, financial reform, and other areas.  Consumer 
Reports is the world’s largest independent product-testing organization.  Using its more than 50 labs, auto test 
center, and survey research center, the nonprofit organization rates thousands of products and services annually.  
Founded in 1936, Consumer Reports has over 8 million subscribers to its magazine, website, and othe r publications.

[PAGE 2]
2 
 
interference, has proven to be too cumbersome and uncertain to effectively remedy these ever-
widening ill effects.  
 
Consumers Union has had first-hand experience with the shortcomings of the Triennial 
Review process.  We supported the exemption created in the Third Triennial Review, ten years 
ago, for unlocking mobile phones, to enable them to be used for connection to a different 
wireless network, under contract with a different service provider.  We supported the 
exemption’s first renewal in the Fourth Triennial Review.  And we formally petitioned for its 
second renewal in the Fifth. 
 
We were surprised with the announcement in October 2012 that the exemption would be 
sunset. And we were surprised at the rationale given, that there were already enough used mobile 
phones in circulation, that more were not needed.  When the predictable outcry ensued, we 
joined with others in urging the President and Congress to act to restore consumers’ right to 
unlock the mobile phones they had purchased.  We helped lead the effort that resulted in 
enactment of the Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act, to restore and 
clarify this right.  And we helped lead the effort to once again renew the right, in the Sixth 
Triennial Review. 
 
Importantly, the technological protection measures obstructing access to the software 
enabling a phone’s connection to another wireless network – and the legal challenges and threats 
brought against consumers and unlockers – had nothing to do with protecting copyrighted 
creative works against infringement.  Instead, they were part of a business model conceived by 
wireless service providers and mobile phone manufacturers to make it harder for consumers to 
change providers, and harder for them to re-purpose their phones when doing so.  One result was 
many perfectly functional used mobile phones gathering dust in desk drawers, or slowly wasting 
away in landfills.  Another result was consumers needlessly incurring the expense of a new 
phone.  And another result was suppression of competition and innovation in the ways mobile 
phones and wireless services were sold and provided. 
 
It was frustrating to have to establish repeatedly, in de novo proceedings, these same 
basic facts, to obtain an exception to a prohibition that should never have applied in the first 
place. 
 
It is in light of these experiences and frustrations that we comment on the questions the 
Copyright Office has posed. 
 
1. Please provide any insights or observations regarding the role and effectiveness 
of the prohibition on circumvention of technological measures in section 1201(a). 
 
As noted above, the prohibition has been applied far more broadly than just to the 
prevention of copyright infringement in the Digital Age.  We generally support tying application 
of the prohibition more clearly to that purpose, to help keep the prohibition from becoming, as it 
did with mobile phones, an instrument for eroding the incidents of ownership of products that 
depend on software inside them to function.

[PAGE 3]
3 
 
 In this regard, we note that when the mobile phone unlocking exemption was renewed in 
2010, a new limitation was added – that the right to unlock would belong not to the consumer 
who had purchased the phone, but instead would belong to “the owner of the copy of the 
computer program” inside the phone that enabled it to connect to a network.  This created a 
hidden legal cloud over the right to unlock, under which the phone manufacturer or the wireless 
service provider could potentially nullify the right simply by slipping a sentence into the fine 
print of the service contract, retaining technical ownership of the technology inside the phone, 
while granting the consumer only a “license” to use the technology.  It would come as a surprise 
to most consumers that the phone they purchased is not really a phone, but merely the shell of a 
phone. 
 
In working for enactment of the Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition 
Act, we succeeded in clarifying that the right to unlock would belong to the owner of the phone.  
But similar technical sleights of hand are all too available, and all too likely to become 
widespread in consumer products, when the DMCA circumvention prohibition is unmoored from 
the purpose of preventing copyright infringement. 
 
2. How should section 1201 accommodate interests that are outside of core 
copyright concerns, for example, in cases where circumvention of access controls 
protecting computer programs implicates issues of product interoperability or 
public safety? 
 
Ensuring the safety of products and services has been a bedrock objective of Consumers 
Union’s mission since its founding 80 years ago.  We fully recognize that for some products and 
services, altering the software inside could have potentially significant impacts on safety.  
However, we also recognize that a company might also use a professed concern for protecting 
safety as a pretext for blocking competition and consumer choice. 
 
While safety concerns are of the utmost importance, they generally do not implicate 
copyright law, and generally fall outside the Copyright Office’s expertise.  So in our view, they 
should generally not be part of the Copyright Office’s own deliberations in considering 
exemptions under section 1201.  We would recommend that the Copyright Office instead 
consider, when safety issues are implicated, referring those issues to regulatory agencies whose 
missions and expertise are directed at safety. 
 
There may be times when delaying the availability of a new exemption is warranted, to 
give the regulatory agency prior notice and a reasonable opportunity to establish appropriate 
conditions on accessing and altering a product’s software, in keeping with the need to ensure 
safety.  For example, in the most recent Triennial Review, the Copyright Office granted an 
exemption for access to computer programs that control the functioning of an automobile, for 
lawful alterations as well as diagnosis and repair. But it subjected the exemption to regulations 
promulgated by the Department of Transportation and the Environmental Protection Agency, and 
delayed the effective date in order to enable the agencies to consider and develop appropriate 
regulations.

[PAGE 4]
4 
 
We would anticipate that in many instances, appropriate input could be obtained from the 
regulatory agency during the Copyright Office’s consideration of the exemption, so that a further 
delay would not be necessary. 
 
3. Should section 1201 be adjusted to provide for presumptive renewal of 
previously granted exemptions – for example, when there is no meaningful 
opposition to renewal – or otherwise be modified to streamline the process of 
continuing an existing exemption?  If so, how? 
 
 Consumers Union believes presumptive renewal would significantly improve the section 
1201 Triennial Review process by reducing unnecessary burden and uncertainty.  As noted 
above, we have recently been involved in re-justifying and re-defending an exemption that had 
previously been granted; then renewed; and then, when it was sunset, for reasons having more to 
do with a perception that it was somehow not important enough than that it was not justified, was 
renewed statutorily by Congress.  And still, in the most recent Triennial Review, we were placed 
in the position of having to re-establish its justification de novo, essentially making the case from 
scratch.  Although we believe that, as a practical matter, the Copyright Office was cognizant of 
the history of this exemption, and likely took that history into account in the most recent Review, 
it would better serve the interests of all concerned if that could be done openly, 
straightforwardly, and efficiently. 
 
 The notion that the exemptions should be determined de novo is found nowhere in the 
statute.  Instead, it is found in a sentence in the report of one of the two House committees that 
considered the bill – the committee with secondary jurisdiction, who had proposed to assign the 
exemption process to the Department of Commerce.  This one sentence in the secondary 
committee’s report is at most a useful indication of that committee’s view at the time the report 
was prepared; it should not be treated as dispositive law.  Experience has shown that requiring de 
novo determination is unnecessary and ill-advised. 
  
 We believe that a presumption for renewal should apply regardless of whether there is 
opposition.  Any opposition should be carefully taken into account in determining whether the 
presumption is overcome; but the burden of proof should be on those seeking to overcome it.  
Likewise, if developments in technology or in industry practice, or other experience in the years 
since an exemption was most recently granted or renewed, lead to calls for its expansion or 
updating, reopening the exemption for that purpose should not eliminate the presumption.  The 
starting point should still be a presumption for renewal; and to the extent that the proposed 
expansion or updating is an adaptation of the existing exemption to new technology or new 
industry practice, that may warrant including the expansion or updating within the presumption 
as well.      
 
4. Please assess the current legal requirements that proponents of an exemption 
must satisfy to demonstrate entitlement to an exemption.  Should they be 
altered?  If so, how?  In responding, please comment on the relationship to 
traditional principles of administrative law. 
 
 While we believe the statutory elements listed for consideration are generally well-
founded, we also believe that, in their implementation, the Copyright Office has given undue

[PAGE 5]
5 
 
emphasis to looking for macro effects, to the exclusion of the impact on individual consumers.  
For example, in deciding to sunset the mobile phone unlocking exemption in the Fifth Triennial 
Review, the Copyright Office was, in our view, too dismissive of the concrete adverse impact of 
the resulting forced obsolescence of perfectly functional phones –on the individual consumers 
who owned them, and on the individual consumers who might be interested in purchasing them.  
Millions of phones were consigned prematurely to the scrapheap, on the premise that there were 
enough other used phones already in circulation – including older phones of diminishing 
usefulness and desirability. 
 
 We would suggest that the Copyright Office’s assessment of “whether the 
implementation of access controls impairs the ability of individuals to make noninfringing uses” 
not be subjected to an additional hurdle that individuals merit protection only if they are harmed 
in sufficiently high numbers.  (No “de minimis” hurdle is found in either the statute or in the 
legislative history, much less any indication of required showing of harm to large numbers of 
individuals.) 
 
7.   Should section 1201 be amended to allow the adoption of exemptions to the 
      prohibition on circumvention that can extend to exemptions to the anti- 
      trafficking prohibitions, and if so, in what way? For example, should the 
      Register be able to recommend, and the Librarian able to adopt, exemptions 
      that permit third-party assistance when justified by the record? 
 
We believe a clarification is warranted so that where a right to circumvention has been 
recognized in an exemption, the exemption should also protect the right to assist another with 
that circumvention.  We worked to ensure that the Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless 
Competition Act protected such assistance. 
_______________ 
 
 We look forward to reviewing the submissions of other interested parties and to working 
with the Copyright Office and Congress to improve the operation of section 1201, so that the 
circumvention prohibitions are focused more effectively on the objective of preventing copyright 
infringement and are not employed to undermine reasonable and long-held consumer 
expectations regarding their ability to exercise the incidents of ownership, dominion, and control 
over the products and services they have paid for or have otherwise lawfully acquired. 
 
Respectfully, 
 
       
  George P. Slover 
  Senior Policy Counsel 
  Consumers Union
