[PAGE 1]
 
Microsoft Corporation 
One Microsoft Way  
Redmond WA 98052 www.microsoft.com 
 
Page 1 of 8 
 
March 3, 2016 
 
 
Hon. Maria Pallante 
Register of Copyrights 
United States Copyright Office 
101 Independence Ave., S.E. 
Washington, D.C. 20559  
 
Re: Section 1201 Study 
 Docket No. 2015-8 
 
Dear Ms. Pallante: 
 
Microsoft Corporation submits these Initial Comments in response to the Copyright 
Office's Section 1201 Study: Notice and Request for Public Comment, 80 Fed. Reg. 81,369 
(Dec. 29, 2015) (“Notice”).  
Background and Interest in the Notice  
Microsoft appreciates the opportunity to provide comments in the Copyright Office’s 
study of Section 1201.  Section 1201 provides an important legal foundation on which 
copyright owners and innovators have built new technological means that have greatly 
increased the ways in which copyrighted works are made available, and resulted in an 
explosion of competitive and compelling business models that greatly expand consumer 
choice.   
Over the same period, the rapid pace of innovation has produced unprecedented new 
devices, online services, and tools for consumers to access, use, and share copyrighted 
works. The pace of innovation has made the safeguards and processes set out in Section 
1201 as important today as when first enacted.   
As with all of copyright law, balance is the key for Section 1201 to satisfy the needs of 
copyright owners, innovators, and consumers, and Microsoft remains committed to 
ensuring that Section 1201 remains appropriately balanced for all impacted parties.  This 
means not only providing copyright owners with effective means to protect their 
copyrighted works using technological protection measures (TPMs), but also ensuring that

[PAGE 2]
 
Microsoft Corporation 
One Microsoft Way  
Redmond WA 98052 www.microsoft.com 
 
Page 2 of 8 
 
users seeking to access and use works for legitimate purposes are not unfairly burdened 
or frustrated.  
Microsoft appreciates the important role Section 1201 plays for all stakeholders.  Indeed, 
we experience Section 1201 through a range of stakeholder perspectives:   
 As a copyright owner, TPMs help Microsoft protect the copyright to some of the 
world’s most successful (and unfortunately, most pirated) software products in 
history, including Windows and Microsoft Office. 
 
 As a platform for copyrighted works, TPMs play a key role for the tens of 
thousands of (i) software developers and publishers whose distribute their apps 
and games via Microsoft’s online Windows Store for use on hundreds of millions 
of PCs, tablets and mobile devices; and (ii) motion picture, music, and video game 
copyright owners whose works are used on Xbox video game consoles and 
distributed via Xbox Live online platforms. 
 
 As a device and platform provider, a balanced application of Section 1201 
ensures that Microsoft’s operating systems can continue to provide both 
Microsoft and its users with innovative ways to access, explore, and experience a 
wide range of copyrighted works on a diverse range of both Microsoft and third 
party devices – from traditional PCs and tablets, phones, wearables, and large 
touch displays, to Microsoft’s groundbreaking HoloLens augmented reality device. 
 
 As a creator of tools for users (including software, productivity tools, web 
browsers, and related online services), Section 1201 impacts the ways Microsoft 
customers access, consume, and create materials that may contain copyrighted 
works subject to technical protection measures. These tools also enable users to 
remix, annotate, store, and share such materials for innumerable legitimate 
purposes. 
These diverse roles inform and guide Microsoft’s regular and active participation in the 
Section 1201 triennial rulemaking process and in policy discussions convened by the 
Office, Executive Branch agencies, and Congress.   
1201 Enables Innovative Software and Digital Content Distribution 
As outlined in Microsoft’s submission in the Copyright Office’s “Software-Enabled 
Consumer Products Study,” we are in the midst of a transformational new generation of 
hardware and software innovation. Online entertainment services such as Xbox Live have

[PAGE 3]
 
Microsoft Corporation 
One Microsoft Way  
Redmond WA 98052 www.microsoft.com 
 
Page 3 of 8 
 
revolutionized how users access and use copyrighted works including games, television 
programming, film, and music content. 1  Similarly, online software and service platforms, 
including Microsoft’s Store and Office 365, have upended traditional software distribution 
and use models, resulting in unprecedented access to billions of users for millions of 
copyrighted works. 2  
The protections in Section 1201 for TPMs provide an important building block for 
copyright owners to enable distribution of works in such innovative ways.  TPMs not only 
help prevent infringement of these works: they also enable copyright owners and online 
platforms to develop and deploy diverse business models, including pay-per-download, 
trials, subscription, rental, ad supported, and even “freemium” models which derive value 
by monetizing data generated from users.   
These business models greatly expand the choice of consumers in the means through 
which they enjoy copyrighted works, and they promote growth in the availability of 
legitimate distribution channels.  TPMs also enable users to increasingly enjoy licensed 
copyrighted works across their various personal hardware devices, negating the need to 
managing multiple (and often redundant) copies, and enhancing the portability of a users’ 
lawfully acquired content.  The availability of these legitimate channels and the diversity 
of consumption choices play critical roles in combatting the growth of illegitimate sources 
for copyrighted works.3  
At the same time, the triennial 1201 rulemaking process provides an important role in 
addressing legitimate concerns regarding access to copyrighted works for noninfringing 
purposes.  The growth in both the number and range of exemptions granted, as 
represented in the 2015 rulemaking, is a clear sign that the process is achieving the 
purposes that Congress intended, and is sufficiently flexible to ensure the availability of 
                                                           
1 See http://www.xbox.com/en-US/xbox-store (Xbox Store enables video content from Netflix, 
Amazon Video, HBO GO, hulu, ESPN, plus games and music).  
2 See e.g. https://blogs.windows.com/buildingapps/2016/02/04/windows-store-trends-february-
2016/ (Windows Store enjoyed 3 billion visits since July 29, 2015) (last accessed March 2, 2016); 
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-02-10/cheap-smartphones-to-propel-app-
spending-past-100-billion (Combined annual app downloads exceeded 111 billion in 2015) ( (last 
accessed March 2, 2016). 
3 See e.g. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 21653, October 2015, available 
at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21653 (“Consistent with the existing literature, our analysis also 
shows that Spotify displaces music piracy”)( (last accessed March 2, 2016).

[PAGE 4]
 
Microsoft Corporation 
One Microsoft Way  
Redmond WA 98052 www.microsoft.com 
 
Page 4 of 8 
 
appropriate exemptions to accommodate advancements in technology and new, 
noninfringing uses of works.  Accordingly, we focus our comments below on areas where 
improvements to the rulemaking process would help insure that Section 1201 continues 
to serve its dual purpose to foster the growth of the digital marketplace by ensuring 
adequate legal protections for copyrighted works.4 
How 1201 Can Accommodate Important Interests outside of Core Copyright Concerns 
Question two of the Notice asks how Section 1201 should “accommodate interests that 
are outside of core copyright concerns.”5  Section 1201(a)(1)(C) directs the Copyright 
Office, in evaluating proposed exemptions, to consider certain issues that are core to 
copyright (e.g., factors associated with the fair use exception in Section 107).  Similarly, 
Section 1201(a)(1)(B) requires the Copyright Office to grant exemptions only to the extent 
the prohibition adversely affects users’ ability to make noninfringing uses of works.   
As the 2015 rulemaking demonstrated, in some limited instances, factors outside core 
copyright concerns may be relevant to the fair use determination and assessments as to 
whether certain activity should reasonably be considered to be noninfringing.  Such 
considerations ultimately may help to shape the scope of a permitted exemption, as 
several of the exemptions established by the Librarian in the most recent rulemaking 
demonstrate.6  The statute contemplates consideration of other — potentially non-
copyright — information, as it directs the Librarian to examine “such other factors as the 
Librarian considers appropriate.”7  
Microsoft believes that the current statutory structure of Section 1201 accommodates 
these essential policy inputs.  In those rare cases where a TPM adversely affects 
consumers’ ability to access copyrighted works for non-infringing uses, and where such 
                                                           
4 See H.R. Rep. No. 105-551, pt. 2, at 23 (1998). 
5 See 80 Fed. Reg. at 81373. 
6 See Final Rule: Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for 
Access Control Technologies, 80 Fed. Reg. 65944 (Oct. 28, 2015) (granting narrowly tailored 
exemptions notwithstanding the broader requested exemptions, inter alia, for software used in 
motorized vehicles for purposes of diagnosis and repair, and for identifying security flaws in 
software). 
7 Section 1201(a)(1)(C)(v).

[PAGE 5]
 
Microsoft Corporation 
One Microsoft Way  
Redmond WA 98052 www.microsoft.com 
 
Page 5 of 8 
 
access is necessary to promote other vital interests, Section 1201 rulemaking was 
intended to and does provide a critical “safety valve” to address these concerns.   
In the case of software or software-enabled products, granting even a narrowly-scoped 
exemption may raise important issues, such as individual privacy, consumer safety, 
interoperability, and data security.  In such cases, the Copyright Office should seek views 
and guidance from those federal agencies with jurisdiction over the regulatory and policy 
considerations at issue and with relevant substantive expertise.  Input of responsible, 
expert agencies should be sought as early as possible in the rulemaking process to allow 
for full vetting of points raised.  If necessary, however, the Office should consider 
adjusting the timing of any exemptions it does grant in order to take agency input into 
account—as it did when it recommended a 12-month delay in the effective date of certain 
newly adopted exemptions in the most recent rulemaking.   
These and related steps are vital to ensure that the Copyright Office — whose expertise is 
in copyright law and practice — has the benefit of the perspectives of stakeholders and 
regulators in shaping its 1201 recommendations.  As with all exemptions, the Copyright 
Office should ensure that any adjustments to the nature or scope of exemptions to 
address non-copyright policy considerations are appropriately scoped to enable only 
noninfringing uses of works and do not open the door to infringement or other illegal 
conduct. 
Enhancements to Improve the Rulemaking Process 
Questions 3 through 5 of the Notice seek input on ways in which the process of the 
triennial rulemaking could be improved.  As a general matter, Microsoft supports 
reasonable efforts to streamline and reduce the burdens of this process—for rights 
owners, for those advocating in support of recognition or renewal of an exemption, and 
for the Copyright Office.  We applaud the Copyright Office for the creative ways in which it 
streamlined the process for identifying, categorizing, and obtaining feedback on proposed 
exemptions in the 2015 rulemaking.  At the same time, given the importance of the issues 
at stake in these rulemakings, and the difficult factual and legal questions that many 
proposed exemptions have raised, we urge the Copyright Office to avoid actions that 
could weaken the integrity of the rulemaking process, the robustness of the Office’s 
recommendations, or that might lead to granting exemptions that are ill-considered or 
that do not in fact satisfy the requirements established by Congress.   
With that in mind, we offer the following suggestions on how the rulemaking process 
might be improved:

[PAGE 6]
 
Microsoft Corporation 
One Microsoft Way  
Redmond WA 98052 www.microsoft.com 
 
Page 6 of 8 
 
 Streamline the process for renewal of previously granted exemptions, and separate 
these submissions from those seeking new exemptions.  Where a particular use is 
already subject to an exemption, the prior record may be sufficient to satisfy the 
burden for renewal, and there may be less empirical evidence that users “are, or are 
likely to be,” adversely affected if the exemption is not renewed—precisely because 
users have had the benefit of the exemption for the past three years.  To avoid 
imposing undue burdens on applicants for renewals, the Copyright Office should 
adopt reasonable procedural adjustments.  This may include simplifying the process 
for interested parties to initially request or oppose renewal, requiring that submitters 
provide only a summary of reasons underlying a renewal, and not requiring a full 
submissions or hearings unless the renewal request receives an objection.  In 
evaluating renewals which receive no objections, the Office also could provide that a 
proponent satisfies its burden if it either establishes that the conditions leading to the 
original granting of the exemption still exist, or that the need at issue is being 
substantially met because of the previously granted exemption.8  
 
 For exemptions that merely expand the scope of an existing exemption, require 
evidence only to the extent relevant to the expansion.  Where an applicant seeks to 
expand an existing exemption—e.g., to new works, new users, or new uses—the 
applicant must, consistent with the statutory language of Section 1201, meet its 
burden of establishing that users are, or are likely to be, adversely affected in their 
ability to make non-infringing uses of works by virtue of Section 1201(a)(1)(A).  The 
Office should consider, consistent with the preceding recommendation, separating the 
expansion request from the renewal request, and require new evidence only to the 
extent of the expansion, and not with respect to the renewal of the earlier exemption 
(absent opposition to the renewal of the earlier exemption). 
 
 Seek agency input and initiate inter-agency deliberations at an early point in the 
rulemaking process.  As already noted, we believe the Copyright Office should 
proactively seek input from federal agencies with regulatory authority and substantive 
expertise that might bear upon the recommendation or scope of a proposed 
                                                           
8 Cf. U.S. Copyright Office, Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding to Determine 
Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention 14 (Oct. 2015), available at 
http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/registers-recommendation.pdf.  A two stage process could likely 
be adopted by the Copyright Office in compliance with the APA and without change to Section 
1201. Similarly, reference to supporting evidence submitted in prior rule making could be an 
“additional factor” suitable for the Librarian to consider in the next cycle.  See Section 
1201(a)(1)(C)(v).

[PAGE 7]
 
Microsoft Corporation 
One Microsoft Way  
Redmond WA 98052 www.microsoft.com 
 
Page 7 of 8 
 
exemption.  The analysis, data and other evidence of expertise from these agencies 
can inform the Office’s recommendations and increase stakeholder and public 
confidence in the outcome of the rulemaking process.  To maximize the opportunities 
for the Office and the public to benefit from these agencies’ expertise, we encourage 
the Office to adopt procedures designed to alert relevant agencies to proposed 
exemptions, seek guidance and views and, to the extent feasible, include agency 
representatives in hearings or other public discussions.  Where more than one agency 
has relevant oversight or expertise, we encourage the Office to facilitate inter-agency 
consultation and dialogue as early in the process as possible. 
Accessibility Exemptions 
Microsoft supports the use of exemptions to help ensure that persons with disabilities are 
able to enjoy the works they’ve lawfully acquired, but which may not be available in an 
accessible format.  At Microsoft, our mission is to enable every person and organization 
on the planet to achieve more, including by making electronic information available to 
screen readers and other assistive technologies so that the information is available to 
persons with visual impairments or other print disabilities.  In an information economy, 
access to information is a prerequisite to an inclusive workplace, classroom, or home 
environment. Microsoft believes that such exemptions strike an appropriate balance 
between protecting incentives for creativity and enabling persons who are disabled to 
access the works they’ve lawfully acquired. 
In particular, Microsoft supports making permanent the authorized exemption that 
facilitates access to literary works by persons who have print disabilities.9  The World Blind 
Union estimates that over 90 percent of published works are unavailable to people with 
print disabilities.  Microsoft and other technology companies have taken some steps to 
facilitate the creation of accessible electronic content, but we know we need to do 
more.10  
Even with the best technologies, however, it is imperative that copyright law not stand as 
an impediment to the creation of accessible content.  While the triennial process is an 
appropriate mechanism for addressing particular exemptions directed at specifically 
                                                           
9 See Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access 
Control Technologies FR 65944,65962 (October 20, 2015) 
10 See http://blogs.microsoft.com/on-the-issues/2015/12/03/uns-international-day-of-persons-
with-disabilities-improving-access-and-inclusion/ (last accessed March 2, 2016)

[PAGE 8]
 
Microsoft Corporation 
One Microsoft Way  
Redmond WA 98052 www.microsoft.com 
 
Page 8 of 8 
 
identified needs, making these exemptions permanent recognizes that factors giving rise 
to the exemption persist beyond each triennial period. 
Microsoft recognizes that more can be done to improve accessibility for copyright works.  
Accordingly, Microsoft welcomes the Copyright Office’s leadership in convening 
stakeholders in relevant industries to participate in the goal of achieving additional 
progress on accessibility to copyrighted works.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Dave Green 
Assistant General Counsel – IP Policy & Strategy 
Intellectual Property Group – Corporate, External & Legal Affairs 
Microsoft Corporation
