[PAGE 1]
Jay Freeman (saurik) +1 (805) 895-7209 saurik@saurik.com
Hello. My name is Jay Freeman, and I am the developer of Cydia, popularly known as "an 
alternative to the App Store for jailbroken iOS devices (iPhone, iPad, and iPod Touch)". I have 
been involved in the 1201 exemption process since 2009, when the EFF ﬁled for an exemption 
on the work in which I am embedded. I attended the hearings in 2012, and in 2015 I was on the 
panel for multiple requests. (If there will be hearings for this study, I would like to be involved.)!
!Speciﬁcally, what I provide are the tools required to "add features" to existing software. Rather 
than having to wait for mobile phone operating system vendors (such as Apple or Google) or 
application developers (such as Facebook or Twitter) to decide that your need is a high enough 
priority to add the functionality you might want in your own device, I provide the tools that allow 
third-party developers to modify the software and add whatever you might need themselves.!
!These tools do not involve copying the original software. These tool work in a similar way to the 
Game Genie, which provided this functionality on the Nintendo gaming platform. This device sat 
"between" a software cartridge and the game console, allowing the code as read by the system 
to be modiﬁed; but at no point was there a modiﬁed copy of the whole program in a form that 
could be used as a derived work. This device ended up in litigation, and was established as not 
creating a derived work in the case law (with a fallback position that it would still be fair use).!
!https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lewis_Galoob_Toys,_Inc._v._Nintendo_of_America,_Inc.!
!I believe that some of my colleagues in this area will be making much better arguments about 
the issue with transient exemptions, so I'm going to limit my comments to aspects of 1201 that I 
believe others are less likely to cover: the anti-trafﬁcking clause and the requirements of ﬁling.!
!The reality is that modifying an iPhone to strip away the software encryption locks that prevent 
this kind of functionality is extremely complex. One key developer has described it as "you have 
to send the following 10 pages of numbers, followed by, *exactly* 23 milliseconds later, the new 
following 10 pages of numbers". This is not something that anyone can do by themselves: they 
need a tool developed by an expert to make these modiﬁcations, for whatever needed purpose.!
!And there are many purposes: in a world where increasingly more devices involve encryption-
based software locks to verify their software, we are rapidly running into the situation where all 
of the use cases we wish to provide exemptions for (blind people reading books using a third-
party screenreader, deaf people using timecode information to synchronize closed captioning 
with the playback of a DVD, educators being able to use snippets of content during lectures) 
require these extremely complex gymnastics (often using an identical set of general tools).!
!This means that the anti-trafﬁcking clause becomes extremely onerous, as exemptions for those 
who distribute the tools required to allow users to make these difﬁcult changes are every bit as 
important as the exemptions for the users themselves. The existence of this anti-trafﬁcking 
clause thereby undermines the entire purpose of the 1201 exemption process existing at all.!
!The other issue that I would like to point to is that the requirement in the exemption submission 
process that the digital lock being defeated be exactly described means that it is easy to claim 
that exemption petitions are incomplete or that the resulting exemptions don't apply to a product 
from a speciﬁc company because the speciﬁc mechanism or arbitrary layering of encryption 
techniques being used to sign the ﬁrmware is different. It needs to be sufﬁcient to simply talk in 
higher-level abstractions: it should be a use case that drives an exemption, not the technology.
