[PAGE 1]
Before the 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 
United States Copyright Office  
 
 
In the Matter of  
 
Section 1201 Study:  
Notice and Request for Public Comment  
 
) 
) 
) 
) 
)
) 
 
 
 
Docket No. 2015-08 
 
COMMENT
  
OF 
INTERNATIONAL DOCUMENTARY ASSOCIATION 
FILM INDEPENDENT  
KARTEMQUIN EDUCATIONAL FILMS 
 
 
Submitted By: 
UCI Intellectual Property, Arts, and 
Technology Clinic 
University of California, Irvine School 
of Law 
401 East Peltason Drive, Law 4800-P 
Irvine, CA 92697 
 
Jack I. Lerner, Director 
Noorean Gill and Daniel Silverman, 
Certified Law Students under the 
Rules of the California State Bar, 
Title 1, Division 1, Chapter 1 
 
 
Donaldson & Callif, LLP 
400 South Beverly Drive 
Beverly Hills, CA 90212 
 
Michael C. Donaldson 
Dean Cheley

[PAGE 2]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
March 3, 2016 
Page 1 of 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABOUT THE COMMENTERS 
 
The International Documentary Association (IDA) is a non-profit 501(c)(3) 
organization that promotes nonfiction filmmaking, and is dedica ted to increasing public 
awareness for the documentary genre.  At IDA, we believe that d ocumentary storytelling 
expands our understanding of shared human experience, fostering  a n  i n f o r m e d ,  
compassionate, and connected world, and we exist to serve the n eeds of those who create 
this art form.  Our major program areas are: Advocacy, Filmmake r Services, Education, 
and Public Programs and Events. For over 30 years, IDA has work ed to support 
documentary filmmaking as a vital art form.  We continue to see k ways to ensure that the 
artists, activists and journalists who make documentaries recei ve the resources that they 
need and deserve. 
Film Independent is a non-profit arts organizati on and our mission is to champio n the 
cause of Independent film and support a community of artists wh o embody diversity, 
innovation and a uniqueness of vision.  We help independent filmmakers tell their stories, 
build an audience for their projects and diversify the voices in the film industry, supporting 
filmmakers at every experience level with a community in which their works can be 
appreciated and sustained.  With over 200 annual screenings and events, Film Independent 
provides access to a network of likeminded artists who are driv ing creativity in the film 
industry.  Our free Filmmaker Labs for selected writers, direct ors, producers and 
documentary filmmakers and year-round educational programs serve as a bridge from film 
school to the real world of filmmaking—one with no defined career ladder. Project Involve 
is Film Independent’s signature program dedicated to fostering the careers of talented 
emerging filmmakers from communities traditionally underreprese nted in the film 
industry.  We also produce the weekly Film Independent at LACMA  film series, the Los 
Angeles Film Festival in June and the annual awards programs fo r the finest independent 
films of the year—the Film Independent Spirit Awards.   
Kartemquin Educational Films is a not-for-profit collaborative center for documentary 
media makers who seek to foster a more engaged and empowered so ciety. In 2016, 
Kartemquin will celebrate 50 ye ars of sparking democracy throug h documentary. Best 
known for producing Hoop Dreams  and The Interrupters  among over 50 other 
documentaries that examine and critique society through the liv es of ordinary people, 
Kartemquin has won every major almost every available prize for  documentary 
filmmaking, including multiple Emmy, Peabody, duPont-Columbia a nd Robert F. 
Kennedy journalism awards, Inde pendent Spirit, IDA, PGA and DGA  a w a r d s ,  a n d  a n  
Oscar nomination. A revered resource on issues of ethics and st orytelling, Kartemquin is 
internationally recognized for crafting quality documentaries b acked by comprehensive 
audience engagement, and for its innovative programs and advoca cy designed to elevate 
the documentary community.

[PAGE 3]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
March 3, 2016 
Page 2 of 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
As participants in the three most recent section 1201 anticircu mvention rulemakings, we 
applaud the Register’s request for comments on section 1201 of the Digital Millennium 
Copyright Act (“DMCA”).  We are pleased that the Register has r ecognized that section 
1201’s triennial rulemaking process consumes an inordinate amount of time and resources 
for all involved, and we agree w ith the Register’s suggestion t hat the process contain a 
presumption of renewability.  We respectfully submit this comme nt to provide further 
suggestions about how the rulemaking process can be improved, a nd how the statute can 
be amended to better account for the digital world we live in today.  We recommend that:   
 
 The Register urge Congress to amend section 1201 to include a requirement that 
circumvention of an access control is not a violation of section 1201 unless there is a 
connection between the circumvention and infringing conduct. 
 
 In the alternative, the Register should revise the triennial ru lemaking in the following 
ways: 
 
o Establish a presumptive renewal of previously granted exemptions;  
o Structure the proceeding as a rulemaking rather than an adjudication; 
o Impose a workable standard for what constitutes a likely noninf ringing use and 
ensure that the standard does not interfere with the developmen t of fair use law in 
the courts; and 
o Strongly favor exemptions involving merged access and use contr ols, particularly 
where the merged control prevents a use such as copying, and th e user does not 
seek to obtain the material unlawfully. 
 
Filmmaking has a uniquely important role in society because filmmakers explore, analyze, 
and comment on politics, history, and culture using the predomi nant form of 
communication of our time. In today’s media ecosystem, independ ent filmmaking is 
particularly significant because independent and documentary fi lmmaking are playing a 
greater role as traditional print investigative journalism face s increasing economic 
pressure.  In addition, filmmaking gives voice to marginalized communities in order to 
shed light on stories and experiences outside the mainstream.  
 
As creators, we depend on copyright law to protect our works.  In the eighteen years since 
the DMCA was enacted, we have seen enormous shifts in our indus try including changes 
in broadcast and theatrical distribution, new online business models, and of course, massive 
online copyright infringement. These are serious problems that bear close examination, and 
we applaud the Register’s work toward finding solutions to them.  
 
Yet despite the profound difficulty these problems present for our community, Congress’s 
signature law designed to address them has done virtually nothi ng to remedy them.  Our

[PAGE 4]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
March 3, 2016 
Page 3 of 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
eighteen years of experience with the law is that rather than c urb copyright infringement, 
the DMCA’s prohibition on circumvention has instead made it vas tly more difficult to 
make films.  As we have shown in previous rulemakings, section 1201 chills freedom of 
expression by preventing criticism, commentary, and other forms  of fair use. That effect 
has never been more pronounced than it is today when more content than ever is protected 
by technological protection measures (“TPMs”) that contain acce ss controls—as the 
Register has recognized.   
 
T h is  d is c o n n e c t b e tw e e n  th e  g o a l of reducing infringement and t he actual effect of the 
anticircumvention provisions was not intended—but it was certai nly foreseeable. Indeed, 
throughout the legislative process, members of Congress and stakeholders alike expressed 
concern about the possibility tha t the DMCA would inhibit lawfu l uses, particularly fair 
use.  In establishing the triennial rulemaking process, Congress intended to provide a “fail-
safe” mechanism that would allow noninfringing uses. While that  process has led to 
exemptions that do help to preserve our ability to make fair us e in the digital age, the 
process has been inordinately burdensome and has led to exempti ons that are unduly 
narrow, difficult to apply, and out of sync with the rapid technological innovation.   
 
We commend the Register for poi nting out to Congress the diffic ult, time-consuming 
nature of the exemption process.  In this Comment, we urge the Register to recommend 
that Congress amend the statute, and we offer several suggestions for ways she should use 
the discretion provided by the statute to modify the exemption process.   
 
First, we agree with the Register that there should be a presumptive renewal of previously 
granted exemptions.  We believe, however, that the presumption does not need to be 
constrained to situations in which there is no opposition.  Suc h a presumption would not 
harm the process because it could always be rebutted; an exempt ion should be reissued 
until and unless the Register finds that the adverse effects co mplained of in previous 
rulemakings no longer exist.  In fact, the statute affords the Librarian substantial discretion 
to structure the burden of proof , burden of persuasion, and sta ndard of proof in ways that 
maximize fairness and efficiency.  For example, even if the Lib rarian determined that de 
novo review is required in each rulemaking, that standard does not require the exclusion of 
all previous evidence in each new rulemaking proceeding. Nothing in the legislative history 
prevents this approach.  
 
Second, the Register should exer cise discretion to modify the e xemption process in ways 
that make it less burdensome on all parties involved in the process. The exemption process 
requires a great deal of time, effort, and resources on the par t of commenters proposing 
exemptions largely because it has been administered like an adj udication instead of a 
rulemaking.  The process should be run like a rulemaking, as th e statute requires, and as 
such should not impose the burden of proof on a subset of participants. 
 
Third, the Register should impose a workable standard for what constitutes a likely 
noninfringing use.  In past rulem akings, the Register has requi red proof by a

[PAGE 5]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
March 3, 2016 
Page 4 of 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“preponderance of the evidence,” and has applied that standard unevenly at times.  This 
approach has the unfortunate effect of preventing the evolution of fair use law in the courts. 
The Register should structure the rulemaking in a way that does  not restrict fair use law 
from developing in the courts.  
 
Finally, the Register should recognize that while Congress acted to prohibit circumvention 
of access controls, it also intentionally permitted circumventi on of use controls.  This 
important balancing has been ignored in the law’s implementatio n, with significantly 
adverse effects on myriad noninfringing uses.  The Register sho uld use her discretion in 
the rulemaking process to restore that balance. Rather than considering merged access and 
use controls to be essentially the same as access controls, the Copyright Office should treat 
merged access and use controls as highly suspect. At a minimum, where such controls are 
present, that fact should weigh heavily in favor of an exemptio n under the fifth statutory 
factor, “such other factors as the Librarian considers appropriate.”  In addition, the Register 
should apply the following test when considering whether to issue an exemption:  If there 
is a finding that (a) a noninfringing use is being adversely af fected even though users are 
lawfully obtaining and consumi ng copyrighted material, e.g. do not seek to circumvent a 
TPM in order to access material they have not paid for; (b) the  users cannot make copies 
of the material without violati ng a merged access and use contr ol; and (c) no substantial 
evidence exists to suggest that the proposed exemption will cau se significant copyright 
infringement, then the Librarian should be inclined to issue an  exemption without further 
examination.  If the exemption process were revised in this way to align with the statutory 
scheme established by Congress, it would solve many of the problems with section 1201.  
 
More fundamentally, given the costs of the exemption process an d section 1201’s 
negligible effect on copyright infringement, we question whether a triennial rulemaking is 
the appropriate fail-safe mechanism. As numerous legislators an d commentators have 
pointed out, adding the simple requirement that there be a conn ection between the 
infringing conduct and the circumvention would obviate the need  for an exemption 
process. We urge the Register to recommend this fix, which woul d have no effect on 
infringement while removing section 1201’s adverse impacts on noninfringing uses.   
 
We deeply appreciate the time, careful effort, and deliberation  that the Copyright Office 
has put into the exemption pro cess. The anticircumvention provi sions cause fear and 
befuddlement for many in the independent filmmaking community, and constrain a wide 
range of criticism and commentary. And while the exemption process has been extremely 
important to independent filmmakers, it has not come close to f ulfilling its promise as a 
fail-safe mechanism.  We respectfully urge the Register to take  this opportunity to 
recommend statutory fixes and ad justments to the rulemaking pro cess that will take into 
account the DMCA’s real-world effects.

[PAGE 6]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
March 3, 2016 
Page 5 of 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANSWERS TO SELECTED QUESTIONS  
POSED BY THE REGISTER 
 
 
1. Please provide any insights or observations regarding the role and effectiveness of the 
prohibition on circumvention of technological measures in section 1201(a). 
 
 
The experience of independent filmmakers is that section 1201 has had little effect on 
copyright infringement, but instead inhibits filmmakers’ ability to make criticism and 
commentary in their films.   
 
We now have eighteen years of experience with the DMCA’s prohib ition on 
circumvention. In that time, it has become quite clear that section 1201 has had little to no 
effect on copyright infringement.
1 Virtually every TPM that protects consumer media that 
has been released to the public has been broken, 2 while independent filmmakers continue 
to find their own copyrighted works infringed online.  Infringers do not distinguish between 
films based on films’ budgets, 3 even though the damaging effects of infringement are 
exacerbated for independent filmmakers who tend to gross significantly less revenue from 
their films than filmmakers backed by large studios do.4   
                                                 
1 Measuring the Digital Millennium Copyright Act Against the Darknet: Implications for the Regulation of 
Technological Protection Measures, 24 LOY. L.A. ENT. L. REV. 635, 636 (2004) (“[T]he DMCA fails in light 
of its stated goal--namely, reducing the threat of copyright infringement in the digital age.”). 
2 See Pamela Samuelson, Digital Rights Management {and, or, vs.} the Law, 46 Comm. ACM (2003); Nathan 
Grayson, Interview: CD Projekt's CEO on Witche r 2 piracy, why DRM's still not worth it  (Nov. 28, 2011), 
http://www.pcgamer.com/interview-cd-projekts-ceo-on-witcher-2-piracy-why-drms-still-not-worth-it/ (“We 
of course experimented with all available DRM/copy protection, but frankly nothing worked. Whatever we 
used was cracked within a day or two, massively copied and immediately available on the streets for a fraction 
of our price.”); Patricia Akester, Technological Accommodation of Conflicts between Freedom of Expression 
and DRM: The First Empirical Assessment at 74 (May 5, 2009) (quoting Steve Jobs as saying “DRM systems 
haven’t worked, and may never work, to halt music piracy”); Joh n T. Holland, Making Money Instead of 
Excuses: A Market-Based Alternative to the Digita l Millennium Copyright Act That Protects Copyrights 
Without Diminishing Expression, 7 GEO. J.L. & PUB. POL'Y 279, 293-94 (2009) (“As expected, no DRM has 
been developed, nor is one likely to be developed, that is invulnerable to circumvention; however, the DMCA 
even failed to prevent user-friendly circumvention technologies from entering mainstream markets.”). 
3 Tim League & Ruth Vitale, Guest Post: Here's How Piracy Hurts Indie Film , Indiewire (July 11, 2014), 
http://www.indiewire.com/article/guest-post-heres-how-piracy-hurts-indie-film-20140711; Adam  L e i p z i g , 
Sundance Infographic 2016: Ample Distribution, Paltry Deals, And The Cost Of Piracy  (2016), 
http://www.culturalweekly.com/sundance-infographic-2016-ample-distribution-paltry-deals-and-the-cost-
of-piracy/ (analyzing fourteen films that were shown at Sundanc e Film Festival in 2014 and 2015 and 
demonstrating that each film had been illegally downloaded from  hundreds of thousands of times to over 
twelve million times.).   
4 Paula Bernstein, ‘Expendables 3' Leaked Online. What  Does It Mean for Indie Filmmakers? , Indiewire 
(July 25, 2014), http://www.indiewire.com/article/expendables-3 -leaked-online-what-does-it-mean-for-
indie-filmmakers-20140725.

[PAGE 7]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
March 3, 2016 
Page 6 of 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Instead of preventing piracy, section 1201’s an ticircumvention provisions have had a 
serious detrimental effect on freedom of speech, fair use, and other lawful uses. According 
to Gordon Quinn, the founder and artistic director of Kartemqui n Films, who participated 
in the three most recent rulemaking proceedings, the DMCA does not impact piracy, but 
instead “inadvertently chills fair use and other lawful activit ies that are central to free 
expression in a democracy and the livelihoods of other filmmakers” like himself.5   
 
Congress anticipated and was con cerned about exactly these ill effects. The House 
Commerce Committee expressed con cerns about potential abuses of  t h e  D M C A  w h e n  
considering the legislation in 1998: 
 
[T]he Committee is concerned that marketplace realities may som eday 
dictate a different outcome, resulting in less access, rather t han more, to 
copyrighted materials that are important to education, scholarship, and other 
socially vital endeavors. This result could flow from a confluence of factors, 
including the elimination of pri nt or other hard-copy versions,  the 
permanent encryption of all electronic copies, and the adoption of business 
models that depend upon restricting distribution and availability, rather than 
upon maximizing it. In this scena rio, it could be appropriate t o modify the 
flat prohibition against the circ umvention of effective technol ogical 
measures that control access to copyrighted materials, in order to ensure that 
access for lawful purposes is not unjustifiably diminished.
6 
 
Much of this has come to pass.  TPMs that include access contro ls are now ubiquitous,
7 
and when filmmakers seek to comment on, criticize, or analyze c ultural materials, fear of 
violating section 1201 prevents t hem from making copies for tha t purpose.  As we have 
shown in previous section 1201 rulemakings, viable alternatives  to circumvention are not 
available.8  In particular, rightsholders often refuse to license content, charge prohibitively 
expensive fees, or require “non-disparagement clauses” restricting what the filmmaker can 
say.9   
 
Although Congress intended for the exemption process to act as a fail-safe mechanism to 
protect lawful uses, it has not successfully done so.  The filmmakers who have participated 
                                                 
5 Gordon Quinn, The DMCA is Broken for Filmmakers Like Me  ( F e b .  1 4 ,  2 0 1 6 ) ,  
http://motherboard.vice.com/read/the-dmca-is-broken-for-filmmakers-like-me. 
6 H.R. REP. NO. 105-551, pt. 2, at 44 (1998) (“Commerce Comm. Report”). 
7 Register’s Perspective on Copyright Review: Hearing Before the H. Comm. on the Judiciary, 114th Cong. 
23–24 (2015) ( Register’s Perspective on Copyright Review Hearing ) (statement of Maria A. Pallante, 
Register of Copyrights and Dir., USCO). 
8 See 2015 Joint Filmmakers Comment at 12 (Feb. 6, 2015), http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/comments-
020615/InitialComments_LongForm_IDA_Class06.pdf (“2015 Joint Filmmakers Comment”). 
9 Id. at Apps. D, E; 2012 Comment at Apps. F, G (2012), 
http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2011/initial/IDA_Mark_Berger.pdf .

[PAGE 8]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
March 3, 2016 
Page 7 of 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the process have found it extre mely burdensome, unpredictabl e, limited in scope, at 
times incomprehensible, and ill-suited to keep up with changes in technology. 10 T h e  
ultimate result is that section 1201 stifles fair use, creative  expression, and technological 
innovation. 
 
We ourselves are copyright owners; we understand the value and importance of intellectual 
property and seek to abide by the rules. Yet it seems that section 1201 effectively punishes 
only those like us who seek to follow the law, while failing to  deter rampant copyright 
infringement. 
 
The Register
11 should recommend that Congress amend the statute to account fo r the past 
eighteen years of experience.  W e urge the Register to approach  the section 1201 
rulemaking process with this reality firmly in mind, and to use  her discretion to make 
changes to the process as we suggest below. 
 
 
The Register should recommend that Congress amend section 1201 t o  r e q u i r e  a  
connection between the circumvention and infringing conduct in order for a violation 
to occur. 
 
There should be a requirement that circumvention of an access control is not a violation of 
section 1201 unless there is a c onnection, or nexus, between th e circumvention and 
infringing conduct. A nexus requirement would prevent section 1 201 from continuing to 
prevent myriad lawful uses, by refining the scope of a 1201 vio lation to include only the 
circumvention of an access control for an unlawful purpose. The  inclusion of a nexus 
requirement would be beneficial for many reasons.
12 First, section 1201 would still prohibit 
circumvention committed to further infringing conduct, but woul d also prevent lawsuits 
brought for anticompetitive reasons. 13 As the court in Chamberlain Group v. Skylink 
                                                 
10 Quinn, The DMCA is Broken for Filmmakers Like Me. 
11 The statute requires that “the Librarian of Congress, upon the  recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights, who shall consult with the Assistant Secretary for Communications and Information of the 
Department of Commerce and report and comment on his or her vie ws in making such recommendation, 
shall make the determination in a rulemaking proceeding.” 17 U. S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C).  We assume for the 
purposes of this Comment that the Librarian will continue to ve st the authority for conducting the triennial 
rulemaking with the Register.  We therefore refer throughout th is document to the Register rather than the 
Librarian. 
12 Eric Wanner, Navigating the Nexus: DMCA Anti-Circumvention Protection of Computer Software , 43 
ARIZ. ST. L.J. 1081, 1106 (2011) (“The Chamberlain nexus requirement, if uniformly adopted, would solve 
many of the problems that courts have been addressing, allowing  expanded definitions of access and 
effectiveness without the need for exceptions such as the unaut horized use of an authorized password 
doctrine, all without giving the DMCA broad, overreaching resul ts. Furthermore, it is consistent with 
standard statutory interpretation, the stated policy goal of Congress to discourage access to perfect copies of 
works, and allows the rejection of claims aiming to monopolize other markets without resorting to 
technicalities that future plaintiffs may trivially avoid.”). 
13 See Chamberlain Grp., Inc. v. Skylink Techs., Inc., 381 F.3d 1178 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

[PAGE 9]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
March 3, 2016 
Page 8 of 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technologies noted, the absence of a nexus requirement “would allow any manu facturer 
of any product to add a single copyrighted sentence or software  fragment to its product, 
wrap the copyrighted material in a trivial ‘encryption’ scheme,  and thereby gain the right 
to restrict consumers' rights to use its products in conjunction with competing products.”14 
Next, the requirement would obviate the need for an exemption p rocess. As a result, the 
requirement would reduce the burden of time, effort, and resour ces that the exemption 
process places on commenters, such as filmmakers, and the Copyright Office.  
 
With respect to the burdensome nature of the exemption process,  t h e  R e g i s t e r  h a s  
recognized that “a wide range of stakeholders have expressed fr ustration that the section 
1201 statutory framework requires that, to continue an existing  exemption, proponents 
must bear the legal and evidentiary burden of justifying the ex emption anew in each 
subsequent rulemaking proceeding” and has stated that “[t]he Copyright Office agrees that 
the process of renewing existi ng exemptions should be adjusted. ”
15 Further, participants 
share common frustrations with the length of the exemption process (particularly the 2010 
rulemaking proceeding which lasted close to twenty-two months), the redundancies caused 
by the current interpretation of the de novo standard of review, and the sheer complexity 
of the exemption process, which usually forces members of the public to seek legal counsel 
to help them navigate the proceeding.16 A nexus requirement would eliminate all of these 
issues. 
 
For all of these reasons, there should be a Congressional fix similar to legislation that has 
been introduced previously. For example, the Unlocking Technolo gy Act of 2013 was 
designed in part to add a copyright infringement requirement to  the anticircumvention 
prohibition, primarily by (1) amending section 1201(a) to read “[n]o person shall, in order 
to infringe or facilitate infringement of a copyright in a work  protected under this title, 
circumvent a technological measure that effectively controls access to that work”; and (2) 
adding that “[i]t shall not be a violation of this section to c ircumvent a technological 
measure in connection with a work protected under this title if  the purpose of such 
circumvention is to engage in a use that is not an infringement  of copyright under this 
title.”
17   
 
  
                                                 
14 Id. at 1201. 
15 Register’s Perspective on Copyright Review Hearing  at 21 (statement of Maria A. Pallante, Register of 
Copyrights and Dir., USCO). 
16 See Maryna Koberidze, The DMCA Rulemaking Mechanism: Fail or Safe?, 11 WASH. J.L. TECH. & ARTS 
211, 215-17 (2015); Arielle Singh, Agency Regulation in Copyright Law: Rulemaking Under the DMCA and 
Its Broader Implications, 26 BERKELEY TECH. L.J. 527, 566–67 (2011). 
17 Unlocking Technology Act of 2013 H.R. 1892, 113 Cong. (2013), § 2(a)(1).

[PAGE 10]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
March 3, 2016 
Page 9 of 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Should section 1201 be adjusted to provide for a presumptive renewal of previously 
granted exemptions—for example, when th ere is no meaningful opposition to renewal—
or otherwise be modified to streamline the process of continuing an existing exemption. If 
so, how? 
 
 
There should be a presumption of renewability for previously gr anted exemptions, 
which would be more equitable and allow commenters and the Regi ster to focus on 
the most important factual questions. 
 
The Register should establish a presumptive renewal of previous ly granted exemptions 
because such a presumption would ease the burden of continuing an exemption on both the 
Copyright Office and participants in the rulemaking.   
 
In previous rulemakings, the Regi ster has required that all exe mptions, even those 
previously granted, be proven de novo, and that no previously submitted evidence can be 
considered.
18  A presumption of renewability would ease the burden on all in volved and 
allow the Copyright Office to focus its resources on evaluating  whether new exemptions 
should be granted. 
 
The exemption process is especially burdensome on independent f ilmmakers.  Our work 
and livelihood depend on the exem ptions, without which we canno t make fair use and 
enrich society with valuable co m m e n t a r y  a n d  c r i t i c i s m .   B u t  t h e p r o c e s s  c o n s u m e s  a n  
inordinate amount of resources . The requirement to reapply de novo  f o r  t h e  s a m e  
previously granted exemptions detracts from our time, attention, and resources to enriching 
society with documentary films. 
 
                                                 
18 79 Fed. Reg. 55,689–90 (Sept. 17, 2014) (explaining in the Notice of Inquiry for the most recent 
exemption process: “The fact that an exemption has been previously adopted creates no presumption that 
readoption is appropriate. This means that a proponent may not simply rely on the fact that the Register has 
recommended an exemption in the past, but must instead produce relevant evidence in each rulemaking to 
justify the continuation of the exemption.”). See also U.S. Copyright Office, Section 1201 Rulemaking: 
Fifth Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention,  
Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights 88 (2012), 
http://copyright.gov/1201/2012/Section_1201_Rulemaking_2012_Recommendation.pdf (“2012 
Recommendation”) (refusing recommendation for wireless telephone handset “unlocking” because 
“[m]erely citing to conclusions drawn by the Register in past rulemakings does not itself create a factual 
record for purposes of a current rulemaking. As the Register has noted many times in the past, the record 
must be developed and reviewed de novo in each proceeding; a proponent is required to present a prima 
facie case, based on current evidence, that it is entitled to the proposed exemption.”).

[PAGE 11]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
March 3, 2016 
Page 10 of 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We agree with the Register’s call for a presumptive renewal of previously granted 
exemptions.19  However, limiting such a presumption to “when there is no opposition”20 or 
“when there is no meaningful opposition to renewal” 21 would render such a presumption 
largely ineffective, because anyone could remove the presumptio n by simply filing an 
opposing comment, for which the Copyright Office has not thus f ar required a burden of 
proof or persuasion.  An exemption should be reissued until and  unless the Register finds 
that the adverse effects complained of in previous rulemakings no longer exist. 
 
The Register has indicated that,  in her view, she cannot establ ish a presumptive renewal 
without Congressional action.
22  But the legislative history, and principles of administrative 
law, permit her to establish suc h a presumption immediately, wi thout further input from 
Congress.  Section 1201 is silent as to the de novo issue and properly entrusts the 
administering agency to decide how to implement the exemption process.  It is true that, as 
the Register notes, a May 1998 House Commerce Committee Report provided that “the 
assessment of adverse impacts on particular categories of works  is to be determined de 
novo.”23 But the Register is not bound by that one sentence from a repo rt issued early in 
the legislative history, 24 and even if she were, the text states only that the assessment  of 
adverse impact is to be determined de novo—not that all evidence must also be presented 
de novo.  Filmmakers and others reapplying for an exemption should be permitted to assert 
that the conditions present in a previous rulemaking continue to exist, and from there the 
burden of proof should shift to opponents or the agency to dete rmine that they no longer 
do.   
 
If the Register determines that she does not have the authority to implement these changes, 
then she should urge Congress to amend section 1201 to recogniz e that those seeking 
exemptions for lawful uses of copyrighted materials should not have to reapply for the 
same exemptions in subsequent proceedings.  
 
  
                                                 
19 Register’s Perspective on Copyright Review Hearing  at 21 (statement of Maria A. Pallante, Register of 
Copyrights and Dir., USCO). 
20 Id. 
21 80 Fed. Reg. 81,373 (Dec. 29, 2015). 
22 79 Fed. Reg. 55,689 (Sept. 17, 2014). 
23 Commerce Comm. Report at 37. 
24 See Am. Hosp. Assn. v. NLRB , 499 U.S. 606 (1991) (explaining that statements in committee reports do 
not have the force of law).

[PAGE 12]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
March 3, 2016 
Page 11 of 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Please assess the current legal requirements that proponents of an exemption must 
satisfy to demonstrate entitlement to an exemption. Should they be altered? If so, how? In 
responding, please comment on the relationship to traditional principles of 
administrative law. 
 
 
The exemption process should be structured as a rulemaking rath er than an 
adjudication, in accordance with Congress’s intent and in order  to more effectively 
conduct the fact-finding process. 
 
The DMCA section 1201 exemption process should be structured as  a rulemaking, rather 
than as an adjudication, as specified by the plain language of the statute.
25  
 
Despite these explicit instructions from Congress, the Copyright Office has structured the 
exemption process more like an  adjudication than a rulemaking.  The problem with this 
approach is that it places too much of a burden on commenters and unnecessarily restricts 
the Register’s factual inquiry.  Commenters have been placed into adversarial positions of 
“proponent” and “opponent”;
26 the burden of proof is on the proponent;27 and the standard 
of proof for the proponent is to  show “substantial” adverse effects.28 The statute does not 
mention proponents or opponents, specify who must bear the burd en of proof, or require 
“substantial” adverse effects.   
 
The Copyright Office has explained that its decision to impose the preponderance of the 
evidence standard is based on principles of agency rulemaking found in the Administrative 
Procedure Act (“APA”).
29 However, the part of the APA to which the Office cites, Section 
556(d), only applies when the statute specifically requires that an agency hold a hearing on 
the record.30 The proper section for an agency holding a “rulemaking” is section 553, which 
does not require adversarial posi tions or assigning the burden of proof to a subset of 
                                                 
25 17 U.S.C. § 1201(c) (“[T]he Librarian of Congress, upon the re commendation of the Register of 
Copyrights, who shall consult with the Assistant Secretary for Communications and Information of the 
Department of Commerce and report and comment on his or her vie ws in making such recommendation, 
shall make the determination in a rulemaking proceeding . . . whether persons who are users of a copyrighted 
work are, or are likely to be in the succeeding 3-year period, adversely affected by the prohibition . . . in their 
ability to make noninfringing uses under this title of a partic ular class of copyrighted works. In conducting 
such rulemaking, the Librarian shall examine . . . .”). 
26 79 Fed. Reg. 55,690 (Sept. 17, 2014). 
27 Id. at 55,689. 
28 U.S. Copyright Office, Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to 
the Prohibition on Circumvention, Recommendation of the Registe r of Copyrights 15–16 (2015), 
http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/registers-recommendation.pdf (“2015 Recommendation”). 
29 79 Fed. Reg. 55,698 (citing 5 U.S.C. § 556(d)). 
30 See 5 U.S.C. § 556(d); Am. Trucking Ass’n v. U.S., 344 U.S. 298, 319–20 (1953) (holding that section 7 of 
the APA (codified as section 556(d) “applies only when hearings  were required by the statute under which 
they were conducted to be made on the record and with opportunity for oral hearing.”).

[PAGE 13]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
March 3, 2016 
Page 12 of 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants.31 Congress intended to create a notice and comment rulemaking governed by 
section 553 of the APA, not an adjudication governed by section 556, as evinced by its use 
of the term “rulemaking” in the enabling statute.32   
 
Bedrock principles of administrative law support structuring the exemption process like a 
rulemaking, with greater responsibility of the agency to seek out all pertinent facts.  First, 
as Copyright Office staff have recognized, section 1201 exempti ons apply to everyone 
across the country, not just to the parties who comment in the rulemaking.
33  Second, the 
exemption process is filled with  determinations that assess con d i t i o n s  a s  t h e y  e x i s t  a l l  
across the land.  These include analysis of TPMs and their effe ct on the market for 
copyrighted works, and whether works are sufficiently available  for nonprofit and other 
purposes.  In particular, the open-ended fifth factor, “such ot her factors as the Librarian 
considers appropriate,” explicitly invites the Register to cons ider other copyright-related 
policy questions.34  Such considerations are most appropriate for a rulemaking.  F inally, 
the exemption process announces rules of prospective applicability that will take place in 
the future, not retrospective rules as take place in adjudication.   
 
Each of these characteristics s upports a conventional rulemakin g procedure, with its 
sweeping fact-finding procedures that permit a wide range of participation.
35  The Register 
should not impose burdens of production and persuasion solely o n the parties or structure 
the process like litigation; nor  should she look to section 556  of the APA to establish the 
burden of proof.  Rather, the Reg ister, as an informed and unbi ased representative of the 
public, should conduct her own fact-finding investigation, informed by the comments but 
not reliant solely on those who have the resources to participa te.36 As the leading treatise 
                                                 
31 See 5 U.S.C. § 553. 
32 H . R . REP. NO. 105-796, at 64 (1998) (“Conference Report”) (“The determinati on will be made in a 
rulemaking proceeding on the record.  It is the intention of th e conferees that, as is typical with other 
rulemaking under title 17, and in recognition of the expertise of the Copyright Office, the Register of 
Copyrights will conduct the rulemaking, including providing not ice of the rulemaking, seeking comments 
from the public, . . . .”). 
33 See Transcript, U.S. Copyright Office, Hearing on Exemptions to th e Prohibition on Circumvention of 
Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies 46 :25–47:2 (May 20, 2015) (statement of 
Jacqueline Charlesworth, General Counsel, Copyright Office) (“A nd that is part of what we where [sic] 
driving at here, is we have to create an exemption which applies in a general way, which is an unusual thing.  
Courts usually decide specific cases with a lot of specific facts.”). 
34 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C); 2015 Recommendation at 10. 
35 1 CHARLES H. KOCH, JR., ADMINISTRATIVE LAW AND PRACTICE § 2:33[3] (3d ed., 2010). 
36 U.S. Copyright Office, Recommendation of the Register of Copyr ights in RM 2008-8; Rulemaking on 
Exemptions from Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Prote ction Systems for Access Control 
Technologies 262 (June 11, 2010) , http://www.copyright.gov/1201 /2010/initialed-registers-
recommendation-june-11-2010.pdf (“2010 Recommendation”) (“[T]he  Register finds no factual basis for 
designating this proposed class of works for the ensuing three- year period. While the Register’s 
recommendations in previous rulemakings made clear that the Register understands and accepts the legal and 
policy reasons for such an exemption, under the constraints est ablished by Congress in this rulemaking 
proceeding, the Register cannot recommend designation of the cl ass in the absence of a factual record that 
supports the need for the exemption. No such showing has been made in this proceeding.”).

[PAGE 14]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
March 3, 2016 
Page 13 of 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Administrative Law and Practice observes, it is well-accepted that in a rulemaking, “[t]he 
agency and its staff cannot sit by passively and let interested  persons develop a record.  
Holes or imbalance in the record is the agency’s responsibility  and not that of private 
participants.”37 
 
Nothing in the legislative history undermines this conclusion, especially in light of the plain 
language of the statute.  If, how ever, the Register chooses to move forward with a more 
adjudication-like process, she s hould at a minimum do so only a fter articulating well-
defined elements that have a clear basis in the language of sec tion 1201.  Along similar 
lines, any factfinding inquiry in a notice-and-comment rulemaki ng should be confined to 
copyright-related matters squarely within the statutory scheme of Chapter 12.    
 
 
When determining whether a use is likely noninfringing, the Register should refrain 
from imposing a restrictive “preponderance of the evidence” sta ndard or one that 
requires near-certainty.  In setting the standard, the Register should ensure that the 
exemption proceeding not interfere with the development of fair use law in the courts. 
 
In previous rulemakings the Copyright Office has announced a “p reponderance of the 
evidence”
38 standard for determining whether a use is noninfringing.  At times, the Office 
has taken an even stricter appro ach requiring near-certainty.  We urge the Register to 
reconsider her position on the standard of proof required to sh ow that a use is likely to be 
noninfringing.  The statute and legislative history provide wid e latitude to make this 
determination and in doing so, the Register should keep in mind that an unduly restrictive 
standard hampers the natural development of the law, which runs  counter to Congress’s 
clearly expressed intent.39  
 
Under section 1201, the prohibition against circumvention appli es unless and until the 
Librarian determines that “persons who are users of a copyright ed work are, or are likely 
to be in the succeeding 3-year period, adversely affected by th e prohibition . . . in their 
ability to make noninfringing uses under this title of a partic ular class of copyrighted 
works.”
40 The Register has interpreted this standard to require that a proponent “must prove 
by a preponderance of the eviden ce that the harm alleged is mor e likely than not.”41 This 
is a stricter standard than what the statute requires.  As we discuss above at pages 113-13, 
                                                 
37 1 CHARLES H. KOCH, JR., ADMINISTRATIVE LAW AND PRACTICE § 4:33[4] (3d ed., 2010) (citing Nat. Res. 
Def. Council, Inc., v. Herrington, 768 F.2d 1355, 1420–21 n.63 (D.C. Cir. 1985). 
38 79 Fed. Reg. 55,689 (citing 2010 Recommendation at 10). 
39 Nowhere in the legislative history does Congress signal an int ention to remove the ongoing development 
of fair use and other areas of copyright law from the courts an d vest the Copyright Office with that status.  
Indeed, Congress signaled exactly the opposite intention in section 1201(c)(1) (“Nothing in this section shall 
affect rights, remedies, limitations, or defenses to copyright infringement, including fair use, under this 
title.”).  
40 17 U.S.C. 1201(a)(1)(C). 
41 79 Fed. Reg. 55,689 (Sept. 17, 2014).

[PAGE 15]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
March 3, 2016 
Page 14 of 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Copyright Office does not need to rely on a provision of th e APA that is meant for a 
different type of administrative procedure in order to determine which burden of proof to 
apply; in fact, the Office has wide latitude to craft rulemaking procedures that fit the unique 
requirements of the statute. 42  In any event, given that whether a use is noninfringing is 
primarily a legal determination, a standard designed for evidentiary inquiries in the context 
of adjudication is ill-suited for such a question.  We think the most plausible reading of the 
statute, and the most workable standard, is that for a proposed noninfringing use to qualify, 
there merely needs to be some likelihood that a desired use is noninfringing—not that one 
has shown by a preponderance of the evidence43 that it is noninfringing.  
 
In addition, we urge the Register to apply the standard more un iformly.  On several 
occasions in previous exemption proceedings, the Copyright Offi ce applied a standard 
more restrictive even than the “preponderance of the evidence” standard.  For example, in 
2012, the Copyright Office rejected an exemption for jailbreaking of video game consoles 
after “consider[ing] whether proponents have satisfied their bu rden of demonstrating that 
the uses in question are, in fact, noninfringing.”
44   
 
The same occurred in the most recent rulemaking with respect to the suggested exemption 
for criticism and commentary in narrative filmmaking.
45  There, the Register added to the 
“preponderance of the evidence” s tandard three additional layers of scrutiny that have no 
basis in case law or the statute.  First, the Register chose not recommend an exemption for 
narrative filmmaking in part “becau se there is no presumption t hat their primary purpose 
is to offer criticism or commentary, as opposed to being includ ed for entertainment 
purposes.”46 But in conducting a fair use ana lysis, courts have never consi dered the 
“primary purpose” of the genre to which the work belongs as a determining factor, instead 
looking at the specific use being made.47 Second, the Copyright Office reasoned that “none 
of the case law examples provided by proponents considered the use of motion picture 
excerpts in narrative films,” 48 despite no real dispute that f air use in narrative films is 
widespread in practice and recognized in the case law.49 The statute does not require having 
                                                 
42 See 1 CHARLES H. KOCH, JR., ADMINISTRATIVE LAW AND PRACTICE § 2:35 (3d ed., 2010). 
43 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protect ion Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, Comments of New America’s Open Technology Institute, at *6 (Feb. 6, 2015). 
44 Id. at *7 (Feb. 6, 2015) (quoting Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection 
Systems for Access Control Technologies, Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights and 
Determination of the Librarian of Congress 39 (2012), 
http://copyright.gov/1201/2012/Section_1201_Rulemaking_2012_Recommendation.pdf). 
45 2015 Recommendation at 79. 
46 Id. 
47 2015 Joint Filmmakers Comment at 6. 
48 2015 Recommendation at 80.  
49 Letter from Jack I. Lerner and Michael C. Donaldson to Maria A. Pallante (Oct. 15, 2015), 
http://www.law.uci.edu/faculty/full-time/lerner/pdfs/Docket-No-2014-7-Proposed-Class-6-Update-Fair-
Use-in-Narrative-Filmmaking.pdf; 2015 Joint Filmmakers Comment at 5; 2015 Joint Filmmakers Reply 
Comment at 5 (May 1, 2015) http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/reply-comments-
050115/class%206/ReplyComments_LongForm_IDAEtAl_Class06.pdf

[PAGE 16]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
March 3, 2016 
Page 15 of 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an exact case on point, which is a far more conservative approa ch even than a 
“preponderance of the evidence” s tandard.  Finally, the Office noted concern that the 
exemption could “supplant the existing, robust licensing market for motion picture clips,”50 
even though it is well-established that rights holders have no claim to the derivative market 
for criticisms of their works.51   
 
Each of these considerations raised the bar beyond what the law  requires, supplanting 
Congress’s intent not to disturb the evolution of case law with respect to fair use and other 
lawful uses.  This is an especially important point because, ab sent an exemption, section 
1201 works to put those who wish to make fair use on the wrong side of the law before 
they even have a chance to make their case to a court. 
 
We urge the Register to use her discretion to impose a workable  standard for what 
constitutes a likely noninfringing use and to make sure that the triennial rulemaking process 
does not interfere with the ongoing development of the law.   
 
 
Congress instructed that circumvention of access controls is pr ohibited, but that 
circumvention of use controls is not.  This choice was integral to Congress’s efforts to 
ensure that section 1201 did not impair fair use and other noni nfringing uses.  The 
Register should revise the rulemaking process to ensure that technologies that merge 
access and use controls do not subvert Congress’s clear intent.   
 
The Register should strongly favor exemptions involving merged access and use controls, 
particularly where the merged control prevents a use such as co pying, and the user does 
not seek to access the material unlawfully.  
 
Section 1201 prohibits circumvention of access controls, but no t use controls (sometimes 
called “copy controls,” “rights controls,” or “infringement-prevention technology”).
52  The 
distinction between access controls and use controls is subtle but important.  In the statutory 
scheme Congress devised, an access control limits a user’s abil ity to obtain, consume, or 
perceive copyrighted material, e xamples being password protecti on,53 an authentication 
sequence,54 or limitations on playback. 55 Section 1201(a)(1), of course, prohibits 
circumvention of such controls.  A use control, by contrast, li mits a user’s ability to copy 
or make some other use of copyrighted material besides accessin g it.  Congress chose not 
                                                 
50 2015 Recommendation at 79. 
51 Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569 (1994). 
52 17 U.S.C. § 1201. 
53 S. REP. NO. 105-190 at 11 (1998).  
54 RealNetworks, Inc. v. Streambox, Inc., No. 2:99CV02070, 2000 WL 127311, at *1 (W.D. Wash. Jan. 18, 
2000).   
55 R. Anthony Reese, Will Merging Access Controls and Rights Controls Undermine the Structure of 
Anticircumvention Law?, 18 BERKELEY TECH. L.J. 619, 644 & n.85 (2003) (discussing Divx technology).

[PAGE 17]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
March 3, 2016 
Page 16 of 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to prohibit circumvention of suc h a control in significant part  because it thought that 
drawing this distinction would preserve fair use.56 
 
A merged access and use control is one that combines both an ac cess control and a use 
control.  Such controls allow ri ghtsholders to undermine Congre ss’s statutory scheme, 
because by simply combining use controls with access controls, they can prevent other 
users from making lawful use of a work.  Eighteen years on, it is clear that this is exactly 
what has happened on a massive scale.  Most participants in the triennial rulemakings who 
have suggested exemptions have sought not to circumvent access controls in the sense of 
a password or control that affects playback, but to make copies  in order to engage in a 
lawful use.  That is certainly the case with independent filmmakers.   
 
We urge the Register to pay closer attention in future rulemaki ngs to the role of merged 
access and use controls.  At a minimum, the Register should con sider such controls under 
the fifth statutory factor, “such other factors as the Librarian considers appropriate,” as she 
has in the past.
57  In future rulemakings, that fact should weigh very heavily in favor of an 
exemption under the fifth factor.   
 
The issue of merged access and use controls is so important tha t the Register go further. 
The Register should apply a new te st when considering whether t o issue an exemption.  
First, the Register should inquire as to whether a noninfringin g use is being adversely 
affected even though users are lawfully obtaining and consuming the copyrighted material 
in question.  A typical example would be situations in which users have lawfully purchased 
the media in question as well as display devices (such as DVD or Blu-ray players) but still 
cannot make the noninfringing use in question.  Second, the Reg ister should inquire as to 
whether the users can make copies of the material without viola ting a merged access and 
use control.  Finally, the Regist er should inquire as to whethe r any substantial evidence 
exists to suggest that the proposed exemption will cause significant copyright infringement.  
If the answer to the first two questions is “yes,” and the answer to the third question is “no,” 
                                                 
56 H.R. REP. NO. 105-551, pt. 1, at 18 (1998) ("[A]n individual would not be a ble to circumvent in order to 
gain unauthorized access to a work, but would be able to do so in order to make fair use of a work which he 
or she has acquired lawfully."); WIPO Copyright Treaties Implementation Act and Online Copyright Liability 
Limitation Act: Hearing on H.R. 2281 and H.R. 2280 Before the Subcomm. on Courts and Intell. Prop. of the 
House Comm. on the Judiciary, 105th Cong. 47 (1997) (statement of Marybeth Peters) (“ The Copyright 
Office firmly believes that the fair use doctrine is a fundamen tal element of the copyright law, and that its 
continued role in striking an appropriate balance of rights and exceptions should not be diminished. We also 
believe that it is possible to provide effective protection against circumvention without undermining this goal. 
. . . Section 1201 seeks to accomplish this result in several ways. First, it treats access- prevention technology 
separately from infringement-prevention technology, and does no t contain a prohibition against individual 
acts of circumvention of the latter. As a result, an individual would not be able to circumvent in order to gain 
unauthorized access to a work, but would be able to do so in order to make fair use of a work which she has 
lawfully acquired.”); R. Anthony Reese, Will Merging Access Controls and Rights Controls Undermine the 
Structure of Anticircumvention Law? , 18
 BERKELEY TECH. L.J. 619, 647–50 (2003) (showing that the 
decision not to prohibit circumvention of use controls was a central component of Congress’s efforts to ensure 
that Section 1201 did not undermine important rights such as fair use).  
57 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(C); 2015 Recommendation at 10.

[PAGE 18]
International Documentary Association, et al. 
Comment regarding Section 1201 Study 
March 3, 2016 
Page 17 of 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
then the Librarian should be str ongly inclined to issue an exem ption without further 
examination. 
 
We urge the Register to take a c loser look at the way that merged access and use controls 
are undermining the statutory scheme of Chapter 12 and to use the discretion that the statute 
and the APA provide her to address the problem. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
For the reasons set forth above, we respectfully recommend that:   
 
 The Register urge Congress to amend section 1201 to include a requirement that 
circumvention of an access control is not a violation of section 1201 unless there is a 
connection between the circumvention and infringing conduct. 
 
 In the alternative, the Register should revise the triennial ru lemaking in the following 
ways: 
 
o Establish a presumptive renewal of previously granted exemptions;  
o Structure the proceeding as a rulemaking rather than an adjudication; 
o Impose a workable standard for what constitutes a likely noninf ringing use and 
ensure that the standard does not interfere with the developmen t of fair use law in 
the courts; and 
o Strongly favor exemptions involving merged access and use contr ols, particularly 
where the merged control prevents a use such as copying, and th e user does not 
seek to obtain the material unlawfully.
