[PAGE 1]
	
1401	K	Street	NW,	2nd	Floor	Washington,	DC	20005		
	 	BEFORE	THE	UNITED	STATES	COPYRIGHT	OFFICE,	LIBRARY	OF	CONGRESS	SECTION	1201	STUDY,	DOCKET	NO.	2015-8		COMMENTS	OF	THE	CENTER	FOR	DEMOCRACY	&	TECHNOLOGY			The	Center	for	Democracy	&	Technology	(CDT)	thanks	the	Copyright	Office	for	initiating	this	inquiry	into	possible	amendments	and	procedural	modifications	to	section	1201	to	improve	the	effectiveness	of	permanent	exemptions	and	the	triennial	review	process.	The	time	is	ripe	for	a	hard	look	at	section	1201’s	potential	adverse	effects	on	legitimate	activities	that	do	not	implicate	copyright	concerns	of	rightsholders.	As	access-controlled	software	and	firmware	increasingly	pervade	and	interface	with	nearly	every	facet	of	our	lives,	so,	too,	do	copyright	issues	and	the	ability	to	leverage	section	1201	to	further	interests	wholly	unrelated	to	copyright.		Leveraging	the	prohibition	on	circumvention	of	access	controls	to	further	non-copyright	interests,	such	as	market	foreclosure	strategies	or	consumer	lock-in,	is	perhaps	the	greatest	public	concern	with	section	1201.	While	CDT	shares	this	concern,	we	are	also	mindful	of	section	1201’s	potential	chilling	effect	on	the	independent	research	necessary	to	make	the	software,	firmware,	devices,	and	networks	we	interact	with	more	secure.	CDT	appreciates	the	Register	and	Librarian’s	work	in	granting	an	exemption	for	security	research	in	the	most	recent	triennial	review	proceeding.	However,	this	is	a	temporary	fix	to	a	problem	in	need	of	a	long-term	solution.		The	following	comments	propose	changes	to	section	1201	that	would	move	us	closer	to	that	long-term	solution.	They	also	focus	on	the	precise	questions	raised	in	the	Notice	of	Inquiry	and	propose	changes	to	the	triennial	rulemaking	process	to	make	it	more	efficient	and	predictable	for	the	Copyright	Office	and	all	participating	parties.	Many	of	the	potential	obstacles	to	making	these	improvements	are	largely	imaginary	or	self-imposed,	premised	on	readings	of	section	1201	and	its	and	legislative	history	that	are	neither	required	nor	fully	consistent	with	the	statute’s	purpose.	We	look	forward	to	working	with	the	Copyright	Office,	Congress,	and	all	parties	to	overcome	those	obstacles	and	arrive	at	a	more	predictable	application	of	section	1201	to	noninfringing	and	beneficial	uses	of	copyright	works	that	require	circumvention	of	access	controls.		 1. General	Observations			 a. Section	1201’s	Focus	on	Deterring	Copyright	Infringement		Section	1201	should	focus	on	copyright	concerns	in	order	to	protect	the	rights	granted	to	authors	in	section	1061	without	unduly	restricting	access	to	copies	of	works	for	legitimate	purposes.	Congress																																																									1	17	U.S.C.	§	106.

[PAGE 2]
	
	 2	
intended	section	1201’s	prohibition	on	circumvention	to	fulfill	the	United	States’	obligations	under	the	World	Intellectual	Property	Organization	(WIPO)	copyright	treaties	by	preventing	unauthorized	access	to	copyrighted	works.2	As	Congress	explained,	circumventing	access	controls	was	akin	to	“breaking	into	a	locked	room	in	order	to	obtain	a	copy	of	a	book[.]”3	Section	1201(a)	sought	to	deter	infringement	of	copyrighted	works	by	banning	unauthorized	lock	picking.4		Today,	access	controls	can	be	found	on	an	increasingly	wide	variety	of	products	that	do	not	involve	the	types	of	creative	content	stored	on	the	access-controlled	digital	media	of	the	1990s.5	That	ubiquity	heightens	the	need	to	focus	section	1201	on	copyright-related	interests,	and	the	need	for	flexibility	in	the	triennial	review	process.	As	the	Register	has	noted,	the	prohibition	on	circumvention	“impacts	a	wide	range	of	consumer	activities	that	have	little	to	do	with	the	consumption	of	creative	content	or	the	core	concerns	of	copyright.”6	Garage	door	openers,	cell	phones,	and	tractors	are	now	almost	as	likely	to	be	the	subject	of	threats	of	anti-circumvention	liability	or	requests	for	exemptions	as	e-books,	DVDs,	or	end-user	software.		As	the	Office	has	pointed	out,	access	controls	have	been	used	for	purposes	other	than	copyright	protection.7	Makers	of	mobile	phones,	printer	cartridges,	and	coffee	makers	have	used	access	controls	as	a	means	to	control	market	entry	and	competition.8	Others	have	used	access	controls	as	a	security																																																									2	Section-by-Section	Analysis	of	H.R.	2281	As	Passed	by	the	United	States	House	of	Representative	on	August	8,	1998,	Committee	on	the	Judiciary,	House	of	Rep.,	105th	Cong.,	2d	Sess.	at	3,	5-6	(Comm.	Print,	Serial	No.	6,	Sept.	1998)	(House	Manager’s	Report).	3	Id.	at	5.	4		Id.	(“Subsection	(a)...	thus	amends	title	17	to	establish	this	new	chapter	12	of	the	Copyright	Act	to	protect	against	certain	acts	of	circumvention	of	technological	measure	employed	by	copyright	owners	to	defend	against	unauthorized	access	to	or	copying	of	their	works.”)	5	See	e.g.	Initial	Comments	of	Dr.	Matthew	Green,	5-10,	Sixth	Triennial	Rulemaking,	Proposed	Class	25:	Security	Research	(explaining	a	variety	of	technological	protection	measures	and	kinds	of	devices	and	systems	in	which	they	are	used),	available	at	http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/comments-020615/InitialComments_LongForm_Green_Class25.pdf.		6	Section	1201	Rulemaking:	Sixth	Triennial	Proceeding	to	Determine	Exemptions	to	the	Prohibition	on	Circumvention,	Recommendation	of	the	Register	of	Copyrights,	2	(Oct.	2015)	(2015	Register’s	Recommendations),	available	at	http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/registers-recommendation.pdf.				7	Recommendation	of	the	Register	of	Copyrights	(2006	Register’s	Recommendation)	at	51	n.	148,	(Nov.	2006)	(“The	purpose	of	the	software	lock	appears	to	be	limited	to	restricting	the	owner’s	use	of	the	mobile	handset	to	support	a	business	model,	rather	than	to	protect	access	to	a	copyrighted	work	itself....	the	record	relating	to	this	proposed	class	of	works	does	not	demonstrate	any	copyright-based	rationale	for	enforcing	the	prohibition	on	circumvention	of	technological	measures	that	control	access	to	works	protected	by	copyright.”),	available	at	http://www.copyright.gov/1201/docs/1201_recommendation.pdf.		8	Librarian	of	Congress,	Exemption	to	Prohibition	on	Circumvention	of	Copyright	Protection	Systems	for	Wireless	Telephone	Handsets,	Final	Rule,	79	Fed.	Reg.	50552,	50552-53	(Aug.	25,	2014);	Lexmark	Intern.	v.	Static	Control	Components,	387	F.	3d	522,	549	(6th	Cir.	2004);	Casey	Johnston,	How	do	you

[PAGE 3]
	
	 3	
feature.9	These	uses	are	far	afield	from	“access	controls	implemented	to	deter	copyright	infringement	in	the	digital	environment”10	and	should	not	enjoy	protection	under	section	1201.	CDT	agrees	with	the	National	Telecommunications	and	Information	Administration	(NTIA)	that	evidence	demonstrating	that	a	rightsholder	or	other	party	is	deploying	access	controls	for	motivations	other	than	copyright	protection	should	weigh	strongly	in	favor	of	granting	an	exemption.11			While	federal	circuit	courts	are	not	in	agreement	as	to	whether	a	violation	of	section	1201’s	prohibition	on	circumvention	requires	some	nexus	with	infringement,12	exemption	proposals	should	not	be	denied	absent	evidence	of	harm	to	an	interest	protected	by	copyright.	When	the	Register	finds	the	uses	described	in	proposed	exemptions	are	noninfringing,	denying	the	exemption	would	seem	to	run	counter	to	the	core	purpose	of	the	triennial	review	process:	mitigating	the	adverse	effects	of	the	anti-circumvention	provision	on	users’	“ability	to	make	noninfringing	uses	under	this	title	of	a	particular	class	of	copyrighted	works.”13	Standing	alone,	concerns	unrelated	to	copyright	are	an	inadequate	basis	for	denying	a	proposed	exemption.				Further	guidance	and	uniformity	as	to	how	the	Office	accounts	for	concerns	unrelated	to	copyright	would	benefit	both	rightsholders	and	users	seeking	to	make	noninfringing	uses	of	works	that	require	circumventing	access	controls.	In	its	consideration	of	the	proposed	Class	22	Vehicle	Software	Security	and	Safety	Research	exemption,	the	Office	concluded	that	erosion	of	the	“public’s	confidence	in	the	safety	and	security	of	products	found	to	be	flawed”	was	“not	truly	a	copyright	concern”	and	therefore	irrelevant	to	the	Office’s	consideration	of	the	effect	of	an	exemption	on	the	market	for	or	value	of	copyrighted	works.14	By	contrast,	the	Office	stated	that	it	“must	take	seriously”	the	“significant	issues																																																																																																																																																																																																	DRM	a	Coffee	Pod?,	ARS	TECHNICA	(Mar.	23,	2014)	http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2014/03/how-do-you-drm-a-thing-like-a-coffee-pod/.		9	See	Chamberlain	Group	v.	Skylink	Tech.,	Inc.,	381	F.	3d	1178,	1185	(Fed.	Cir.	2004)	(using	access	controls	to	prevent	unauthorized	persons	from	activating	garage	door	openers);	Class	22	Comments	of	General	Motors,	Mar.	27,	2015,	at	28	(use	of	access	controls	to	prevent	tampering	with	vehicle	electronic	control	units	(ECUs))),	available	at	http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/comments-032715/class%2022/General_Motors_Class22_1201_2014.pdf.		10	Recommendations	of	the	National	Telecommunications	and	Information	Administration	to	the	Register	of	Copyrights,	Sixth	Triennial	Section	1201	Rulemaking,	Sept.	8,	2015	(NTIA	Recommendations)	at	80,	http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/2015_NTIA_Letter.pdf.		11	NTIA	Recommendations	at	7	(“First,	a	record	showing	that	a	technological	measure	was	not	deployed	with	copyright	protection	in	mind	should	weigh	heavily	in	favor	of	a	proposed	exemption.	Such	a	standard	is	entirely	consistent	with	the	statutory	factors	to	be	considered	in	this	rulemaking.”).	12	Compare	Chamberlain	Group,	381	F.	3d	at	1202	(concluding	that	17	U.S.C.	§	1201	prohibits	only	forms	of	access	that	bear	a	reasonable	relationship	to	the	protections	that	the	Copyright	Act	otherwise	affords	copyright	owners)	with	MDY	Ind.,	LLC	v.	Blizzard	Entertainment,	Inc.,	629	F.	3d	928,	945	(9th	Cir.	2010)	(finding	that	1201(a)	grants	an	independent	anti-circumvention	right	to	copyright	owners).	13	17	U.S.C.	Sec.	1201(a)(C).		14		2015	Register’s	Recommendation	at	311.

[PAGE 4]
	
	 4	
raised	by	opponents	concerning	public	safety	and	regulatory	compliance[.]”15	It	is	unclear	whether	the	Office	dismissed	proponents’	safety-related	concerns	because	they	were	raised	under	the	fourth	factor	of	section	1201(a)(1)(B)—the	effect	on	the	market	for	or	value	of	copyrighted	works—or	because	they	were	unaccompanied	by	an	expression	of	concern	from	regulatory	agencies.	In	any	event,	further	clarity	as	to	how	the	Office	will	evaluate	concerns	unrelated	to	copyright	will	ensure	that	one	of	the	least	clear	and	probative	factors	under	section	1201—the	“other	factors”	catchall—does	not	become	dispositive.			b. Regulatory	Concerns	Unrelated	to	Copyright		In	the	Sixth	Triennial	Exemption	proceeding,	the	Register	expressed	concerns	about	some	proposed	exemptions’	effects	on	compliance	with	laws	and	regulations	outside	of	copyright.16	Agencies	should	work	together	when	their	policy	fields	overlap.	However,	conditioning	the	applicability	of	1201	exemptions	on	laws	and	regulations	outside	the	Copyright	Act	adds	uncertainty	to	a	process	intended	to	reduce	it.	CDT	agrees	with	NTIA	that	expanding	the	scope	of	considerations	in	1201	proceedings	to	regulatory	matters	unrelated	to	copyright	could	require	the	Office	to	develop	expertise	in	any	number	of	fields	that	would	duplicate	the	expertise	of	other	agencies.17	CDT	also	shares	NTIA’s	confidence	that	when	triennial	exemptions	raise	substantial	concerns	outside	the	scope	of	copyright,	clear	and	transparent	communication	can	provide	notice	to	other	agencies,	alerting	them	to	the	potential	need	to	address	issues	that	lie	within	their	realm	of	expertise.18			An	exemption	under	section	1201	does	not	obviate	the	need	to	comply	with	other	laws	and	regulations.	The	Health	Insurance	Portability	and	Accountability,	the	Computer	Fraud	and	Abuse	Act	(CFAA),	and	regulations	promulgated	by	federal	agencies	are	no	less	applicable	to	users	of	copyrighted	works	simply	because	they	have	circumvented	a	technological	protection	measure	pursuant	to	an	exemption	granted	under	section	1201.	CDT	agrees	with	NTIA	that	rather	than	conditioning	exemption	applicability	on	compliance	with	these	laws	and	regulations	and	requiring	would-be	circumventors	to	wager	their	interpretation	of	those	laws	against	liability	under	1201(a),	a	provision	in	exemptions	“stating	that	it	does	not	preclude	liability	under	other	applicable	laws”	suffices	to	ensure	that	users	do	not	misconstrue	an	exemption	under	section	1201	as	a	blanket	exemption	from	legal	compliance	generally.19		 2. Rulemaking	Process																																																									15	Id.	at	312.	16	Id.	at	248,	315,	403.	17	NTIA	Recommendations	at	4	(“NTIA	urges	the	Copyright	Office	against	interpreting	the	statute	in	a	way	that	would	require	it	to	develop	expertise	in	every	area	of	policy	that	participants	may	cite	on	the	record.”)	18	Id.	at	62	(“NTIA	appreciates	that	parties	have	raised	important	questions	about	the	safety	and	efficacy	of	medical	devices,	and	NTIA	is	confident	that	the	appropriate	regulatory	agencies	will	address	any	non-copyright	issues	that	may	arise	once	this	exemption	is	granted.”)	19	Id.	at	58,	72.

[PAGE 5]
	
	 5	
	a. Presumptive	Renewal	of	Previously	Granted	Exemptions		CDT	agrees	with	the	Register	that	the	process	of	renewing	existing	exemptions	should	be	adjusted	to	create	a	regulatory	presumption	in	favor	of	renewal.20	In	the	last	triennial	rulemaking,	no	party	opposed	renewal	of	the	Class	9	exemption	for	assistive	technologies	to	make	literary	works	distributed	electronically	accessible	to	persons	who	are	blind,	visually	impaired,	or	print	disabled.21	Indeed,	groups	such	as	the	Association	of	American	Publishers	supported	renewal	of	the	exemption.22	In	such	cases,	developing	a	new	record	from	scratch	imposes	an	administrative	burden	on	the	Office	and	parties	with	no	apparent	benefit.		Even	in	cases	where	a	party	opposes	a	previously	granted	exemption,	the	Office’s	earlier	grant	of	the	exemption	should	satisfy	the	proponent’s	obligation	to	demonstrate	that	the	exemption	is	warranted	and	consistent	with	the	requirements	of	section	1201.	Absent	new,	specific	evidence	that	undermines	the	basis	for	granting	the	exemption,	those	who	benefit	from	an	exemption	should	be	able	to	rely	upon	it.	As	demonstrated	in	the	case	of	cellphone	unlocking,	consumers	may	come	to	rely	on	exemptions	even	when	the	Office	later	deems	the	evidence	to	support	them	“weak,	incomplete,	or	otherwise	inadequate.”23	CDT	therefore	supports	proposals	such	as	the	Breaking	Down	Barriers	to	Innovation	Act	that	would	instruct	the	Librarian	to	renew	exemptions	automatically	absent	a	showing	of	changed	circumstances.24			Even	without	legislative	change,	the	Librarian	is	entitled	to	rely	on	the	evidence	adduced	in	earlier	rulemakings.	The	reference	to	de	novo	review	cited	by	the	Register	in	the	Notice	of	Inquiry	(NOI)	in	this	proceeding25	and	elsewhere	comes	from	the	House	Commerce	Committee’s	Report	explaining	the	triennial	rulemaking	that	the	Commerce	Committee	required	the	Secretary	of	Commerce	to	conduct	in	consultation	with	NTIA,	the	Patent	and	Trademark	Office,	and	the	Copyright	Office.26	It	is	questionable	whether	this	passage	in	the	House	Commerce	Report	is	entitled	to	much	weight.	The	Report’s	instruction	to	the	Secretary	of	Commerce	to	make	“a	new	determination	that	the	adverse	impact	criteria	have	been	met	with	respect	to	a	particular	class”27	does	not	appear	in	either	the	Senate	or	House	Judiciary	Committee	Reports.	Indeed,	the	Senate	or	House	Judiciary	legislation	did	not	include	a	triennial	review	at	all.	The	House	Manager’s	Report,	issued	after	the	legislation	had	passed	the	House,																																																									20	Statement	of	Maria	A.	Pallante	before	the	Committee	on	the	Judiciary,	United	States	House	of	Representatives,	“The	Register’s	Perspective	on	Copyright	Review”	(Apr.	29,	2015)	at	21.	21	Library	of	Congress,	Exemption	to	Prohibition	on	Circumvention	of	Copyright	Protection	Systems	for	Access	Control	Technologies,	Final	Rule,	80	Fed.	Reg.	65944,	65950	(Oct.	28,	2015)	(2015	Final	Rule).			22	Id.			23	2015	Register’s	Recommendations	at	4.	24	H.R.	1883,	114th	Cong.	Sec	3(a)(1)(F)(iii)	(2015);	S.990,	114th	Cong.	Sec	3(a)(1)(F)(iii)	(2015).	25	Library	of	Congress,	Section	1201	Study:	Notice	and	Request	for	Public	Comment,	80	Fed.	Reg.	81369,	81370	(Dec.	29,	2015)	(2015	NOI).	26	H.R.	Rep.	No.	105-551,	Part	2	at	37	(Jul.	22,	1998).	27	Id.;	see	also	2015	NOI	80	Fed.	Reg.	at	81370	&	n.25.

[PAGE 6]
	
	 6	
discusses	the	triennial	review	but	does	not	mention	a	de	novo	review	standard	or	whether	the	Secretary	of	Commerce	must	make	a	new	determination.	It	states	only	that	“[d]uring	the	next	rulemaking	proceeding,	if	it	is	determined	that	there	is	no	longer	an	adverse	impact	on	noninfringing	use,	the	prohibition	will	apply	and	the	exemption	will	cease	to	exist.”28	This	passage	suggests	if	the	Secretary	does	not	make	such	a	determination,	the	exemption	persists.	The	House	Conference	Report	does	not	explain	how	rulemaking	duties	migrated	from	the	Secretary	of	Commerce	to	the	Librarian	of	Congress,	but	it	certainly	does	not	mandate	that	the	House	Commerce	Report’s	mention	of	de	novo	review	migrated	with	them.		Even	if	the	statute	does	require	de	novo	review	of	a	requested	exemption,	that	review	does	not	foreclose	consideration	of	or	reliance	on	evidence	adduced	in	prior	rulemakings.	De	novo	review	determines	the	weight	accorded	a	prior	determination,	not	the	permissible	evidence	on	which	the	determination	is	made.	It	means	only	that	the	decision	maker	must	consider	the	matter	anew,	as	if	no	decision	previously	had	been	rendered.29	Moreover,	de	novo	review	is	generally	understood	to	apply	to	questions	of	law	rather	than	factual	determinations,	which	are	generally	reviewed	for	clear	error.30	Just	as	appellate	courts	may	rely	on	the	record	developed	below	when	reviewing	a	lower	court’s	decision	de	novo,	the	Office	is	entitled	to	rely	on	evidence	from	a	prior	rulemaking	when	conducting	a	subsequent	one.		Renewed	exemptions	are	particularly	important	to	legitimate	activity	that	may	require	more	than	three	years	(or	in	the	case	of	some	exemptions,	two	years)	to	complete.	This	is	a	concern	for	researchers	whose	projects	may	have	time	horizons	extending	beyond	the	pendency	of	a	temporary	exemption	to	anti-circumvention	liability	under	section	1201.	Without	any	assurance	that	their	actions	are	at	least	presumptively	legal,	they	may	never	undertake	them	in	the	first	place,	even	if	the	Librarian	has	determined	they	are	entitled	to	an	exemption	during	a	particular	triennial	review	period.		 b. Calibrating	Proponents’	Burdens	to	Copyright-Related	Interests		As	noted	in	the	Librarian’s	2000	Final	Rule,	the	language	of	section	1201	“does	not	offer	much	guidance	as	to	the	respective	burdens	of	proponents	and	opponents	of	any	classes	of	works	to	be	exempted	.	.	.”31	The	Librarian	therefore	relied	on	case	law,	restatements,	and	legislative	history	to	find	that	a	proponent	of	an	exemption	must	demonstrate	a	“substantial”	adverse	impact	to	be	eligible	for	an	exemption.32	The	NOI	in	this	proceeding	relies	on	the	House	Manager’s	Report	for	the	proposition	that	“proponents	must	establish	that	a	‘substantial	diminution’	of	the	availability	of	works	for	noninfringing	uses	is	‘actually	occurring’	in	the	marketplace—or,	in	‘extraordinary	circumstances,’	may	establish	that	the	‘likelihood	of	future	adverse	impact	during	that	time	period’	where	such	evidence	is																																																									28	House	Manager’s	Report	at	8.	29	Freeman	v.	DirecTV,	Inc.,	457	F.3d	1001,	1004	(9th	Cir.	2006).			30	United	States	v.	Wilkes,	662	F.3d	524,	532	(9th	Cir.	2011).	31	Library	of	Congress,	Exemption	to	Prohibition	on	Circumvention	of	Copyright	Protection	Systems	for	Access	Control	Technologies,	Final	Rule,	64	Fed.	Reg.	64556,	64558	(Oct.	27,	2000)	(2000	Final	Rule).			32	Id.

[PAGE 7]
	
	 7	
‘highly	specific,	strong	and	persuasive.’”33			It	is	questionable	whether	this	heightened	burden	on	proponents	of	an	exemption	is	either	required	or	consistent	with	the	purpose	of	section	1201’s	exemption	process.	Although	administrative	law	generally	places	the	burden	of	proof	on	the	proponent	of	a	rule	or	order,34	the	plain	text	of	section	1201	requires	the	Librarian	to	make	a	triennial	determination	as	to	the	provision’s	adverse	effect	or	likely	adverse	effect	on	users	making	noninfringing	uses	of	particular	classes	of	works,	regardless	whether	any	parties	step	forward.	Thus,	exemption	proponents	are	not	typical	petitioners	in	the	sense	of	seeking	an	unanticipated	declaratory	rulemaking	or	waiver	from	a	rule	of	general	application.	Section	1201(a)(1)(B)	itself	states	that	the	prohibition	of	circumvention	of	technological	measures	“shall	not	apply”	to	persons	determined	to	be	adversely	affected	by	section	1201’s	anti-circumvention	provision’s	application	to	noninfringing	uses	of	a	particular	class	of	words.	Thus,	it	is	more	appropriate	to	say	that	the	prohibition	does	not	apply	to	such	uses	than	to	say	that	such	uses	are	eligible	for	a	discretionary	exemption	from	the	prohibition.		Placing	the	burden	on	exemption	proponents	in	all	cases	to	demonstrate	a	“substantial	diminution”	of	the	availability	of	works	for	noninfringing	uses	or	a	substantial	adverse	impact	on	such	uses	deprives	the	rulemaking	process	of	needed	flexibility	for	cases	in	which	noninfringing	uses	have	a	negligible	impact	on	the	availability,	value,	or	market	for	copyrighted	works.	The	current	allocation	of	burdens	in	the	section	1201	rulemaking	process	makes	no	distinction	between	access	controls	that	protect	music,	art,	books,	video	games,	automobiles,	cell	phone	firmware,	or	garage	door	openers.	A	better	approach	would	be	one	that	calibrates	the	proponent’s	burden	to	the	potential	harm	of	granting	an	exemption	to	rightsholders’	copyright-related	interests.	Nothing	in	the	text	of	section	1201	would	prevent	the	Office	from	adopting	such	an	approach.		 c. Avoiding	Delay		The	section	1201	rulemaking	process	must	recognize	that	delayed	exemptions	frustrate	legitimate,	noninfringing	uses	of	copyrighted	works	and	create	substantial	uncertainty	for	users.	Unlike	prior	rulemakings	that	delayed	the	expiration	of	a	previously	granted	exemption,35	the	twelve-month	delayed	implementation	of	newly	granted	exemptions	in	the	most	recent	rulemaking	place	users	in	administrative	limbo:	the	Office	has	determined	that	the	proponents	have	carried	their	burden	to	demonstrate	the	need	of	the	exemption,	but	left	them	open	to	liability	under	section	1201	should	they	circumvent	access	controls	to	engage	in	the	noninfringing	use	during	the	year-long	phase-in.																																																										33	2015	NOI,	80	Fed.	Reg.	at	81370	(citing	House	Manager’s	Report	at	6).	In	past	proceedings,	some	commenters	have	questioned	the	Office’s	reliance	on	the	House	Manager’s	Report.	2000	Final	Rule,	64	Fed.	Reg.	at	64558	n.4.	CDT	does	not	seek	to	relitigate	that	issue	here	but	notes	that	the	Conference	and	Committee	Reports	do	not	refer	to	“substantial	diminution”	or	characterize	forward-looking	assertions	of	harm	as	relevant	only	in	“extraordinary	circumstances.”		34	5	U.S.C.	§	556(d).	35	Librarian	of	Congress,	Exemption	to	Prohibition	on	Circumvention	of	Copyright	Protection	Systems	for	Wireless	Telephone	Handsets,	Final	Rule,	79	Fed.	Reg.	50552,	50552-53	(Aug.	25,	2014).

[PAGE 8]
	
	 8	
	Aside	from	this	uncertainty,	delayed	implementation	deprives	a	granted	exemption	of	much	of	its	usefulness.	In	the	case	of	the	Class	25	exemption	for	good-faith	security	research,	researchers	may	have	to	delay	their	work,	compress	their	research	into	a	two-year	window,	or	account	for	the	possibility	that	further	restrictions	will	be	placed	on	the	exemption	as	a	result	of	the	implementation	process.	Such	obstacles	may	disincentivize	researchers	and	other	proponents	to	expend	the	necessary	effort	and	resources	to	seek	an	exemption	in	the	first	place.				It	is	unclear	that	the	statute	even	contemplates	exemptions	of	less	than	three	years.	To	the	extent	that	it	does,	the	Librarian	should	resort	to	delay	only	sparingly	and	should	be	transparent	as	to	a	delayed	exemption’s	implementation	process.	In	the	most	recent	rulemaking,	exemption	proponents	and	opponents	were	given	no	opportunity	to	respond	to	the	letters	from	state	and	federal	agencies	that	cited	concerns	with	or	opposed	requested	exemptions.36	These	concerns	led	the	Librarian	to	find	that	“twelve	months	was	the	shortest	period	that	would	reasonably	permit	other	agencies	to	respond”	to	delayed	exemptions.”37	However,	four	months	into	that	period,	exemption	proponents	(and	users)	still	have	no	participation,	or	even	visibility,	into	those	agencies’	response.	A	more	transparent	and	participatory	approach	to	addressing	the	concerns	of	other	agencies	will	reduce	the	element	of	surprise	with	respect	to	any	requirements	or	limitations	placed	on	granted	exemptions	and,	ideally,	obviate	the	need	for	future	delays.							 3. Anti-trafficking			According	to	the	House	Manager’s	Report,	the	anti-trafficking	provision	in	section	1201(a)(2)	was	“drafted	carefully	to	target	‘black	boxes’	and	to	ensure	that	legitimate	multipurpose	devices	can	continue	to	be	made	or	sold.”38	While	prohibiting	trafficking	in	devices	intended	to	circumvent	technological	protection	measures	can	deter	infringement,	some	assertions	of	liability	under	section	1201’s	anti-trafficking	provisions	have	gone	well	beyond	such	devices.	Those	provisions	pose	unique	and	unwarranted	risks	for	both	researchers	and	third	parties	seeking	to	assist	users	in	lawful	circumvention	of	access	controls	on	the	devices	they	own.			 a. 	Accommodating	Research		The	anti-trafficking	provisions	in	section	1201	create	uncertainty	and	risk	for	those	performing	research	that	requires	circumvention	of	access	controls	and	wish	to	publish	their	work	or	subject	it	to	peer	review.	On	their	face,	references	to	“technology,	product,	service,	device,	component,	or	part																																																									36	See,	e.g.,	Letter	from	Geoff	Cooper,	Ass’t.	Gen.	Counsel,	U.S.	Environmental	Protection	Agency,	to	Jacqueline	C.	Charlesworth,	Gen.	Counsel	&	Assoc.	Register	of	Copyrights,	U.S.	Copyright	Office,	(Jul.	17,	2015)	(urging	the	Office	not	to	recommend	the	proposed	Class	21	and	Class	22	exemptions),	available	at	http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/USCO-letters/EPA_Letter_to_USCO_re_1201.pdf.				37	2055	Final	Rule,	80	Fed.	Reg.	at	65956.	38	House	Manager’s	Report	at	9.

[PAGE 9]
	
	 9	
thereof”	do	not	reach	mere	discussions	of	circumvention	for	research	purposes.39	Nonetheless,	some	parties	have	taken	the	position	that	publishing	information	that	can	be	used	to	circumvent	access	controls	constitutes	prohibited	trafficking	within	the	meaning	of	section	1201(a)(2)	and	1201(b).40				The	risk	of	liability	attached	to	the	sharing	of	any	information	that	could	be	used	to	circumvent	access	controls,	even	in	the	context	of	a	broader	discussion,	inhibits	security	researchers	who	seek	to	build	on	each	other’s	work	or	subject	their	own	discoveries	to	independent	scrutiny	and	duplication	of	results	that	are	essential	to	the	scientific	method.	Although	section	1201(f)’s	exemption	for	reverse	engineering	allows	users	to	share	information	acquired	through	circumvention,	that	provision	is	limited	and	does	not	apply	to	exemptions	secured	through	the	triennial	review	process.41			Particularly	where	scholarship	or	research	about	access	controls	forms	the	basis	for	an	exemption	from	liability	for	circumventing	those	access	controls,	that	basis	should	exempt	from	anti-trafficking	liability	information	that	can	be	used	to	circumvent	the	access	controls	in	question.	While	section	1201’s	exemption	regime	would	be	improved	in	general	by	granting	the	Librarian	authority	to	grant	exemptions	from	anti-trafficking	liability,	the	need	for	such	authority	is	acute	in	the	case	of	research-based	exemptions.		 b. Facilitating	Third-Party	Circumvention		Consumers	seeking	to	make	noninfringing	uses	of	devices	they	already	own	present	a	compelling	case	for	permitting	third-party	circumvention	when	that	circumvention	requires	technical	knowledge	or	skill	beyond	the	grasp	of	a	typical	device	owner.	Congress	recognized	as	much	in	the	Unlocking	Consumer	Choice	and	Wireless	Competition	Act,	which	allows	circumvention	by	the	user	and	also	“by	another	person	at	the	direction	of	the	owner	.	.	.”42	In	her	recommendations	to	the	Librarian,	the	Register	notes	that	the	issue	of	third-party	circumvention	also	arose	in	the	context	of	proposed	exemptions	for	vehicle	repair	and	access	to	medical	data.43	The	Register	suggested	that	“Congress	may	wish	to	consider	another	amendment	to	section	1201	to	address	these	sorts	of	situations,	for	example,	by	expressly	allowing	the	Librarian	to	adopt	exemptions	that	permit	third-party	assistance	when	justified	by	the	record.”44																																																										39	17	U.S.C.	§	1201(a)(2),	(b).			40		Complaint	at	6	¶	9,	OdioWorks,	LLC	v.	Apple,	Inc.,	(N.D.	Cal.	No.	CV-09-1818),	available	at	https://www.eff.org/document/complaint-41.				41		See	17	U.S.C.	§	1201(f)(3)	(“The	information	acquired	through	the	acts	permitted	under	[the	reverse	engineering	exception]	may	be	made	available	to	others	.	.	.	solely	for	the	purpose	of	enabling	interoperability	of	an	independently	created	computer	program	with	other	programs,	and	to	the	extent	that	doing	so	does	not	constitute	infringement	under	this	title	or	violate	applicable	law	other	than	this	section.”).			42	Unlocking	Consumer	Choice	and	Wireless	Competition	Act,	Pub.	L.	113-144	Section	2(c).			43	2015	Register	Recommendations	at	5.	44	Id.

[PAGE 10]
	
	 10	
CDT	strongly	agrees	with	the	Register’s	suggestion,	which	is	echoed	by	NTIA’s	recommendation	to	grant	certain	exemptions	that	allow	circumvention	“at	the	request	of	the	owner”	or,	in	the	case	of	medical	data,	“at	the	direction	of	a	patient.”45	With	highly	sophisticated	devices,	the	inability	to	enlist	the	aid	of	a	third	party	can	deprive	the	device	owner	of	much	of	the	utility	of	the	exemption.	In	certain	cases,	users	may	even	render	the	device	inoperable	through	a	poorly	executed	attempt	at	lawful	circumvention.	Where	the	record	supports	an	exemption	for	a	device	or	vehicle	owner	to	circumvent	access	controls	to	engage	in	noninfringing	uses,	it	equally	supports	the	owner	enlisting	the	assistance	of	others	to	do	so.					 4. Permanent	Exemptions:	Security	Testing		The	existing	categories	of	section	1201’s	permanent	exemptions	are	necessary.	However,	the	continued	participation	of	security	researchers,	educational	institutions,	and	libraries	in	triennial	rulemakings	demonstrate	that,	in	their	current	form,	section	1201’s	permanent	exemptions	are	insufficient	to	cover	the	full	range	of	legitimate,	noninfringing	circumvention	for	research	purposes.46	The	overlap	between	permanent	exemptions	and	exemptions	granted	or	renewed	in	triennial	rulemakings	shows	that	the	statutory	exemptions	correctly	identify	areas	where	the	prohibition	on	circumvention	is	likely	to	adversely	affect	legitimate	noninfringing	uses,	but	do	not	provide	adequate	guidance	or	certainty	as	to	their	applicability	in	many	situations.47	Whether	through	legislation	or	interpretive	guidance,	enabling	more	noninfringing	uses	to	fit	within	the	permanent	exemptions	may	help	to	reduce	the	scope	of	future	triennial	rulemakings,	conserving	the	resources	of	the	Office	and	those	who	would	otherwise	participate	in	the	rulemaking	process.			The	existing	permanent	exemption	for	security	testing	allows	“accessing	a	computer,	computer	system,	or	computer	network,	solely	for	the	purpose	of	good	faith	testing,	investigating,	or	correcting	a	security	flaw	or	vulnerability,”48	yet	researchers	have	asked	for	triennial	exemptions	to	allow	security	research	three	times,	each	time	citing	uncertainty	as	to	the	applicability	of	1201(j)	to	their	proposed	areas	of	research.49	That	uncertainty	stems	primarily	from	three	features	of	the	existing	exemption:	the	required	authorization	of	the	“owner	or	operator,”	the	required	compliance	with	other	laws	including	the	CFAA,	and	the	consideration	of	a	nonexclusive	set	of	factors.50																																																										45	NTIA	Recommendations	at	58,	62.	46	See	2015	Register’s	Recommendations	at	309	(“...the	permanent	exemptions	embodied	in	sections	1201(j),	1201(f)	and	1201(g)	do	not	appear	unambiguously	to	permit	the	full	range	of	legitimate	security	research	that	could	be	encompassed	by	the	proposed	exemption”).	47	2015	Register’s	Recommendations	at	308;	NTIA	Recommendations	at	81	(“the	widely	reported	mass	uncertainty	over	these	exemptions,	combined	with	the	potentially	unrealistic	requirements	and	restrictions,	necessitate	a	complementary	exemption	for	general	security	research.”).	48	17	U.S.C.	§	1201(j)	49	See,	e.g.,	2006	Register’s	Recommendations	at	57-59	(Citing	testimony	of	Perzanowski,	3/31/06,	at	19-20,	and	Comments	of	CCIA/OSAIA,	at	9);	2015	Register’s	Recommendations	at	267	(citing	Comments	of	Matthew	Green,	Class	25	Supp.	at	19;		CDT	Supp.	at	3-4;	Green	Class	25	Reply	at	9).	50	17	U.S.C.	§	1201(j)

[PAGE 11]
	
	 11	
	First,	the	exemption	requires	a	researcher	to	obtain	the	authorization	of	the	“owner	or	operator”	of	the	computer,	system	or	network	she	wishes	to	research	before	starting	the	project.51	Due	to	the	interconnected	nature	of	many	devices,	systems,	and	networks,	however,	determining	which	owner	or	owners	must	authorize	the	research	is	an	increasingly	complex	task	that	may	not	always	be	possible.	Clarification	of	the	extent	of	authorization	required	and	how	to	properly	assess	ownership	in	the	case	of	research	that	may	involve	interdependent	computers,	systems,	and	networks	would	add	certainty	to	this	element	of	the	permanent	exemption	for	security	testing.		Second,	requiring	compliance	with	other	laws,	especially	the	reference	to	the	CFAA,	with	its	attendant	ambiguities,52	compounds	the	uncertainty	researchers	face	when	trying	to	determine	the	scope	of	1201(j).	Removing	from	section	1201	the	requirement	to	comply	with	this	and	other	laws	would	not	eliminate	the	responsibility	to	do	so,	nor	would	it	make	legal	any	acts	otherwise	inconsistent	with	the	CFAA.	However,	it	would	reduce	liability	risk	and	uncertainty	for	good-faith	security	researchers	who	might	use	the	exemption,	only	to	find	later	that	a	court’s	adverse	construction	of	“exceeding	authorized	access”53	within	the	meaning	of	the	CFAA	has	exposed	them	to	liability	both	under	that	statute	and	section	1201.			Third,	consideration	of	the	two	factors	listed	in	1201(j)(3),	which	may	be	“of	uncertain	application	to	at	least	some”	activities,54	adds	uncertainty	because	the	statute	suggests	that	these	factors	are	but	two	in	a	non-exhaustive	list	and	gives	no	signal	as	to	how	those	factors	should	be	weighed.	In	particular,	the	factor	assessing	“whether	the	information	derived	from	the	security	testing	was	used	solely	to	promote	the	security	of	the	owner	or	operator”55	raises	questions	in	cases	where	research	may	be	undertaken	with	the	security	of	someone	other	than	the	owner	in	mind.	Advance	clarification	of	how	the	Office	might	weigh	these	factors	would	help	researchers	assess	section	1201(j)’s	application	to	their	projects.	Alternately,	CDT	supports	simply	striking	the	portions	of	the	statute	requiring	compliance	with	other	laws	and	the	unspecified	consideration	of	factors,	as	proposed	by	the	Breaking	Down	Barriers	to	Innovation	Act.56																																																											51	17	U.S.C.	§	1201(j)(1).	52	The	Second,	Fourth,	and	Ninth	Circuits	interpret	the	statute’s	phrase	“exceeding	authorized	access”	narrowly,	limiting	it	to	instances	of	traditional	hacking	activity	(United	States	v.	Valle,	807	F.3d	508	(2d	Cir.	2015);	WEC	Carolina	Energy	Solutions	v.	Miller,	687	F.3d	199	(4th	Cir.	2012);	United	States	v.	Nosal,	676	F.3d	854	(9th	Cir.	2012)),	while	the	First,	Fifth,	Seventh,	and	Eleventh	Circuits	read	the	phrase	more	broadly,	including	using	a	computer	for	purposes	prohibited	in	a	terms	of	use	agreement	(EF	Cultural	Travel	BV	v.	Explorica	Inc.,	274	F.3d	577	(1st	Cir.	2001);	United	States	v.	John,	597	F.3d	263	(5th	Cir.	2010);	Int'l	Airport	Ctrs.	LLC	v.	Citrin,	440	F.3d	418	(7th	Cir.	2006);	United	States	v.	Rodriguez,	628	F.3d	1258	(11th	Cir.	2010)).	53	18	U.S.C.	Sec.	1030(a)(1).	54	2015	Register’s	Recommendations	at	309.	55	17	U.S.C.	§	1201(j)(3)(A).	56	H.R.	1883,	114th	Cong.	Sec	3(a)(1)(F)(iii)	(2015);	S.990,	114th	Cong.	Sec	3(a)(1)(F)(iii)	(2015).

[PAGE 12]
	
	 12	
CDT	thanks	the	Register	for	declining	to	include	a	mandatory	disclosure	requirement	in	her	recommendation	to	the	Librarian.	As	the	Office	has	observed,	the	appropriate	disclosure	of	flaws	and	vulnerabilities	is	a	complex	and	fact-dependent	endeavor,57	the	regulation	of	which	“may	implicate	First	Amendment	concerns.”58	Free	expression	concerns	aside,	the	norms	of	the	security	research	community	are	still	evolving,	and	appropriate	research	and	disclosure	practices	are	highly	contextual.	Consequently,	any	limiting	language	should	be	flexible	so	as	not	to	constrain	the	development	of	safe	testing	or	disclosure	practices.59	Through	multi-stakeholder	collaborative	efforts,	such	as	NTIA’s	current	process	addressing	cybersecurity	vulnerabilities,60	developing	consensus	on	appropriate	disclosure	practices	may	be	possible.	Any	legislative	changes	to	the	permanent	exemptions	should	leave	room	for	these	efforts	to	comprehensively	address	disclosure	practices.	Similarly,	provisions	such	as	section	1201(j)(3)(A),	which	evaluates	whether	information	was	“shared	directly	with	the	developer	of	such	computer,	computer	system,	or	computer	network”	should	not	be	construed	as	a	strict	disclosure	requirement.			 5. Other:	International	Trade	and	Treaty	Obligations		Congress	enacted	section	1201	to	implement	provisions	of	the	WIPO	Copyright	Treaty	and	the	WIPO	Performances	and	Phonograms	Treaty.61	The	largely	parallel	provisions	of	those	treaties	require	contracting	parties	to	“provide	adequate	legal	protection	and	effective	legal	remedies	against	the	circumvention	of	effective	technological	measures	that	are	used	by	authors	in	connection	with	the	exercise	of	their	rights	under	this	Treaty	or	the	Berne	Convention	and	that	restrict	acts,	in	respect	to	their	works,	which	are	not	authorized	by	the	authors	concerned	or	permitted	by	law.”62			As	then-Register	Marybeth	Peters	explained	in	testimony	before	the	House	Judiciary	Committee,	“[t]his	language	was	deliberately	written	to	be	broad	and	general,	and	to	leave	to	individual	countries	considerable	flexibility	in	determining	how	to	formulate	the	prohibition	[on	circumvention	of	technological	protection	measures].”63	That	considerable	flexibility	gives	Congress	the	latitude	it	needs	to	amend	section	1201	in	ways	that	address	known	defects	while	ensuring	that	the	statute	continues	to	accomplish	its	core	purpose	of	deterring	copyright	infringement.	Congress	can	amend	section	1201	to	extend	exemptions	to	anti-trafficking	provisions,	create	a	presumption	of	renewal	(which	could	be																																																									57	2015	Register’s	Recommendations	at	311-315,	318-19.	58	Id.	at	311	59	NTIA	letter	at	87.		60	See	NTIA,	Multistakeholder	Process:	Cybersecurity	Vulnerabilities,	at	https://www.ntia.doc.gov/other-publication/2015/multistakeholder-process-cybersecurity-vulnerabilities.			61	WIPO	Copyright	Treaty,	Dec.	20,	1996;	WIPO	Performances	and	Phonograms	Treaty,	Dec.	20,	1996.	62	WIPO	Copyright	Treaty,	Article	11,	available	at	http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=12740.					63	Statement	of	Marybeth	Peters	before	the	Subcommittee	on	Courts	and	Intellectual	Property,	Committee	on	the	Judiciary,	United	States	House	of	Representatives,	105th	Cong.,	1st	Session,	(Sept.	16,	1997)	available	at	http://copyright.gov/docs/2180_stat.html.

[PAGE 13]
	
	 13	
accomplished	without	amendment),	or	clarify	statutory	exemptions	while	preserving	our	commitments	under	international	treaties	and	trade	agreements.			CDT	urges	caution	in	entering	into	trade	agreements—or	advocating	for	provisions	in	those	agreements—that	would	barter	away	the	flexibility	Congress	and	the	Office	need	to	focus	anti-circumvention	liability	on	copyright	concerns.	The	United	States-Korea	Free	Trade	Agreement	(KORUS)	contains	anti-circumvention	provisions	that	largely	duplicate	terms	of	section	1201,	along	with	their	acknowledged	shortcomings.64	KORUS’s	fixed	list	of	exemptions	(along	with	a	triennial	review	process)	is	an	unfortunate	departure	from	the	WIPO	treaties’	more	flexible	approach.	The	recently	negotiated	Trans	Pacific	Partnership	(TPP)	provides	more	flexibility	than	KORUS,	but	includes	anti-trafficking	provisions	and	mandatory	criminal	penalties	in	certain	cases.65	However	well-intentioned,	overly	prescriptive	anti-circumvention	and	anti-trafficking	provisions	in	trade	agreements	carry	the	dual	risks	of	exporting	known	defects	with	those	provisions	and	also	complicating	efforts	to	fix	those	defects	at	home.	Should	the	United	States	continue	to	deem	it	advisable	to	advocate	for	these	adjuncts	to	copyright	protection	in	future	trade	agreements,	such	provisions	should	be	modeled	after	the	flexible	approaches	taken	in	the	WIPO	Treaties.		CONCLUSION		CDT	once	again	thanks	the	Office	for	initiating	this	proceeding	and	especially	thanks	the	Register	for	recognizing	the	need	to	address	such	matters	as	renewals	of	existing	exemptions	secured	through	prior	rulemakings,	third-party	circumvention,	and	the	interplay	between	statutory	exemptions	and	proposed	exemptions	in	the	triennial	review	process.	By	addressing	these	matters,	the	Office	can	make		significant	headway	in	more	clearly	focusing	section	1201	on	copyright-related	interests	and	reducing	burdens	and	uncertainty	for	both	rightsholders	and	users.	CDT	looks	forward	to	participating	with	the	Office	and	others	in	this	ongoing	effort.		 	 Respectfully	submitted,		Erik	Stallman	Stan	Adams		Center	for	Democracy	&	Technology		 March	3,	2016	
																																																								64	United	States-Korea	Free	Trade	Agreement,	Art.	18.4(7),	available	at	https://ustr.gov/trade-agreements/free-trade-agreements/korus-fta/final-text.		65	Trans-Pacific	Partnership,	Art.	18.68,	available	at	https://ustr.gov/trade-agreements/free-trade-agreements/trans-pacific-partnership/tpp-full-text.
