[PAGE 1]
 
 
UNITED STATES COPYRIGHT OFFICE 
 
 
    *  
Section 1201 Study: Request                                     Additional Comments of:  
For Additional Comments                              *       Association of American Publishers,       
  Entertainment Software Association,      
  Motion Picture Association of America, 
                                                *       Recording Industry Association of  
Docket  No. 2015-8                                                      America 
    * 
  
****** 
 
 
I. Introduction 
The Association of American Publishers (“AAP”) is the largest national trade 
organization of U.S. book and journal publishers, representing over 400 members, ranging from 
major commercial book and journal publishers to small non-profit, university, and scholarly 
presses.  AAP seeks to promote the effective and efficient protection of copyright to enable 
publishers and our technology partners to create and disseminate literary, scholarly, and 
educational works in new and convenient formats for consumers around the world to enjoy. 
The Entertainment Software Association (“ESA”) is the United States trade association 
serving companies that publish computer and video games for video game consoles, handheld 
gaming devices, personal computers, and the internet.  It represents nearly all of the major video 
game publishers and major gaming platform providers in the United States. 
The Motion Picture Association of America, Inc. (“MPAA”) is a trade association 
representing some of the world’s largest producers and distributors of motion pictures and other 
audiovisual entertainment material for viewing in theaters, on prerecorded media, over broadcast 
TV, cable and satellite services, and on the internet.  The MPAA’s members are: Paramount 
Pictures Corp., Sony Pictures Entertainment Inc., Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp., Universal 
City Studios LLC, Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, and Warner Bros. Entertainment Inc. 
The Recording Industry Association of America (“RIAA”) is the trade organization that 
supports and promotes the creative and financial vitality of the major music companies.  Its 
members are the music labels that comprise the most vibrant record industry in the world.  RIAA 
members create, manufacture and/or distribute approximately 85% of all recorded music 
produced in the United States. 
As AAP, ESA, MPAA and RIAA have stated in comments and reply comments in this 
proceeding, and at the public roundtables, the protections provided in Chapter 12 of Title 17 are 
extremely important to their members.  These protections have enabled the music, publishing, 
entertainment software, movie, and television industries to bring to market the diverse digital 
products that millions of consumers enjoy today.  Moreover, these protections are an essential 
component of these creative industries’ plans for the future.

[PAGE 2]
 
 
 2 
 
AAP, ESA, MPAA and RIAA appreciate the Copyright Office’s careful and thoughtful 
approach to this proceeding.  They also urge the Copyright Office not to recommend any action 
– legislative or otherwise – that could have the unintended consequence of enabling copyright 
infringement or deterring investment in new digital entertainment products and business models.  
The record in this docket demonstrates that Section 1201 has worked well and helped to generate 
the vibrant digital offerings that Congress sought to incentivize.   
Although Ranking Member Conyers of the House Judiciary Committee asked the 
Copyright Office to consider whether any changes to the statute are necessary, nothing presented 
to date in two rounds of comments and multiple public roundtables has established that to be the 
case.  The current statute and the triennial rulemaking process already provide the requisite 
flexibility and protections for both consumers and copyright owners.  When a statute of this 
import has worked so well based on distinctly integrated elements to achieve its objectives, 
legislative efforts to fix what is not broken will cause more harm than good.
1    
II. Response to Notice of Inquiry 
During the roundtables conducted by the Copyright Office earlier this year, as well as in 
filed comments, a notable consensus emerged that the process for the triennial rulemaking should 
be adjusted to provide for streamlined renewal of previously-granted exemptions, at least where 
adverse impact on noninfringing uses of the kind previously demonstrated to exist would likely 
recur in the absence of renewal of the exemption and there is no meaningful opposition to such 
renewal.  See, e.g., Comments of AAP, MPAA, and RIAA at 11-12; see also Comments of ESA 
at 9-10.  If the Copyright Office formally adopts a streamlined approach to renewal of previously 
granted exemptions, then it will be even more evident that the flexibility provided by the 
rulemaking process is preferable to attempts to make ostensibly permanent changes to the statute 
through legislation. 
 
                                                 
1 The DMCA – including the provisions codified in 17 U.S.C. sections 1201 and 512 – embodies 
a compromise negotiated at length among all stakeholders, including creators and copyright 
owners, Internet service and website providers, consumer electronics companies, libraries, and 
organizations representing the interests of consumers.  See 144 Cong. Rec. S12376 (Oct. 12, 
1998) (statement of Mr. Hatch) (commending the “hard-fought, but ultimately fruitful, private-
sector negotiations”).  This compromise included securing adequate prohibitions against 
undermining the integrity of technological protection measures and incentives for service 
provider cooperation in dealing with the proliferation of infringing material online in exchange 
for limitations on liability for service providers and the creation of a regulatory process by which 
consumers, libraries and others could propose new, temporary exemptions to the anti-
circumvention prohibitions.  See 144 Cong. Rec. H7095 (Aug. 4, 1998) (statement of Mr. 
Goodlatte) (“After a great deal of meetings and negotiation sessions, the copyright community 
and the service provider community were able to successfully reach agreement.  That agreement 
is included in the bill we are considering today.  No one is happier, except maybe those in each 
community who spent countless hours and a great deal of effort trying to reach agreement, than I 
am with the agreement contained in this bill.”).  We expect the Register– and Congress – to be 
mindful of this bigger picture when considering how any changes to portions of Section 1201 
would affect the delicate balance that the DMCA represents.

[PAGE 3]
 
 
 3 
 
The NOI asks whether new “permanent exemptions” should be codified, and then 
immediately turns to ask what changes, if any, should be made to existing permanent 
exemptions.  See generally Section 1201 Study: Request for Additional Comments, 81 Fed. Reg. 
66,296 (Sept. 27, 2016).  This only highlights the problem with permanent exemptions:  their 
language is likely to become outdated and incapable of keeping up with evolving technology, 
business practices and marketplace developments.  Unlike exemptions that may be renewed, 
updated, or sunset every three years, if they are perceived to be inadequate, ineffective, or no 
longer needed, statutory exemptions are difficult to change.   
For this reason, legislative action is unlikely to prove capable of addressing with 
specificity, flexibility, and with lasting impact, any perceived problems – many of which are 
manufactured, academic or philosophical – with current exemptions.  As a result, legislative 
action is also unlikely to reduce the number of new exemption proposals submitted during 
triennial proceedings or to reduce the associated workload that these proposals create for the 
Copyright Office’s staff.  Rather than recommending the investment of substantial agency, 
congressional and stakeholder resources in amending Section 1201, the Copyright Office should 
remain focused on managing the rulemaking process, which has proven the Office is capable of 
hearing concerns, assessing their validity and potential solutions, and adopting regulations 
responsive to changing market and technological developments without excessively harming 
rights holders in their statutorily-protected use of technological measures.     
1. Proposals for New Permanent Exemptions 
Although the NOI identifies issues worthy of attention, these issues are better addressed 
in the context of the rulemaking than through legislation.  Congress understood when it created 
the rulemaking that matters related to how we interact with digital copies of copyrighted works 
are, by definition, ever-changing.  Staff of House Comm. On the Judiciary, 105th Cong., 
Section-by-Section Analysis of H.R. 2281 as passed by the United States House of 
Representatives on August 4, 1998, at 6 (Comm. Print 1998) (‘‘Manager’s Report’’)  
(“technology evolves so rapidly that it would be impractical to freeze in time the applicability of 
these provisions”).  That is why a flexible proceeding reconvened every three years is preferable 
to new legislation.   
As discussed above, AAP, ESA, MPAA and RIAA do not oppose the Office adopting a 
streamlined approach to requests for renewal of existing exemptions, such as those listed in the 
NOI.  The record thus far supports the conclusion that this change in procedure would reduce 
unnecessary burdens without discarding the benefits offered by the opportunity to reassess 
marketplace conditions every three years to determine whether exemptions remain necessary or 
require alterations to retain relevance.  The standard for codifying an exemption in the statute 
should be more rigorous than the standard for granting a temporary regulatory exemption.  By 
creating the rulemaking, Congress acknowledged that few issues justified statutory exemptions 
and that in most cases a regulatory approach is preferable.  But if the Copyright Office 
nevertheless considers recommending that Congress make some or all of the exemptions 
mentioned in the NOI permanent, the Office should only do so if the Register is certain that 
legislative changes (i) would not be, as the NOI states, “likely to result in economically harmful 
unauthorized uses of copyrighted works” and (ii) would “preserv[e] congressional intent in 
supporting new ways of disseminating copyrighted materials to users[.]”  81 Fed Reg. at 66,297.

[PAGE 4]
 
 
 4 
 
2. Proposed Amendments to Existing Permanent Exemptions 
As discussed above, altering statutory provisions is unlikely to resolve perceived 
problems with the existence or application of the anti-circumvention and anti-trafficking 
prohibitions.  Meanwhile, removing existing safeguards from the statute could result in misuse of 
the newly modified exemptions.  AAP, ESA, MPAA and RIAA have serious concerns regarding 
whether some of the safeguards mentioned in the NOI could be deleted without harming rights 
holders, undermining the integrity of the systems used by consumers to access entertainment 
products, and running afoul of international agreements.  However, they will review the 
additional comments submitted by other stakeholders in response to the NOI and offer their more 
specific views in the context of reply comments.  For now, they simply note that Congress 
included these safeguards for good reasons after careful deliberation and agreement reached 
through extensive stakeholder negotiations.  See Manager’s Report at 15 (“Recognizing … that 
making circumvention information or tools generally available would undermine the objectives 
of this Act, the [reverse engineering] provision imposes strict limitations.”); H.R. Rep. No. 105-
551, pt. 2, 105th Cong., 2d Sess., at 44 (July 22, 1998) (“The Committee recognizes that courts 
may be unfamiliar with encryption research and technology, and may have difficulty 
distinguishing between a legitimate encryption research[er] and a so-called ‘hacker’ who seeks to 
cloak his activities with this defense.  Section 102(g)(3) therefore contains a non-exhaustive list 
of factors a court shall consider in determining whether a person properly qualifies for the 
encryption research defense.”); H.R. Rep. No. 105-796, 105th Cong. 2d Sess., at 67 (Oct. 8, 
1998) (“[T]he scope of permissible security testing under the Act should be the same as 
permissible testing of a simple door lock:  a prospective buyer may test the lock at the store with 
the store’s consent, or may purchase the lock and test it at home in any manner that he or she 
sees fit …What that person may not do, however, is test the lock once it has been installed on 
someone else’s door, without the consent of the person whose property is protected by the 
lock.”).     
3. Anti-Trafficking Provisions 
As emphasized in prior comments and reply comments, as well as in statements made at 
stakeholder roundtables earlier this year, the anti-trafficking prohibitions contained in Section 
1201 are critically important to the members of AAP, ESA, MPAA and RIAA.  In the words of 
the NOI, “because circumvention tools may be used for lawful and unlawful purposes alike, it 
would be impossible to ensure that tools manufactured and distributed pursuant to an exemption, 
once available in the marketplace, would be employed solely for authorized uses.”  81 Fed. Reg. 
at 66,299.  Accordingly, any diminishment in the scope of the prohibitions would have a 
deleterious impact on their effectiveness for preventing infringement and unauthorized access to 
works.  Thus, AAP, ESA, MPAA and RIAA are highly skeptical of the statutory interpretations 
proffered by exemption proponents and mentioned in the NOI.  These interpretations, even at 
this late stage in the proceeding, remain vague and unsubstantiated.     
The NOI’s request for comments on whether some forms of “third party assistance” fall 
outside the scope of the anti-trafficking prohibitions and are permissible under current law is 
particularly troubling.  Although the Office does not provide citations to anything specific in the 
record, it appears the NOI alludes to testimony and comments by the Electronic Frontier 
Foundation arguing that if the objective of a service provider is not only to circumvent but also 
to enable a consumer to enjoy some level of access to a work to accomplish some goal that is

[PAGE 5]
 
 
 5 
 
otherwise prevented by a technological measure, that service is not prohibited by Section 1201.  
See San Francisco May 25, 2016 Transcript at 181 (statement of Mr. Stoltz).  Such a view would 
gut the statute.  Of course, the end goal of trafficking in circumvention services is not the 
circumvention in and of itself.  The goal is to enable unauthorized access to a copyrighted work 
such that it can be adapted, copied or enjoyed in ways that extend beyond the terms of use 
incorporated into the transaction by which the copy of the work was obtained.  Reading the 
statute to allow all hacking services that market themselves as providing some benefit beyond 
circumvention for its own sake (i) would be inconsistent with congressional intent and (ii) would 
cause significant harm to copyright owners, including the members of AAP, ESA, MPAA and 
RIAA. 
III. Conclusion 
AAP, ESA, MPAA and RIAA look forward to reviewing the additional comments 
submitted by other interested parties and to continued participation in this proceeding. 
DATE: October 27, 2016 
Respectfully submitted: 
 
_____________________ 
Allan R. Adler 
General Counsel 
Vice President for Government Affairs 
Association of American Publishers 
455 Massachusetts Ave., NW, 7th Floor 
Washington, DC 20001 
(phone)  202-220-4544 
(email)   adler@publishers.org 
 
 
_____________________ 
Stanley Pierre-Louis 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Entertainment Software Association 
601 Massachusetts Avenue NW 
Suite 300 
Washington, DC 20001 
(phone) 202-223-2400 
(email) stan@theESA.com

[PAGE 6]
 
 
 6 
 
 
_____________________ 
Benjamin S. Sheffner 
Vice President, Legal Affairs 
Motion Picture Association of America, Inc. 
15301 Ventura Blvd., Bldg. E 
Sherman Oaks, CA 91403 
(phone) 818- 935-5784 
(email) Ben_Sheffner@mpaa.org 
 
 
_____________________ 
Susan B. Chertkof 
Senior Vice President, Business and Legal Affairs 
Recording Industry Association of America, Inc. 
1025 F Street NW, 10th Floor 
Washington, DC 20004 
(phone) 202-775-0101 
(email) schertkof@riaa.com
