[PAGE 1]
U~tVERSTIY <:1,.\[IRGINIA 
LIBRARY 
March 3, 2016 
OFFI C E ofthe LIB RA RI AN 
United States Copyright Office 
Library of Congress 
To Whom It May Concern, 
I write today to provide comments in response to the Copyright Office's December 29 
Notice of Inquiry regarding section 1201 of the Copyright Act. This response has been 
authored by Brandon Butler, Director of Information Policy, University of Virginia Library. 
It reflects the views ofthe University of Virginia Library and we offer it for your 
consideration. 
When Thomas Jefferson founded the University of Virginia in 1819, he placed a library, not 
a chapel, at the center of the institution. It was a characteristically radical move, heralding 
an unwavering commitment to the pursuit of knowledge. As the University has grown and 
evolved over the ensuing 200 years, so has the University Library. Its collections now 
include five million print items, 463,000 ebooks, and 16 million manuscripts and archival 
items. The University Library also holds over 50,000 DVD , Blu-Ray, and streaming titles. 
Each year the University Library invests more than $13 million acquiring new materials for 
its collections. 
The advent of media formats protected by technological protection measures, and the 
adoption of Section 1201 of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, created a schism in our 
collection. One set of rules, the default rules of copyright, applies to non-TPM content, but 
another, stricter set applies to media with TPMs. Everything we and our patrons have 
learned over the decades about how to make lawful uses oflibrary materials was 
ALDERMAN LIBRARY • P.O. Box 4oou4 • C!iARLOTTESVlLLE, V IRG INIA 22904 -4n4 • PHONE (434) 924-7849 • FAX (434) 924-1431 
http://www.lib. virginia.edu

[PAGE 2]
destabilized by this move. We welcome the Copyright Office's inquiry into how well this 
bifurcated system is working, and we offer the following observations. 
The University of Virginia Library's experience with Section 1201 of the Copyright Act has 
revealed three key things about the law: 
1. The endless cycle of petitioning the Copyright Office for special exemptions is 
inefficient and unfair. Past exemptions should be presumptively renewable, as the 
Office has suggested in its NOI. This can be done without legislation. 
2. The sole permanent exemption for libraries is essentially useless. A useful 
permanent exemption would simply and clearly permit circumvention for all lawful 
uses, as the Unlocking Technology Act and other reform bills have proposed over 
the years. 
3. The complexity of the specially-granted exemptions deters intended beneficiaries 
from making lawful uses. If the Office is to continue recommending specific 
exemptions, it should recommend broader and simpler exemptions to foster the 
lawful uses that the exemption process is supposed to enable. 
To elaborate on each of these points: 
First, the current structure of the rule making, where the class of users seeking an 
exemption bears the same burden every three years to prove the exemption is needed, is 
one of the most problematic aspects of the law. For librarians and educators, this has meant 
going to the Copyright Office every three years to prove two facts that haven't changed in 
over a decade: that their uses are lawful, and that they need to copy clips from consumer 
sources protected by encryption. Indeed, these facts aren't likely to change for a decade to 
come. Even the content industries seem to realize this, as in the most recent cycle of the 
triennial process they did not oppose renewal of several exemptions that have been 
granted in previous cycles, including those for educational use. 
T he rule-making process is cumbersome and alien for non-lawyers, which only exacerbates 
the difficulty of returning to it every three years to re-prove the same facts. It requires 
investment of substantial resources, including multiple sophisticated filings and 
appearances at in-person hearings in Washington, D.C., or Los Angeles. Developing fresh

[PAGE 3]
evidence of faculty need, of technology availability, of the state of the content market, and 
so on is extremely taxing for the dedicated few who have worked to participate in this 
ruling. Demanding this kind of investment over and over puts widely disbursed interests 
like libraries, professors, and students at a disadvantage relative to highly motivated and 
concentrated interests on the other side. Advocates on both sides should be encouraged to 
focus their energies on new issues, to the extent that there are any, rather than returning 
eternally to settled legal questions and unchanged facts. 
Second, the current permanent exemption for libraries is, by all accounts, completely 
useless. Indeed, it does serious harm to the extent that it gives the false imp ression that the 
statute has granted libraries some leeway for circumvention in core use cases. In reality, 
the only use case covered by the permanent exemption for libraries simply does not exist. 
We have never encountered a situation where the University Library wanted to circumvent 
DRM to make a purchasing decision, but could not get permission from the relevant vendor 
to do so (or, more likely, get temporary authorization such that circumvention is 
unnecessary). Seventeen years since its passage, we are not aware of anyone ever actually 
using this provision. 
A more useful permanent exemption for libraries (and others) would be a blanket 
exception for any lawful use, as proposed by the Unlocking Technology Act and numerous 
other reform bills over the years. This would free librarians, educators, and students to 
focus on the question of whether a use is fair, or permitted by another relevant exception, 
and do away with the arbitrary disparate treatment of library materials contingent on 
formats. 
Third, the complexity of the exemptions granted by the Librarian of Congress in previous 
rule makings has deterred lawful uses. The triennial rulings have become complex legal 
docum ents that lay practitioners struggle to parse without expert help. Most colleges and 
universities simply do not have the capacity to provide individualized legal advice to 
faculty and students who are trying, in good faith, to comply with these dense rules. While 
there are certainly some sophisticated faculty and students who are able to decode the 
rules, and others who are willing to move forward in the face of uncertainty, in our

[PAGE 4]
experience many students and faculty members will err on the side of caution and refrain 
from lawful uses. 
A final, overarching point emerges from each of these more specific concerns: the flaws in 
the 1201 regime threaten to undermine the credibility of the copyright law in the eyes of 
faculty and students who must interact with it. When they learn that otherwise lawfu l uses 
are nevertheless forbidden when they involve TPM-protected media, and then they try to 
parse the latest set of comp lex rules which may offer an exception to that bar, or they 
consider proposing a new exemption to permit their own lawful activities only to discover 
the extraordinary effort involved in obtaining an exemption, it reflects poorly on the law. A 
balanced and functioning 1201 system, by contrast, would inspire confidence in the law 
and lead those who interact with it to take all of the law's requirements more seriously. The 
University Library takes its responsibility to educate the UVA community about copyright 
very seriously, and a balanced 1201 system would be a boon to our efforts in that regard. 
We hope these comments are helpful to you.lfyou have follow-up questions, please do not 
hesitate to contact us. 
Sincerely, 
Martha Sites 
University Librarian and Dean of Libraries
