[PAGE 1]
Represm1i11g the lilem ry, !heatricol a11d mrt.sico/ w orl:s of L. Ron H11 bbord 
October 21, 2016 
U .S. Copyright Office 
Jam es M adi on Memorial Building 
10 1 Independen ce A venue, S .E . 
Wa shington, DC 20559-6000 
Re: U.S. Copyright Office Notice of Inquiry (NO I) 
Section 1201 Study: Request for Additional Comments 
Docket No. 2015-8 
D ear Sirs: 
Thank you for the oppo rtunity to provide comments. The following is the information 
we would like to provide in response to the above referenced Notice of Inquiry. 
Specifically, we would like to address the following: 
l. Proposals for New Perman ent Exemption . C. Computer Program s 
It i of utm o. t importance for the Copyright Office, in seeking to create new permanent 
exemp tions from the general prohibition against the circumvention of technological protection 
measures ("TPM ").to recogn ize and account for the fact that there are only limited circumstances 
in which permissibly circum ventions are appropriate. W e certainly understand the concem of ome 
consum ers purcha ing oftware-driven products when it is necessary for the consumers to be able 
to repair these products on their own initiative. Many of the e products are purchased under 
unilateral " hrink-w rap" or "click-wrap" agreement s, which govem the terms of use of the 
software contained within the product. 
Y et within the mas sive umbr ella of consumer products, there are many different 
categories, and the mere fact that they all incorporate software does not alone warrant treating 
the. e products as the same under a statutory exemption to the prohibition against circumvention of 
TMPs. 
There are some business models , for example , for devices and the software that run the 
devices, where the device can only be purchased and used by omeone who i qualified and 
specifically trained on the u. e of the device. B ecause of these strict qualification requirements, 
before the per. on purchasing the device can physically possess it they mu st agree to and 1gn a 
7051 Hollywood Boulevard, Hollywood, California 90028-6007 
(Telephone) 323-466-3310 (Fax) 323-466-6474 
(E-mail) lrhmaslerpieceeditions@authorservices.com

[PAGE 2]
purchase agreement for the device and a eparate license agreement for the software contained in 
it. Th e e agreements are not unilateral "shrink-wrap" or "click-wrap" agreements; they are 
negotiated and agreed to as a condition of purchase and use of the oftware and the device. The 
agreements contain a number of restrictions concerning the u e of the device with its software, 
including restrictions on rever ·e-engineering the device/software, prohibitions on copying the 
oftware, and prohibitions on transferring the device to a third party unle s certain conditions are 
met (including both agreements being signed by the third party before taking physical custody of 
the device). Pe1mitting the circumvention of TPMs in the context of this type of software-driven 
device would go much farther than the situation where a con umer need to be able to acces the 
software und er a" hrink-wrap " license for it ba ic functionality-it would e entially circumvent 
the entire business m odel of the contractual nego tiation proce as a tool to protect its product and 
the copyrights therein. 
The propo. ed exemptions that the Copyright O f fice is reviewing and entertaining would 
adversely affect bu. iness mod els . uch as the one di cus ed above. Statutory circumvention 
would directly contradict the busines terms and effectively void the core of the business model , 
undoubtedly leading to economic harm. Any change to the Section 1201 of the U .S. Copyright 
Act for software-enabled devices should be narrowly drafted so as not to override the terms of a 
negotiated software license. The copyright laws should not invalidate such an arrangement or 
business model s and we would ask that thi be re pected. 
If there is any further information that I can provide, please let me know. I can be 
contacted at the above addre and phone number or emailed at ryland@ author ervicesinc.com.
