[PAGE 1]
 
 
 
 
Docket No. 2015-8 
 
 
 
Section 1201 Study 
 
 
 
Initial Comments of the Software and Information Industry 
Association 
 
 
March 3, 2016

[PAGE 2]
2 
 
The Software & Information Industry Association (“SIIA”) 
respectfully submits these comments to the United States 
Copyright Office in response to the Notice of Inquiry entitled 
“Section 1201 Study,” 80 Fed. Reg. 81369 (Dec. 29, 2015). 
 
Introduction 
SIIA is the principal trade association of the software and 
information industries and represents over 800 companies that 
develop and market software and digital content for business, 
education, consumers, the Internet, and entertainment.   SIIA’s 
members range from start-up firms to some of the largest and 
most recognizable corporations in the world, and one of SIIA’s 
primary missions is to protect their intellectual property and 
advocate a legal and regulatory environment that benefits the 
software and digital content industries.  SIIA member 
companies are market leaders in many areas, including but by 
no means limited to: 
 
 software publishing, graphics, and photo editing tools 
 corporate database and da ta processing software 
 financial trading and investing services, news, and 
commodities exchanges 
 online legal information and legal research tools 
 protection against software viruses and other malware 
and 
 education software and online education services  
 
Our members depend on section 1201 to protect their works 
from infringement, and SIIA has participated in every 
rulemaking since the statute’s enactment.   In our view, 
Section 1201 has succeeded in performing its intended purpose: 
namely, to accomplish the “mutually supportive” goals of a 
“thriving electronic marketplace [that] provides new and 
powerful ways for the creators of intellectual property to make 
their works available to legitimate consumers in the digital 
environment,” and a “plentiful supply of intellectual property” 
to drive the demand for a more flexible and efficient

[PAGE 3]
3 
 
marketplace.”1  Congress properly recognized that “the digital 
environment poses a unique threat to copyright owners” and 
that it “necessitates protection against devices that undermine 
copyright interests.”2    
The anti-circumvention provisions of the statute contain 
three provisions intended to advance these goals.   First, 
section 1201(a)(1) prevents a user from circumventing a 
technological measure that controls access to a copyrighted 
work.  “The act of circumventing a technological measure put 
in place by the copyright owner is the equivalent of breaking 
into a locked room to obtain a copy of a book.”
3   Congress 
thought, with good reason, that once protected software, film, 
or music was available in the clear, it could be exploited in a 
way that seriously harmed the copyright owner’s legitimate 
market.  
Second, 1201(a)(2) prevents the trafficking in devices 
primarily designed to  circumvent technological measures, only 
prohibiting devices primarily designed for that purpose or that 
have only a limited commercially significant purpose other 
than circumventing.   The provision is “aimed primarily at 
black boxes that have virtually no legitimate uses,” and not at 
“legitimate consumer products such as personal computers, 
VCRS and the like.”
4 
Finally, as a check on section 1201, Congress also enacted a 
rulemaking provision enabling the Library of Congress, in 
consultation with the Department of Commerce (e.g., NTIA), to 
offer an exemption to the ban on circumvention to petitioners 
that have shown that they are likely to be adversely affected by 
the prohibition on circumvention.  Congress intended that 
exemptions issue only on “specific evidence” that a diminution 
of the availability of a particular work for noninfringing 
purposes is “
actually occurring.”5  To the extent that the office 
                                                 
1  H. Rep. 105-551 (1998) (Part II), at 23. 
2  Id. at 25. 
3  House Committee on the Judiciary, Section-by-section 
Analysis of H.R. 2281 as Passed by the House of Representatives 
(1998) (Comm. Print. No. 6), at 5 [hereinafter “House Manager’s 
Report”]. 
4  House Manager’s Report, at 9. See also id. (rejecting standard 
for secondary liability established by Sony Corp. of America v. 
Universal City Studios, 464 U.S. 417 (1984)).   
5  House Manager’s Report, at 6 (emphasis in original).

[PAGE 4]
4 
 
is issuing exemptions based on fears of what might happen, 
those exemptions should issue “only in extraordinary 
circumstances in which the evidence of likelihood of future 
impact during that time period is highly specific, strong and 
persuasive.”
6  Moreover, it must be the statute that causes any 
alleged problems: “marketplace trends, other technological 
developments, or changes in the roles of libraries, distributors 
or other intermediaries--or that are not clearly attributable to 
[the statute’s] prohibition, are outside the scope of the 
rulemaking.”
7 
Read together, the text, structure, purpose, and history of 
the DMCA’s circumvention provisions reflect an intention to 
create a liability regime preventing device manufacturers and 
others from exposing works to risks of digital piracy.  Section 
1201 neither expands nor contracts the scope of the copyright 
owner’s exclusive rights.
8  Instead, it creates a legal backstop to 
technological protection in order to protect copyrighted works 
from piracy, and encourage copyright owners to find new ways 
to get their creativity to the public.  In the United States, that 
backstop has prevented capital formation around “black box” 
businesses dedicated to circumvention or the sale of 
circumvention devices, and the U.S. has successfully exported 
that model in a number of trade agreements.
9  To the extent 
that the circumvention ban directly causes unjustifiable 
adverse effects on noninfringing use, section 1201 allows the 
Librarian to exempt certain classes of works.   
                                                 
6  Id. at 6. 
7  Id.  
8  See 17 U.S.C.  1201(c) (1) (stating that the statute does not 
affect rights, liabilities, remedies or defenses to copyright 
infringement).    
9  E.g., CAFTA chapter 15, art. 7(a),  
https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/uploads/agreements/cafta/asset_upl
oad_file934_3935.pdf; Singapore FTA Art. 16.4 (7)(a) (anti-
circumvention statute combined with exceptions), 
https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/uploads/agreements/fta/singapore/as
set_upload_file708_4036.pdf; Australia FTA, Art. 17.7 (paralleling 
1201(a), and listing permissible exceptions analogous to those in U.S. 
law), 
https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/uploads/agreements/fta/australia/as
set_upload_file469_5141.pdf.

[PAGE 5]
5 
 
As an organization that has monitored and participated in 
every triennial event, we appreciate that the rulemaking 
process has become cumbersome.  In part, that has occurred 
because of the application of the statute in ways that Congress 
did not foresee in 1998, and in part because of the need to 
review each proposed exemption 
de novo  every three years.  In 
short, while we believe the rulemaking process could be 
improved, the statute as a whole is being well interpreted by 
the courts. 
1. 
Please provide any insights or observations regarding the 
role and effectiveness of the prohibition on circumvention of 
technological measures in section 1201(a). 
Section 1201 enabled SIIA members to build new ways 
of transmitting wo rks (Question 1). 
The DMCA helped ensure the investment of billions of 
dollars by our members in making works available through 
both interactive and static digital formats.  For example, many 
SIIA members have made their works available as e-books on 
different types of readers including stand-alone devices 
dedicated to that purpose as well as applications enabling 
reading on cell phones, tablets and personal computers.   When 
making works available in those formats, they apply 
technological protection measures to ensure that their works 
are not made available in the clear.   
In addition, our members have used technological protection 
measures to create innovative interactive services in a variety 
of disciplines.  For example, our members’ web-enabled 
education products allow teachers to customize lesson plans 
from a variety of suggested course formats.   Their online 
offerings supplement the material in textbooks with video, 
audio, and interactive learning tools, and wrong-answer 
feedback designed to guide students based on the kind of error 
that they make.   
Nonetheless, threats abound. Paywalls, passwords, and 
multi-level authentication systems face thousands of 
circumvention attempts each day from both domestic and 
international sources, and tools can be found to circumvent 
TPMs applied to e-books and other SIIA-member works.    As 
the Office is well aware, piracy of these works remains a 
persistent and serious problem.  In spite of these threats, 
section 1201 can be credited with keeping consumers honest by 
preventing circumvention tools from being conveniently 
available at Amazon or Newegg.   SIIA therefore opposes any

[PAGE 6]
6 
 
weakening of the anti-trafficking provisions, or an expansion of 
the rulemaking that would allow persons to traffic in particular 
devices.   
2. How should section 1201 accommodate interests that are outside 
of core copyright concerns, for example, in cases where circumvention 
of access controls protecting computer programs implicates issues of 
product interoperability or public safety? 
During the last rulemaking, disputes arose over software in 
tractors, automobiles, and the like—situations that Congress 
did not envision when passing the law eighteen years ago.  But 
there are doctrines which limit the application of statutes to 
situations that Congress did not anticipate.  Indeed, we note 
that attempts to apply the DMCA to secondary markets in 
printer cartridges, garage door openers, and similar devices 
have failed.
10   
With these decisions as a backdrop, we are especially 
concerned by advocates of overbroad “right to repair” 
amendments based on scant or minimal evidence, and the 
argument that a software or other vendor provides technical 
support for a particular product or service entitles others to 
modify it.  SIIA members routinely spend millions in providing 
technical support to their customers. The mere existence of an 
extensive support network does not justify unfettered and 
harmful access to our members’ intellectual property.  
Although we remain open to new evidence, our experience is 
that issues of “product interoperability” are adequately 
addressed by the DMCA’s reverse engineering provision in 
section 1201(f).  To the extent that such issues inject 
                                                 
10   E.g., Storage Tech. Corp. v. Custom Hardware Eng'g & 
Consulting, Inc., 421 F.3d 1307 (Fed. Cir. 2005) (rejecting application 
of statute to prevent servicing of machines by ISO);  
Chamberlain Group, Inc. v. Skylink Technologies, Inc., 381 F.3d 1178 
(Fed. Cir. 2004) (rejecting application of DMCA to universal remote);  
Lexmark International, Inc. v. Static Control Components, 387 F.3d 
522 (6th Cir. 2005). But see  TracFone Wireless, Inc. v. Anadisk LLC, 
685 F. Supp. 2d 1304, 1317 (S.D. Fla. 2010) (finding commercial, 
large-scale unlocking of subsidized cell phones from the subsidizing 
carrier to be a violation of the DMCA); The Unlocking Consumer 
Choice and Wireless Competition Act, Pub. L. No. 113-144 (Aug. 1, 
2014), and S. Rep. No. 113-112 at 4 (2014) (stating that cell phone 
unlocking statute not intended to permit large-scale unlocking and 
commercial resale of subsidized cell phones).

[PAGE 7]
7 
 
themselves into the rulemaking, we believe the Office did the 
right thing in contacting other agencies with relevant 
expertise. 
    
3. Should section 1201 be adjusted to provide for presumptive 
renewal of previously granted exemptions—for example, when there is 
no meaningful opposition to renewal—or otherwise be modified to 
streamline the process of continuing an existing exemption? If so, 
how? 
Once an exemption is issued, we are unclear what 
“meaningful resistance” would look like, but we agree that any 
presumption that exists should be rebuttable.  It seems a 
“presumption” already exists in practice, as the vast majority of 
issued exemptions are renewed, even when resisted.  That said, 
in order for any kind of presumption for renewal to exist, the 
person seeking that presumption should have to demonstrate 
specific evidence of use in the triennial after the exemption 
issued.  The presumption should only apply to the exemption 
exactly as it issued the first time.    And, of course, evidence of 
the presumption’s use to commit or facilitate infringement 
would be grounds for requiring 
de novo review.   
Questions 6 and 7:  
6. Please assess the role of the antitrafficking provisions of sections 
1201(a)(2) and 1201(b) in deterring copyright infringement, and 
address whether any amendments may be advisable.  
7. Should section 1201 be amended to allow the adoption of 
exemptions to the prohibition on circumvention that can extend to 
exemptions to the antitrafficking prohibitions, and if so, in what way? 
For example, should the Register be able to recommend, and the 
Librarian able to adopt, exemptions that permit third-party assistance 
when justified by the record? 
Given the success of the provisions in preventing the 
manufacture of circumvention devices and based on what we 
know of the marketplace, SIIA would not support either 
weakening of the anti-trafficking provisions or an expansion of 
the rulemaking to allow trafficking in circumvention devices.

[PAGE 8]
8 
 
8. Please assess whether the existing categories of permanent 
exemptions are necessary, relevant, and/or sufficient. How do the 
permanent exemptions affect the current state of reverse engineering, 
encryption research, and security testing? How do the permanent 
exemptions affect the activities of libraries, archives, and educational 
institutions? How might the existing permanent exemptions be 
amended to better facilitate such activities? 
SIIA is unaware of any information that supports amending 
the existing exemptions. 
 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
/s/ 
Christopher A. Mohr 
Vice President for Intellectual Property and 
General Counsel 
Software and Information Industry 
Association 
1090 Vermont Avenue 
Washington, D.C. 20005
