[PAGE 1]
 
1 
 
Before the 
Copyright Office 
Library of Congress 
Washington, D.C. 20024 
 
 
 
 
 
In the Matter of   
  
Section 1201 Study: Request for  Docket No. 2015-8 
Additional Comments  
  
 
 
 
 
 
COMMENTS 
OF 
THE SOCIETY OF AMERICAN ARCHIVISTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nancy McGovern 
President  
Society of American Archivists 
17 North State Street, Suite 1425 
Chicago, IL 60602-4061

[PAGE 2]
 
2 
 
The Society of American Archivists (SAA) welcomes the opportunity to provide additional comments on 
the need for a new permanent exemption in Section 1201 for obsolete technologies. This is identified as 
subject 1(d) in the Notice of Inquiry. 
As the oldest and largest organization of archivists in North America, SAA is deeply interested in the 
challenges that obsolete technology presents. Archivists select, preserve, and make available primary 
sources that document the activities of institutions, communities, and individuals. These archival 
sources can be used for many purposes, including providing legal and administrative evidence, 
protecting the rights of individuals and organizations, and securing the cultural heritage of society.  
Archivists provide important benefits and services, such as identifying and preserving essential parts of 
the cultural heritage of society; organizing and maintaining the documentary record of institutions, 
groups, and individuals; assisting in the process of remembering the past through authentic and reliable 
primary sources; and serving people who seek to locate and use valuable evidence and information.1 
When archival research sources are embedded in obsolete media, archivists cannot fulfill their 
democratic, cultural, and professional missions. 
Through the previous rulemaking proceedings, the Copyright Office has learned how an obsolete access 
control method can prevent a contemporary user from accessing content. VisiCalc software is a perfect 
example of the kinds of problems that archivists face when trying to preserve and provide access to 
older software. VisiCalc was the first spreadsheet program for the personal computer. Many consider it 
to be the application that turned what had been a toy for computer enthusiasts into a serious business 
tool.2 Several years ago the developer of VisiCalc, Dan Bricklin, wanted to run a copy of the original 
program, but the copy protection system on the diskette kept him from being able to create a copy that 
he could distribute to others.  Fortunately there was a “test” copy that did not have the copy protection 
mechanism on it, and Bricklin could use that copy to give people today a sense of what the seminal 
software for the personal computer was like. But it is not quite the same as the software that was 
actually distributed, which remains inaccessible because of an obsolete copy control mechanism.3 A part 
of our social, intellectual and cultural heritage has been lost.  As software and storage media age, there 
will be a flood of stories similar to Bricklin’s.   
SAA believes that there should be a blanket exemption in Section 1201 that would allow anyone to 
circumvent an access control mechanism for a lawful purpose. If such a provision were included in 
Section 1201, there would be no need to single out special exemptions for obsolete media. Preservation 
activities are authorized in 17 U.S.C. §108(b) and 108(c), and those sections should take precedence 
over the Section 1201 restrictions.  Preservation can also be justified under 17 U.S.C. §107, which has 
the added benefit of being available as a right to all users, not just archives and libraries. The 
preservation of our digital heritage is so enormous a challenge that we will need input from a wide 
range of actors to ensure that we do not enter a digital “dark age.”  The most effective solution would 
be to exempt legal activities from the limitations imposed by Section 1201. 
If it proves to be impossible to make this critical change to Section 1201, an acceptable alternative 
would be to allow archives and libraries to bypass Section 1201 when they are engaged in legal 
                                                           
1 Society of American Archivists, “Core Values of Archivists,” May 2011.  
http://www2.archivists.org/statements/saa-core-values-statement-and-code-of-ethics. 
2 “VisiCalc” from Wikipedia, accessed on 18 October 2016, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/VisiCalc. 
3 Dan Bricklin, “Copy Protection Robs the Future,” http://www.bricklin.com/robfuture.htm.

[PAGE 3]
 
3 
 
activities. A permanent exemption could be added for “Original works of authorship fixed in a digital 
medium of expression that are currently in the collection of a library or archives of the type described by 
clause (2) of subsection (a) of 17 USC §108 when circumvention is accomplished for the sole purpose of 
managing, maintaining, and preserving its collection pursuant to 17 USC §107 and §108.” 
It is not necessary to specify in the exemption that it is the access control mechanism that is obsolete, 
i.e., “is no longer manufactured or is no longer reasonably available in the commercial marketplace.”  
Given the difficulty of bypassing an access control mechanism, an archivist’s preferred method of 
operation would be to work with the manufacturer of the software and/or the access control 
mechanism to gain access to the underlying work. It is possible, however, that a commercially active 
manufacturer of an access control may not wish to assist an archives in gaining access to content that 
has become “orphan,” i.e., for which no owner can be found. In this case, the access control would not 
be faulty, but archivists still could not gain access to the content. Therefore obsolescence of the access 
control mechanism should not be a precondition to avoid legal penalty when a circumvention is 
undertaken for a lawful purpose. 
Archivists are not a threat to the creative endeavor. Instead, our labor preserves and makes available 
the raw material for imaginative, innovative, and inventive new works. It is truly in the nation’s interest 
to allow us to circumvent access protection mechanisms in the pursuit of our lawful and valuable 
mission—to preserve our essential cultural heritage. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
 
Nancy McGovern, President 
Society of American Archivists 
17 North State Street, Suite 1425 
Chicago, IL 60602-4061 
 
Date: 25 October 2016
