[PAGE 1]
 
1 
  
 
 
                                        
 
U.S. Copyright Office (Docket No. 2015-8) 
Section 1201 Study: 
Request for Additional Comment 
September 27, 2016 
 
Joint Industry Comments 
Respectfully Submitted October 26, 2016 
 
 
 The Association of Equipment Manufacturers (AEM) is a trade association that provides 
services on a global basis for companies that manufacture equipment, products and services 
used worldwide in the agriculture, construction, forestry, mining, and utility industries.  AEM's 
membership includes more than 850 companies, many of which depend on the anti-
circumvention provisions of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA).1  The DMCA protects 
the highly-creative, copyrighted digital software of AEM's members against unauthorized 
access, copying, and distribution.    
 The Equipment Dealers Association respectfully joins in the submission of these 
comments. Founded in 1900, the Equipment Dealers Association (“EDA”) is non-profit trade 
organization representing approximately 4,000 retail dealers extensively engaged in the sale 
and service of agricultural, construction, industrial, forestry, outdoor power, lawn and garden, 
and/or turf equipment. EDA supports legislation or regulations which protect consumers and 
enhance consumer safety. EDA opposes legislation or regulations which allow the widespread 
release of proprietary equipment repair information to unqualified persons or entities which are 
not subject to uniform standards including training, safety, engineering and environmental.  
Such legislation or regulations could facilitate conduct which would put equipment operators and 
third parties at risk and put dealerships who invest in training, safety and liability coverage at an 
unfair economic disadvantage.  
                                                           
1 17 U.S.C. § 1201.

[PAGE 2]
 
2 
  
 AEM and EDA submit these comments in connection with the Copyright Office’s Section 
1201 study to explain the importance of the technological measures in Section 1201(a) to the 
AEM's members and the public.  The DMCA supports copyright by encouraging the 
development and availability of highly-valuable creative digital works of authorship in the 
products of AEM's members which are, in turn, distributed and serviced by EDA’s members.  
The below section numbers correspond to the numbers of the specific questions on page 
66296-66299 of the Section 1201 Study notice ("Study") published in the Federal Register.2  
The Copyright Office seeks comments on several new proposed permanent exemptions, 
including computer programs that operate a machine or device.  The following comments are 
limited to the subject matter specifically referenced.  
 
1. The Copyright Office suggests the possibility of "adoption of a permanent exemption for 
purposes of diagnosis, maintenance, and repair" and seeks "helpful starting points for further 
consideration of legislation." The proposed permanent exemption "could provide that a person 
who has lawfully obtained the right to use a computer program may circumvent a TPM 
controlling access to that program, so long as the circumvention is undertaken for purposes of 
diagnosis, maintenance, or repair."  Study at p. 6.  
AEM and EDA oppose the enactment of any permanent exemption to circumvention for 
diagnosis, repair, maintenance or modification that would pose unnecessary risks to 
public safety, the environment and the economy.  AEM and EDA caution against 
enactment of any permanent exemption where the copyrighted work, such as vehicle 
software or software updates, are commercially available products or services.  If the 
works are already commercially available, the proposed permanent exemption would 
diminish or destroy the value of the vehicle software or software updates and unfairly 
disrupt the competitive landscape for both AEM and EDA members.  Any permanent 
exemption must be limited to copyrighted works that are not commercially available or 
that are obsolete to reduce risks to public safety, the environment, and the economy.  
 
A.  Public Safety Risks:  The proposed permanent exemption for vehicle 
diagnosis, repair, or maintenance of vehicle software poses significant public safety 
risks. 
                                                           
2 Federal Register, Vol. 81, September 27, 2016, 66296-66299.

[PAGE 3]
 
3 
  
As Ambassador Michael Froman, U.S. Trade Representative, has emphasized, 
"counterfeit products, including semiconductors, automobile parts, and medicines, pose 
significant risks to consumer health and safety."3 Likewise, unauthorized modifications and/or 
repairs of vehicle software by untrained individuals raise similar safety concerns. 
The proposed permanent exemption for vehicle diagnosis, repair or maintenance is a 
risky proposition as some vehicle owners may be willing to accept the risk of non-compliance 
with applicable safety and environmental requirements. These individuals include not only 
traditional “bad actors” but also individuals who simply lack an understanding of the risks that 
their non-compliant modification and/or repair may create for themselves or others.  
 Compounding these risks is the obvious inefficiency that this situation would create for 
regulators, such as the Environmental Protection Agency. It would be difficult and extremely 
costly to pursue enforcement of a large number of private vehicle owners who are readily able 
to hack, repair or modify vehicle software in non-compliant or otherwise dangerous ways. 
Conversely, the restriction of this information to a finite number of highly qualified and readily 
identifiable parties aids in the efficient and effective enforcement of safety and environmental 
regulations.   
 
B.  Environmental Risks:  The proposed permanent exemption for diagnosis, repair, or 
maintenance of vehicle software poses significant environmental and air quality issues 
that can impact public health. 
Providing increased access of the public to vehicle emissions control software has the 
potential to promote violations of EPA anti-tampering provisions and could result in vehicle 
owners altering software to improve vehicle performance at the expense of vehicle emissions, 
which is sometimes referred to as "engine chipping."  Some engine chipping can relate to 
changing software programs or settings that are compliant with EPA certification to non-
compliant software instructions that tend to violate emission regulations. AEM and EDA have 
serious concerns about both the potential harm to the environment and the potential liability 
exposure that their members may face with the widespread dissemination of this information to 
unqualified parties who may be willing accept the risk of non-compliance and, as discussed 
supra, may be difficult to hold accountable for violations.  
 
                                                           
3 See, e.g., Executive Office of the President of the United States, Ambassador Michael  Froman, United States 
Trade Representative, 2015 Special 301 Report at p. 6.

[PAGE 4]
 
4 
  
C.  Economic Risks:  The proposed permanent exemption for vehicle diagnosis, 
maintenance, and repair (or modification) should not apply to commercially available 
software updates or to vehicle software where software updates are already available. 
The proposed permanent exemption for diagnosis, repair, or maintenance of vehicle 
software is contrary to sound economic policy. The general prohibition on circumvention 
of technological measures in section 1201 encourages innovation, prevents freeriding 
and supports a strong economy, particularly with respect to innovative vehicle software 
with expressive or creative content.  
Many software updates in the equipment industry are commercially available to 
consumers through the authorized dealer network or directly from their equipment manufacturer.  
If the software is already commercially available, the fair use analysis of the software favors not 
providing a permanent exemption under section 1201.  In particular, the fair use factor includes 
"the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the copyrighted work."4  
Here, the proposed permanent exemption would impair the potential market for software 
updates or any diagnostic software that are commercially available from the equipment 
manufacturer and equipment dealers.  Such software updates can provide improvements, 
maintenance or repairs, for example.  Reputable manufacturers and equipment dealers have 
the economic burden of developing or providing tested software updates that comply with safety 
standards, such as the (Automotive Safety Integrity Level) ASIL standard, and all applicable 
state and federal emissions regulations.  In contrast, the vehicle owner does not typically 
possess the engineering knowledge or resources to develop software code or updates that 
complies with safety requirements or environmental requirements.   
What’s more, if private equipment owners are permitted to publish or market alternate 
sources of software updates, which are untested with respect to safety or emissions 
requirements, such untested software would have an unfair price advantage (and a quality 
deficit) over tested alternatives and could easily displace software updates developed by 
reputable manufacturers and provided by authorized dealers to their customers.  The untested 
vehicle software could degrade or destroy the market for software upgrade development by 
AEM’s members and for sale by EDA’s members. In the end, used vehicles for resale may 
include unknown software modifications or untested software updates that change machine 
                                                           
4 17 U.S.C. § 107.

[PAGE 5]
 
5 
  
behavior in unpredictable ways creating unsafe situation(s) for consumers and new liability 
issues for equipment manufacturers and dealers.   
Under current practices, equipment manufacturers provide software updates and 
patches to vehicle software through their dealers or directly to vehicle owners.  There is no need 
for the vehicle owner to undertake the risk of endangering himself or herself, his or her family, 
passengers and bystanders by attempting to make repairs or modifications to vehicle software, 
or to procure such solutions from risky unknown sources that are not familiar with the design of 
a particular vehicle, or its software.   
  To the extent that the vehicle owners or third parties lack the resources or skill to 
develop and produce software that is compliant with voluntary safety standards (e.g., ASIL 
(Automotive Safety Integrity Level)), mandatory safety regulations and emissions regulations, 
public policy should favor manufacturers and dealers that comply with applicable laws, 
regulations and voluntary safety standards.  Accordingly, it is recommended that the proposed 
expansion of circumvention measures does not apply where software updates are already 
commercially available.  
Furthermore, the purpose of the DMCA’s anti-circumvention provisions are in place to 
enable creative persons and businesses that operate in the U.S. to protect copyrights in digital 
works, such as music recordings, video recordings, and software, against unauthorized access 
and unauthorized copying and distribution.5 The DMCA helps mitigate against the threat of 
"massive piracy" of digital works due to "the ease with which [they] can be copied and 
distributed worldwide virtually instantaneously."6 Therefore, since 1998 when the DMCA was 
passed; software developers, distributors and manufacturers of equipment, which use 
embedded software, have relied upon anti-circumvention measures as a viable tool to prevent 
or discourage piracy and anti-competitive free riding on the creative authorship of copyright 
owners.   
In conclusion, a permanent exemption of this nature would put equipment manufactures 
and authorized dealerships who invest in testing to ensure that software systems and updates 
provided to consumers are in compliance with both safety and environmental regulations at an 
unfair economic disadvantage. 
                                                           
5 5 17 U.S.C. § 1201(b). 
6 Lexmark International, Inc. v. Static Control Components, Inc. , 387 F.3d 522, 549 (6th Cir. 2004) (citing S. Rep. No. 
105-190, at 8 (1998)).

[PAGE 6]
 
6
