[PAGE 1]
Submitted by Bruce Turnbull on 
behalf of DVD CCA and AACS LA 
 
 
 
Before the  
United States Copyright Office  
Library of Congress  
Washington, D.C.  20559 
 
 
 
 
 In the Matter of: 
 
  Section 1201 Study 
 
 
 
 
Docket No. 2015-8 
 
 
JOINT REPLY OF THE DVD COPY CONTROL ASSOCIATION AND THE 
ADVANCED ACCESS CONTENT SYSTEM LICENSING ADMINISTRATOR, LLC  
TO THE REQUEST FOR ADDITIONAL COMMENTS  
I. Any Proposal Must Not Threaten Either the Legal Framework of Section 1201 or 
the Digital Marketplace It Has Fostered 
Section 1201 has been and remains instrumental to today’s robust digital marketplace.  At 
a recent hearing, Members of the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property 
and the Internet recognized that section 1201 has fueled the economic growth of the digital 
economy.1  Ranking Member Conyers said: “[Section 1201] strengthens our copyright system by 
cultivating innovative business models that encourage the lawful dissemination of copyrighted 
works to the public.  This in turn discourages piracy and infringement.  But nonetheless, some 
ignore the effectiveness of [section 1201] by wanting to weaken it or even eliminate it.”2  At that 
                                                           
1 See Hearing of House Judiciary Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property and the Internet, 
Chapter 12 of Title 17; Serial No. 113–115 at 2 (Sep. 17, 2014) (hereinafter “House Judiciary 
Subcommittee Hearing”) (Vice Chairman Marino). 
2 Id. at 4.

[PAGE 2]
 
 2 
hearing, Representative Nadler addressed some of the contentions advanced in comments filed to 
date in this Study; he noted  
The DMCA has been effective and has worked to encourage the creation of new 
digital works and has allowed authors a way to protect against copyright 
infringement while also helping to promote the development of new and 
innovative business models. Some of the witnesses today will argue that these 
anti-circumvention provisions have been used to stifle a variety of legitimate 
activities. However, the DMCA has also been successful by promoting the 
creation of many new legal online services in the United States that consumers 
use to access movies and TV shows. Companies that distribute their works 
digitally often use technological protection measures or TPMs to protect their 
works from unauthorized access or use. . . .  Copyright owners depend on these 
TPMs as an effective way to respond to copyright infringement and a way to 
make their works available online. Although piracy continues, TPMs have played 
a key role in reducing it, . . . .3 
Most importantly, Representative Nadler correctly concluded: 
[E]nactment of the DMCA has led to a long period of innovation and benefits for 
consumers. Section 1201 has proven to be extremely helpful to creators because it 
has helped creators to have the confidence to provide video content over the 
internet despite the risk of piracy. And Section 1201 has helped deter theft of 
unauthorized access by/or unauthorized access by prohibiting circumvention of 
protection measures and trafficking tools designed for circumvention.4 
In the most recent recommendation of the triennial rulemaking, the Register of Copyright 
unequivocally stated the same: 
Enacted by Congress in 1998,
 
the DMCA has fostered widespread dissemination 
and enjoyment of creative works by establishing legal protections for copyrighted 
content—as well as for the consumers and businesses who wish to access and use 
it—whether over the internet or through a computer or device.5 
                                                           
3 House Judiciary Subcommittee Hearing, supra note 1 at 2. 
4 Id. at 3. 
5 Section 1201 Rulemaking: Sixth Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the 
Prohibition on Circumvention at 1 (Oct. 2015) (citation omitted) (Recommendation of the 
Register of Copyrights).

[PAGE 3]
 
 3 
In light of the success of today’s digital marketplace, DVD CCA and AACS LA once 
again reiterate their concern that any efforts to address either the application of section 1201 
beyond the core copyright industries or even the alleged shortcomings with the statutory 
exemptions must not come at the expense of denying proprietors of technological protection 
measures (like DVD CCA and AACS LA) and core copyright holders the full array of legal tools 
provided under section 1201. 
II. A Streamlined Rulemaking Will Address Concerns Raised in the Course of the 
Study  
The Copyright Office can contribute to the improvement of section 1201’s operation by 
focusing on adjusting the triennial rulemaking that it conducts. 
A.  Renewal Process Can Be Facilitated 
There is significant consensus that the rulemaking should be streamlined to permit 
previously granted exemptions to be more easily renewed.6  While more work may be needed on 
what constitutes “meaningful opposition,” the parties did agree that the Register could rely on 
the evidentiary record developed in the prior rulemaking when considering the renewal of an 
exemption.7  By taking advantage of this consensus and focusing its efforts on the rulemaking, 
the Copyright Office would be able to address the issues of renewing unobjectionable 
                                                           
6 See Additional Comments of Association of American Publishers, Entertainment Software 
Association, Motion Picture Association of America, Recording Industry Association of America 
at 2 (Oct. 28, 2016); Reply Comments of the Electronic Frontier Foundation at 3 (April 3, 2016); 
see also U.S. Copyright Office Public Roundtable on Section 1201at 155:1-5 (May 19, 2016) 
(hereinafter “Roundtable Transcript”) (“And in the comments that the Copyright Office has 
received, there seems to be . . . some consensus that doing something would be permissible and 
advisable to deal with repeated exemption requests”) (Smith, Regan). 
7 See Roundtable Transcript at 167:4-15 (“I'm in agreement with my colleague, Mr. Sheffner, on 
this. And to expand a little bit and capture some of the other comments that have been made, I 
think the notion of bringing forward the evidence from the record or referring to it. . .we'd be 
okay with that”) (Turnbull, Bruce).

[PAGE 4]
 
 4 
exemptions and reducing the burden on the rulemaking participants.  Both are goals that the 
Register of Copyright had previously identified.  
An improved streamlined rulemaking may also make a substantive difference.  In its 
Request for Additional Comments, the Copyright Office noted that the Librarian in his most 
recent determination had approved exemptions for certain noninfringing uses, which were 
apparently not clearly authorized under the statutory exemptions.8  If the Copyright Office acts 
on the consensus discussed above, the exemptions resulting from the Sixth Triennial Rulemaking 
would be the immediate beneficiaries of a new streamlined renewal process. 
Furthermore, to the extent that remedial exemptions for the alleged shortcomings of the 
statutory exemptions do not already exist, the noninfringing uses advanced under the statutory 
exemptions and their shortcomings should be the province of the rulemaking.  As DVD CCA and 
AACS LA have previously stated, a legislative “fix” to codify any of the previously granted 
triennial exemptions runs the same risk that even amended statutory exemptions may also 
inevitably become unresponsive to future changes in technology and industry practices, just as 
current statutory exemptions are alleged to be today.  Instead, the same noninfringing uses 
facilitated under the statutory exemptions could (and should) be advanced in the rulemaking.  
Agency rulemaking is superior to legislative action as periodic reviews on a factual record result 
in rules that are more responsive and appropriate to changing technology and uses.  To that end, 
most - if not all - of the proposed changes could be achieved through carefully crafted 
exemptions developed on a factual record.  Once recommended by the Copyright Office and 
approved by the Librarian, these exemptions would then be subject to the streamlined renewal 
                                                           
8 See U.S. Copyright Office, Library of Congress, Section 1201 Study: Request for Additional 
Comments, 81 Fed. Reg. 66296 (Sep. 27, 2016).

[PAGE 5]
 
 5 
process, which would be a more flexible tool than legislation to ensure that the rules of the road 
are appropriate and effective.  
B.  Assistance Can Be Accommodated Through the Rule-Making Process 
DVD CCA and AACS LA have already pointed out that third-party assistance can be 
permitted as a result of the rulemaking proceeding.  For example, the 2010 and 2012 exemptions 
at least implicitly authorized librarians to assist professors and other intended exemption 
beneficiaries to circumvent CSS in order to create the short segment copies from motion pictures 
distributed on DVDs for the particular exempted purposes.  In 2015, the formulation of the 
exemptions for the same intended beneficiaries changed, causing uncertainty about the ability of 
librarians to provide this third-party assistance.9  DVD CCA and AACS LA, as previously stated, 
believe that the 2010 and 2012 formulations are acceptable in the specific contexts of the record 
of those rulemakings and the limitations stated in those rules (and that extending those to future 
rulemakings would be acceptable assuming the contexts remain the same).10  Perhaps more 
usefully, as DVD CCA and AACS LA have stated throughout this Study, both organizations 
remain willing and able to engage with parties that have obtained exemptions (or are seeking and 
obtaining exemptions in the future) to find ways to license tools, and perhaps services for using 
tools, to enable the exemptions.11 
  
                                                           
9 See Roundtable Transcript, supra note 6 at 53:10-54:5 (May 20, 2016) (Butler, Brandon).  
10 See id. at 82:8-14 (Turnbull, Bruce).  
11 See id. at 46:8-47:16, 83:3-8 (Turnbull, Bruce).

[PAGE 6]
 
 6 
In sum, the Copyright Office should focus its efforts on the rulemaking, which is capable 
of addressing many of the concerns raised in the course of this Study. 
Date: November 16, 2016 
 Respectfully submitted,  
 
 
 /s/ Bruce H. Turnbull    
 Bruce H. Turnbull 
 Turnbull Law Firm PLLC 
 5335 Wisconsin, Avenue, NW STE 440 
 Washington, DC 20015 
 202-274-1801 
 turnbull@bhtlawfirm.com 
  
 /s/ David J. Taylor    
 David Jonathan Taylor 
 Right Size Law PLLC 
 621 G ST SE 
 Washington, DC 20003 
 202-546-1536 
 david.taylor@rightsizelaw.com
