Comment ID: COLC-2015-0012-0101
Title: Additional Comments - Ehrhart, Brian
Posted: 2016-10-28T04:00:00Z
Submitter: Ehrhart-Brian

I am writing regarding the U.S. Copyright Office request for additional comments on Section 1201 of the DMCA. The DMCA has broad legal overreach as-written, with many provisions having no explicit exemptions for fair use of any kind. Granted, this overreach has been somewhat limited by various court cases (of which I am sure the Office is well versed), but even the opinions of some of these cases have requested the Copyright Office itself, if not an Act of Congress, to make these exemptions explicit, rather than relying on unclear and potentially contradictory legal decisions. Clear exemptions would bring the DMCA more in line with most other copyright provisions, which have clear, explicit exceptions for fair use. <br/><br/>The requested proposals for new permanent exceptions (II.1.a): An explicit permanent exemption for assistive technology is critical; there are many different types of visual or print impairment, and development of a technology that will address all of these concerns is difficult. If copyright holders are allowed to restrict all access to their content, it becomes incumbent on each individual copyright holder to implement an appropriate assistive technology. This is redundant and unnecessary; each entity that creates any kind of content is not and should not be simultaneously expected to become instant experts in assistive technology creation and implementation. Conversely, those with visual or print impairments should not be denied access to the wealth of digital content because those same individuals do not grant easy access to their assistive technology of choice. It should not be up to the end-users in need of various assistive technologies to request an individual exemption for each snippet of text they wish to read. <br/><br/>A permanent exemption for device unlocking (II.1.b): A consumer that owns their own device should not have unnecessary restrictions placed on what sort of networks they are or are not allowed to use it on. Such restrictions suppress competition in the Internet and mobile service providing industry which is already severely restricted, with most consumers in the U.S. only having 1 or 2 provider options. <br/><br/>A permanent exemption for computer programs (II.1.c): The ability to diagnose and repair a computer program obtained and used lawfully allows consumers to address their own problems, rather than being forced to wait on arbitrary decisions by software developers as to what is or is not a priority. Illegal uses of computer programs would still be prevented, but those skilled in applicable technologies could apply their knowledge to the improvement of specific issues for consumers. As things stand now, those trying to improve software end up legally liable to developers even when those same developers have no interest in addressing the problem at hand. <br/><br/>A permanent exemption for obsolete technologies (II.1.d): Many different digital technologies and devices become rapidly obsolete, often within a year or two (if not less) of introduction to the market.  This leads to a huge number of old devices which contribute to waste that is both hazardous to human health and the environment. Many individuals have developed other uses for these devices, but implementation is hindered by a myriad of software restrictions which exist only because the original manufacturer no longer supports the device in question. Therefore, any implementation of other uses for obsolete devices must cope with this confusing web of restrictions, making development and use difficult for all but those most dedicated to re-purposing. If these unnecessary restrictions were removed, development of additional uses for old devices would greatly expand. <br/><br/>Absence of the above exceptions can negatively impact international agreements (II.1.e). The lack of permanent and clear exemptions for common and intuitive reasons for copyrights of digital content present clear problems in international free trade agreements. If international entities are suddenly subject to these onerous rules, the benefits of further free-trade agreements will likely go unused. U.S. entities do not have the right to extent anti-competitive practices abroad. <br/><br/>The aforementioned (and other similar) exemptions also have an impact on anti-trafficking provisions in the DMCA (II.3.a and b). Many digital content creators enable protections on their works which are easily bypassed by those with malicious intent to distribute content illegally. Granting exemptions such as those discussed above would not make it legal to distribute illegally obtained content, but would grant legal protections for those who wish to improve their own products.  Exemptions for research and repair would make the entire market safer and better, without limiting copyright holders from pursuing damages from malicious agents. <br/><br/>Thank you for your time and consideration.
