[PAGE 1]
 
 
Juelsgaard Intellectual Property  
and Innovation Clinic 
Mills Legal Clinic 
Stanford Law School 
Crown Quadrangle 
559 Nathan Abbott Way 
Stanford, CA 94305-8610 
jipic@law.stanford.edu 
650.724.1900 
Before the 
U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 
In the Matter of Section 1201 Study 
Docket No. 2015-8 
Comments of the Institute of Scrap Recycling Industries, Inc. 
 Wangshu Tai 
Brian Weissenberg 
 Certified Law Students 
Phil Malone 
Jef Pearlman  
 Counsel for Commenter

[PAGE 2]
 ii 
 
Contents 
ISRI and DMCA § 1201 ................................................................................................................. 1 
Question 2. How should section 1201 accommodate interests that are outside of core 
copyright concerns, for example, in cases where circumvention of access controls 
protecting computer programs implicates issues of product interoperability or public 
safety? ............................................................................................................................................. 4
 
Question 3. Should section 1201 be adjusted to provide for presumptive renewal of 
previously granted exemptions—for example, when there is no meaningful opposition to 
renewal—or otherwise be modified to stream line the process of continuing an existing 
exemption? If so, how? ................................................................................................................... 8 
Question 4. Please assess the current legal requirements that proponents of an exemption 
must satisfy to demonstrate entitlement to an exemption. Should they be altered? If so, 
how? In responding, please comment on the relationship to traditional principles of 
administrative law. ........................................................................................................................ 11 
Question 7. Should section 1201 be amended to allow the adoption of exemptions to the 
prohibition on circumvention that can extend to exemptions to the anti-trafficking 
prohibitions, and if so, in what way? For example, should the Register be able to 
recommend, and the Librarian able to adopt, exemptions that permit third-party 
assistance when justified by the record? ....................................................................................... 15 
Conclusion .................................................................................................................................... 17

[PAGE 3]
 1
 
Petitioner Institute of Scrap Recycling Industries, Inc. (“ISRI”) submits this comment in 
response to the Copyright Office’s Section 1201 Study: Notice and Request for Public Comment. 
ISRI is a Washington, DC-based trade association representing more than 1,600 
companies—ranging from small, family-owned businesses to large, multi-national 
corporations—operating at more than 3,500 facil ities in the United States and 34 countries 
worldwide. ISRI members are manufacturers and processors, brokers, and industrial consumers 
of scrap commodities, including ferrous and nonferrous metals, paper, electronics, rubber, 
plastics, glass, and textiles. 
As detailed in its recent triennial petition, comments, and reply comments, ISRI members 
have suffered years of adverse effects from the DMCA restricting their ability to make 
noninfringing uses of phones and tablets they have legally acquired and seek to recycle to new 
owners. After the Copyright Office significant narrowed the phone unlocking exemption in 2012, 
ISRI was forced to advocate for Congressional intervention to help ensure its members could 
continue their socially beneficial, noninfringing business practices. And although ISRI’s petition 
in the 2015 proceeding resulted in an exemption, ISRI had to expend significant resources to 
meet unnecessarily strict and burdensome requirements that are neither required by law nor 
supported by the legislative history of the DMCA, all to maintain (over minimal opposition) an 
exemption that had been granted several times before and recently restored by the Unlocking 
Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act.  
Even after securing the current 3-year exemption, ISRI faces the prospect of expending 
more time, effort and, resources in 2018 to fight this fight once more, with little certainty that it 
will again be successful and its members will be able to continue their noninfringing activities 
without fear of DMCA liability. Perhaps worse, because the exemption will likely mitigate the 
adverse impacts ISRI members otherwise would suffer without it, it may actually be harder to 
meet these high burdens in 2018.  
ISRI therefore submits these comments requesting that the Copyright Office reform the 
§ 1201 exemption rulemaking process in several ways, including the addition of a presumption 
of renewability, and recommend that Congress make additional reforms, including permitting 
exemptions to be applied to the anti-trafficking provisions of the DMCA. 
ISRI and DMCA § 1201 
For over a decade, ISRI and its members have been adversely affected by the anti-
circumvention provisions of § 1201 and the unnecessary complexity, uncertainty, and cost of the 
triennial rulemaking process. The Copyright Office has considered and granted exemptions for 
mobile device unlocking in each of the last four rulemakings. Yet in each of the previous three 
§ 1201 rulemakings the Register recommended and the Librarian adopted increasingly narrow 
exemptions for mobile device unlocking. This culminated in the severely limited exemption

[PAGE 4]
 2
adopted in 2012, which applied only to “legacy phones” and devices purchased within 90 days 
after the effective date of the exemption.1  
ISRI’s members were particularly impacted by this narrow 2012 exemption. They were 
uncertain how the exemption applied to the measures they used to unlock devices they lawfully 
acquired, and how they might remedy the situation. ISRI stepped in to help organize these 
uncoordinated efforts and had to expend significant time and resources to develop a new policy 
focus for itself and its hundreds of members to seek the relief they needed to continue to make 
legitimate, noninfringing uses of used phones for the next three years. Yet even with this new 
policy, there was no way—absent a revised exemp tion or legislative action—to ensure that 
recyclers of used phones would be able to continue to rely on wireless carriers or themselves to 
unlock used mobile devices for their customers without fear of DMCA liability. 
ISRI’s fears were well-founded. As ISRI demonstrated in the last rulemaking, at least one 
of ISRI’s members reported that a wireless carrier stopped providing unlock codes in bulk after 
the Copyright Office narrowed the phone unlocking exemption in 2012: 
Another recycler, HOBI International, Inc., reports that the company previously 
worked with two carriers to gain unlocking of mobile devices. After the 2012 
exemption, one carrier refused to continue unlocking HOBI’s used mobile devices 
for resale. Because those devices remained locked to a particular carrier, HOBI 
found that prices for mobile devices dropped $25 across the board, reducing the 
price that individual owners could receive for their used devices, harming 
consumers and bulk recyclers alike.2 
There was significant public as well as recycler discontent with and opposition to the Copyright 
Office’s narrow 2012 “sunset” exemption. In response to a 2013 “We The People” petition 
asking that unlocking be again made legal,3 the White House announced that it  
agree[d] with the 114,000+ of you who believe that consumers should be able to 
unlock their cell phones without risking criminal or other penalties . . . . It’s 
common sense, crucial for protecting consumer choice, and important for 
ensuring we continue to have the vibrant, competitive wireless market that 
delivers innovative products and solid service to meet consumers’ needs.
4 
                                                 
1 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access 
Control Technologies, 77 Fed. Reg. 65260, 65264 (Oct. 26, 2012) [hereinafter 2012 Final Rule], 
http://copyright.gov/fedreg/2012/77fr65260.pdf. 
2 Comment of ISRI on Proposed Class 11 in the Sixth Triennial Rulemaking, at 16-17 (citations 
omitted) [hereinafter “2015 ISRI Comment”]. 
3 Make Unlocking Cell Phones Legal petition (January 24, 2013), https://
petitions.whitehouse.gov/petition/make-unlocking-cell-phones-legal/1g9KhZG7. 
4 Official White House Response to “It’s Time to Legalize Cell Phone Unlocking,” https://
petitions.whitehouse.gov/response/its-time-legalize-cell-phone-unlocking.

[PAGE 5]
 3
Most importantly the White House stated that “the DMCA exception process is a rigid and 
imperfect fit for this telecommunications issue, and we want to ensure this particular challenge 
for mobile competition is solved.”5 
And the White House and Congress did just that. After sustained debate, Congress passed 
the Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act (“Unlocking Act”),6 which 
repealed the 2012 exemption, substituted the 2010 exemption, and directed the Register to 
consider proposals for cell phone and other device unlocking as part of the 2015 rulemaking.7 
But the Unlocking Act was just a band-aid, set to be removed during the 2015 triennial. 
Despite extensive and effective advocacy on behalf of the Unlocking Act, ISRI and other 
consumer groups were forced to reengage with the admittedly “rigid and imperfect fit”8 of the 
DMCA triennial process to seek a new exemption for their noninfringing unlocking activities. 
This meant that more pressing issues facing ISRI and its members—including export restrictions, 
device theft, and device safety—had to be relegated to lower priorities so that it could mount its 
best effort to convince the Copyright Office to grant the latest unlocking request.  
Last year, ISRI submitted a comment to the Copyright Office demonstrating that 
unlocking mobile devices is a noninfringing use under each of the Copyright Office’s criteria for 
a § 1201 exemption. ISRI then submitted a reply comment addressing the concerns of TracFone, 
the only entity that opposed ISRI’s and other similar comments regarding mobile device 
unlocking. Finally, ISRI and its counsel testified at the DMCA hearing in Washington, D.C. in 
late May 2015. 
While ISRI was pleased that the Copyright Office ultimately granted its proposed 
exemption, ISRI urges the Copyright Office to modify the § 1201 process to reduce the 
substantial burden on proponents of DMCA exemptions.  The DMCA did not intend such 
repeated and sustained burden and investment of resources to continue an already justified and 
well-warranted circumvention of TPMs. And unless the triennial rulemaking process is 
significantly changed, the DMCA will continue to substantially burden ISRI, its members, and 
other proponents of a § 1201 exemption.  
First, the Copyright Office should focus its assessment on copyright interests during the 
triennial rulemaking process. As discussed more thoroughly below in response to NOI Question 
2, there is no legitimate reason why proponents of an exemption to copyright law should have to 
rebut non-copyright concerns. Indeed, ISRI spent significant time and resources rebutting 
TracFone’s reply comment, which was principally focused on protecting its lock-in business 
                                                 
5 Id. (emphasis added). 
6 Pub. L. No. 113-144, 128 Stat. 1751 (Aug. 1, 2014); see also Exemption to Prohibition on 
Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, 79 Fed. Reg. 
55687 (Sept. 17, 2014) [hereinafter 2014 NOI] at 55689 n.8 (“Congress enacted the Unlocking 
Act after public calls for a broader exemption than that provided in the 2012 rule.”). 
7 Unlocking Act § 2(a); see also 2014 NOI at 55688-89. 
8 Official White House Response to “It’s Time to Legalize Cell Phone Unlocking,” https://
petitions.whitehouse.gov/response/its-time-legalize-cell-phone-unlocking.

[PAGE 6]
 4
model, a non-copyright concern. Proponents should not be burdened by the need to address 
concerns that do not arise under U.S. copyright law. In fact, no one should need to secure an 
exemption under  § 1201 where their circumvention does not infringe copyright or serves an 
infringing activity. 
Additionally, many would-be proponents of a DMCA exception do not have sufficient 
resources—including counsel—to submit a persuasive  comment to the Copyright Office. Indeed, 
many proponents are either unassisted or submit short comments that may not meet the 
requirements of the Register. This is in part due to the substantial evidentiary and legal showing 
required by the Copyright Office as part of the triennial process, which, as detailed below, is not 
required by the statute. While ISRI was fortunate to have pro bono counsel for its most recent 
exemption request, the limited number of law school clinics and other low-cost counsel resources 
are insufficient to meet the needs of every proponent of a § 1201exemption. 
Question 2. How should section 1201 accommodate interests that are outside of core 
copyright concerns, for example, in cases where circumvention of access controls 
protecting computer programs implicates issues of product interoperability or public 
safety? 
Section 1201 should not be used to protect non-copyright concerns or deny an otherwise 
legitimate § 1201 exemption where the use is not made for the purpose of violating copyright 
law. There is no language in § 1201 itself, and no indication in any legislative history, that the 
DMCA’s anticircumvention provisions were meant to address non-copyright issues such as 
health, safety, environmental, competitive or business-model concerns. To the contrary, the 
DMCA was explicitly enacted to protect and promote copyrighted content in the digital age. In 
line with the then-recently-signed WIPO treaties, the DMCA sought to provide “‘adequate legal 
protection’ and ‘effective legal remedies’ against circumvention of certain technologies that 
copyright owners use to protect their works, and against violation of the integrity of copyright 
management information.”
9 In signing the DMCA into law, President Clinton proclaimed that 
“[t]hrough enactment of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, we have done our best to protect 
from digital piracy the copyright industries that comprise the leading export of the United 
States.”10 
The Copyright Office itself has previously affirmed that non-copyright concerns have no 
place in the § 1201 process where a proponent demonstrates a legitimate noninfringing use. The 
Register articulated this point in her 2010 recommendation: 
The Register appreciates that other administrative agencies also have jurisdiction 
on potential issues relating to the iPhone, smartphones, and other mobile phone 
and data services. However, the focus in this rulemaking is limited to actual or 
likely adverse effects on noninfringing uses of copyrighted works. No other 
agency has delegated authority to temporarily limit the application of the 
                                                 
9 President Bill Clinton, Statement on Signing the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, (Oct 28, 
1998), http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=55169 
10 Id. (emphasis added).

[PAGE 7]
 5
prohibition on circumvention. This prohibition was established to provide legal 
support for, and foster the availability of, copyrighted works in the digital 
environment.11 
The Register has often correctly rejected these non-copyright concerns. For instance, in 
the 2015 rulemaking, the Copyright Office rejected the arguments of TracFone—the only 
opponent to cell phone unlocking—that § 1201 shoul d protect its business model even though 
that interest has no connection to core copyright concerns. As ISRI noted, TracFone “explicitly 
state[d] that it opposes the proposed phone unlocking exemptions because they ‘could be 
interpreted to provide loopholes for traffickers intending to steal the subsidies offered by 
providers like TracFone and thus imperil TracFone’s ability to offer subsidized phones to 
consumers.’”12 ISRI further explained: 
TracFone’s position would create the disturbing result that breaking a TPM to 
unlock one’s phone does not violate copyright law unless it prevents the wireless 
provider from making its expected profit on that phone. TracFone should be and 
is able to enforce its business models and recover its subsidies through a variety 
of other legal tools, including contracts, early termination fees, and, where 
necessary, lawsuits raising a variety of other legal claims. But not through 
misusing copyright law.13 
This was not the only time the Register rejected an attempt to use § 1201 to protect a non-
core copyright concern such as a business model. The Register’s 2010 recommendation could 
not have been more clear: 
[T]he primary purpose of the locks is to keep consumers bound to their existing 
networks, rather than to protect the rights of copyright owners in their capacity as 
copyright owners . . . . Because there appear to be no copyright-based reasons 
why circumvention under these circumstances should not be permitted, the 
Register recommends that the Librarian designate a class of works similar to the 
class designated in 2006. The designated classes, both [2006 and 2009], simply 
reflect a conclusion that unlocking a mobile phone to be used on another wireless 
network does not ordinarily constitute copyright infringement and that Section 
                                                 
11 Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights in RM 2008-8, Rulemaking on Exemptions 
from Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control 
Technologies, 103 (June 11, 2010), http://www.copyright.gov/1201/2010/initialed-registers-
recommendation-june-11-2010.pdf (emphasis added) [hereinafter 2010 Recommendation]. 
12 TracFone, Long Comment Regarding a Proposed Exemption Under 17 U.S.C. 1201, 
http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/comments-
032715/class%2011/TracFone_Wireless_class11_1201_2014.pdf, 7.
  
13 Reply Comment of ISRI on Proposed Class 11 in the Sixth Triennial Rulemaking, at 4 
[hereinafter “2015 ISRI Reply Comment”].

[PAGE 8]
 6
1201(a)(1), a statute intended to protect copyright interests, should not be used to 
prevent mobile phone owners from engaging in such noninfringing activity.14 
Likewise, in the 2006 Final Rule the Librarian emphasized the non-copyright purposes of 
handset locks, technology protection measures (“TPMs”) that have “nothing whatsoever to do 
with the interests protected by copyright,” finding that a user who unlocks a wireless handset to 
connect is not 
engaging in copyright infringement or in an activity that in any way implicates 
copyright infringement or the interests of the copyright holder [and that] the 
access controls do not appear to actually be deployed in order to protect the 
interests of the copyright owner or the value or integrity of the copyrighted work; 
rather, they are used by wireless carriers to limit the ability of subscribers to 
switch to other carriers, a business decision that has nothing whatsoever to do 
with the interests protected by copyright.15 
And importantly, when the Copyright Office greatly narrowed the exemption for 
cellphone unlocking in 2012, Congress and President Obama stepped in to right a copyright 
wrong by passing the Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act (“Unlocking 
Act”). In signing the Act, President Obama commended Congress for taking steps “to ensure 
copyright law does not undermine wireless competition.”
16 
The Register, however, does not always reject these non-copyright concerns. For 
instance, in the most recent triennial, opponents of the vehicle repair exemption claimed that “the 
use of TPMs has played a role in effectuating compliance”17 with federal and state safety and 
environmental laws. But federal and state agencies—and others—should not rely on copyright 
law to enforce other laws unrelated to copyright. As the Register noted, “opponents [of the 
exemption] recognize that the non-copyright factors that they identify have not played a 
significant role in the Register’s consideration of proposed exemptions in prior rulemakings. But, 
they urge that the instant exemption is different because of its potential to impact the highly 
regulated automotive sector directly.”18 However, in so doing, the opponents admit theirs is a 
highly regulated sector.  
                                                 
14 2010 Recommendation at 152-153 (emphasis added). 
15 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access 
Control Technologies, 71 Fed. Reg. 68472, 68476 (Nov. 27, 2006) (codified at 37 C.F.R. 201) 
[hereinafter 2006 Final Rule], http://www.copyright.gov/fedreg/2006/71fr68472.pdf (emphasis 
added). 
16 Office of the Press Secretary, Statement from the President on Unlocking Consumer Choice 
and Wireless Competition Act, WHITEHOUSE.GOV (July 25, 2014), http://www.whitehouse.gov/
the-press-office/2014/07/25/statement-president-unlocking-consumer-choice-and-wireless-
competition-a. 
17 2015 Recommendation at 242. 
18 2015 Recommendation at 234.

[PAGE 9]
 7
This demonstrates that the automotive sector and other similar agencies have the 
authority and legal capability to independently deal with the supposed health and safety effects 
of circumvention. Indeed, the Register found that the opponents of the exemption actually 
admitted “that both state and federal regulatory regimes are designed to prevent many of the 
activities that would fall within the exemption. In particular, they point out that commercial 
providers are prohibited from knowingly modifying vehicles to take them out of compliance with 
emissions and safety standards.”19 
In discussing these concerns, the Register agreed that “proponents [of the exemption] 
also point out with some force that such issues are relatively remote from the copyright interests 
that are at the heart of § 1201— namely, the abi lity to protect, disseminate and enjoy creative 
works in the digital age.”20 The Register further acknowledged that “this rulemaking is 
principally focused on the copyright concerns implicated by any proposed exemption.”21 
Nevertheless, the Register responded that “section 1201(a)(1) calls for consideration of ‘such 
other factors as the Librarian considers appropriate,’ and, while acknowledging NTIA’s views, 
the Register believes it would be inappropriate simply to disregard other agencies’ concerns 
regarding the possible negative impacts of the exemption on their respective regulatory and 
enforcement efforts.”22 
And while, despite concerns from the EPA and other non-copyright agencies, the 
Register ultimately recommended a vehicle repair exemption because “safety and environmental 
concerns have a tenuous nexus to copyright protection,”23 it did not do so unequivocally. The 
Register also recommended “a delay of twelve months before the exemption goes into effect to 
allow other agencies with expertise in vehicle safety, environmental issues, and other relevant 
areas an opportunity to consider and react to the new rule.” This delay, while better than a denial, 
remains problematic. 
ISRI recognizes that using TPMs for safety and health concerns is qualitatively different 
than doing so simply to protect a business model, as is the case with cell phone carriers’ use of 
§ 1201. Yet what is even more important than the qualitative differences is what these uses have 
in common—they are not core c opyright concerns. The federal government’s protection of our 
health and safety is of critical importance. But that is a job for another federal agency, not the 
Copyright Office. 
The final factor of § 1201(a)(1) must not be used to hijack a process the Register admits 
is primarily intended to protect the “heart” of § 1201: “the ability to protect, disseminate and 
                                                 
19 2015 Recommendation at 233. 
20 Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights, Section 1201 Rulemaking Sixth Triennial 
Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the Prohibition on Circumvention 242 (Oct. 8, 2015) 
http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/registers-recommendation.pdf [hereinafter 2015 
Recommendation]. 
21 2015 Recommendation at 248. 
22 2015 Recommendation at 248. 
23 U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, Understanding the Section 1201 Rulemaking, at 7 (last visited Mar. 
1, 2016), http://copyright.gov/1201/2015/2015_1201_FAQ_final.pdf.

[PAGE 10]
 8
enjoy creative works in the digital age.”24 It is more “inappropriate” to attempt to address the 
non-copyright concerns of other agencies under the guise of copyright protection than it is to 
leave it to those agencies to address their concerns through more appropriate venues. The 
language of the fifth factor of § 1201(a)(1) does not obligate the Librarian to consider non-
copyright interests. If the realm of “appropriate” considerations is expanded to encompass the 
concerns of any other agency, the fifth factor does not merely escape the bounds of copyright—it 
becomes essentially boundless, drastically increasing the burden on the Copyright Office, 
proponents, commenters, and innovators, while utterly failing to further the purpose of the law. 
The Librarian can—and shoul d—consider non-copyright  interests to be inappropriate 
factors in evaluating exemptions to DMCA liability in the triennial rulemaking process. The 
Librarian has discretion regarding what he or she considers “appropriate,” but this discretion 
should not be used to expand the scope of the proceeding is such a nigh-unlimited manner. 
Instead, it should be used to reinforce the fact that the Copyright Office deals with: copyright 
issues.  
To the extent the Register and Librarian nevertheless choose to continue to consider non-
copyright concerns as part of the § 1201 analysis, ISRI urges the Copyright Office at least to 
continue the practice it demonstrated in the most recent proceeding of not allowing non-
copyright concerns to lead to the denial or delay of a legitimate, copyright-based exemption to 
§ 1201. At most, delays for other agencies to consider issues that relate not to copyright, but to 
possible misuse of software or property, should be as short as possible and used only as a 
temporary tool. If the Copyright Office ceases to consider these issues, then agencies or other 
parties with actual responsibility for any genuine safety or health concerns can take timely 
enforcement or regulatory action, or can bring the concerns directly to Congress for further 
needed authority.  Rather than misusing these concerns to try to block lawful, noninfringing uses 
of copyrighted works, and the Copyright Office will cease being a venue for boundary-free 
policymaking through copyright enforcement. The Register should grant any such time 
extensions only if absolutely necessary and only for those concerns that are not already 
addressed by other agencies. For instance, now that the Librarian has granted an exemption for 
vehicle repair, the EPA and other relevant agencies should hereafter deal with any health and 
safety concerns using the tools available to them. 
Question 3. Should section 1201 be adjusted to provide for presumptive renewal of 
previously granted exemptions—for example, when there is no meaningful opposition to 
renewal—or otherwise be modified to streamlin e the process of continuing an existing 
exemption? If so, how? 
The Copyright Office should discard its mistaken requirement of de novo review for 
previously granted exemptions in each subsequent § 1201 rulemaking, should provide for 
presumptive renewal of granted exceptions, and should shift the burden of justifying non-
renewal to any opponents of that renewal rather than requiring proponents to repeatedly establish 
the need for continuation of their exemption. Eliminating the de novo requirement would vastly 
reduce much of the unnecessary burden on proponents to reestablish the evidentiary and legal 
                                                 
24 2015 Recommendation at 242.

[PAGE 11]
 9
justifications for their exemptions every three years, as well as the burden on the office to review 
ever-expending records for already-granted exceptions. Presumptive renewal is consistent with 
the overall purpose and intent of the rulemaking process. ISRI submits that the Copyright Office 
currently possesses the authority to make such a change without legislative action, but if it 
continues to conclude that it does not, urges it to recommend such changes to Congress and to 
support their adoption. 
The existing § 1201 process, with its de novo review and requirements for substantial 
evidentiary showings even for exemptions which have been granted repeatedly and which lack 
significant opposition, place a substantial burden on any party who would take on the socially 
beneficial task of requesting an exemption. As explained above, ISRI and others seeking DMCA 
exemptions for lawful owners of phones and tablets, seeking to unlock their own devices, have 
been expending resources seeking and obtaining nearly the same exemption for over a decade. 
Others, such as the American Foundation for the Blind, have been requesting exemptions since 
the second proceeding, having to proceed throught all the complicated requirements of the 
process each time even in the face of little or no opposition.  
Each of these successive proceedings requires parties—be they trade associations, 
nonprofits operating on a shoestring, groups of researchers or repair advocates, or individual 
entrepreneurs—to pour significant resources, including employee time and outside counsel 
hours, into developing a brand new factual and legal records every three years. If nothing 
changes as a result of the current NOI Study proceeding, each proponent from 2015 will be 
forced to spend that time and money again in 2018, abandon their otherwise lawful uses of 
copyrighted works, or go back to operating in the shadow of potentially violating the DMCA 
without infringing copyright. Eliminating the de novo approach, adding presumptive renewal, 
and shifting the burden to opponents of renews in future § 1201 proceedings would reduce the 
waste currently imposed on the proponents and the Copyright Office, while still allowing the 
Office to properly evaluate new exemptions and, when and if opponents demonstrate that 
relevant facts have actually changed, reevaluate old ones. 
No congressional action is needed to make these changes. In § 1201(a)(1)(C), Congress 
outlined the rulemaking proceeding only in very broad strokes and delegated the rest of its 
authority to the Register of Copyrights and to a lesser extent, the Assistant Secretary for 
Communications and Information of the Department of Commerce. There is no mention at all of 
any presumptions or any de novo review. As a result, the Copyright Office is not bound by any 
relevant Congressional mandate when it is amends the presumption requirements. 
The Register has previously stated her belief that legislative history precludes reliance on 
presumptive renewal in the rulemaking proceeding. For instance, in the most recent Notice of 
Inquiry, the Office again asserted that “Congress made clear that the basis for an exemption must 
be established de novo in each triennial proceeding.”25 In fact, however, Congress did no such 
                                                 
25 Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access 
Control Technologies, 79 Fed. Reg. 55687, 55689 (Sept. 17, 2014) (codified at 37 C.F.R. 201) 
[hereinafter 2015 Notice of Inquiry].

[PAGE 12]
 10
thing. Instead, a de novo requirement can be found in only one piece of legislative history, the 
House Commerce Committee Report: 
The rulemaking will be repeated on a biennial basis, and on each occasion, the 
assessment of adverse impacts on particular categories of works is to be 
determined de novo. The regulatory prohibition is presumed to apply to any and 
all kinds of works, including those as to which a waiver of applicability was 
previously in effect, unless, and until, the Secretary makes a new determination 
that the adverse impact criteria have been met with respect to a particular class 
and therefore issues a new waiver. In conducting the rulemaking proceeding, the 
Secretary must consult closely with the National Telecommunications and 
Information Administration, as well as with the Patent and Trademark Office and 
the Register of Copyrights.26 
However, after this Report, the rulemaking section of the statute described in the Report 
underwent so many substantive changes that there simply is no basis for giving the Report’s 
mention of de novo review any weight whatsoever. For instance, the Commerce Committee 
version would have mandated the rulemaking proceeding to happen every two years, instead of 
three. Four agencies would have been involved, instead of two. Moreover, the Register of 
Copyrights would not even have been the leading entity in the rulemaking procees: the Secretary 
of Commerce would.  
Most importantly, the Senate-House Conference report that accompanied the enacted 
version of the bill does not mention any de novo requirement at all.27 Given the significance of 
the various substantive changes and the subsequent silence on the renewal issue, the Register’s 
reliance on this isolated bit of language is misplaced and ill-advised. The Copyright Office 
should reconsider its prior positions and conclude that it is legally free to prudently change 
course on this issue and proceed to recognize that there is no statutory prohibition on its ability to 
institute presumptive renewal.  
Last but not least, the de novo requirement creates a paradox for those seeking 
exemptions. Where an exemption successfully mitigates the harm, then petitioners likely will 
have more difficulty in pointing to the adverse impacts during the next proceeding. As one 
professor eloquently puts it, “the very success of the exemption in preventing harm to 
noninfringing uses will weigh against its renewal.”
28 This Catch-22 could not possibly have been 
                                                 
26 H.R. Rep. 105–551 (ii), at 37. 
27 See H.R. Conf. Rep. 105-796 at 64. “The determination will be made in a rulemaking 
proceeding on the record. It is the intention of the conferees that, as is typical with other 
rulemaking under title 17, and in recognition of the expertise of the Copyright Office, the 
Register of Copyrights will conduct the rulemaking, including providing notice of the 
rulemaking, seeking comments from the public, consulting with the Assistant Secretary for 
Communications and Information of the Department of Commerce and any other agencies that 
are deemed appropriate, and recommending final regulations in the report to the Librarian.” 
28 Aaron K. Perzanowski, Evolving Standards & the Future of the DMCA Anticircumvention 
Rulemaking, 10 J. OF INTERNET L. 1, 25 (Apr. 2007)..

[PAGE 13]
 11
what Congress intended when it created the “fail-safe mechanism” of exceptions for 
noninfringing uses.29 The current process not only places all the initial burden on the proponents, 
who often have less resources to start with, but also increases the burden over time because what 
was sufficient last time will be by default insufficient next time as, at a bare minimum, 
proponents have to prove that the “conditions that led to the adoption of the prior exemption 
continue to exist today”
30 and provide “a new showing of ongoing harm.”31 For instance, in 
2010, the Register recommended against renewing the e-book exemption because, as one 
commentator has noted, “petitioners based their proposal for renewal on their previous 
submissions in the 2003 and 2006 Rulemakings, although the situation with e-books had not 
significantly changed since 2002.”32  
To avoid this paradox and the undue and unnecessary burden of parties seeking the 
continuance of their previously granted exemption, the Office should shift the burden to 
opponents of renewal to establish by substantial evidence that the exemption is no longer 
warranted. 
Question 4. Please assess the current legal requirements that proponents of an exemption 
must satisfy to demonstrate entitlement to an exemption. Should they be altered? If so, 
how? In responding, please comment on the relationship to traditional principles of 
administrative law. 
The current legal and evidentiary requirements the Office has imposed on proponents of 
an exemption to demonstrate entitlement to an exemption are unnecessary, unduly burdensome, 
and not required by the statutory language of the DMCA, the legislative intent behind the 
rulemaking sections of the Act, or traditional principles of administrative law. Proponents should 
not have to produce evidence and justification on all the points currently required or to satisfy the 
heightened burden of demonstrating substantial adverse impacts. Specifically, the Register of 
Copyright should abolish the mere inconvenience threshold and stop requiring proponents to 
demonstrate a lack of any viable alternatives. Instead, proponents should only need to prove that 
there are or likely will be actual adverse impacts on noninfringing uses due to the prohibition on 
circumvention. Anything more goes beyond what the statute requires.  
Under the current rule, proponents bear the burden of proof in the § 1201 proceeding. 
They have to prove “by a preponderance of evidence” that the uses are or are likely to be 
noninfringing and that these uses are adversely affected or will “likely” be affected by the § 1201 
ban on access circumvention.
33 In proving existing adverse affects, proponents have to prove that 
a “‘substantial diminution’” (emphasis added) of the availability of works for noninfringing uses 
by demonstrating “‘distinct, verifiable and measurable impacts’ occurring in the marketplace.’”34 
                                                 
29 H.R. Rep. 105-551(ii), 36.  
30 2015 Notice of Inquiry, supra note 44, at 55690. 
31 Perzanowski, supra note 52, at 25. 
32 Maryna Koberidze, The DMCA Rulemaking Mechanism: Fail or Safe? 11 Wash. J.L. Tech. & 
Arts 211, 264 (2015).  
33 2015 Notice of Inquiry at 55690. 
34 Id.

[PAGE 14]
 12
In other words, “mere inconveniences” and “individual cases” fail this burden because they are 
“de minimis.”35 In proving future harms, proponents have to prove that future harm is “likely,” 
prevailing “‘only in extraordinary circumstances in which the evidence of likelihood of future 
adverse impact during that time period is highly specific, strong, and persuasive.’”36 
The plain language of § 1201 is unambiguous, requiring only a showing of actual or 
likely adverse effects on noninfringing uses.37 When the text of the statute is clear, the plain 
meaning rule usually discourages further inquiry into legislative history. This is a classic instance 
of Justice Holmes’ statement that, “[w]e do not inquire what the legislature meant; we ask only 
what the statute means.” 38 Nevertheless, the standard that has been created and utilized in 
previous rulemakings by the Copyright Office results in a convoluted, adjudicatory (rather than 
rulemaking) process and imposes several additional hurdles on proponents, all of which are 
neither required nor justified by the statutory language.  
In particular, the Office’s requirement of a substantial diminution and its misplaced 
concerns with disregarding mere inconvenience are not required by the DMCA. They are 
nowhere to be found in the statutory language. They also are nowhere to be found in the primary 
legislative history of the 1201 rulemaking provisions of the Act. Rather, support for such 
requirements, meager as it is, can be found in only one isolated and ultimately unpersuasive 
place, the House Manager’s Report.39  
The Manager’s Report, however, is not authoritative legislative history. The rulemaking 
provisions of the DMCA first appear in the Commerce Committee’s version, which “prevailed in 
the full House of Representatives over the Judiciary Committee’s bill and was ultimately enacted 
by both chambers.”40 The House Manager’s Report was a section-by-section analysis after the 
Commerce Committee’s version passed the House. As Nimmer puts it, it is the “the handiwork 
of one legislator after the fact.” 41 More importantly, the definitive Senate-House Conference 
Report does not rely on the Manager’s Report and does not even mention substantiality.42  
Nevertheless, the Register has seized on this one bit of tangential history in the 
Manager’s Report to formulate and then attempt to defend its imposition of a standard of 
                                                 
35 Id.  
36 Id. 
37 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1)(B), (C) and (D) uniformly use the language “are, or are likely to be . . . 
adversely affected.” 
38 12 HARV. L. REV. 417, 419 (1899). 
39 See Rep. Howard Coble, Section-by-Section Analysis of H.R. 2281 as Passed by the House of 
Representatives on Aug. 4, 1998 (Comm. Print 1998) at 6 [hereinafter House Manager’s Report]. 
(“The focus of the rulemaking proceeding” as “whether the protection on circumvention of 
technological measures (such as encryption or scrambling) has caused any substantial (emphasis 
added) adverse impact on the ability of users to make non-infringing uses.”) 
40 David Nimmer, Copyright: Scared Text, Technology, and the DMCA 426 (Kluwer Law 
International)(2003). 
41 Id. at 466.  
42 Id. at n.152.

[PAGE 15]
 13
“substantial” diminution of noninfringing uses. NTIA, the other agency responsible for the 
rulemaking proceeding, was quick to note that the substantiality requirement “impose[s] a 
significantly heightened burden on proponents.”43 The Register offered a somewhat circuitous 
interpretation. When “[r]ead in context,” the Register asserted, this standard is “the equivalent of 
what the Commerce Committee Report described as a requirement of a showing of ‘distinct, 
verifiable, and measurable impacts.’”44 She described substantial as “the opposite of 
‘insubstantial,’” which is “another way of saying that a showing of more than ‘de minimis 
impacts’ is required.”45 The Register then quoted the dictionary meaning of “substantial” and the 
Supreme Court’s usage of this word, and concluded: 
This burden of proof is not more stringent than the statutory text, but rather is a 
clarification that any showing must be based on real, verifiable, and reasonable 
evidence. Such a showing is equally applicable to present or likely harm. 
Substantial evidence of likely adverse impacts is more than mere speculative or 
theoretical harm. It requires more than ‘mere inconveniences, or individual 
cases.’46 
The crux of the problem is the last sentence. The test draws no bright line between 
adverse effects and mere inconvenience. Nor does it provide a turning point when “individual 
cases” become more than isolated instances and hence indicative of a larger problem. Mere 
inconveniences and individual cases may seem similar to the de minimis threshold mentioned in 
the Commerce Committee Report,47 but in practice there is no principled basis for drawing lines 
or deciding when some is enough.  Thus the irony becomes that in order to overcome the 
supposedly low threshold of de minimis impacts, proponents have to prove both substantial harm 
and lack of viable alternatives—a much higher standard.  
On the latter point, for example, in 2003, the Register refused to recommend the 
proposed class of “[a]udiovisual works store on DVDs that are not available in Region 1 DVD 
format and access to which is prevented by technological measures.”48 The Register received 
over one hundred reply comments in support of the exemption, the “overwhelming majority” of 
which were submitted by “individuals who had acquired DVDs from a region outside the U.S. 
and then encountered difficulty in playing DVDs on devices purchased in the U.S.49 Commercial 
DVDs are often encrypted and restricted to a particular “region code” so they cannot be played 
on a drive that has a non-matching region code. This means that without circumventing a TPM, 
                                                 
43 Nancy J. Victory, NTIA Letter to Register of Copyrights Regarding DMCA, https://
www.ntia.doc.gov/other-publication/2003/ntia-letter-register-copyrights-regarding-dmca 
[hereinafter 2003 NTIA Letter].  
44 Marybeth Peters, Register of Copyright, Recommendation of the Register of Copyrights in 
RM 2002-4; Rulemaking on Exemptions from Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright 
Protection System for Access Control Technologies, 16 [hereinafter 2003 Recommendation]. 
45 Id. at 17. 
46 Id. 
47 See H.R. Rep. 105-551(ii), at 37. 
48 2003 Recommendation at 120. 
49 Id. at 122.

[PAGE 16]
 14
the DVD owners would have to get a lower-quality VHS version of the work, reset the region 
code on their computers, or buy a second DVD player with a matching region code. Each 
solution was far less than ideal: first, VHS provided inferior quality and was becoming obsolete, 
as the Register recognized; second, many computer manufacturers, like Apple, restrict the 
number of times you can reset your region code;50 and third, an extra external DVD player would 
be an otherwise unnecessary and unjustifiable investment in duplicative hardware. The Register 
agreed that “[i]t is uncontested that merely watching a lawfully obtained copy of a non-region 1 
DVD is a noninfringing use.”51 Yet she still rejected the exemption because in her view, “[a]s 
long as such relatively inexpensive options remain available to those users who seek to view 
foreign DVDs, it does not appear that an exemption is necessary to preserve this noninfringing 
use.”52 
The reliance on requiring proof of the absence of any alternative reached a high point 
when the Register rejected the proposed class to circumvent TPMs on e-books in 2010. Since the 
first rule-making, the Register had consistently granted this exemption because the visually 
impaired need to circumvent TPMs on e-books to employ the read-aloud function and there were 
few, if any, opponents to the exemptions. Yet once again the Register saw the existence of 
alternatives, even costly and inconvenient ones, as fatal to the request: 
However, as the Joint Reply Commenters pointed out, [proponent] AFB did not 
test all of the ebook formats in which the sampled book titles were available. For 
instance, AFB tested The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas A. Kemp is, in the 
Microsoft Reader LIT Format and found that work to be inaccessible whether or 
not Microsoft’s text-to-speech product was installed. However, the Joint Reply 
Commenters pointed out that the same title appeared to be available in the Adobe 
format with the read-aloud function enabled.
53 
While it is true that the AFB could have presented more book titles to strengthen their 
case, that would remain true until they catalogued every available book. Moreover, the 
availability of “alternatives” the Register identified were far from costless to the millions of 
print-disabled individuals who might be affected.  If extra hours of web search and investment in 
a new e-book reader (or several) are issues of “mere convenience” for the visually impaired, 
“adverse impact” is left with significantly reduced practical meaning.54 
Similarly, in the 2012 rulemaking, the Register narrowed the previous exemption for 
phone unlocking to apply only to used “legacy” phones and then only for a 90-day period before 
the exemption sunsetted.55 The Register rejected the proponents’ requests for exemption for 
                                                 
50 DVD Player: About DVD-Video Regions (Mar. 3, 2016, 7:10 PM), https://support.apple.com/
en-us/HT201705. 
51 2003 Recommendation at 121. 
52 Id. at 123. 
53 2010 Recommendation at 254. 
54 Bill Herman & Oscar Gandy, Jr., Catch 1201: A Legislative History and Context Analysis of 
the DMCA Exemption Proceedings, CARDOZO ARTS & ENT. L.J., 121, 188 (2006). 
55 2012 Final Rule, 65265-66.

[PAGE 17]
 15
newly purchased handsets, over the objection of the NTIA, on the basis that an increasing 
number of new unlocked phones were available for purchase. The Register adopted this narrow 
view of adverse impacts even though it specifically acknowledged that “not every wireless 
device is available unlocked, and wireless carriers’ unlocking polices are not free from all 
restrictions.”56 It also rejected the NTIA’s recommendation that a broader exemption be granted 
because many carriers’ unlocked phone policies “apply only to current customers or subscribers, 
because some carriers will refuse to unlock devices, and because unlocking policies are often 
contingent upon the carrier’s ability to obtain the necessary code.”57 More broadly, the Register 
rejected NTIA’s common-sense conclusion that it is not “an appropriate alternative for a current 
device owner to be required to purchase another device to switch carriers.”58 
Thus, the Copyright Office should, and has the authority to, modify the showing required 
to warrant a § 1201 exemption in the manner discussed above. 
Question 7. Should section 1201 be amended to allow the adoption of exemptions to the 
prohibition on circumvention that can extend to exemptions to the anti-trafficking 
prohibitions, and if so, in what way? For example, should the Register be able to 
recommend, and the Librarian able to adopt, exemptions that permit third-party 
assistance when justified by the record? 
Section 1201 should be amended to allow third parties to assist users to engage in their 
§ 1201 exemption and to allow third parties to develop and offer the tools necessary to do so. An 
exemption that affirms a user’s right to unlock his or her phone is largely meaningless when 
doing so is a highly technical process for users and when third parties may face liability for 
assisting or developing tools to help users engage in this lawful behavior. There is no copyright-
based reason why third parties should be unable to help consumers, lawfully exempted under 
§ 1201, circumvent locks on their devices. And as we explain in response to Question 2, device 
manufacturers may have other reasons for why they lock their devices, and thus other reasons to 
prevent third-party assistance in circumventing their locks, but those concerns should be 
addressed elsewhere and by an entity other than the Copyright Office.  
For example, consumer electronics, many of which contain TPMs, are now ubiquitous, 
and the continued meteoric rise of smart devices will bring more networked devices—including 
their device locks—to the aver age consumer. It should be no surprise that in 2015 over 64% of 
American adults owned a smartphone, up from 35% in 2011.
59 A more recent study found that 
66% of Americans own at least two digital devices (smartphone, tablet, laptop), and 36% own all 
                                                 
56 Id at 65265. 
57 Id. 
58 Id. 
59 Monica Anderson, 6 Facts About Americans and Their Smartphones, PEWRESEARCH.ORG 
(Apr. 1, 2015), http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/04/01/6-facts-about-americans-and-
their-smartphones.

[PAGE 18]
 16
three.60 Similarly, while nearly every American home has a television, over 40% of American 
households now have a network-connected television, up from 8% in 2011.61 But there has been 
an explosion of smart devices beyond the obvious phone and television examples.62  
The average consumer is probably incapable of circumventing TPMs on his or her own, 
as it is often a complex, technical process, requiring custom software development and deep 
knowledge of software, hardware, and cryptography. Yet it is only recently that owners of 
smartphones and similar mobile devices have received explicit authorization, via the Unlocking 
Act, to seek third party assistance to unlock their devices, and it remains unlawful to traffic in the 
tools used to lawfully unlock these devices.63 American consumers should not have to wait for 
Congress to authorize third-party assistance to unlock other devices where the Register 
recommends and the Librarian grant exemptions allowing lawful circumvention, nor should 
users they need to each individually develop the tools and expertise necessary to assert their 
rights. 
Opponents of this amending § 1201 in this way may make several ultimately 
unpersuasive arguments. First, they may argue that third-party assistance may not even exist to 
unlock the various new TPMs, so granting an exemption to the anti-trafficking provision to allow 
for third-party assistance is fruitless. But this argument misses the point. The very reason that 
third-party assistance may not exist is because of the current limitations of § 1201. In particular, 
§ 1201(a)(2) prohibits the mere creation of access control circumvention methods. Under this 
language, not only is a third party prohibited from offering unlocking services, but it cannot even 
provide a “self-help” guide for the user to unlock his own device. It’s no wonder that there is 
scant evidence of available third-party unlocking assistance, especially for non-exempt activities: 
third parties are likely and understandably discouraged from developing methods of 
circumvention for fear of liability under § 1201 and the accompanying civil and criminal 
penalties under §§ 1204 and 1205. One author explained this issue in the context of 
circumventing CSS technology (used to prevent unauthorized access to DVDs): 
In many instances this asymmetry can give rise to a rather perverse result: An act 
of circumvention is permitted by an exemption, but the tools necessary to take 
advantage of that privileged use remain illegal. Film studies professors, for 
example, could face difficulty in legally obtaining tools to engage in the very sort 
of circumvention privileged by the new exemption. While DeCSS, a tool for 
circumventing CSS, is available on the Internet, those who make it available, even 
to film studies professors, risk liability for trafficking in circumvention tools. 
                                                 
60 Monica Anderson, Smartphone, Computer or Tablet? 36% of Americans Own All Three, 
PEWRESEARCH.ORG (Nov. 25, 2015), http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/11/25/device-
ownership. 
61 STATISTA, Number of Smart TV Households in the United States from 2011 to 2016, (last 
visited Mar. 1, 2016), http://www.statista.com/statistics/268857/number-of-smart-tv-households-
in-the-us. 
62 See, e.g., Category: Smart Devices, WIKIPEDIA.ORG (last visited Mar. 1, 2016), https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Smart_devices. 
63 Unlocking Act at §§ 2(a), (c); 37 C.F.R. § 201.40; see also 2014 NOI at 55688.

[PAGE 19]
 17
Moreover, DeCSS alone is insufficient for all but the most sophisticated users to 
engage in circumvention and user-friendly software tools built around DeCSS 
have been pulled from store shelves as a result of DMCA liability. Even if film 
studies professors can locate or develop such tools, they would still face liability 
for sharing them amongst themselves.64 
And this is no mere threat— Universal City Studios v. Corley65 demonstrates that 
companies are willing to sue and can succeed under the § 1201 antitrafficking provisions. In this 
case, Corley posted a copy of the decryption program “DeCSS” on his website, and also posted 
links to other sites offering similar technology.
66 Eight motion picture companies sued under the 
DMCA, and Corley responded with several arguments, including fair use and constitutional 
assertions under the First Amendment.67 The Second Circuit rejected Corley’s arguments and 
affirmed the District Court’s judgment:68 Corley was enjoined from posting DeCSS on his 
website, as well as knowingly linking to other sites on which DeCSS was posted.69 
Consumers should not require special action by Congress, or be forced to rely on the 
whims of the manufacturers of their devices for assistance lawfully unlocking their devices. The 
DMCA should permit, or should allow the Copyright Office to authorize, third-party assistance 
and creation of tools for every § 1201 exemption the Office grants. 
Conclusion  
ISRI appreciates the opportunity to contribute to the Copyright Office’s study of § 1201 
and the triennial rulemaking process. IRSI submits that, as the most significant copyright-related 
legislation after the Copyright Act of 1976, the DMCA was intended to and should always focus 
on copyright concerns only. The § 1201 exemption rulemaking is not an appropriate venue for 
weighing non-copyright concerns. The current de novo requirement is not only unwarranted by 
legislative history or statutory language, but has also imposed a recurrent burden on resource-
constrained proponents. Additionally, the Copyright Office’s interpretation and application of the 
substantial impact requirement has deviated from congressional intent and the plain meaning of 
the statute. A substantial diminution of availability of works, through the showing of a lack of 
alternatives, has proven to be unrealistically burdensome to otherwise noninfringing users. ISRI 
therefore urges the adoption of a presumption of renewability in future rulemakings and a 
reduction of the burden on proponents. 
                                                 
64 Aaron K. Perzanowski, Evolving Standards & the Future of the DMCA Anticircumvention 
Rulemaking, 10 J. OF INTERNET L. 1, 23 (Apr. 2007). 
65 273 F.3d 429, 440 (2d Cir. 2001). 
66 Id. at 435-36. 
67 Id. 
68 Id. at 459-60. 
69 Id. at 434-35.
