[PAGE 1]
 
 
November 16, 2016 
Additional Comments of Consumers Union 
To the U.S. Copyright Office 
Section 1201 Study  
[Docket No. 2015–8] 
 
 
 Consumers Union, the policy and mobilization arm of Consumer Reports,1 respectfully 
submits these additional comments in the above-referenced matter, in response to the Copyright 
Office’s request for additional information dated September 27, 2016, and in light of the further 
comments submitted by others. 
 
Introduction 
 
 As we have stated previously, including in our initial comments submitted in March of 
this year, the prohibition in section 1201 of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act against 
circumvention of technological protection measures has proven, in experience, to be an 
overbroad response to a concern that the digital age would usher in a massive deluge of 
copyright infringement for which drastic new countermeasures were needed.  Instead, its use to 
protect access to software that enables and governs – and restricts – the functioning of everyday 
consumer products in which it is embedded, and their interoperability with other products, 
threatens to cause far-reaching harm to fundamental consumer rights. 
 
Section 1201 was conceived with the goal of protecting digital forms of traditional 
copyright-protected creative works in mind, such as digital versions of books, music, and films.  
But its actual reach is far broader, affecting the full array of the increasing numbers of consumer 
products that rely on computer software for their functioning.  Section 1201 is being misused by 
some businesses to shield themselves against competition, and the leverage competition gives 
consumers in the marketplace.  Consumers are also being denied the long-accustomed rights and 
incidents of ownership and control over products they have purchased, including the right to 
choose who will service those products, the right to adapt them to other uses, and the right to 
prolong their usefulness – undermining fundamental consumer expectations of what ownership 
means. 
 
                                                           
1 Consumers Union is the policy and mobilization arm of Consumer Reports, an expert, independent, nonprofit 
organization whose mission is to work for a safe, fair, and just marketplace for all consumers and to empower 
consumers to protect themselves.  Consumers Union conducts its policy and advocacy work in the areas of 
telecommunications reform, health reform, food and product safety, financial reform, and other areas.  Consumer 
Reports is the world’s largest independent product-testing organization.  Using its more than 50 labs, auto test 
center, and survey research center, the nonprofit organization rates thousands of products and services annually.  
Founded in 1936, Consumer Reports has over 8 million subscribers to its magazine, website, and other publications.

[PAGE 2]
2 
 
The current section 1201 puts an unreasonable and costly burden on consumer rights.  It 
starts with prohibiting any circumvention of any access-blocking technology whatsoever, subject 
to felony fines and imprisonment.  The statute lists a few exceptions for specified purposes, each 
of which needs a lawyer to understand.  Then every three years, those who want permission to 
circumvent for any other purpose must go through a resource-intensive process before the 
Copyright Office to demonstrate with specificity how it is warranted and useful, and must do so 
repeatedly.  And because the burden of proof lies with the person seeking the exception, the 
exception is typically written tightly around the justification put forward, often with conditions 
written in complicated language that creates uncertainty and limits the exception’s practical 
usefulness.   
 
As experience is repeatedly proving, blocking access to software that governs product 
functioning goes far beyond any legitimate copyright goal.  We are pleased that the Copyright 
Office has recognized that section 1201 is in need of rebalancing, and is gathering perspectives 
for a recommendation to Congress. 
 
The goal should be to bring consumers’ rights and abilities to exercise ownership 
dominion and control over software-enabled products to an equivalent place to where they have 
been for products that did not depend on software for their functioning.  A consumer who 
purchases a product or otherwise lawfully acquires it should own it, and be able to use it – as he 
or she sees fit.   
 
That also includes selling or giving the product to someone else, complete with all its 
parts and contents and accessories.  It includes being able to tinker with the product, to customize 
or adapt it, to improve its utility or performance, to get it repaired, or to remove its parts and use 
them in some other product.  And it includes being able to choose how to accomplish any of 
those, or who to enlist or hire for assistance.  Just as a dress can be resold in a consignment shop, 
or given to a friend, or donated to a thrift store; or re-hemmed, or mended, or have its buttons 
removed and used on another dress, either by the owner herself, or by hiring a seamstress. 
 
Technological innovation should be bringing new freedoms and capabilities to 
consumers, not placing consumers under new constraints. 
 
Ideally, Congress would comprehensively tighten the scope of the prohibition on 
circumvention to better focus it on the accepted goal of deterring actual copyright infringement.  
It would replace the current sweeping approach, under which all circumventions are presumed to 
be prohibited, with an approach that more closely ties the prohibition to actual copyright 
infringement.  This would eliminate the need for many of the new permanent exceptions now 
being contemplated, and would reduce the number of exceptions that would need to be requested 
would become unnecessary.   
 
  If the Copyright Office opts instead to limit itself to proposing specific new exemptions, 
we address below some of the specific questions posed in the September 27 request, as they 
pertain to our experience with the exemption and legislation to permit the unlocking of mobile 
devices, and our more general interest in giving consumers more control over other consumer 
products that depend on computer software for their functioning.  The goal should be for

[PAGE 3]
3 
 
exemptions to be written simply enough for consumers to understand and apply in confidence 
without having to hire attorneys to help them navigate the requirements.  
 
Comments on Specific Questions 
 
(1)(b) – Permanent exemption for mobile device unlocking 
 
We recommend making this exemption permanent – finally.  We have now advocated for 
this exemption in three Copyright Office triennial review proceedings, as well as helping lead the 
effort in Congress to enact the Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act, as 
well as in efforts to address the issue in the Federal Communications Commission.  We 
recommend applying the exemption broadly to all devices that connect to a wireless network, 
rather than freezing a list of categories of devices into the statute, however comprehensive that 
list may appear to be now.  Consumers will have the same interest in having power to choose 
among competing wireless networks for whatever product they are connecting, including 
products in the Internet of Things.  (If the exemption for computer programs, (1)(c) above, is 
written comprehensively enough, as we recommend, a separate exemption here may be less 
important.) 
 
(1)(c ) – Permanent exemption for access to computer programs  
   
 We recommend making such an exemption permanent.  We recommend writing it 
broadly, so as to permit circumvention for any lawful analysis, diagnosis, maintenance, repair, or 
adaptation of a computer program in any consumer product.  This is the essential protection for 
helping ensure that a consumer’s product’s ability to function can be in the hands of the 
consumer.  To the fullest extent possible, this exemption should not be limited or conditioned.   
 
We fully recognize that some changes to the operating software of some products could 
have serious impacts on safety.  Ensuring product safety has been a bedrock objective of 
Consumers Union’s mission since its founding 80 years ago.  But safety considerations should 
not be dragged into copyright law, where they are more apt to be used as a pretext for blocking 
competition and consumer choice and undermining rights of ownership.  Safety issues are better 
dealt with by agencies experienced in and responsible for protecting safety, not as an awkward 
adjunct to copyright law. 
 
(1)(d) – Permanent exemption for addressing obsolete or discontinued technologies  
 
We recommend making such an exemption permanent.  This is essential for putting 
control over a product’s useful life in the hands of the consumer, rather than allowing the 
manufacturer or seller to arbitrarily render it obsolete in order to sell a new product or because 
maintaining support for it is no longer profitable enough.  We recommend including 
circumvention to address malfunction or damage as well, as suggested by the Copyright Office 
in its request.  (If the exemption for computer programs, (1)(c) above, is written 
comprehensively enough, as we recommend, a separate exemption here may be less important.)

[PAGE 4]
4 
 
(2)(e) – Revising exemption for interoperability 
 
We recommend extending this exemption to cover not only analyzing the software in a 
product that would enable interoperability with other products, but also adapting the software to 
enable interoperability.  This is essential to enabling consumers to better control how they are 
able to use their products, and to get the benefit of choosing between competing products for 
each function rather than having to stick with one “family” of interoperating products.  It is also 
essential for enabling consumers to adapt a product for which the manufacturer or seller has 
discontinued support.  (If the exemption for computer programs, (1)(c) above, is written 
comprehensively enough, as we recommend, a separate exemption here may be less important.)       
   
(3) – Clarifying the anti-trafficking provisions 
 
The laws should be clear that when there is a right to circumvent the technological 
protection measures, there should also be a right to obtain assistance in doing so, and therefore a 
right to assist.  Although this may well be implicit, we recommend erring on the side of caution 
and making this clear in the statute, without conditions that would inject uncertainty regarding its 
usefulness.   
 
Conclusion 
 
There is now a more than sufficient record of experience with section 1201 to have 
illuminated its overbreadth and other flaws, and to form a sound basis for revising it to more 
closely adhere to the purpose for which it was enacted, the deterrence of wide-scale copyright 
infringement in the digital age.  We urge the Copyright Office to incorporate our 
recommendations into a common-sense proposal to help guide Congress to a revised law that 
better protects the rights and interests of consumers in competition and choice and in control 
over products they have paid for or otherwise lawfully acquired. 
 
Respectfully, 
 
       
  George P. Slover 
  Senior Policy Counsel 
  Consumers Union
