[PAGE 1]
 
1 
 
Attn: 
U.S. Copyright Office, Library of Congress 
101 Independence Avenue, SE, Washington, DC 20559 
RE: Section 1201 Study: Notice and Request for Public Comment 
 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) comments on Federal Register Docket 2015-8 
Submitted by: Chris Bourg, Director of Libraries, on behalf of MIT Libraries (including MIT Press) 
 and MIT Office of Digital Learning  
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Cambridge, MA 
 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on the Section 1201 Study.   Members of the MIT 
community rely upon access to a wide range of materials in digital form to carry out our mission 
of solving world problems through education, research, and scholarship.   Digital materials are 
frequently subject to technological protection measures (TPM) and thus to the significant and 
chilling constraints of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act’s (DMCA) section 1201.   The MIT 
Libraries and MIT Office of Digital Learning have strong reservations about the DMCA and its 
rulemaking process and we appreciate the opportunity to provide input on this matter.   We 
address several of the Copyright Office’s subjects of inquiry below.

[PAGE 2]
 
2 
 
#1 Role and effectiveness of the prohibition on circumvention of technological measures in 
1201a. 
 
At MIT we have found 1201(a) inhibiting when evaluating the potential for sharing content 
from CDs and DVDs in an educational context.   Section 1201(a) limits and constrains innovative 
educational and instructional activities, including the lawful sharing of media for educational 
purposes. 
 
The DMCA’s ban on circumvention of TPM is essentially a ban on use of DVD or Blu-Ray media, 
or any other new media that may emerge, if there is no specific exception.  Use in a Massive 
Open Online Course (MOOC), such as through MIT’s MITx/edX environment, is derailed by the 
rule-making system that requires each new kind of lawful use to come before the Copyright 
Office to seek its own narrow exemption, and then to have to lobby again for, and re-justify the 
need for, that exemption every three years.  This process undermines the missions of 
universities and libraries to advance and disseminate knowledge, ironically inhibiting the use of 
the newest technologies by constraining uses of key material within our most innovative and 
transformative tools.   For instance, courses offered to worldwide learners via MITx, free of 
charge, are democratizing access to education and advancing our understanding of how 
education can best be delivered online.   The DMCA inhibits these humanitarian and 
technological advancements.

[PAGE 3]
 
3 
 
Libraries and universities need long-term and stable policies on use of materials in MOOCs and 
other platforms to provide a coherent environment for those building courses for these 
platforms.  The three-year rule-making process works against a shared, stable understanding of 
what is permissible.   Even when exemptions are created, they are problematic, because having 
to educate users about elaborate, time-limited and arcane exemptions is exceedingly difficult.  
The complexity of the rules inhibits use of digital media. 
 
Our technology experts in the Libraries have found that when using widely deployed tools for 
copying digital media, it is often very difficult to detect whether technological protection 
measures (TPM) exist, so it is not always clear when one could be violating the DMCA.   If TPM 
does exist, the threat of criminal penalties looms large.   Although it is difficult to quantify 
missed opportunities, at MIT we have had to set aside materials from educational sharing due 
to the ambiguities regarding the existence of TPMs and, for faculty and researchers, the threat 
of criminal penalty looming over even the best-intended and well-informed use of digital 
media. 
 
#3 Should section 1201 be adjusted to provide for presumptive renewal of previously granted 
exemptions. 
 
The 3-year cycle of petitioning the Copyright Office for special exemptions is inefficient and 
creates an unnecessary burden and resource drain on libraries and universities.   Past 
exemptions should be presumptively renewable, as the Office has suggested in its Notice of

[PAGE 4]
 
4 
 
Inquiry. 
 
The law’s requirement that each exemption be revisited every 3 years does not map well to the 
needs of universities and libraries, which have remained fairly constant throughout the DMCA’s 
history.  These needs – to access and use materials in manner consistent with copyright law for 
educational, research, and scholarly purposes-- should not have to be revisited and re-
established every three years.  The burden to provide proof each time is problematic, because 
the limits of 1201 stifle contemplated uses before they arise, making it highly challenging to 
capture and provide examples. 
 
The rule-making process is cumbersome and inaccessible for anyone but experts who are 
actively practicing intellectual property law.    The evidence gathering process and related filings 
as well as appearances at hearings present significant barriers.   In this environment, deep-
pocketed commercial interests are at an advantage, and universities with their distributed and 
decentralized environments are at a disadvantage.   Requiring redundant reviews of unchanged 
facts and long-established needs through a resource-intensive process and structure is a waste 
of precious resources for all parties.  In addition, the increasing complexity of each exemption, 
even if granted, makes it difficult for users to take advantage of the exemptions. 
 
#8 Whether existing permanent exemptions are necessary, relevant, and/or sufficient. 
 
The sole permanent exemption for libraries, provided in section 1201(d), is not useful.  Libraries

[PAGE 5]
 
5 
 
generally request trial access from vendors to make purchase decisions and do not need the 
DMCA exemption that allows for reviewing an item for purchase.   Library practitioners in 
copyright and acquisitions across the nation are unaware of any cases where a library would 
need to – or be able to – obtain an encrypted copy and circumvent protection measures in 
order to determine whether to buy an item.  Libraries and archives did not ask for this 
exemption, nor is it useful to us.  In addition, the language of this exemption has the potential 
to cause harm, as it augments confusion about the extent to which fair uses are still protected 
despite the language of the DMCA. 
 
A useful permanent exemption would permit circumvention for all lawful uses-- all uses 
permitted by the Copyright Act.  This was proposed by the Unlocking Technology Act.  With this 
kind of permanent exemption in place, libraries and universities could appropriately and 
productively focus on the question of whether a use is fair, or permitted by another 
relevant exception. 
  
 
#9 Whether there are other permanent exemptions that should be established. 
For the reasons described above, we strongly recommend a permanent exemption to 
permit circumvention for all lawful uses—that is, for all uses permitted by the Copyright Act.

[PAGE 6]
 
6 
 
MIT’s mission is to “advance knowledge and educate students in science, technology, and other 
areas of scholarship that will best serve the nation and the world in the 21st century.”   This 
mission depends upon use of copyrighted works for education, research, and scholarship.  We 
call upon the Copyright Office and Congress to modify the DMCA to provide a permanent 
exemption for all lawful uses of digital media, in support of the mission of MIT and the missions 
of other universities, whose nonprofit educational and scholarly activities serve humankind.
