[PAGE 1]
 
 
UNITED STATES COPYRIGHT OFFICE 
 
    *  
Section 1201 Study: Notice and                                 Reply Comments of:  
Request for Public Comment                           *       Association of American Publishers,   
     Motion Picture Association of America,  
                                                *       Recording Industry Association of  
Docket  No. 2015-8                                                      America 
    * 
  
****** 
 
 
I. Introduction 
The Association of American Publishers (“AAP”), the Motion Picture Association of 
America, Inc. (“MPAA”) and the Recording Industry Association of America, Inc. (“RIAA”) 
respectfully submit these reply comments in connection with the above referenced docket.  As 
described in the prior comments submitted by AAP, MPAA and RIAA on March 3, 2016, the 
protections provided in Chapter 12 of Title 17 are extremely important to the motion picture, 
music and publishing industries.  These protections helped encourage early adoption of digital 
dissemination methods and continue to enable the exciting new business models that AAP, 
MPAA and RIAA members and their partners are currently using to disseminate their creative 
works.  Nothing in the comments filed in this docket persuasively supports the calls to 
undermine the vital protections of Chapter 12.  Doing so would impede the growth of innovative 
new services and products and harm consumers. 
The majority of the complaints regarding Section 1201 contained in the submitted 
comments focus on (i) purported uses of access controls to hinder competition in industries 
unrelated to the dissemination of expressive works and (ii) accessing software code for the 
purpose of studying or reverse engineering it or rendering consumer products, such as printers or 
automobiles, interoperable with other products.  AAP, MPAA and RIAA take no position on the 
specifics of these issues, which do not directly relate to their industries.  However, it is important 
to note that many of the complaints are based on stale cases that are more than a decade old and 
that Section 1201 already includes potentially applicable permanent exemptions related to 
interoperability and security testing.  
Very few comments pointed to any purported problems associated with accessing 
expressive works.  Although a cadre of commenters who have opposed the existence of Section 
1201 since prior to its passage continue to do so, they presented no evidence that anti-
circumvention prohibitions are being abused by anyone in the motion picture, music or 
publishing industries.  That is no surprise – as detailed in the comments submitted by AAP, 
MPAA and RIAA, access controls and use-based controls are facilitating the availability of 
innovative products and services that enable consumers to choose between a wide variety of 
offerings at different price points.   
The lack of any evidence that the existence of the protections contained in Section 1201 
has led to less access to expressive works, rather than more access, is cause for the Copyright

[PAGE 2]
 
 
 2 
 
Office to recommend that Congress refrain from amending Section 1201 to reduce the 
safeguards that underpin the digital businesses that AAP, MPAA and RIAA members and their 
partners engage in and license.  It is critical, for example, that Congress reject calls to amend the 
statute to require plaintiffs to prove that circumvention was undertaken for the purpose of 
committing infringement.  It is also crucial that Congress, and the Copyright Office, decline to 
significantly revise and weaken the procedural and substantive requirements for obtaining 
exemptions through the triennial rulemaking process.  If anything, the comments submitted in 
this docket demonstrate that, where valid concerns were raised in the proceedings, the Register 
and the Librarian have acted responsibly to address them, as Congress intended.  While some 
minor adjustments to the process might be warranted, it would be ill advised to convert the 
proceeding into an open-ended invitation for broad-based assaults on the policy objectives that 
Section 1201was meant to achieve, as opposed to maintaining it as a regulatory “fail safe 
mechanism” focused on correcting specific and actualized hindrances to non-infringing uses.  
H.R. Rep. No. 105-551, pt. 2, 105th Cong., 2d Sess., at 36 (July 22, 1998).  
II. Technological Protection Measures Benefit Consumers  
The March 3, 2016 comments submitted by AAP, MPAA and RIAA detail numerous 
exciting products and services, underwritten by technological protection measures, that are 
revolutionizing the ways that consumers enjoy and interact with books, journals, movies, music, 
and television shows.  Subscription on-demand services, digital “rental” services, and online 
lockers that enable family sharing and remote access to purchased titles are just a few examples 
of business models that would not be possible without technological access controls and use 
controls, protected by Section 1201. 
Comments submitted in this docket by other copyright owners and organizations provide 
additional examples of the benefits of technological protection measures.  ACT – the App 
Association explained how Section 1201 protects start-up app developers looking to grow their 
businesses and to provide consumers with software products that add life to their phones, tablets 
and computers.  The Entertainment Software Association (“ESA”) described how access controls 
limit piracy of videogames and other expressive works being enjoyed on sophisticated in-home 
consoles that enable consumers to not only play games, but also to access movies, television 
series and music.  And the Copyright Alliance provided an overview of how Section 1201 
benefits its diverse collection of members, and their customers.
1   
  In contrast, critics of Section 1201 ignored all of these realities and pretended as if the 
marketplace for expressive works is stagnant and hobbled by the use of digital rights 
management technologies.  Nothing could be further from the truth.  Just as Congress intended 
and predicted, consumers have access to more works through more channels than ever before.  In 
addition, technological protections measures are an essential part of a regime designed to make it 
possible for the authors and lawful distributors of expressive works to recoup their investments 
and sustain their businesses, and to thereby fuel investment in the creation of new literary works, 
                                                 
1 Other comments that include useful information regarding the benefits of Section 1201 were submitted 
by the Business Software Alliance (“BSA”), DVD Copy Control Association (“DVD CCA”), Advanced 
Access Content System Licensing Authority (“AACS LA”), the Kernochan Center for Law, Media and 
the Arts at Columbia University, Microsoft, and the Software & Information Industry Association 
(“SIIA”).

[PAGE 3]
 
 
 3 
 
sound recordings, motion pictures and other copyrighted materials.  Incentivizing and enabling 
that type of creative activity is exactly why copyright laws exist.  Mazer v. Stein, 347 U.S. 201, 
219 (1954) (“The economic philosophy behind the clause empowering Congress to grant patents 
and copyrights is the conviction that encouragement of individual effort by personal gain is the 
best way to advance public welfare through the talents of authors and inventors in ‘Science and 
useful Arts.’”).  Section 1201 is a necessary component of those laws in the digital environment.    
III. There Is No Need To Amend The Statute Or To Significantly Alter The Rulemaking  
As discussed above, the comments filed in this docket do not proffer any evidence that 
Section 1201 is failing to achieve Congress’ goal of encouraging lawful, digital dissemination of 
expressive works by providing copyright owners with reasonable protections against theft and 
unauthorized access.
2  To the contrary, all evidence indicates that copyright owners have 
embraced digital dissemination, and that technological protections measures, especially access 
control technologies, are central to innovation, diversity and consumer choice in digital delivery. 
Nevertheless, numerous comments propose deleting Section 1201 from the statute 
entirely.  Many comments also propose tying anti-circumvention liability to proven acts of 
copyright infringement, some even going so far as to propose that a plaintiff in a Section 1201 
case should be required to prove that a person who engaged in circumvention, or who trafficked 
in circumvention tools or services, intended to facilitate copyright infringement and had no basis 
to believe that acts of infringement were defensible in any manner.  See, e.g., Comments of New 
Media Rights at 12.  Adopting these proposals would gut the protections provided by Section 
1201, which Congress intended to supplement, not duplicate, copyright owners’ exclusive rights.  
Moreover, adopting a specific intent approach in Section 1201 would, with respect to trafficking, 
require proof of the mindset that consumers would have when utilizing circumvention tools 
before actual acts of circumvention occur.  This would place the cart before the horse.
3   
As discussed in the opening comments of AAP, MPAA, and RIAA, it is essential that 
Section 1201 liability remain separate and distinct from copyright infringement.  By, for 
example, hacking into digital subscriptions services, bad actors can read entire books, listen to 
entire records, and view entire movies simply by circumventing an access control, such as a 
password requirement.  These bad actors need not reproduce these works or further distribute 
them in order (i) to gain the full value of experiencing the works and (ii) to deprive copyright 
owners and their licensees of the purchase (or rental) price.  As the Ninth Circuit’s thorough and 
                                                 
2 The only examples of purported problems proffered by commenters related to the use of access controls 
in connection with expressive works, as opposed to functional software, relate to activities that the 
Register and the Librarian have already determined to likely qualify as infringing (such as “space 
shifting” of movies on DVDs) or considered and exempted from liability in prior rulemakings (such as 
use of film clips by media studies professors or access to e-books for the blind). 
3 In the rare instances where Congress elects to require proof of an intent to facilitate infringement, it 
clearly understands how to do so.  See, e.g., 17 U.S.C. § 1202 (“No person shall, without the authority of 
the copyright owner or the law … intentionally remove or alter any copyright management information 
… knowing, or, with respect to civil remedies und er section 1203, having reasonable grounds to know, 
that it will induce, enable, facilitate, or conceal an infringement of any right under this title.”).  The fact 
that Congress did not include such requirements in section 1201 reflects an affirmative conclusion that 
doing so would hinder the effectiveness of the anti-circumvention provisions.

[PAGE 4]
 
 
 4 
 
carefully-reasoned opinion in MDY Industries, LLC v. Blizzard Entertainment, 629 F.3d 928 (9th 
Cir. 2010) explains, Congress intended to limit this harmful conduct by prohibiting 
circumvention of access controls and trafficking in related goods and services without regard to 
whether acts of copyright infringement are ultimately committed.  See S. Rep. No. 105-190, 
105th Cong., 2d Sess., at 11 (May 11, 1998) (“[I]f unauthorized access to a copyrighted work is 
effectively prevented through use of a password, it would be a violation of [section 1201(a)] to 
defeat or bypass the password and to make the means to do so…”). 
AAP, MPAA, and RIAA respectfully urge the Copyright Office to strongly oppose 
proposals to delete Section 1201 from the statute or to neuter it by requiring proof of 
infringement to establish violations of Section 1201.  The Copyright Office also should oppose 
other proposals to amend the statute to weaken the protections provided by Section 1201, 
including its anti-trafficking provisions.  As multiple comments explain, Section 1201’s t anti-
trafficking provisions are critical to the overall scheme of protecting technological controls 
against circumvention.  All technological protection measures are at risk of being broken, “so 
without the ban against trafficking, circumvention devices useable by even the most technology-
challenged of consumers would undoubtedly be readily available, and TPMs would be largely 
ineffective.”  Comments of Kernochan Center for Law, Media and the Arts at 6.  Even statutory 
exceptions or regulatory exemptions that superficially allow trafficking of devices and services 
to enable lawful uses of works could cause significant harm to copyright owners because the rise 
of a market in circumvention devices and services, ostensibly for the purpose of engaging in 
permitted acts of circumvention, but primarily fostering illegal uses, would be unavoidable.
4 
This risk is exacerbated by confusion that often exists, and misrepresentations that often 
are made, concerning the scope of exemptions.  For example, in his comments in this docket, 
Professor Peter Decherney contends that the exemption for using short portions of motion 
pictures in media studies courses allows for circumvention of access controls on video games, 
even though the Register expressly stated the opposite when she recommended the exemption to 
the Librarian.  Compare Comment of Prof. Peter Decherney at 4 (“This exemption enables 
students and professors to use short portions or still images from motion pictures but also 
television programs, slide shows, video games, and other works to prepare a lecture or 
dissertation, facilitate a classroom discussion, complete an assignment, or otherwise participate 
in activities that enhance the educational experience.”), with Recommendation of the Register of 
Copyrights, Sixth Triennial Proceeding to Determine Exemptions to the Prohibition on 
Circumvention at 68-69 (October 2015) (“While Joint Educators contend that video game 
                                                 
4 Although Congress, in the Unlocking Consumer Choice and Wireless Competition Act, instructed the 
Librarian to expand exemptions related to mobile phone unlocking to cover circumvention by certain 
persons at the direction of device owners, that law (i) was strictly limited by Congress to apply to this 
narrow category of circumvention (which is unrelated to accessing expressive works) and (ii) does not 
alter the anti-trafficking provisions of 17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(2) or (b).  S. Rep. No. 113-212, 113th Cong., 
2d Sess., at 6 (July 17, 2014) (“Unlocking a cell phone or other wireless device enables the device owner 
to connect his or her device to a wireless telephone network of his or her choice, and does not enable the 
device owner, or a third party on an owner’s behalf, to engage in other activities that infringe copyrighted 
works.”); H.R.  Rep. No. 113-356, 113th Cong., 2d Sess., at 9 (Feb. 25, 2014) (“Nothing in this Act is 
intended to serve as a limitation on section 1201(a)(2) or section 1201(b), which remain critical to the 
effectiveness of Chapter 12 of Title 17 and are in no way altered or modified by the provisions of this 
legislation.” ).

[PAGE 5]
 
 
 5 
 
excerpts can be used in classroom instruction, it is unclear how or why circumvention of TPMs 
would be necessary to incorporate a video game excerpt as a pedagogical tool, as opposed to 
showing a filmed clip of game play (for example, from Twitch or YouTube).  …  Accordingly, 
as no further examples of non-motion-picture audiovisual works were provided to support a 
broader exemption, the Register declines to recommend an exemption for excerpts of 
‘audiovisual works,’ as opposed to ‘motion pictures.’”). 
The Copyright Office should reject requests to deviate from the rulemaking framework 
established by Congress for the triennial proceedings designed to identify and alleviate specific 
marketplace problems, which is, for the most part, working quite well.  The Copyright Office has 
repeatedly described at great length how it carefully deduced, from the statute and its legislative 
history, the procedural and substantive obligations of persons seeking regulatory exemptions 
under Section 1201(a)(1)(C).  See, e.g., Exemption to Prohibition on Circumvention of 
Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies, Notice of Inquiry and Request 
for Petitions, 79 Fed. Reg. 55,687, 55,689-91 (Sept. 17, 2014).  The requirements that each 
proceeding be considered de novo, that the Register apply a preponderance of the evidence 
standard, that proponents demonstrate that the conduct they intend to engage in is “in fact” non-
infringing, and that exemptions cannot be based on mere inconveniences or de minimis harms 
and must instead be justified by “substantial adverse effects,” all serve to ensure that the process 
is not abused and that Congress’ decision to prohibit acts of circumvention is not set aside lightly 
based on hypothetical complaints, hyperbole, abstract policy positions and minor grievances.  
Proponents of undoing these regulatory standards ask the Copyright Office to “ignore” 
(Comments of Library Copyright Alliance at 34) the legislative history in furtherance of creating 
a proceeding that would make obtaining exemptions so easy that they would quickly swallow the 
rule.   
Although these same proponents claim that altering the ground-rules for the proceeding 
will reduce the burdens on the Register and the Librarian associated with vetting exemption 
requests, the proposed new, lax standards, if adopted, would be far more likely to result in a 
proliferation of poorly supported requests from exemption proponents.  As emphasized in the 
comments previously submitted by ESA, exemptions that the Register has rejected during prior 
cycles are frequently and repeatedly proposed again in successive cycles.  Comments of ESA at 
11.  These wasteful and unjustified proposals, and others, burden copyright owners and the 
Copyright Office, and similar proposals would almost certainly increase in number if the 
standards for granting exemptions were significantly relaxed.  Id. 
The outcomes of the most recent triennial rulemaking cycles demonstrate that the 
requirements for supporting exemptions are not unreasonable to satisfy.  Whereas the first 
triennial rulemaking only resulted in exemptions for two classes of works, the 2015 proceeding 
resulted in exemptions covering twenty-two types of uses of copyrighted works.  In fact, since 
the first proceeding in 2000, every successive cycle has resulted in more exemptions than the 
prior cycle.  In 2003, there were four exempt classes of works; 2006 resulted in six exempt 
classes of works; the Librarian exempted nine categories of uses in 2010; and the number grew 
to seventeen categories of uses in 2012.  Given the success that exemption proponents have had

[PAGE 6]
 
 
 6 
 
in these proceedings, claims that the process favors exemption opponents are exaggerated and 
inaccurate.5 
AAP, MPAA and RIAA support ESA’s suggestion that the Copyright Office should 
require exemption proponents to demonstrate significant changes in the marketplace or the case 
law before any exemption that has been previously denied will be reconsidered.  Id.  In addition, 
AAP, MPAA, and RIAA continue to believe that, under the existing ground rules, where renewal 
of an existing exemption is requested, if the proponent asserts that adverse impact of the kind 
previously demonstrated to exist would be felt, and no one meaningfully opposes that assertion, 
the Register may conclude, without further comments or hearing testimony, that adverse impact 
is more likely than not, and recommend that the Librarian grant the exemption.6  Aside from 
these clarifications, AAP, MPAA and RIAA do not believe that any changes to the ground rules 
for the proceeding are necessary or advisable.  However, AAP, MPAA and RIAA continue to 
support the procedural changes to the rulemaking they recommended on pages 13 and 14 of their 
prior comments, including sharing proposed exemption language with hearing participants in 
order to obtain feedback on drafting issues prior to publication of the Final Rule. 
IV. Conclusion  
AAP, MPAA and RIAA appreciate this opportunity to comment on issues of critical 
importance to the motion picture, music and publishing industries.  They also look forward to 
continuing to participate in the Copyright Office’s process for studying Section 1201 of Title 17.  
 
DATE: April 1, 2016 
 
[Signatures on following page] 
 
 
 
                                                 
5 Uses of digital content have evolved and changed over time, as discussed above in Section II.  Section 
1201 has led to a flourishing market for expressive content and various business models now exist to 
distribute it.  Compared to the rapid growth of digital products and services, the increase in the number of 
exemptions is relatively minor.  
6 The Copyright Office should reject calls to completely shift the burden of persuasion to opponents of 
renewing exemptions.  Assertions that copyright owners reflexively oppose all exemptions, including 
previously granted exemptions, (Comments of the Organization for Transformative Works at 2) are 
baseless.  AAP, MPAA and RIAA have not opposed renewal of numerous exemptions during the last two 
cycles.  Congress intended for proponents, who are better positioned than opponents, to present evidence 
regarding the purported need for exemptions.  See 79 Fed. Reg. at 55,689 (“Those who seek an exemption 
from the prohibition on circumvention bear the burden of establishing that the requirements for granting 
an exemption have been satisfied.”).  Even some proponents of exemptions concede that Congress did not 
intend for exemptions to be renewed absent any showing from proponents.  See, e.g., Comments of 
Professor Peter Decherney at 8 (“The purpose behind reconsidering existing exemptions on a triennial 
basis is to account for that fact that changes in technology, patterns of consumption, and the marketplace 
may make some existing exemptions obsolete.  Thus, the creation of a hard presumption of renewability 
might well violate Congressional preference expressed through legislative history.”).

[PAGE 7]
 
 
 7 
 
Respectfully submitted: 
 
_____________________ 
Allan R. Adler 
General Counsel 
Vice President for Government Affairs 
Association of American Publishers 
455 Massachusetts Ave., NW, 7th Floor 
Washington, DC 20001 
Phone (202) 220-4544 
adler@publishers.org 
 
 
_____________________ 
Benjamin S. Sheffner 
Vice President, Legal Affairs 
Motion Picture Association of America, Inc. 
15301 Ventura Blvd., Bldg. E 
Sherman Oaks, CA 91403 
Phone (818) 935-5784 
Ben_Sheffner@mpaa.org 
 
 
_____________________ 
Susan B. Chertkof 
Senior Vice President, Business and Legal Affairs 
Recording Industry Association of America, Inc. 
1025 F Street NW, 10th Floor 
Washington, DC 20004 
Phone (202) 775-0101 
schertkof@riaa.com
